This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion-4K: Ultra-High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion
Models
Jinjin Zhang1,2 Qiuyu Huang3 Junjie Liu3 Xiefan Guo1,2 Di Huang1,2 *
1
State Key Laboratory of Complex and Critical Software Environment,
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
3
Meituan
{jinjin.zhang, xfguo, dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn {huangqiuyu, liujunjie10}@meituan.com

Figure 1. Example results synthesized by our Diffusion-4K, emphasizing exceptional fine details in generated 4K images.

Abstract
In this paper, we present Diffusion-4K, a novel framework for direct ultra-high-resolution image synthesis using text-to-image diffusion models. The core advancements include: (1) Aesthetic-4K Benchmark: addressing the absence of a publicly available 4K image synthesis dataset, we construct Aesthetic-4K, a comprehensive benchmark for ultra-high-resolution image generation.
We curated a high-quality 4K dataset with carefully selected images and captions generated by GPT-4o. Additionally, we introduce GLCM Score and Compression Ratio metrics to evaluate fine details, combined with holis-

tic measures such as FID, Aesthetics and CLIPScore for a
comprehensive assessment of ultra-high-resolution images.
(2) Wavelet-based Fine-tuning: we propose a waveletbased fine-tuning approach for direct training with photorealistic 4K images, applicable to various latent diffusion models, demonstrating its effectiveness in synthesizing highly detailed 4K images. Consequently, Diffusion4K achieves impressive performance in high-quality image
synthesis and text prompt adherence, especially when powered by modern large-scale diffusion models (e.g., SD32B and Flux-12B). Extensive experimental results from our
benchmark demonstrate the superiority of Diffusion-4K in
ultra-high-resolution image synthesis. Code is available at

* Corresponding author.

23464

