This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PoseTraj: Pose-Aware Trajectory Control in Video Diffusion
Longbin Ji1
1

Lei Zhong1

Pengfei Wei2

Changjian Li1

University of Edinburgh 2 Nanyang Technological University
https://robingg1.github.io/Pose-Traj/

Figure 1. PoseTraj produces plausible dragging videos, where objects follow a rotational trajectory with awareness of changing poses.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Recent advancements in trajectory-guided video generation
have achieved notable progress. However, existing models still face challenges in generating object motions with
potentially changing 6D poses under wide-range rotations,
due to limited 3D understanding. To address this problem, we introduce PoseTraj, a pose-aware video dragging
model for generating 3D-aligned motion from 2D trajectories. Our method adopts a novel two-stage pose-aware
pretraining framework, improving 3D understanding across
diverse trajectories. Specifically, we propose a large-scale
synthetic dataset PoseTraj-10K, containing 10k videos of
objects following rotational trajectories, and enhance the
model perception of object pose changes by incorporating 3D bounding boxes as intermediate supervision signals.
Following this, we fine-tune the trajectory-controlling module on real-world videos, applying an additional cameradisentanglement module to further refine motion accuracy.
Experiments on various benchmark datasets demonstrate
that our method not only excels in 3D pose-aligned dragging for rotational trajectories but also outperforms existing baselines in trajectory accuracy and video quality.

22776

We address the problem of controlling video generation
with trajectories involving potential object rotations, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Recently, significant advancements have
been made in text-to-video generation [6, 10, 11]. Building on these foundational models, many works have explored the use of additional guidance signals, such as images [2, 19, 20], trajectories [36, 40, 43], audio [30, 37],
and poses [14, 17, 33, 45] to control the content in the generated video. Among these, trajectory-guided motion control [36, 40] has been gaining increasing attention due to its
interactive and user-friendly nature.
Trajectory-guided motion control requires the target object to follow a specified path accurately, preserving temporal coherence and realism in the generated video. Earlier works IPoke [1] and MCDiff [7] leverage dragging animation only in the limited human domain. DragNUWA
[40] is the first to attempt trajectory control in open-domain
videos. DragAnything [36] further enhances object-level
motion awareness by extracting object entities using corresponding masks and integrating them with trajectory guidance. However, these works constrain the object to follow
the trajectory in a 2D image space, without considering potential changes of the object’s 6D pose (position and ori-

