This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridge the Gap: From Weak to Full Supervision for Temporal Action
Localization with PseudoFormer
Ziyi Liu
University of Science and Technology Beijing

Yangcen Liu
Georgia Institute of Technology

liuziyi.iair@gmail.com

yliu3735@gatech.edu

Abstract
Weakly-supervised Temporal Action Localization
(WTAL) has achieved notable success but still suffers from
a lack of temporal annotations, leading to a performance
and framework gap compared with fully-supervised methods. While recent approaches employ pseudo labels for
training, three key challenges: generating high-quality
pseudo labels, making full use of different priors, and
optimizing training methods with noisy labels remain
unresolved. Due to these perspectives, we propose PseudoFormer, a novel two-branch framework that bridges the
gap between weakly and fully-supervised Temporal Action
Localization (TAL). We first introduce RickerFusion, which
maps all predicted action proposals to a global shared
space to generate pseudo labels with better quality. Subsequently, we leverage both snippet-level and proposal-level
labels with different priors from the weak branch to train
the regression-based model in the full branch. Finally,
the uncertainty mask and iterative refinement mechanism
are applied for training with noisy pseudo labels. PseudoFormer achieves state-of-the-art WTAL results on the
two commonly used benchmarks, THUMOS14 and ActivityNet1.3. Besides, extensive ablation studies demonstrate
the contribution of each component of our method.

Figure 1. Our paper aims at addressing the three primary questions: (a) How to improve the quality of generated labels from
the base model? (b) What priors could the regression model learn
from, and how could it better use them? (c) How to train with
noisy labels in uncertainty?

els to learn from generated labels, a more comprehensive
approach to effectively bridge the gap of framework and
performance between WTAL and TAL remains an open
challenge.
Some of the latest approaches [33, 55] design two-stage
schemes to generate pseudo labels to train a regressionbased model. The introduction of the pseudo-label learning framework boosts performance significantly. Unlike
previous WTAL methods [8, 13, 14, 27], the key to these
methods is to improve the quality of pseudo labels with
post-processing strategies. However, current approaches
face several limitations: they often fail to fully leverage
the priors generated in the first stage, leading to suboptimal use of valuable contextual information. Furthermore,
they lack effective integration with existing fully-supervised
TAL frameworks, which can hinder the adaptation and consistency of the methods. We propose a two-branch (weak
and full) PseudoFormer, focusing on addressing the following three critical problems shown in Fig. 1: (1) How
can we generate pseudo labels with confidence scores and
more reliable boundaries? (2) How can we fully leverage
the priors contained in the generated pseudo labels? (3)

1. Introduction
Weakly-supervised Temporal Action Localization (WTAL),
which aims to use video-level annotations to identify and localize temporal action instance, has gained significant traction in recent years [9, 21, 29, 36, 48]. Despite the progress,
a substantial gap remains between weakly-supervised and
fully-supervised TAL methods, in both the framework and
performance. WTAL methods predominantly rely on Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) [30] for localization-byclassification, while TAL approaches often employ regression models to learn from densely annotated proposals. Although recent work [33] has explored using regression mod-

8711

