This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Your Large Vision-Language Model Only Needs
A Few Attention Heads For Visual Grounding
Seil Kang

Jinyeong Kim Junhyeok Kim Seong Jae Hwang
Yonsei University
{seil, jinyeong1324, timespt, seongjae}@yonsei.ac.kr
GT

Abstract
Visual grounding seeks to localize the image region corresponding to a free-form text description. Recently, the
strong multimodal capabilities of Large Vision-Language
Models (LVLMs) have driven substantial improvements in
visual grounding, though they inevitably require fine-tuning
and additional model components to explicitly generate
bounding boxes or segmentation masks. However, we discover that a few attention heads in frozen LVLMs demonstrate strong visual grounding capabilities. We refer to these
heads, which consistently capture object locations related
to text semantics, as localization heads. Using localization heads, we introduce a straightforward and effective
training-free visual grounding framework that utilizes textto-image attention maps from localization heads to identify
the target objects. Surprisingly, only three out of thousands
of attention heads are sufficient to achieve competitive localization performance compared to existing LVLM-based
visual grounding methods that require fine-tuning. Our findings suggest that LVLMs can innately ground objects based
on a deep comprehension of the text-image relationship, as
they implicitly focus on relevant image regions to generate
informative text outputs.

Average

L14 H24

L14 H13

Expression: the pizza mouth.

Mask:

Expression: guy in the right.

Mask:

Expression: girl on outer seat long hair no sleeves on.

Mask:

Figure 1. Visualization of the text-to-image attention maps from
LLaVA-1.5-7B [39]. While the average attention map initially
seems uninformative for localization, a closer examination reveals
that LVLM possesses built-in localization heads that consistently
capture key areas of an image corresponding to the referring text,
regardless of sample variations. L14 H24 refers to the 24th attention head in the 14th layer of the LVLM.

1. Introduction

plicit fine-tuning of LVLMs with additional visual grounding datasets and modifications to model components to enable the generation of bounding boxes [6, 65, 72] or segmentation masks [30, 49, 69, 78].
Despite the interesting integration of LVLMs in previous
visual grounding works, a fundamental question remains:
since LVLMs generate text outputs that imply an understanding of specific image regions, is it possible to explicitly
observe this mechanism in action? In other words, we ask
whether we can extract how the LVLMs “focus” on specific image regions corresponding to given text descriptions
for visual grounding. A natural first approach to addressing this question might be to examine the text-to-image attention maps, which reveal how a text description attends

Visual grounding is a task that, given textual descriptions,
identifies and localizes relevant objects within an image,
producing outputs such as bounding boxes [43, 74] or segmentation masks [19]. Recently, this vision-language task,
which inherently requires a deep understanding of the relationship between images and text, has seen significant advancements with the emergence of powerful Large VisionLanguage Models (LVLMs) [32, 39, 40, 60]. However,
since LVLMs are primarily designed to generate text outputs, directly leveraging them as a vision-language tool to
identify and localize objects within an image (i.e., visual
grounding) presents technical challenges. Inevitably, current LVLM-based visual grounding methods require ex-

9339

