This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image Generation Diversity Issues and How to Tame Them
Mischa Dombrowski1
Weitong Zhang2
Sarah Cechnicka2
Hadrien Reynaud2
Bernhard Kainz1,2
1
2
Friedrich–Alexander–Universität Erlangen–Nürnberg
Imperial College London
mischa.dombrowski@fau.de

Abstract

Generative methods have reached a level of quality that is
almost indistinguishable from real data. However, while
individual samples may appear unique, generative models
often exhibit limitations in covering the full data distribution. Unlike quality issues, diversity problems within generative models are not easily detected by simply observing
single images or generated datasets, which means we need
a specific measure to assess the diversity of these models.
In this paper, we draw attention to the current lack of diversity in generative models and the inability of common
metrics to measure this. We achieve this by framing diversity as an image retrieval problem, where we measure how
many real images can be retrieved using synthetic data as
queries. This yields the Image Retrieval Score (IRS), an interpretable, hyperparameter-free metric that quantifies the
diversity of a generative model’s output. IRS requires only a
subset of synthetic samples and provides a statistical measure of confidence. Our experiments indicate that current
feature extractors commonly used in generative model assessment are inadequate for evaluating diversity effectively.
Consequently, we perform an extensive search for the best
feature extractors to assess diversity. Evaluation reveals
that current diffusion models converge to limited subsets of
the real distribution, with no current state-of-the-art models
superpassing 77% of the diversity of the training data. To
address this limitation, we introduce Diversity-Aware Diffusion Models (DiADM), a novel approach that improves
diversity of unconditional diffusion models without loss
of image quality. We do this by disentangling diversity
from image quality by using a diversity aware module that
uses pseudo-unconditional features as input. We provide a
Python package offering unified feature extraction and metric computation to further facilitate the evaluation of generative models https://github.com/MischaD/beyondfid.

Figure 1. Predicted gender diversity - as one possible example
for diversity - after sampling pre-trained text-to-image diffusion
models infinitely often. Visually it is apparent that most terms
are inherently biased toward one gender. Our proposed IRS score
predicts that off-the-shelf models will only ever reach 50 percent
diversity, which is equivalent to one gender being perfectly represented while the other gender is missing entirely. Using diversification strategies increases diversity. Details about this can be
found in Sec. 4.4.

1. Introduction
With advancements in large-scale models and datasets, diffusion models have demonstrated substantial capacity to
capture high-dimensional, complex distributions, enabling
photo-realistic conditional image generation across diverse
guidance types, including image-based [56], classifierbased [11], and text-based guidance [42]. However, diffusion models frequently inherit and amplify data biases due to their reliance on large-scale, naturally biased
datasets [4, 53], limiting comprehensive distributional coverage in generated samples. For instance, text-to-image diffusion models often exhibit gender bias for certain occupations. When prompted with “a teacher”, models predominantly generate females, with male representations notably
underrepresented, as shown in Fig. 1. The “conditional
mode collapse” [1, 31] also affects image- [56] and classconditional [11] diffusion models, where the guidance often
produces overly uniform outputs, leading to a loss in diver-

3029

