This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LumiNet: Latent Intrinsics Meets Diffusion Models for Indoor Scene Relighting
Xiaoyan Xing1
1

Konrad Groh2

University of Amsterdam

2

Sezer Karaoglu1

BCAI-Bosch

3

Theo Gevers1

Anand Bhattad3

Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

https://luminet-relight.github.io

(a) Target lighting condition

(b) Original source image

(c) Relit source image

(d) Original
(Zoomed)

(e) Relit
(Zoomed)

Figure 1. LumiNet transfers complex lighting conditions from a target image (a) to a source image (b), synthesizing a relit version of the
source image (c) while preserving its geometry and albedo. In the top row, observe how LumiNet transforms the scene from nighttime
to daytime by transferring strong directional light from the target image’s window to the source image. Key details in the relit image
include pronounced gloss on the table, shadows cast onto the carpet (center left), cast shadows from the TV stand (left corner), and, most
importantly, reflections of the table on the TV screen (d, e). These changes demonstrate plausible control over both direct and indirect
lighting effects, such as reflections, specular highlights and shadow placement. In the bottom row, LumiNet “knows” about luminaires. In
the relit image, two bedside lamps illuminate the scene, transforming it from a dimly lit room into a well-lit environment. This suggests that
LumiNet recognizes the spatial arrangement of objects and infers where light sources should be switched on. Note how LumiNet introduces
specular highlights on the left painting (see crop) and gloss in the far-right corner of the bedroom, where a previously invisible bedside lamp
is now turned on. These results show LumiNet’s ability to handle complex lighting phenomena—including direct illumination, specular
highlights, cast shadows, inter-reflections and other indirect effects—while maintaining scene geometry, and albedo.

Abstract

a learned adaptor that injects the target’s latent extrinsic
properties via cross-attention and light-weight fine-tuning.
Unlike traditional ControlNet, which generates images
with conditional maps from a single scene, LumiNet processes latent representations from two different images preserving geometry and albedo from the source while
transferring lighting characteristics from the target. Experiments demonstrate that our method successfully transfers
complex lighting phenomena including specular highlights
and indirect illumination across scenes with varying spatial
layouts and materials, outperforming existing approaches
on challenging indoor scenes using only images as input.

We introduce LumiNet, a novel architecture that leverages
generative models and latent intrinsic representations for
transferring lighting from one image to another. Given a
source image and a target lighting image, LumiNet generates a relit version of the source scene that captures the target’s lighting. Our approach makes two key contributions: a
data curation strategy from the StyleGAN-based relighting
model for our training, and a modified diffusion-based ControlNet that processes both latent intrinsic properties from
the source image and latent extrinsic properties from the
target image. We further improve lighting transfer through

442

