This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalized Recorrupted-to-Recorrupted:
Self-Supervised Learning Beyond Gaussian Noise
Brayan Monroy1 , Jorge Bacca1 , Julián Tachella2
Universidad Industrial de Santander, 2 CNRS & ENS Lyon
https://github.com/bemc22/GeneralizedR2R
1

Abstract
Recorrupted-to-Recorrupted (R2R) has emerged as a
methodology for training deep networks for image restoration in a self-supervised manner from noisy measurement
data alone, demonstrating equivalence in expectation to
the supervised squared loss in the case of Gaussian noise.
However, its effectiveness with non-Gaussian noise remains unexplored. In this paper, we propose Generalized
R2R (GR2R), extending the R2R framework to handle a
broader class of noise distribution as additive noise like
log-Rayleigh and address the natural exponential family including Poisson, Gamma and Binomial noise distributions,
which play a key role in many applications including lowphoton imaging and synthetic aperture radar. We show that
the GR2R loss is an unbiased estimator of the supervised
loss and that the popular Stein’s unbiased risk estimator
can be seen as a special case. A series of experiments with
Gaussian, Poisson, and Gamma noise validate GR2R’s performance, showing its effectiveness compared to other selfsupervised methods.

Self-supervised image denoising has attracted significant
attention for its potential to perform denoising without relying on clean, paired data, making it a baseline for many
image restoration techniques. Methods in this domain are
often classified based on the level of prior knowledge they
require about the noise distribution [29].
The first class of methods relies on two independent
noisy realizations per image to construct a loss that uses
these pairs as inputs and targets. Noise2Noise [18] can obtain performance close to supervised learning, but obtaining
independent noisy pairs is impossible in many applications.
The second class only assumes that the noise distribution is
independent across pixels. Blind Spot Networks, for example, rely on a masking strategy applied to the input or within
the network itself [1, 15, 30]. This approach forces the network to predict denoised values based solely on neighboring pixels, leveraging the assumption of local spatial correlations within the image. As the central pixel is not used,
these methods generally have suboptimal performance.
The third family of methods assumes that the noise
distribution is fully known, and can obtain performances
that are on par with supervised learning. Stein’s Unbiased Risk Estimator (SURE) [27] loss matches the supervised loss in expectation, and is available for Gaussian,
Poisson [17] and Poisson-Gaussian noise distributions [17].
However, SURE requires approximating the divergence of
the restoration function [24], which can lead to suboptimal results. The computation of the divergence is avoided
by Noise2Score [14], which approximates the score of the
noisy distribution during training and leverages Tweedie’s
formula to denoise at the test time. Finally, Recorrupted-toRecorrupted [20, 22] synthetically recorrupts a noisy image
into noisy pairs, removing the need to approximate the divergence term, while remaining an unbiased estimator of
the supervised loss. However, this method has been mostly
demonstrated with Gaussian noise.
This work extends the R2R framework to address noise
types beyond the traditional additive Gaussian model by introducing Generalized R2R (GR2R). Our formulation covers two noise modalities: additive noise and noise distri-

1. Introduction
Image restoration is essential in many scientific and engineering applications, from medical imaging to computational photography. State-of-the-art image restoration approaches train a deep network to predict clean images from
noisy measurements. However, most approaches are based
on supervised learning, which requires clean image datasets
for effective deep network training [11]. This reliance
introduces significant challenges, such as the scarcity of
clean image data in many important medical and scientific
imaging applications [2], and the risk of models overfitting or memorizing specific examples [12, 26]. As a result, there is growing interest in developing robust selfsupervised learning strategies that can operate exclusively
on noisy data [7, 18, 22], representing a promising direction
for the future of image processing and computer vision.

28155

