This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unseen Visual Anomaly Generation
Han Sun
EPFL, Switzerland

Yunkang Cao
HUST, China

Hao Dong
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Olga Fink
EPFL, Switzerland

{han.sun, olga.fink}@epfl.ch, cyk hust@hust.edu.cn, hao.dong@ibk.baug.ethz.ch

Abstract
Visual anomaly detection (AD) presents significant challenges due to the scarcity of anomalous data samples. While
numerous works have been proposed to synthesize anomalous samples, these synthetic anomalies often lack authenticity or require extensive training data, limiting their applicability in real-world scenarios. In this work, we propose Anomaly Anything (AnomalyAny), a novel framework that leverages Stable Diffusion (SD)’s image generation capabilities to generate diverse and realistic unseen anomalies. By conditioning on a single normal sample during test time, AnomalyAny is able to generate unseen anomalies for arbitrary object types with text descriptions. Within AnomalyAny, we propose attention-guided
anomaly optimization to direct SD’s attention on generating
hard anomaly concepts. Additionally, we introduce promptguided anomaly refinement, incorporating detailed descriptions to further improve the generation quality. Extensive experiments on MVTec AD and VisA datasets demonstrate AnomalyAny’s ability in generating high-quality unseen anomalies and its effectiveness in enhancing downstream AD performance. Our demo and code are available
at https://hansunhayden.github.io/CUT.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Visual anomaly detection (AD) [5] aims to identify unusual
or unexpected patterns in image data that deviate from a
normal distribution of features, and is essential in fields
such as industrial inspection and quality control [3]. Since
anomalies are rare and difficult to collect, most existing AD
methods rely on unsupervised learning [12, 22, 32] using
solely normal samples. Despite recent advancements in the
AD field, the scarcity of anomalous samples for training remains a persistent challenge. To address this, various studies have explored visual anomaly generation, as illustrated
in Fig. 1. Some approaches [33, 35] augment normal samples by cropping and pasting random patterns, either from
natural patterns in other datasets or from the images them-

selves. While this generates diverse anomalous samples and
is applicable to unseen objects without training, these samples often appear unrealistic. Another approach involves
generating visual anomalies using generative models [17],
which produce more realistic images but require sufficient
and representative normal and abnormal samples for training, which is typically challenging to obtain for AD. Given
the rarity and variability of anomalies, collecting a representative set of anomalous samples is difficult. Additionally, the diversity of product variants and configurations in
industrial applications often results in a lack of representative normal samples [18], presenting an additional challenge. These limitations lead to a shortage of both abnormal
and normal samples. Consequently, generative models are
often not suitable for real-world applications with limited
data and may be biased towards the few available training
observations.
Given the limitations of existing visual anomaly generation methods, we aim to generate diverse and realistic
unseen anomalies using minimal normal data without any
anomalous samples. The goal motivates us to explore Stable Diffusion (SD) [27], a latent text-to-image diffusion
model known for generating diverse images across various domains. Although SD demonstrates impressive image generation capabilities, it is not specifically designed
for visual anomaly generation. Consequently, when applied
directly for anomaly generation, SD may produce images
that deviate from the desired normal distribution and fail to
accurately represent realistic anomaly patterns (Fig. 3 (b)).
Prior approaches [17, 35] suggest fine-tuning SD on available normal or anomalous samples, but this approach is constrained in data scarcity scenarios and can compromise SD’s
ability to generalize to unseen data and anomaly types.
In this work, we propose Anomaly Anything (AnomalyAny) for realistic and diverse unseen visual anomaly generation. We leverage SD for unseen visual anomaly generation with anomaly text descriptions, which can be defined manually or automatically acquired from GPT-4 [24]
with object category as input. Instead of fine-tuning SD on
normal data, we introduce test-time normal sample condi-

25508

