This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reconstructing People, Places, and Cameras
Lea Müller*

Hongsuk Choi*

Anthony Zhang Brent Yi
UC Berkeley

Jitendra Malik

Angjoo Kanazawa

{mueller,hongsuk,anthony zhang1234,brentyi,malik,kanazawa}@berkeley.edu
* equal contribution

Figure 1. Humans and Structure from Motion (HSfM). We propose a method for the joint reconstruction of humans, scene point
clouds, and cameras from an uncalibrated, sparse set of images depicting people. By explicitly incorporating humans into the traditional
Structure from Motion (SfM) framework through 2D human keypoint correspondences and leveraging robust initialization from an off-theshelf model for scene and camera reconstruction, our approach demonstrates that integrating these three elements—people, scenes, and
cameras—synergistically improves the reconstruction accuracy of each component. Unlike prior work in SfM and human pose estimation,
our method reconstructs metric-scale scene point clouds and camera parameters, informed by human mesh predictions, while situating
human meshes in coherent world coordinates consistent with the surrounding environment without any explicit contact constraints.

Abstract
We present “Humans and Structure from Motion” (HSfM),
a method for jointly reconstructing multiple human meshes,
scene point clouds, and camera parameters in a metric world coordinate system from a sparse set of uncalibrated multi-view images featuring people. Our approach
combines data-driven scene reconstruction with the traditional Structure-from-Motion (SfM) framework to achieve
more accurate scene reconstruction and camera estimation
while simultaneously recovering human meshes. In con-

trast to existing scene reconstruction and SfM methods that
lack metric scale information, our method estimates approximate metric scale by leveraging the human statistical model. Furthermore, our method reconstructs multiple human meshes within the same world coordinate system with the scene point cloud, effectively capturing spatial
relationships among individuals and their positions in the
environment. We initialize the reconstruction of humans,
scenes, and cameras using robust foundational models and
jointly optimize these elements. This joint optimization synergistically improves the accuracy of each component. We

21948

