This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CaMuViD: Calibration-Free Multi-View Detection
Amir Etefaghi Daryani*

M. Usman Maqbool Bhutta
Byron Hernandez
University of Florida

Henry Medeiros

{amir.etefaghidar, m.maqboolbhutta, bhernandezosorio, hmedeiros}@ufl.edu

Abstract
Projection

Feature Extraction

Multi-view object detection in crowded environments
presents significant challenges, particularly for occlusion
management across multiple camera views. This paper introduces a novel approach that extends conventional multi-view
detection to operate directly within each camera’s image
space. Our method finds objects bounding boxes for images
from various perspectives without resorting to a bird’s eye
view (BEV) representation. Thus, our approach removes the
need for camera calibration by leveraging a learnable architecture that facilitates flexible transformations and improves
feature fusion across perspectives to increase detection accuracy. Our model achieves Multi-Object Detection Accuracy
(MODA) scores of 95.0% and 96.5% on the Wildtrack and
MultiviewX datasets, respectively, significantly advancing
the state of the art in multi-view detection. Furthermore, it
demonstrates robust performance even without ground truth
annotations, highlighting its resilience and practicality in
real-world applications. These results emphasize the effectiveness of our calibration-free, multi-view object detector.

Feature Fusion

Back
Projection

Refinement and
Detection

Figure 1. Overview of the Calibration-free Multi-View Detection
(CaMuViD) architecture. Our method uses N camera views to
extract feature maps and estimate the projection (Api ) / back projection matrices (Abi ) that predict bounding boxes Bi for each view.

locations. The world plane, typically a BEV, encompasses
points in the 3D world at a fixed height, generally z = 0,
i.e., the ground plane. Assuming average human dimensions,
bounding boxes from various image views can be projected
to the real world and aggregated at each location on the
ground plane. This enables multi-view pedestrian detection
methods to assess ground-plane pedestrian occupancy. However, this approach faces significant challenges, primarily
due to view obstructions, particularly in densely populated
environments. The dynamic nature of occlusions and the lack
of adequate criteria to determine optimal camera perspectives for multi-object detection further complicate matters.
Traditional methods [12, 18, 27, 28] address the challenges of multi-view pedestrian detection by making predictions from individual cameras and matching distinct features
of pedestrians across different views. However, occlusions
still pose significant challenges, often leading to association errors. To solve the global association problem, several

1. Introduction
Occlusions continue to represent a significant barrier to the
accurate detection and tracking of objects using computer
vision techniques. Various strategies have been employed
to address this problem for single-view scenarios, such as
part-based detection [38, 47] and detectors trained with specialized losses [42, 46]. Alternatively, numerous approaches
make use of additional information from RGB-D sensors
[14, 15], LIDAR point clouds [7], or multiple RGB camera views [6, 11]. In this study, we consider the problem of
multi-view pedestrian detection, which is the recognition of
pedestrians from several RGB camera perspectives.
Multi-view pedestrian detection uses synchronized
frames from multiple calibrated cameras that observe a common region of interest with partially overlapping fields of
view. The calibration parameters of the cameras provide the
connection between 2D image coordinates and 3D world

1220

