This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CARL: A Framework for Equivariant Image Registration
Hastings Greer1 Lin Tian1 François-Xavier Vialard2,3 Roland Kwitt4 Raúl San José Estépar5
Marc Niethammer1
1

UNC Chapel Hill 2 LIGM, Université Gustave Eiffel 3 MOKAPLAN, INRIA Paris
4
University of Salzburg 5 Harvard Medical School

Abstract
Image registration estimates spatial correspondences between image pairs. These estimates are typically obtained
via numerical optimization or regression by a deep network.
A desirable property is that a correspondence estimate (e.g.,
the true oracle correspondence) for an image pair is maintained under deformations of the input images. Formally,
the estimator should be equivariant to a desired class of
image transformations. In this work, we present careful
analyses of equivariance properties in the context of multistep deep registration networks. Based on these analyses
we 1) introduce the notions of [U, U ] equivariance (network
equivariance to the same deformations of the input images)
and [W, U ] equivariance (where input images can undergo
different deformations); we 2) show that in a suitable multistep registration setup it is sufficient for overall [W, U ]
equivariance if the first step has [W, U ] equivariance and
all others have [U, U ] equivariance; we 3) show that common displacement-predicting networks only exhibit [U, U ]
equivariance to translations instead of the more powerful
[W, U ] equivariance; and we 4) show how to achieve multistep [W, U ] equivariance via a coordinate-attention mechanism combined with displacement-predicting networks. Our
approach obtains excellent practical performance for 3D
abdomen, lung, and brain medical image registration. We
match or outperform state-of-the-art (SOTA) registration
approaches on all the datasets with a particularly strong
performance for the challenging abdomen registration.

Moving Image

Warped (CARL)

Grid (CARL)

Fixed Image

Moving Image

Warped (CARL{ROT})

Grid (CARL{ROT})

Fixed Image

1. Introduction
Image registration is an important task in medical image
computing [39]. There is extensive research into solving
this problem with deep learning [2, 27, 36, 45]. In particular, unsupervised deep learning methods [12, 43] have attained strong performance on many benchmarks [19]. We
present an equivariant registration layer that can be inserted
into an unsupervised multi-step registration network, which
makes the overall registration architecture equivariant to independently translated images.

26014

Figure 1. Results on a pair from the Abdomen1k dataset, and a
synthetically rotated example from the HCP dataset. CARL tackles large displacements and arbitrary rotations via equivariance.

