This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Split Adaptation for Pre-trained Vision Transformers
Lixu Wang1, 2 *, Bingqi Shang1 *, Yi Li1 , Payal Mohapatra1 , Wei Dong2 , Xiao Wang1 , Qi Zhu1
1
Northwestern University. 2 Nanyang Technological University.
lixu.wang@ntu.edu.sg, {bingqishang2025, yili2023.1, payalmohapatra2026}@u.northwestern.edu,
wei dong@ntu.edu.sg, {wangxiao, qzhu}@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs), extensively pre-trained on
large-scale datasets, have become fundamental to foundation models, enabling adaptation to diverse downstream
tasks. Existing adaptation methods typically require direct
data access, rendering them infeasible in privacy-sensitive
domains where clients are often reluctant to share their
data. A straightforward solution may be sending the pretrained ViT to clients for local adaptation, which poses issues of model intellectual property and incurs heavy client
computation overhead. To address these issues, we propose
a novel split adaptation (SA) method that enables effective
downstream adaptation while protecting data and models.
SA, inspired by split learning (SL), segments the pre-trained
ViT into a frontend and a backend, with only the frontend
shared with the client for data representation extraction.
But unlike regular SL, SA replaces frontend parameters
with low-bit quantized values, preventing direct exposure of
the model. SA allows the client to add bi-level noise to the
frontend and the extracted data representations, ensuring
data protection. Accordingly, SA incorporates data-level
and model-level out-of-distribution enhancements to mitigate noise injection’s impact. Our SA focuses on the challenging few-shot adaptation and adopts patch retrieval augmentation for overfitting alleviation. Extensive experiments
on multiple datasets validate SA’s superiority over stateof-the-art methods and demonstrate its defense against advanced data reconstruction attacks while preventing model
leakage with minimal computation cost on the client side.
The source codes can be found at https://github.
com/conditionWang/Split_Adaptation.

visual tasks [13, 28, 50, 52]. ViTs have been equipped with
general semantic knowledge during large-scale pre-training,
which can be readily transferred to other domains including
sensitive fields such as healthcare [41], finance [10], and
manufacturing [8]. However, adapting pre-trained ViTs in
these sensitive domains is extremely challenging.
In real-world scenarios, model adaptation often follows a
two-party framework, where the pre-trained model is hosted
on a server, and the training data resides on a client. In
non-sensitive domains, training data can be directly shared
with the server. Real-world examples include users uploading data to access OpenAI’s CLIP model API [40] or tune
GPT-3.5 [3]. However, in sensitive domains, data is often
tightly linked to personal privacy [12, 14], intellectual property (IP) [19, 47], and ethical concerns [15], making any
form of public exposure, sharing, or transfer strictly prohibited. In this context, an alternative solution might involve
sending the model to the client for local adaptation, as in
federated learning [11, 27, 46]. However, large pre-trained
models are expensive to obtain, making their owners unlikely to share or transfer them freely [47]. Moreover, given
that these pre-trained models consist of billions of parameters, adaptation on the client side would incur substantial
computational and storage costs.

1. Introduction

To our knowledge, there have been a few preliminary
attempts to achieve downstream adaptation of pre-trained
models while safeguarding data and models. Split learning
(SL) [1, 44] divides the model into segments managed by
different parties, which can partially protect the model from
full exposure. Additionally, SL only communicates intermediate representations, avoiding the leakage of raw data.
However, SL has critical drawbacks. On one hand, emerging malicious attacks, such as data reconstruction attacks
(DRA) [16, 23, 38, 53, 54], can infer sensitive information
from the intermediate representations. On the other hand,
standard SL places the model training on the client side,
imposing high computational costs. Beyond SL, a recent
method called offsite tuning (OT) [49] has been proposed,
which involves the server sending an emulator—a simplified version of the pre-trained model—to the client. The

In recent years, pre-trained vision transformers (ViTs) [13]
have become mainstream foundational models in computer
vision, delivering remarkable performance across a range of
* Equal contributions.

20092

