This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vid2Sim: Generalizable, Video-based Reconstruction of Appearance, Geometry
and Physics for Mesh-free Simulation
Chuhao Chen1 Zhiyang Dou1,2 Chen Wang1 Yiming Huang1
Anjun Chen1,3 Qiao Feng1 Jiatao Gu1 Lingjie Liu1
1
University of Pennsylvania 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 Zhejiang University
{chuhaoc,zydou,chenw30,ymhuang9,chen3110,fengqiao,jiagu32,lingjie.liu}@seas.upenn.edu

https://czzzzh.github.io/Vid2Sim
Simulation

Input Videos

Novel Force

Novel Material

Reconstruction

Young’s Modulus:
Poisson’s Ratio:
Novel Boundary

Physical Properties

3D Gaussian Splats

Skinning Weights

Figure 1. Vid2Sim achieves high-quality reconstruction of appearance, geometry, and physics from multi-view videos effectively. The
reconstruction results are simulation-ready, enabling high-fidelity and visually appealing animations via mesh-free simulation. Here, we
present our method’s reconstruction and simulation results in the GSO [10] dataset.

Abstract
Faithfully reconstructing textured shapes and physical
properties from videos presents an intriguing yet challenging problem. Significant efforts have been dedicated to advancing such a system identification problem in this area.
Previous methods often rely on heavy optimization pipelines
with a differentiable simulator and renderer to estimate
physical parameters. However, these approaches frequently
necessitate extensive hyperparameter tuning for each scene
and involve a costly optimization process, which limits both
their practicality and generalizability. In this work, we propose a novel framework, Vid2Sim, a generalizable videobased approach for recovering geometry and physical properties through a mesh-free reduced simulation based on
Linear Blend Skinning (LBS), offering high computational

efficiency and versatile representation capability. Specifically, Vid2Sim first reconstructs the observed configuration
of the physical system from video using a feed-forward neural network trained to capture physical world knowledge. A
lightweight optimization pipeline then refines the estimated
appearance, geometry, and physical properties to closely
align with video observations within just a few minutes. Additionally, after the reconstruction, Vid2Sim enables highquality, mesh-free simulation with high efficiency. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves superior accuracy and efficiency in reconstructing geometry
and physical properties from video data.

1. Introduction

26545

Understanding and reconstructing appearance, geometry,
and physical properties from observations with high fidelity,

