This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GaussianUDF: Inferring Unsigned Distance Functions through 3D Gaussian
Splatting
Shujuan Li1 , Yu-Shen Liu1 *, Zhizhong Han2
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
1

lisj22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn, h312h@wayne.edu

Input

Abstract
Reconstructing open surfaces from multi-view images is
vital in digitalizing complex objects in daily life. A
widely used strategy is to learn unsigned distance functions
(UDFs) by checking if their appearance conforms to the
image observations through neural rendering. However,
it is still hard to learn continuous and implicit UDF representations through 3D Gaussians splatting (3DGS) due
to the discrete and explicit scene representation, i.e., 3D
Gaussians. To resolve this issue, we propose a novel approach to bridge the gap between 3D Gaussians and UDFs.
Our key idea is to overfit thin and flat 2D Gaussian planes
on surfaces, and then, leverage the self-supervision and
gradient-based inference to supervise unsigned distances
in both near and far area to surfaces. To this end, we introduce novel constraints and strategies to constrain the
learning of 2D Gaussians to pursue more stable optimization and more reliable self-supervision, addressing the challenges brought by complicated gradient field on or near
the zero level set of UDFs. We report numerical and visual comparisons with the state-of-the-art on widely used
benchmarks and real data to show our advantages in terms
of accuracy, efficiency, completeness, and sharpness of reconstructed open surfaces with boundaries. Project page:
https://lisj575.github.io/GaussianUDF/

2DGS

2S-UDF

VRPrior

Ours

Figure 1. The comparisons with 2DGS [14], 2S-UDF [9], and VRPrior [55]. Our method recovers the most accurate open surfaces
without artifacts.

1. Introduction

volume rendering, i.e., the ability of reconstructing shapes
with arbitrary topologies and the differentiability for backpropagating the gradients of rendering errors. Eventually,
the open surfaces can be extracted from the zero level set of
the learned UDF.
Recent methods [9, 22, 23, 32, 55] usually learn a UDF
within a radiance field through the volume rendering introduced by NeRF [34]. They infer unsigned distances at sampled points along rays emitted from views through an additional transformation which bridges the gap between the
UDF and the radiance field. However, NeRF-based rendering is not efficient due to intersection finding in ray tracing.
This makes 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) a promising solution since rasterizing 3D Gaussians is not only differentiable but also faster than ray tracing in NeRF-based rendering. However, one obstacle coming from the discrete and
explicit scene representations, i.e., 3D Gaussians, is that
they are much different from the continuous and implicit
radiance field. Therefore, how to overcome this obstacle is
the most challenging problem to reveal complete, smooth,
and continuous UDFs through 3DGS.
To resolve this problem, we introduce a novel approach
to inferring UDFs from multi-view images through 3DGS,
which can efficiently reconstruct high-quality surfaces with
open structures as shown in Figure 1. Our key idea is to

It is vital but still challenging to reconstruct shapes with
open surfaces and sharp boundaries from multi-view images. A widely used strategy is to learn implicit representations, such as unsigned distance functions (UDFs), by
minimizing rendering errors of UDFs with respect to multiview observations, such as RGB images [9, 22, 23, 32, 55].
This strategy shows promising results because of the advantages of both implicit representations and the neural
* Corresponding author: Yu-Shen Liu

27113

