This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Watermarking One for All: A Robust Watermarking Scheme
Against Partial Image Theft
Gaozhi Liu1

Silu Cao1 Zhenxing Qian1 * Xinpeng Zhang1 Sheng Li1
1
Fudan University 2 China Agricultural University

Wanli Peng2

{gzliu24, slcao23}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {zxqian, zhangxinpeng, lisheng}@fudan.edu.cn
wlpeng@cau.edu.cn

Watermarked Image

Original Image

Abstract

Famous Tall
Towers
Worldwide

The proliferation of digital images on the Internet has provided unprecedented convenience, but also poses significant
risks of malicious theft and misuse. Digital watermarking
has long been researched as an effective tool for copyright
protection. However, it often falls short when addressing
partial image theft, a common yet little-researched issue in
practical applications. Most existing schemes typically require the entire image as input to extract watermarks. However, in practice, malicious users often steal only a portion
of the image to create new content. The stolen portion can
have arbitrary shape or content, being fused with a new
background and may have undergone geometric transformations, making it challenging for current methods to extract correctly. To address the issues above, we propose
WOFA (Watermarking One for All), a robust watermarking scheme against partial image theft. First of all, we define the entire process of partial image theft and construct
a dataset accordingly. To gain robustness against partial image theft, we then design a comprehensive distortion
layer that incorporates the process of partial image theft
and several common distortions in channel. For easier network convergence, we employ a multi-level network structure on the basis of the commonly used embedder-distortion
layer-extractor architecture and adopt a progressive training strategy. Abundant experiments demonstrate that our
superior performance in the scenario of partial image theft,
offering a more reliable solution for protecting digital images against unauthorized use in practical use.

Copyright
Information

Famous Tall
Towers
Worldwide

Watermark
Embedding

Shanghai City
Skyline

Watermark
Extraction

Malicious
User 1
①

Fused Image 1

Copyright
Information

Malicious
User 2

Watermark
Extraction

②

Fused Image 2
Malicious
User 3

Watermark
Extraction

③

Fused Image 3

Figure 1. A brief description to the scenario of partial image theft.
Malicious users may take arbitrary portion of the image to create
new content.

1. Introduction

theft and unauthorized misuse of digital content. Digital
watermarking technology has been researched for long and
proven to be an effective tool for copyright protection by
embedding ownership information within images. However, despite its extensive research and development, existing watermarking schemes often fall short when confronted
with the scenario of partial image theft.

In the digital era, the widespread availability and sharing
of digital images on the Internet have revolutionized how
we access and disseminate information. This ease of access, however, comes with significant risks, particularly the
* Corresponding author.

8225

