This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Audio-guided Video Representation with Gated Attention for
Video-Text Retrieval
Boseung Jeong1
1

Jicheol Park2

Sungyeon Kim1

Suha Kwak1,2

2
Dept. of CSE, POSTECH
Graduate School of AI, POSTECH
{boseung01, jicheol, sungyeon.kim, suha.kwak}@postech.ac.kr

http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/AVIGATE

Abstract

Query text: a man and a woman are singing on the beach
𝑆𝑖𝑚 ∶ 0.9 
𝑆𝑖𝑚 ∶ 0.9 

𝑆𝑖𝑚 ∶ 0.6 

Video-text retrieval, the task of retrieving videos based on a
textual query or vice versa, is of paramount importance for
video understanding and multimodal information retrieval.
Recent methods in this area rely primarily on visual and
textual features and often ignore audio, although it helps
enhance overall comprehension of video content. Moreover, traditional models that incorporate audio blindly utilize the audio input regardless of whether it is useful or not,
resulting in suboptimal video representation. To address
these limitations, we propose a novel video-text retrieval
framework, Audio-guided VIdeo representation learning
with GATEd attention (AVIGATE), that effectively leverages
audio cues through a gated attention mechanism that selectively filters out uninformative audio signals. In addition,
we propose an adaptive margin-based contrastive loss to
deal with the inherently unclear positive-negative relationship between video and text, which facilitates learning better video-text alignment. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that AVIGATE achieves state-of-the-art performance
on all the public benchmarks.

La La La~♪

La La La~♪

No Audio

Visual only
Visual-audio fusion
Ours
(a) Audio signal giving an important clue (e.g., the sound of people singing)

Query text: a man with a very red nose
𝑆𝑖𝑚 ∶ 0.7 
𝑆𝑖𝑚 ∶ 0.9 

𝑆𝑖𝑚 ∶ 0.9 

BG Sound

BG Sound

No Audio

Visual only
Visual-audio fusion
Ours
(b) Audio signal giving confuse (e.g., background noise)

Figure 1. Comparative illustration of different scenarios using
visual-only, audio-video fusion, and our proposed gated fusion
approach. (a) In cases where the audio signal provides valuable
information, the audio-video fusion and our gated fusion achieve
high similarity scores. (b) When the audio signal is misleading,
traditional fusion methods degrade performance. In contrast, our
gated fusion mechanism successfully filters irrelevant audio cues,
maintaining a high similarity score like the visual-only case.

aging the audio information in video representation learning
has potential to substantially improve retrieval performance
by offering a richer multi-modal representation of video, as
shown in Figure 1(a).
Nevertheless, only a few recent studies [14, 20] have
explored the use of audio information in video-text retrieval tasks. ECLIPSE [20] employs a cross-modal attention mechanism to fuse audio and visual modalities, creating a unified representation. TEFAL [14], on the other hand,
proposes text-conditioned feature alignment based on the
cross-attention mechanism for audio and textual modalities
as well as for visual and textual modalities. These methods
commonly assume that audio contributes positively to enhancing the video representation, but this is not always the
case. When irrelevant audio is processed jointly with visual

1. Introduction
Video-text retrieval, the task of finding videos relevant to
text query or vice versa, has gained significant interest due
to its diverse applications in video understanding and multimodal information retrieval. Most existing methods in this
field have primarily focused on leveraging visual information from videos and textual information from accompanying metadata or captions [5, 8, 9, 13, 19, 22, 23, 24, 31].
While these methods have greatly advanced video-text retrieval, they still have a significant limitation: they neglect
audio information of video that conveys ‘invisible but audible’ cues providing essential context such as speaker identity, background noises, or emotional nuances, which are
crucial for a comprehensive understanding of video. Lever-

26202

