This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DaCapo: Score Distillation as Stacked Bridge for Fast and
High-quality 3D Editing
Yufei Huang1,2 , Bangyan Liao1 , Yuqi Hu2 , Haitao Lin1 , Lirong Wu1 , Siyuan Li1 , Cheng Tan1 ,
Zicheng Liu1 , Yunfan Liu1 , Zelin Zang5 , Chang Yu2,† ,* Zhen Lei3,4,5,6†
1
Zhejiang University 2 Westlake University
3
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
CAIR, HKSIS, Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
School of Computer Science and Engineering, the Faculty of Innovation Engineering, M.U.S.T

Abstract
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) has been successfully extended to text-driven 3D scene editing with 2D pretrained
diffusion models. However, SDS-based editing methods suffer from lengthy optimization processes with slow inference and low quality. We attribute the issue of lengthy
optimization to the stochastic optimization scheme used in
SDS-based editing, where many steps may conflict with
each other (e.g., the inherent trade-off between editing and
preservation). To reduce this internal conflict and speed
up the editing process, we propose to separate editing and
preservation in time with a diffusion time schedule and
frame the 3D editing optimization process as a diffusion
bridge sampling process. Motivated by the analysis above,
we introduce DaCapo, a fast diffusion sampling-like 3D
editing method that incorporates a novel stacked bridge
framework, which estimates a direct diffusion bridge between source and target distribution with only a pretrained
2D diffusion model. Specifically, It models the editing process as a combination of inversion and generation, where
both processes happen simultaneously as a stack of Diffusion Bridges. DaCapo shows a 15× speed-up with comparable results to the state-of-the-art SDS-based method. It
completes the process in just 2,500 steps on a single GPU
and accommodates a variety of 3D representation methods.

Splatting (3DGS) [17] have enabled versatile 3D applications. Building on these advances, Dreamfusion [28] introduced Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) to generate 3D
scenes from text using 2D diffusion model prior [29] in a
stochastic optimization manner. SDS is now widely used to
optimize 3D models like NeRF and 3DGS. While SDS has
advanced 3D scene generation, the equally important area
of 3D scene editing remains relatively underexplored [9].
Unlike generation, 3D scene editing requires both alignment with target texts and preservation of source content.
To extend SDS, which lacks preservation, the Delta Denoising Score (DDS) [12] was introduced to reduce noisy gradients in SDS for better background maintenance. And Posterior Distillation Sampling (PDS) [19] further improved 3D
editing by enhancing text alignment and identity preservation via minimizing the proposed stochastic latent matching loss. However, SDS-based editing methods suffer from
lengthy optimization process with slow inference and
low quality, limiting their use in real-world applications.
Past methods are slow and ineffective because steps often conflict during stochastic optimization process of
Score Distillation. Key issues include preservation versus
editing and overlapping edits from language ambiguity, especially in high-noise phases. Reducing these conflicts is
crucial for efficient optimization.

1. Introduction

How can internal conflicts be reduced? Previous 2D
editing methods [7, 11] used masks to separate editing and
preservation spatially, but for 3D, acquiring and updating
multi-view masks is labor-intensive [10, 27, 34]. Given
the link between space and time, we ask: can editing and
preservation be separated temporally? The answer is yes.
We could assign distinct tasks to different time stages
and frame 3D editing as a diffusion sampling-like process with coarse-to-fine editing stages. In early, high-noise
phases, preservation constrains editing to shape the struc-

3D vision is crucial in various fields, such as virtual reality, film, gaming, and design [9, 17, 25]. Recent Advances
in Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [25] and 3D Gaussian
* Project Lead
† Corresponding Author

16304

