This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaskGaussian: Adaptive 3D Gaussian Representation from Probabilistic Masks
Yifei Liu1,2⋆ Zhihang Zhong1† Yifan Zhan1,3 Sheng Xu2 Xiao Sun1,†
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 Beihang University 3 The University of Tokyo

Abstract

for expensive ray point sampling and MLP inferences, make
it less practical for scenarios where real-time rendering is
critical, such as virtual and augmented reality.
In this context, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [14]
introduces an explicit Gaussian unit-based representation, achieving both photorealistic and real-time rendering
through highly parallel GPU kernels. Although explicit
Gaussian units can be splatted [40] efficiently for fast rasterization, the densification and optimization processes tend
to generate redundant Gaussians [5, 6, 17, 28], resulting in
even millions of points for a single indoor scene. This not
only reduces training and rendering speed, which could otherwise be faster, but also leads to significant memory consumption.
Recent methods attempt to address this problem by pruning redundant Gaussian points with two main approaches.
The first computes a hand-crafted importance score [5, 6,
28] per Gaussian and removes those below a preset threshold. The calculation of the importance score typically requires a scan of all training images, therefore limiting the
pruning to be performed only once or twice during training. The other stream uses a learnable mask [4, 17, 34]
and multiplies them by Gaussian attributes to receive a gradient. While this allows for gradual removal of Gaussians
with masks, the rendered scene keeps relying on the same
subset of Gaussians: if a Gaussian is not removed, it persists
present from the beginning until the current iteration; once
a Gaussian is removed, it is permanently excluded. Pruning with such deterministic generation of masks does not
account for the scene’s evolution after pruning, potentially
leading to the removal of Gaussians that may appear to contribute little at the current iteration, but are vital and difficult
to recover in later stages of training (Fig. 3). This yields
suboptimized reconstructions, where finer details or small
objects are removed (Fig. 2).
In this work, we instead treat Gaussians as being probabilistically existing and utilize them by sampling based
on their probability of existence. By rendering solely the
sampled Gaussians, we naturally enable the dynamic evolution of the sampled Gaussians alongside the rendered scene,
as both the sampling and rendering processes are differentiable. However, only rendering with sampled Gaussians is

While 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has demonstrated remarkable performance in novel view synthesis and real-time
rendering, the high memory consumption due to the use of
millions of Gaussians limits its practicality. To mitigate this
issue, improvements have been made by pruning unnecessary Gaussians, either through a hand-crafted criterion or
by using learned masks. However, these methods deterministically remove Gaussians based on a snapshot of the
pruning moment, leading to sub-optimized reconstruction
performance from a long-term perspective. To address this
issue, we introduce MaskGaussian, which models Gaussians as probabilistic entities rather than permanently removing them, and utilize them according to their probability of existence. To achieve this, we propose a maskedrasterization technique that enables unused yet probabilistically existing Gaussians to receive gradients, allowing
for dynamic assessment of their contribution to the evolving scene and adjustment of their probability of existence.
Hence, the importance of Gaussians iteratively changes
and the pruned Gaussians are selected diversely. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method in achieving better rendering quality with
fewer Gaussians than previous pruning methods, pruning
over 60% of Gaussians on average with only a 0.02 PSNR
decline. Our code can be found at: https://github.
com/kaikai23/MaskGaussian

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis (NVS) aims to generate photorealistic images of a 3D scene from unobserved views, and has
emerged as a crucial area in computer vision and graphics. Central to the main progress is the Neural Radiance
Field (NeRF) [24], a method that utilizes multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to represent 3D scenes as continuous volumetric functions, enabling high-fidelity image generation
from a collection of 2D images. Despite its impressive results, NeRF’s computational demands, particularly the need
⋆ Work done during his internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
† denotes co-corresponding authors.

681

