This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniK3D: Universal Camera Monocular 3D Estimation
Luigi Piccinelli1
Yung-Hsu Yang1
1

ETH Zürich

2

Christos Sakaridis1

Siyuan Li1

Toyota Motor Europe

Mattia Segu1

Wim Abbeloos2
3

Luc Van Gool1,3

INSAIT, Sofia University St. Kliment Ohridski

Abstract

3D Point Cloud

RGB Input

Monocular 3D estimation is crucial for visual perception.
However, current methods fall short by relying on oversimplified assumptions, such as pinhole camera models or rectified
images. These limitations severely restrict their general applicability, causing poor performance in real-world scenarios with fisheye or panoramic images and resulting in substantial context loss. To address this, we present UniK3D1 ,
the first generalizable method for monocular 3D estimation
able to model any camera. Our method introduces a spherical 3D representation which allows for better disentanglement of camera and scene geometry and enables accurate
metric 3D reconstruction for unconstrained camera models.
Our camera component features a novel, model-independent
representation of the pencil of rays, achieved through a
learned superposition of spherical harmonics. We also introduce an angular loss, which, together with the camera module design, prevents the contraction of the 3D outputs for
wide-view cameras. A comprehensive zero-shot evaluation
on 13 diverse datasets demonstrates the state-of-the-art performance of UniK3D across 3D, depth, and camera metrics,
with substantial gains in challenging large-field-of-view and
panoramic settings, while maintaining top accuracy in conventional pinhole small-field-of-view domains. Code and
models are available at github.com/lpiccinelli-eth/unik3d.

Equirectangular

One Model
One Input
Any Camera

Mei

UniK3D
Fisheye624

Pinhole

Figure 1. UniK3D introduces a novel and versatile approach that
delivers precise metric 3D geometry estimation from a single image and for any camera type, ranging from pinhole to panoramic,
without requiring any camera information. By leveraging (i) a flexible and general spherical formulation both for the radial dimension
of 3D space and for the two camera-model-dependent orientation
dimensions and (ii) advanced conditioning strategies. UniK3D outperforms traditional models without needing camera calibration or
domain-specific tuning.

els are constrained to a relative output scale. Nonetheless,
for practical applications, a consistent and reliable metricscaled monocular depth estimate (MMDE) is crucial, as it
enables accurate 3D reconstruction and geometric scene understanding necessary for embodied agents.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D scene geometry is a fundamental task in computer vision since such 3D information serves as a crucial
cue for action planning and execution [13, 80]. The scene’s
geometry 3D estimation task is vital for a wide range of applications, including autonomous navigation [49, 67] and 3D
modeling [12], where accurate spatial understanding is essential. Recent advances in generalizable monocular depth estimation (MDE) [27, 56, 72] deliver impressive performance
and visual quality across various domains, but these mod-

Existing methods have made considerable strides in the
above direction of metric estimation. Earlier approaches assumed known camera intrinsics at test time [22, 76], while
more recent works have relaxed this assumption [8, 53, 54].
However, these approaches still impose restrictive assumptions about input cameras, such as relying on a basic pinhole
camera model [8, 53] or requiring access to ground-truth
rectification parameters [76]. These simplifications substantially hinder the applicability and degrade the performance

1 Pronounced “Unique-3D”, with K denoting the intrinsics matrix.

1028

