This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Incomplete Multi-modal Brain Tumor Segmentation
via Learnable Sorting State Space Model
Zheyu Zhang1,2 Yayuan Lu1,2 Feipeng Ma1,2 Yueyi Zhang1,2 Huanjing Yue3 Xiaoyan Sun1,2, *
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230026, China
2
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Biomedical Imaging and Intelligent Processing,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei 230088, China
3
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China
Zhangzy0@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

sunxiaoyan@ustc.edu.cn

Brain tumor segmentation plays a crucial role in clinical diagnosis, yet the frequent unavailability of certain
MRI modalities poses a significant challenge. In this paper, we introduce the Learnable Sorting State Space Model
(LS3M), a novel framework designed to maximize the utilization of available modalities for brain tumor segmentation. LS3M excels at efficiently modeling long-range dependencies based on the Mamba design, while incorporating differentiable permutation matrices that reorder input
sequences based on modality-specific characteristics. This
dynamic reordering ensures that critical spatial inductive
biases and long-range semantic correlations inherent in 3D
brain MRI are preserved, which is crucial for imcomplete
multi-modal brain tumor segmentation. Once the input sequences are reordered using the generated permutation matrix, the Series State Space Model (S3M) block models the
relationships between them, capturing both local and longrange dependencies. This enables effective representation
of intra-modal and inter-modal relationships, significantly
improving segmentation accuracy. Extensive experiments
on the BraTS2018 and BraTS2020 datasets demonstrate
that LS3M outperforms existing methods, offering a robust
solution for brain tumor segmentation, particularly in scenarios with missing modalities.

tain modalities, like T1ce due to contrast agent allergies,
presents a challenge. Existing methods addressing missing
modalities fall into two categories: (1) bridging the data gap
between complete and missing modalities through modality synthesis [26, 27, 32, 51, 54, 62] and knowledge distillation [2, 39, 47, 48] and (2) optimizing architectures to
maximize information extraction from available modalities,
which is the focus of our work. Some methods [8, 63] adopt
multi-scale convolutions to capture critical structural details
by focusing on spatial inductive bias, such as local texture.
However, the limited receptive field restricts their ability to
represent tumor tissue effectively, especially when other areas may appear visually similar in localized views, making
it difficult to differentiate tumor tissue [35, 40]. Some methods explore models such as Transformers [55] and graph
neural networks [51, 59] to build long-range semantic correlation to mitigate the mentioned problem, but they suffer from quadratic computational complexity. The computational inefficiency is further exacerbated by the large sequence lengths typical of 3D brain MRI.

1. Introduction

Recent advancements in selective state space models
(SSMs), such as Mamba [7, 13], offer the potential to obtain long-range representations for available modalities with
dynamic weighting parameters in an efficient way. Mamba
flattens the 3D brain MRI into a 1D sequence and iteratively
scans this sequence to compress hidden states, which are
then used to enhance the current token by combining it with
previously scanned tokens. While Mamba can efficiently
build long-range dependencies, the influence of distant tokens on the current token diminishes significantly. This becomes problematic for 3D brain MRI, as flattening the sequence destroys the 3D spatial structure. Follow-up methods [33, 50, 58, 65] propose bi-directional, four-directional,
and omni-directional scanning to mitigate distortion to spatial structures, as shown in Fig. 1. However, these methods

Accurate brain tumor segmentation in clinical settings relies on the integration of various MRI modalities (FLAIR,
T1ce, T1, T2) that provide complementary information for
diagnosis. However, the frequent unavailability of cer* Corresponding author

25982

