This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IDOL: Instant Photorealistic 3D Human Creation from a Single Image
Yiyu Zhuang1,4∗

Jiaxi Lv2,4∗ Hao Wen3,4∗ Qing Shuai4
Shifeng Chen2,5 Yujiu Yang3 Xun Cao1

Ailing Zeng4†
Wei Liu4

Hao Zhu1†

1 Nanjing University, 2 Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3 Tsinghua University, 4 Tencent, 5 Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology

https://yiyuzhuang.github.io/IDOL/

Figure 1. This work introduces (a) IDOL, a feed-forward, single-image human reconstruction framework that is fast, high-fidelity, and
generalizable; (b) Utilizing the proposed Large Generated Human Multi-View Dataset consisting of 100K multi-view subjects, our method
exhibits exceptional generalizability in handling diverse human shapes, cross-domain data, severe viewpoints, and occlusions; (c) With a
uniform structured representation, the avatars can be directly animatable and easily editable.

Abstract
Creating a high-fidelity, animatable 3D full-body avatar
from a single image is a challenging task due to the diverse appearance and poses of humans and the limited
availability of high-quality training data. To achieve fast
and high-quality human reconstruction, this work rethinks
the task from the perspectives of dataset, model, and representation. First, we introduce a large-scale HUmancentric GEnerated dataset, HuGe100K, consisting of 100K
diverse, photorealistic sets of human images. Each set
contains 24-view frames in specific human poses, generated using a pose-controllable image-to-multi-view model.

Next, leveraging the diversity in views, poses, and appearances within HuGe100K, we develop a scalable feedforward transformer model to predict a 3D human Gaussian
representation in a uniform space from a given human image. This model is trained to disentangle human pose, body
shape, clothing geometry, and texture. The estimated Gaussians can be animated without post-processing. We conduct
comprehensive experiments to validate the effectiveness of
the proposed dataset and method. Our model demonstrates
the ability to efficiently reconstruct photorealistic humans
at 1K resolution from a single input image using a single
GPU instantly. Additionally, it seamlessly supports various
applications, as well as shape and texture editing tasks.

Work done during the internship at Tencent by Yiyu Zhuang, Jiaxi
Lv, and Wenhao.
∗ Equal contributions
† Corresponding authors

26308

