This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UCOD-DPL: Unsupervised Camouflaged Object Detection
via Dynamic Pseudo-label Learning
Weiqi Yan1 , Lvhai Chen1 , Huaijia Ko1 , Shengchuan Zhang1 *, Yan Zhang1 , Liujuan Cao1
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
weiqi yan@outlook.com lvhaichen2002@gmail.com zsc 2016@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

Pseudo-label

Strategy
Backbone
(freeze)

Unsupervised Camoflaged Object Detection (UCOD) has
gained attention since it doesn’t need to rely on extensive
pixel-level labels. Existing UCOD methods typically generate pseudo-labels using fixed strategies and train 1 × 1 convolutional layers as a simple decoder, leading to low performance compared to fully-supervised methods. We emphasize two drawbacks in these approaches: 1). The model
is prone to fitting incorrect knowledge due to the pseudolabel containing substantial noise. 2). The simple decoder
fails to capture and learn the semantic features of camouflaged objects, especially for small-sized objects, due to the
low-resolution pseudo-labels and severe confusion between
foreground and background pixels. To this end, we propose a UCOD method with a teacher-student framework
via Dynamic Pseudo-label Learning called UCOD-DPL,
which contains an Adaptive Pseudo-label Module (APM),
a Dual-Branch Adversarial (DBA) decoder, and a LookTwice mechanism. The APM module adaptively combines
pseudo-labels generated by fixed strategies and the teacher
model to prevent the model from overfitting incorrect knowledge while preserving the ability for self-correction; the
DBA decoder takes adversarial learning of different segmentation objectives, guides the model to overcome the
foreground-background confusion of camouflaged objects,
and the Look-Twice mechanism mimics the human tendency to zoom in on camouflaged objects and performs secondary refinement on small-sized objects. Extensive experiments show that our method demonstrates outstanding performance, even surpassing some existing fully supervised
methods. The code is available now1 .

Unlabeled

Not Suitable for COD

Supervise
Extra
Regularization

1*1 Conv
Prediction

a). Previous Fixed Pseudo-label-based Methods

Unlabeled

Designed for COD

Low
Performance

Pseudo-label

Strategy
Backbone
(freeze)

Fixed &
Low Quality

Teacher
DBA Decoder

Dynamic
Mixing
Supervise

Student
DBA Decoder
Prediction

Good
Performance

b). Dynamic Pseudo-label-based Method(ours)

Figure 1. Comparison between our method and previous pseudolabel-based methods.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author
1 https://github.com/Heartfirey/UCOD-DPL

“Camouflage” originates from the natural behavior of objects blending into their surroundings using similar textures
and colors to evade “predators”[4]. Camouflaged Object
Detection (COD) is a challenging semantic segmentation
task aimed at learning to segment objects that are visually
hidden in their backgrounds, which has significant applications in several important fields [11, 50].
Although fully-supervised methods have achieved significant progress in the COD tasks [19, 38, 49, 59, 60],
they heavily rely on large-scale human annotations for training. However, it is difficult to get pixel-level human labels for camouflaged objects due to their complex visual
attributes [27]. Therefore, this reliance on annotations has
sparked increasing interest in the task of unsupervised camouflage object detection (UCOD) among researchers. However, existing UCOD methods typically use pseudo-labels
generated by fixed strategies to train a single 1 × 1 convolutional layer [44, 63]. By investing in existing methods,
we identified two main issues: 1). The pseudo-label con-

30365

