This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-Modal Interactive Perception Network with Mamba for Lung Tumor
Segmentation in PET-CT Images
Jie Mei1,2 *, Chenyu Lin2 *, Yu Qiu3†, Yaonan Wang1 , Hui Zhang1 , Ziyang Wang4 , Dong Dai4
1

Hunan University

2

3

Nankai University

Hunan Normal University

4

Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital

{jiemei, yaonan, zhanghui1983}@hnu.edu.cn, {chenyulin, yqiu}@mail.nankai.edu.cn
{wangziyang, dongdai}@tmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related deaths
globally. PET-CT is crucial for imaging lung tumors,
providing essential metabolic and anatomical information,
while it faces challenges such as poor image quality, motion
artifacts, and complex tumor morphology. Deep learningbased models are expected to address these problems, however, existing small-scale and private datasets limit significant performance improvements for these methods. Hence,
we introduce a large-scale PET-CT lung tumor segmentation dataset, termed PCLT20K, which comprises 21,930
pairs of PET-CT images from 605 patients. Furthermore,
we propose a cross-modal interactive perception network
with Mamba (CIPA) for lung tumor segmentation in PETCT images. Specifically, we design a channel-wise rectification module (CRM) that implements a channel state space
block across multi-modal features to learn correlated representations and helps filter out modality-specific noise. A
dynamic cross-modality interaction module (DCIM) is designed to effectively integrate position and context information, which employs PET images to learn regional position
information and serves as a bridge to assist in modeling
the relationships between local features of CT images. Extensive experiments on a comprehensive benchmark demonstrate the effectiveness of our CIPA compared to the current state-of-the-art segmentation methods. We hope our research can provide more exploration opportunities for medical image segmentation. The dataset and code are available at https://github.com/mj129/CIPA.

CT

CT

PET

CT

PET

Figure 1. Some examples of the PET-CT images and the corresponding tumor picked from the PCLT20K dataset. The metabolic
data from PET enhances sensitivity to lesion location, while the
anatomical details from CT help precise localization and morphological characterization.

tumors, providing crucial metabolic and anatomical information [37]. The accurate segmentation of lung tumors in
PET-CT images is essential for effective diagnosis, treatment planning, and monitoring of therapeutic responses.
However, this task faces substantial challenges due to the
complex nature of lung tumors and the variability in PETCT images, such as poor image quality, motion artifacts or
noise, complex morphology, irregular shape, and unclear tumor boundaries. Deep learning-based segmentation models
are expected to address these problems, which can significantly improve segmentation accuracy, reduce the workload
of radiologists, and lead to consistent assessments.
However, these models are usually data-hungry, and their
performance gains mainly benefit from the large amounts of
accurately labeled training data. Although some annotated
datasets have been build for model training and validation,
they are usually small-scale [4, 6, 15, 16, 33, 37, 43, 44].
The two largest publicly reported datasets of lung only comprise 6,985 PET-CT pairs from 126 patients [37] and 3,905
pairs from 290 patients [33], respectively. What’s worse,
almost all of these datasets are private, severely hindering
further advancements in this field. We summarize the recent
PET-CT tumor segmentation datasets in Table 1. Although

1. Introduction
Lung cancer remains one of the most significant causes
of cancer-related mortality globally. Positron Emission
Tomography-Computed Tomography (PET-CT) has become a cornerstone in the imaging and evaluation of lung
∗ Equal contribution.

PET

† Corresponding author.

15653

