This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RaSS: Improving Denoising Diffusion Samplers with Reinforced Active
Sampling Scheduler
Xin Ding1 Lei Yu2 Xin Li1† Zhijun Tu2 Hanting Chen2 Jie Hu2∗ Zhibo Chen1
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the great success of denoising diffusion samplers in improving the generative capability and sampling efficiency given a pre-trained diffusion
model. However, most sampling schedulers in diffusion
models lack the sampling dynamics and planning capability for future generation results, leading to suboptimal solutions. To overcome this, we propose the Reinforced Active
Sampling Scheduler, termed RaSS, intending to find the optimal sampling trajectory by actively planning and adjusting the sampling steps for each sampling process in time.
Concretely, RaSS divides the whole sampling process into
five stages and introduces a reinforcement learning (RL)
agent to continuously monitor the generated instance and
perceive the potential generation results, thereby achieving
optimal instance- and state-adaptive sampling steps decision. Meanwhile, a sampling reward is designed to assist
the planning capability of the RL agent by balancing the
sampling efficiency and generation quality. The RaSS is a
plug-and-play module, which is applicable to multiple denoising diffusion samplers of diffusion models. Extensive
experiments on different benchmarks have shown that our
RaSS can consistently improve the generation quality and
efficiency across various tasks, without introducing significant computational overhead.

image-to-image translation [12, 76], video synthesis [7, 8]
and even image restoration [36, 54, 56, 58]. However, the
computationally intensive nature of the manual and heuristic sequential forward process poses a significant challenge,
impeding the real-time adoption of these models.
Consequently, extensive research has been conducted
to accelerate the repetitive sequential inference speed of
DDPM models, which can be broadly categorized into two
approaches: optimizing sampling efficiency and optimizing inference efficiency. The optimization of inference efficiency [29, 45, 46, 50, 59, 73] aims to reduce the single
step inference time of the model, while the optimization of
sampling [11, 18, 30, 40, 65, 78] efficiency aims to reduce
the total number of samples required. Although these methods have shown improvements in the generation speed of
diffusion models, they have also resulted in a degradation
of model performance. We have identified that due to the
unique long-sequence generation process of diffusion models, the final quality is not solely determined by the results
of individual inference steps but is also influenced by the
temporal sequence of model samples.
Our goal is to optimize the sampling sequence in diffusion models to accelerate sampling efficiency while enhancing sample quality. Previous approaches focusing on sampling schedulers have utilized dynamic programming [70]
methods to minimize the model’s evidence lower bound
(ELBO) in order to obtain an optimized K-step schedule.
Another study [69] involves differentiating through sample quality scores to optimize the sampler. However, these
methods have either failed to improve the quality of generated samples, as measured by metrics such as Fréchet Inception Distance (FID), or have imposed limitations on the
applicable task scenarios and data types. Zhang et al.[75]
introduced the concept of reinforcement learning to train
a prompt-specific step scheduler. However, their optimization of the sampling sequence is limited, and the approach is
primarily applicable to text-to-image tasks, providing only
marginal improvements compared to the baseline sampler.
Additionally, as shown in fig. 1, it can be observed that none
of the aforementioned approaches consider the state of the
sampling process, which is contrary to common sense.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a surge of interest in Diffusion models [14, 23, 44, 62, 64, 66] due to their impressive image-generation capabilities, establishing them as
extremely reliable probabilistic generative models. These
models have effectively mitigated the issues of mode collapse and instability that plagued previous implicit generative models. Diffusion models have been successfully
applied to a wide range of applications, including text-toimage generation [21, 53, 67], image editing [10, 28, 47],
† Corresponding Author.
∗ Co-corresponding Author.

12923

