This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GPS as a Control Signal for Image Generation
Chao Feng1

Ziyang Chen1
1

Aleksander Hołyński2

University of Michigan

2

Alexei A. Efros2

Andrew Owens1

UC Berkeley

https://cfeng16.github.io/gps-gen/
Average
ÒbuildingÓ

GPS-to-3D Óstatue of libertyÓ

Òstreet view in oil
painting styleÓ

ÒselfieÓ

Òstreet view in acrylic
painting styleÓ

Òstreet view in
watercolor painting styleÓ

Òtourist busÓ

ÒtouristsÓ

ÒselfieÓ

ÒselfieÓ

Òaerial viewÓ

ÒbagelÓ

ÒsunshineÓ

ÒspringÓ

Òaerial viewÓ

ÒsupermanÓ

ÒsupermanÓ

ÒboatÓ

ÒsupermanÓ

ÒautumnÓ

ÒbagelÓ

ÒsnowingÓ

Figure 1. What can we do with a GPS-conditioned image generation model? We train GPS-to-image models and use them for tasks
that require a fine-grained understanding of how images vary within a city. For example, a model trained on densely sampled geotagged
photos from Manhattan can generate images that match a neighborhood’s general appearance and capture key landmarks like museums and
parks. We show images sampled from a variety of GPS locations and text prompts. For example, an image with the text prompt “bagel”
results in a modern-style sculpture when conditioned on the Museum of Modern Art and an impressionist-style painting when conditioned
on the Metropolitan Museum of Art. We also “lift” a 3D NeRF of the Statue of Liberty from a landmark-specific 2D GPS-to-image model
using score distillation sampling. Please see the project webpage and the supplementary material for more examples.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Each time a tourist snaps a photo, they capture a tiny sliver
of the world. Research on geotagged photo collections
has shown that these images, when analyzed collectively,
can reveal surprising amounts of information, including the
landmarks that people visit [18], the 3D structure of the
buildings they see [83], and geographic variations in architecture and fashion [21, 56].

We show that the GPS tags contained in photo metadata provide a useful control signal for image generation.
We train GPS-to-image models and use them for tasks that
require a fine-grained understanding of how images vary
within a city. In particular, we train a diffusion model to
generate images conditioned on both GPS and text. The
learned model generates images that capture the distinctive
appearance of different neighborhoods, parks, and landmarks. We also extract 3D models from 2D GPS-to-image
models through score distillation sampling, using GPS conditioning to constrain the appearance of the reconstruction from each viewpoint. Our evaluations suggest that our
GPS-conditioned models successfully learn to generate images that vary based on location, and that GPS conditioning
improves estimated 3D structure.

In this paper, we show that GPS conditioning is a useful and abundantly available control signal for image generation, which complements other common forms of conditioning like text. We train diffusion models to map GPS coordinates from a particular city (or from a more spatially localized region) to images. To solve this problem, the model
needs to capture fine-grained distinctions in how images
change their appearance over space. Such a model, for example, needs to know the locations of museums and parks,

2766

