This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EchoWorld: Learning Motion-Aware World Models
for Echocardiography Probe Guidance
Yang Yue1 *

Yulin Wang1∗

Haojun Jiang1

Pan Liu2

Shiji Song1

Gao Huang1

1

Tsinghua University 2 PLA General Hospital
yueyang22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Echocardiography is crucial for cardiovascular disease
detection but relies heavily on experienced sonographers.
Echocardiography probe guidance systems, which provide
real-time movement instructions for acquiring standard
plane images, offer a promising solution for AI-assisted
or fully autonomous scanning. However, developing effective machine learning models for this task remains challenging, as they must grasp heart anatomy and the intricate interplay between probe motion and visual signals.
To address this, we present EchoWorld, a motion-aware
world modeling framework for probe guidance that encodes anatomical knowledge and motion-induced visual dynamics, while effectively leveraging past visual-motion sequences to enhance guidance precision. EchoWorld employs a pre-training strategy inspired by world modeling
principles, where the model predicts masked anatomical regions and simulates the visual outcomes of probe adjustments. Built upon this pre-trained model, we introduce a
motion-aware attention mechanism in the fine-tuning stage
that effectively integrates historical visual-motion data, enabling precise and adaptive probe guidance. Trained on
more than one million ultrasound images from over 200
routine scans, EchoWorld effectively captures key echocardiographic knowledge, as validated by qualitative analysis.
Moreover, our method significantly reduces guidance errors compared to existing visual backbones and guidance
frameworks, excelling in both single-frame and sequential evaluation protocols. Code is available at https:
//github.com/LeapLabTHU/EchoWorld.

1. Introduction
Cardiovascular disease remains one of the leading causes
of death worldwide [46, 52], making timely and accurate
diagnosis critical to saving lives. Among the various di* Equal contribution.

Corresponding authors.

agnostic tools available, echocardiography stands out as a
non-invasive, cost-effective, and widely accessible method
for assessing cardiac health. In this method, a probe emits
high-frequency sound waves into the body, which are reflected by heart structures and captured to generate realtime images (Figure 1(a)). However, performing cardiac
ultrasound scans requires the sonographer to carefully maneuver the probe to acquire key sectional views of the heart
(Figure 1(a-b)), a task that demands extensive anatomical
knowledge and experience. This complexity, coupled with a
global shortage of qualified sonographers, limits the accessibility of ultrasound services, particularly in less developed
regions. This challenge has motivated the development of
probe guidance systems [19, 29, 40, 48] capable of assisting less experienced sonographers or, in the longer term, enabling fully autonomous ultrasound scanning robots. Such
systems hold the potential to democratize cardiac care by
providing real-time, actionable feedback, which can significantly improve the efficiency of the scanning process.
As shown in Figure 1(c), probe guidance in echocardiography can be formulated as a vision-based sequential prediction problem, where a model needs to predict the necessary probe movement vectors to reach each target view, utilizing historical visual-motion data. However, unlike other
computer vision tasks in medical imaging, it presents the
unique challenge of integrating motion data with dynamic
visual observations. Autonomous systems must not only
understand the complex anatomical structures of the heart
(e.g. chambers, valves, and vessels) but also how these
structures are represented in ultrasound images as the probe
moves and changes position. While early efforts in probe
guidance [19, 40, 50] have made some progress in developing assistive and autonomous scanning systems, few studies focus on a fundamental problem: How can we develop
a principled approach that effectively learns essential medical knowledge while seamlessly integrating visual and motion data for precise probe guidance?
In this paper, we present EchoWorld, a motion-aware
world modeling framework that begins by pre-training a

25993

