This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Commonsense Video Question Answering through Video-Grounded
Entailment Tree Reasoning

1

Huabin Liu1,3* , Filip Ilievski2 , Cees G. M. Snoek3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam 3 University of Amsterdam
huabinliu@sjtu.edu.cn, f.ilievski@vu.nl, c.g.m.snoek@uva.nl

toy movement

Abstract
This paper proposes the first video-grounded entailment
tree reasoning method for commonsense video question answering (VQA). Despite the remarkable progress of large
visual-language models (VLMs), there are growing concerns that they learn spurious correlations between videos
and likely answers, reinforced by their black-box nature
and remaining benchmarking biases. Our method explicitly
grounds VQA tasks to video fragments in four steps: entailment tree construction, video-language entailment verification, tree reasoning, and dynamic tree expansion. A
vital benefit of the method is its generalizability to current
video- and image-based VLMs across reasoning types. To
support fair evaluation, we devise a de-biasing procedure
based on large-language models that rewrites VQA benchmark answer sets to enforce model reasoning. Systematic
experiments on existing and de-biased benchmarks highlight the impact of our method components across benchmarks, VLMs, and reasoning types.

boy shake leg

Visual Evidence Grounding
Q: Why did the boy shake his leg?
(a) Mimic toy movement
(b) Trying to crawl forward

Video
Question
Answering

: (a)

# Statement of (a)
The boy shake his legs to mimic toy movement.

entail

entail
Decomposition

The boy mimics the
toy’s movement.

Video-Grounded
Entailment
Tree
Reasoning

The toy is in
shaking.

Statement Verification

Figure 1. Given a video questioning answering task, our framework performs explicit reasoning over an entailment tree, where
answer options are transformed into statements. These statements
are then recursively decomposed and verified based on videogrounded evidence relevant to the question.

1. Introduction
This paper proposes a video-grounded reasoning method
for commonsense video question answering (VQA). VQA
has a long tradition in computer vision [11, 16, 25, 26],
with remarkable recent progress obtained through videoand image-language models [10, 12, 14, 17, 33] (throughout this paper collectively referred to as vision-language
models, or VLMs). Yet, there are growing concerns that
their improved performance is based on learning shortcut
associations between videos and likely answers, as opposed
to reasoning [27]. Such concerns are reinforced by the
black-box nature of these models [12, 14], which prohibits
a deeper understanding of their decision-making process.
We are inspired by recent work in natural language processing, where entailment trees have emerged as a mechanism to explicitly analyze answer candidates, using LLMs

to recursively decompose a candidate into hypotheses and
natural language inference formalisms to evaluate the hypotheses [4]. Entailment trees provide an explicit reasoning chain that explains the model’s decision-making process and enables verification of each step, thus addressing concerns about shortcut learning. Recently, Sanders et
al. [19] have devised a mechanism to apply entailment trees
to videos. However, their work assumes video transcripts
are explicitly provided to evaluate answers, thus avoiding
the complexity of grounding hypotheses into video content.
In this paper, we propose the first video-grounded entailment tree reasoning method for commonsense VQA.
Our method explicitly grounds VQA tasks to video fragments in four steps: (i) entailment tree construction, (ii)
video-language entailment verification, (iii) tree reasoning,
and (iv) dynamic tree expansion. As shown in Fig. 1, given

∗ Work was done as a visiting student at University of Amsterdam

3262

