This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LSNet: See Large, Focus Small
Ao Wang1 Hui Chen2 * Zijia Lin1 Jungong Han3 Guiguang Ding1
1
School of Software, Tsinghua University 2 BNRist, Tsinghua University
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
wanga24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

jichenhui2012@gmail.com

jungonghan77@gmail.com

linzijia07@tsinghua.org.cn

dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

and Vision Transformers (ViTs) [17, 50, 63, 74, 88, 93],
have significantly pushed the boundaries in various computer vision tasks [3, 4, 23, 70, 82, 84, 92]. However, both
of them have traditionally been computationally expensive,
presenting remarkable challenges for their practical deployments, especially for real-time applications [44, 49].
Recently, researchers have been actively exploring the
lightweight and efficient designs of vision networks [7, 34,
55, 57, 60, 76] for practical applications. Despite effective, these lightweight models typically rely on certain basic modules, such as self-attention mechanism [17, 77, 86]
and convolution [38, 39], for token mixing [73]. This reliance poses challenges regarding the efficiency and effectiveness of the underlying perception and aggregation processes within lightweight networks, often compromising
the architectural expressiveness or inference speed.
Essentially, contextual perception and aggregation are
core processes for token mixing [19, 73, 91], facilitating
spatial information fusion. Perception models contextual
relationships among tokens, while aggregation integrates
token features based on corresponding relationships. In existing lightweight models, two dominant token mixing approaches, self-attention and convolution, employ distinct
perception and aggregation processes. Specifically, selfattention employs global perception through holistic feature
interaction and global aggregation via weighted sum of all
features. Convolution uses the relative positional relationships among tokens for perception and aggregates features
with static kernel weights. However, as shown in Fig. 1.(a)
and (b), both approaches have limitations. (1) Self-attention often introduces excessive attention to regions lacking
significant interconnections, leading to less critical aggregation, e.g., in less informative background [46, 65]. Besides, its perception and aggregation share the same mixing scope. The expansion of context in self-attention and
its variants [19, 33, 49] comes at the expense of notable
computational complexity. These hinder lightweight models from pursuing high representational ability under low
computational budgets. (2) In convolution, the relationships

Vision network designs, including Convolutional Neural
Networks and Vision Transformers, have significantly advanced the field of computer vision. Yet, their complex computations pose challenges for practical deployments, particularly in real-time applications. To tackle this issue, researchers have explored various lightweight and efficient
network designs. However, existing lightweight models predominantly leverage self-attention mechanisms and convolutions for token mixing. This dependence brings limitations in effectiveness and efficiency in the perception and
aggregation processes of lightweight networks, hindering
the balance between performance and efficiency under limited computational budgets. In this paper, we draw inspiration from the dynamic heteroscale vision ability inherent in the efficient human vision system and propose a
“See Large, Focus Small” strategy for lightweight vision
network design. We introduce LS (Large-Small) convolution, which combines large-kernel perception and smallkernel aggregation. It can efficiently capture a wide range
of perceptual information and achieve precise feature aggregation for dynamic and complex visual representations,
thus enabling proficient processing of visual information.
Based on LS convolution, we present LSNet, a new family of lightweight models. Extensive experiments demonstrate that LSNet achieves superior performance and efficiency over existing lightweight networks in various vision tasks. Codes and models are available at https:
//github.com/jameslahm/lsnet.

1. Introduction
Vision network designs have consistently been a focal point
of research in the field of computer vision [17, 22, 24, 50,
51, 96], where two prominent network architectures, i.e.,
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [24, 29, 38, 39, 51]
* Corresponding author.

9718

