This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dyn-HaMR: Recovering 4D Interacting Hand Motion from a Dynamic Camera
Zhengdi Yu

Stefanos Zafeiriou Tolga Birdal
Imperial College London

Hand motion
Camera motion

Input video

HaMeR

Dyn-HaMR (Ours)

Figure 1. Dyn-HaMR as a remedy for the motion entanglement in the wild. The green and red arrows represent the direction of the hand
motion. Dyn-HaMR (Ours) can disentangle the camera and object poses to recover the 4D global hand motion in the real world whilst
state-of-the-art 3D hand reconstruction methods like HaMeR [37], IntagHand [25] and ACR [51] fail to do so since they cannot disentangle
the sources of motion.

Abstract
We propose Dyn-HaMR, to the best of our knowledge, the
first approach to reconstruct 4D global hand motion from
monocular videos recorded by dynamic cameras in the wild.
Reconstructing accurate 3D hand meshes from monocular videos is a crucial task for understanding human behaviour, with significant applications in augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR). However, existing methods for monocular hand reconstruction typically rely on a weak perspective camera model, which simulates hand motion within
a limited camera frustum. As a result, these approaches
struggle to recover the full 3D global trajectory and often
produce noisy or incorrect depth estimations, particularly
when the video is captured by dynamic or moving cameras, which is common in egocentric scenarios. Our DynHaMR consists of a multi-stage, multi-objective optimization pipeline, that factors in (i) simultaneous localization
and mapping (SLAM) to robustly estimate relative camera

motion, (ii) an interacting-hand prior for generative infilling and to refine the interaction dynamics, ensuring plausible recovery under (self-)occlusions, and (iii) hierarchical initialization through a combination of state-of-the-art
hand tracking methods. Through extensive evaluations on
both in-the-wild and indoor datasets, we show that our approach significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in
terms of 4D global mesh recovery. This establishes a new
benchmark for hand motion reconstruction from monocular video with moving cameras. Our project page is at
https://dyn-hamr.github.io/.

1. Introduction
In our increasingly digitalized world, capturing and interpreting human movement has become essential for advancing our interaction with computers (HCI) and immersive experiences of augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR). Many
of these applications rely on a single, off-the-shelf body-

27716

