This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Classifier-guided CLIP Distillation for Unsupervised Multi-label Classification
Dongseob Kim
Samsung Electronics, Republic of Korea

Hyunjung Shim
KAIST, Republic of Korea

kou.kim@samsung.com

kateshim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Multi-label classification is crucial for comprehensive image understanding, yet acquiring accurate annotations is
challenging and costly. To address this, a recent study
suggests exploiting unsupervised multi-label classification
leveraging CLIP, a powerful vision-language model. Despite CLIP’s proficiency, it suffers from view-dependent predictions and inherent bias, limiting its effectiveness. We
propose a novel method that addresses these issues by leveraging multiple views near target objects, guided by Class
Activation Mapping (CAM) of the classifier, and debiasing pseudo-labels derived from CLIP predictions. Our
Classifier-guided CLIP Distillation (CCD) enables selecting multiple local views without extra labels and debiasing
predictions to enhance classification performance. Experimental results validate our method’s superiority over existing techniques across diverse datasets. The code is available at https://github.com/k0u-id/CCD.

H : 0.99 / P : 0.00

(a) original image

H : 0.96 / P : 0.00

(b) 1/4 patch

H : 0.14 / P : 0.12

(c) 1/9 patch

H : 0.05 / P : 0.65

(d) 1/16 patch

Figure 1. CLIP prediction probability of horse (H) and person (P)
corresponding to different input patches from single image: (a)
The original image and its CLIP prediction. (b) The 1/4 sized
patch and its CLIP prediction. (c) The 1/9 sized patch and its
CLIP prediction. (d) The 1/16 sized patch and its CLIP prediction. The same colored box indicates each patch cropped from the
corresponding box.

oritize labeling trivial objects first.
To overcome these limitations, we focus on an unsupervised multi-label classification problem leveraging a visionlanguage model. One such model is CLIP [31], trained
on an extensive dataset of 400M {image, text} pairs from
the web. As a result, this model excels at recognizing diverse visual attributes and object categories in a zero-shot
manner. Most recently, CDUL [2] applied CLIP for unsupervised multi-label classification by using it as a pseudolabeling function. CDUL generates pseudo-labels for both
global and local views to help identify less prominent objects, training a multi-label classifier with each view-label
pair. However, CDUL overlooks the limitations of CLIP,
which hinders its prediction performance.
In this paper, we identified two reliability issues in
CLIP, addressing them to fully harness CLIP’s potential.
Firstly, we demonstrate that CLIP’s predictions are highly
view-dependent, considerably impacting classification performance. In a toy experiment, we observe that changing
the crop position and size of an image leads to notable
changes in CLIP’s predictions. For example, in Fig. 1,
when the cropped area is slightly shifted or increased, the
probabilities for the horse and person classes vary significantly. Based on these key observations, we use multiple local views near the target object to mitigate the uncertainty of
CLIP’s pseudo-labels caused by view changes. Specifically,

1. Introduction
Multi-label classification plays a pivotal role in identifying
multiple classes within an image, serving as a foundational
component in image understanding [25, 27, 29, 36, 40].
Its applications are widespread, including recommendation
systems, surveillance, and image retrieval [43]. However,
acquiring multi-label annotations poses challenges due to
the difficulty and significant costs involved in meticulously
annotating all relevant objects within an image.
To solve this problem, various label-efficient techniques
have been proposed. A partial label setting [5, 10, 14, 20,
24, 30] annotates only a portion of the classes appearing
in an image and considers the rest as unknown labels. In
the extreme, single positive label settings [7, 19, 35, 42, 51]
provide only one positive label per image, with all other labels assumed unknown. However, these methods still incur
labeling costs. Besides, current studies simulate partial and
single positive settings by randomly omitting labels from a
fully labeled dataset, which may not accurately reflect the
actual labeling practices. For example, humans tend to pri-

4661

