This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoScene: Distilling Video Diffusion Model to Generate 3D Scenes in One Step
Hanyang Wang,* Fangfu Liu,* Jiawei Chi, Yueqi Duan†
Tsinghua University
Input view 2
Input view 2

Input views

Input views

Input views

DL3DV

Sora

Zip-NeRF

Input view 2

Figure 1. VideoScene enables one-step video generation of 3D scenes with strong structural consistency from just two input images. The
top row shows the input sparse views and the following two rows show the output novel-view video frames.

Abstract
Recovering 3D scenes from sparse views is a challenging
task due to its inherent ill-posed problem. Conventional
methods have developed specialized solutions (e.g., geometry regularization or feed-forward deterministic model) to
mitigate the issue. However, they still suffer from performance degradation by minimal overlap across input views
with insufficient visual information. Fortunately, recent
video generative models show promise in addressing this
challenge as they are capable of generating video clips with
plausible 3D structures. Powered by large pretrained video
NeRF-LLFF diffusion models, some pioneering research start to explore
the potential of video generative prior and create 3D scenes
from sparse views. Despite impressive improvements, they
are limited by slow inference time and the lack of 3D constraint, leading to inefficiencies and reconstruction artifacts
that do not align with real-world geometry structure. In
this paper, we propose VideoScene to distill the video diffusion model to generate 3D scenes in one step, aiming
to build an efficient and effective tool to bridge the gap
from video to 3D. Specifically, we design a 3D-aware leap
flow distillation strategy to leap over time-consuming re-

dundant information and train a dynamic denoising policy
network to adaptively determine the optimal leap timestep
during inference. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our VideoScene achieves faster and superior 3D scene generation results than previous video diffusion models, highlighting its potential as an efficient tool for future video to
3D applications.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution. † The corresponding author.

The demand for efficient 3D reconstruction is growing
rapidly, driven by applications in real-time gaming [63],
autonomous navigation [1], and beyond [41, 76]. Techniques like NeRF [43] and 3DGS [25] have pioneered highquality, dense-view reconstruction and demonstrated impressive performance in realistic scene generation. However, these methods typically require numerous professionally captured images, limiting accessibility [64]. To overcome this, researchers have begun exploring 3D reconstruction from sparse views [8, 64, 74, 77], reducing the input
requirements to even two casually captured images.
Previous work has developed various specialized methods to tackle the challenges of sparse-view reconstruction,
such as geometry regularization techniques [53, 74] for
sparse inputs and feed-forward models [8, 11] trained to

16475

