This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PEER pressure: Model-to-Model Regularization for Single Source Domain
Generalization
Dong Kyu Cho
New York University
New York, USA

Inwoo Hwang* †
Columbia University
New York, USA

Sanghack Lee*
Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea

dongkyu.cho@nyu.edu

ih2455@columbia.edu

sanghack@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Data augmentation is a popular tool for single source
domain generalization, which expands the source domain
by generating simulated ones, improving generalization on
unseen target domains. In this work, we show that the performance of such augmentation-based methods in the target
domains universally fluctuates during training, posing challenges in model selection under realistic scenarios. We argue
that the fluctuation stems from the inability of the model to accumulate the knowledge learned from diverse augmentations,
exacerbating feature distortion during training. Based on
this observation, we propose a novel generalization method,
coined Parameter-Space Ensemble with Entropy Regularization (PEER), that uses a proxy model to learn the augmented
data on behalf of the main model. The main model is updated by averaging its parameters with the proxy model, progressively accumulating knowledge over the training steps.
Maximizing the mutual information between the output representations of the two models guides the learning process of
the proxy model, mitigating feature distortion during training. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of
PEER in reducing the OOD performance fluctuation and
enhancing generalization across various datasets, including
PACS, Digits, Office-Home, and VLCS. Notably, our method
with simple random augmentation achieves state-of-the-art
performance, surpassing prior approaches on sDG that utilize complex data augmentation strategies.

1. Introduction
Real-world deployment of deep neural networks frequently
encounters domain shift, which refers to the discrepancy
between the training domain and the unseen target domain
on which the model is tested. An important aspect of domain
shift is that it hinders the generalization of trained models
* Corresponding authors.
† Work done at Seoul National University.

Figure 1. Despite its generalization effect, data augmentation induces fluctuations in target domain accuracy during the training.
This phenomenon becomes more pronounced as the complexity
of the augmentation increases, complicating model selection. We
address this issue of fluctuation with a simple model-to-model regularization method that cushions the effect of data augmentation.

[36]. Nevertheless, a trained model is expected to perform
well on various OOD data, given a limited source of training
data. Similarly, single source domain generalization (sDG) is
the task of building a robust model that performs well across
multiple target domains, trained from a single source domain
[63]. Existing approaches commonly utilize data augmentation to generate simulated target domains [60] and attempt
to learn domain-invariant features from the augmented data.
This paper highlights an overlooked issue of leveraging
data augmentation for sDG, particularly focusing on the fluctuation of OOD target domain performance amidst training,
referred to as mid-train OOD fluctuation (Fig. 1). We find
that this phenomenon stems from the model’s incapability to
accumulate the knowledge obtained from diverse augmentations and demonstrate that the features obtained from previous steps are largely distorted during training (see Fig. 2).
We further illustrate that the fluctuation worsens when the
model’s trained features are distorted by augmented samples
discrepant from the previously trained data and show that
augmented samples are surprisingly inconsistent from their
original state. This complicates model selection and poten-

15360

