This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SATA: Spatial Autocorrelation Token Analysis for Enhancing the Robustness of
Vision Transformers
Nick Nikzad, Yi Liao, Yongsheng Gao, Jun Zhou
Griffith University, Queensland, Australia
{n.nikzaddehaji, y.liao, yongsheng.gao, jun.zhou}@griffith.edu.au

Abstract

layers [48] to capture relationships between these tokens,
ultimately generating rich representations for visual recognition tasks. While recent studies indicate that ViTs can exhibit
greater robustness than Convolutional Networks (ConvNets),
attributed to their self-attention mechanism [1, 2, 35, 37].
However, this hypothesis has been challenged. Liu et al. [30]
demonstrated that a carefully constructed ConvNet can surpass ViTs in both generalization and robustness. Furthermore, while techniques such as patch augmentation [32, 38],
contrastive learning strategies [16, 38], and network adjustments [32, 57] have shown promise in enhancing ViT performance and robustness, two primary limitations remain: 1)
these methods require extensive retraining or fine-tuning on
large datasets (e.g., ImageNet-1K, ImageNet-21K), a labourintensive and resource-demanding process, especially for
large-scale ViT architectures; and 2) the attention maps generated by the self-attention mechanism are highly sensitive to
noise, which degrades robustness when inputs are corrupted.
Recently, Nikzad et al. [36] showed the existence of spatial correlation among feature maps in convolutional neural
networks (CNNs). Moreover, they observed a decrease in
spatial autocorrelation among feature maps through deeper
network layers, suggesting that final features exhibit reduced
spatial dependency. Motivated by these findings, in this
work, we first investigate spatial autocorrelation within Vision Transformer (ViT) architectures and its implications for
their performance and robustness. Then, we present a novel
approach named “Spatial Autocorrelation Token Analysis”
(SATA) to tackle the identified shortcomings in the current
efforts to enhance ViT robustness.
Our analysis shows that spatial autocorrelation among
visual patches (tokens) diminishes through ViT networks,
similar to CNNs [36], aligning with findings that spatially
uncorrelated features enhance recognition performance [25].
SATA integrates seamlessly into pre-trained ViT models
without retraining, boosting robustness and efficiency by
reducing the computational load on FFN units. These enhancements in feature aggregation and resilience to corruption account for SATA’s exceptional performance from two
perspectives:

Over the past few years, vision transformers (ViTs) have
consistently demonstrated remarkable performance across
various visual recognition tasks. However, attempts to enhance their robustness have yielded limited success, mainly
focusing on different training strategies, input patch augmentation, or network structural enhancements. These approaches often involve extensive training and fine-tuning,
which are time-consuming and resource-intensive. To tackle
these obstacles, we introduce a novel approach named Spatial Autocorrelation Token Analysis (SATA). By harnessing
spatial relationships between token features, SATA enhances
both the representational capacity and robustness of ViT
models. This is achieved through the analysis and grouping
of tokens according to their spatial autocorrelation scores
prior to their input into the Feed-Forward Network (FFN)
block of the self-attention mechanism. Importantly, SATA
seamlessly integrates into existing pre-trained ViT baselines
without requiring retraining or additional fine-tuning, while
concurrently improving efficiency by reducing the computational load of the FFN units. Experimental results show that
the baseline ViTs enhanced with SATA not only achieve a
new state-of-the-art top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1K image
classification (94.9%) but also establish new state-of-the-art
performance across multiple robustness benchmarks, including ImageNet-A (top-1=63.6%), ImageNet-R (top-1=79.2%),
and ImageNet-C (mCE=13.6%), all without requiring additional training or fine-tuning of baseline models.
Availability: https://github.com/nick-nikzad/SATA

1. Introduction
In recent years, vision transformers (ViTs) have demonstrated exceptional performance across diverse computer
vision applications [9, 18]. Drawing inspiration from the significant achievements of transformer architectures in natural
language processing (NLP), ViTs divide an input image into
a sequence of patches (tokens) and leverage self-attention

9730

