This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot Novel View and Depth Synthesis with Multi-View Geometric Diffusion
Vitor Guizilini1
Muhammad Zubair Irshad1
Dian Chen1
Greg Shakhnarovich2
Rares Ambrus1
Toyota Research Institute (TRI)1

Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago (TTIC)2

Figure 1. MVGD is a state-of-the-art method that generates images and scale-consistent depth maps from novel viewpoints given
an arbitrary number of posed input views. In the above, red cameras are used as conditioning to directly generate RGB-D predictions from
green cameras. To highlight the multi-view consistency of our method, predicted colored pointclouds from all novel viewpoints are stacked
together for visualization without any post-processing. More examples and videos can be found in https://mvgd.github.io/

Abstract

(3DGS) [53] and other neural methods [34, 77, 83] for constructing a parameterized 3D representation of the scene observed from different viewpoints. Novel views, and by extension depth maps observed from novel viewpoints, can be
generated via volumetric rendering or rasterization from the
3D model, once it is constructed from available input views.
Subsequent work introduced improvements including generalization to novel scenes [12, 13, 118], better sampleefficiency [15, 74, 101], reduced memory cost [36], and
rendering speedups [36, 83]. Despite these advances, the
ability to generalize to novel scenes remains limited, especially with increasing numbers of input views [12, 13].
We pursue a compelling alternative to creating a parameterized 3D representation: the direct rendering of
novel views and depth maps as a conditional generative
task. Our work is inspired by light and depth field networks [34, 36, 77, 83] and recent developments on multiview diffusion [22, 41, 103, 108]. Diffusion-based methods
for novel view synthesis have so far been limited to simpler
settings [58, 59] or as a source of 2D priors for downstream
3D reconstruction [22, 103]. This is largely due to a key
challenge: the difficulty, without an intermediate 3D scene
representation, to impose multi-view consistency when generating novel views. Our proposed solution to this problem
is to train a single diffusion model for the joint task of novel
view and depth synthesis, using direct conditioning on the
input views and known input camera geometry via raymap
conditioning. We show that this leads to the generation of
scale-aware and multi-view consistent predictions without
any intermediate 3D representation or special mechanisms.
To train such a model that learns to implicitly represent

Current methods for 3D scene reconstruction from sparse
posed images employ intermediate 3D representations such
as neural fields, voxel grids, or 3D Gaussians, to achieve
multi-view consistent scene appearance and geometry. In
this paper we introduce MVGD, a diffusion-based architecture capable of direct pixel-level generation of images
and depth maps from novel viewpoints, given an arbitrary
number of input views. Our method uses raymap conditioning to both augment visual features with spatial information
from different viewpoints, as well as to guide the generation
of images and depth maps from novel views. A key aspect
of our approach is the multi-task generation of images and
depth maps, using learnable task embeddings to guide the
diffusion process towards specific modalities. We train this
model on a collection of more than 60 million multi-view
samples from publicly available datasets, and propose techniques to enable efficient and consistent learning in such
diverse conditions. We also propose a novel strategy that
enables the efficient training of larger models by incrementally fine-tuning smaller ones, with promising scaling behavior. Through extensive experiments, we report state-ofthe-art results in multiple novel view synthesis benchmarks,
as well as multi-view stereo and video depth estimation.

1. Introduction
We investigate the task of generalizable novel view synthesis and depth estimation from sparse posed images. This
task has received much attention with the advent of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [63], 3D Gaussian Splatting

764

