This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Satellite Observations Guided Diffusion Model for Accurate Meteorological
States at Arbitrary Resolution
Siwei Tu1,2 , Ben Fei2,3† , Weidong Yang1† , Fenghua Ling2 , Hao Chen2 , Zili Liu4 , Kun Chen1,2
Hang Fan2,5 , Wanli Ouyang2,3 , Lei Bai2
1
Fudan University 2 Shanghai Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Beihang University
5
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology
1. Introduction

Abstract
Accurate acquisition of surface meteorological conditions
at arbitrary locations holds signiﬁcant importance for
weather forecasting and climate simulation. Meteorological states derived from satellite observations are often provided in the form of low-resolution grid ﬁelds. If spatial
interpolation is applied directly to obtain meteorological
states for speciﬁc locations, there will often be signiﬁcant
discrepancies compared to actual observations. Existing
downscaling methods for acquiring meteorological state
information at higher resolutions commonly overlook the
correlation with satellite observations. To bridge the gap,
we propose Satellite-observations Guided Diffusion Model
(SGD), a conditional diffusion model pre-trained on ERA5
reanalysis data with satellite observations (GridSat) as conditions, which is employed for sampling downscaled meteorological states through a zero-shot guided sampling strategy and patch-based methods. During the training process,
we propose to fuse the information from GridSat satellite
observations into ERA5 maps via the attention mechanism,
enabling SGD to generate atmospheric states that align
more accurately with actual conditions. In the sampling,
we employed optimizable convolutional kernels to simulate the upscale process, thereby generating high-resolution
ERA5 maps using low-resolution ERA5 maps as well as observations from weather stations as guidance. Moreover,
our devised patch-based method promotes SGD to generate meteorological states at arbitrary resolutions. Experiments demonstrate SGD fulﬁlls accurate meteorological
states downscaling to 6.25km. The code is available at
https://github.com/Tusiwei/SGD

† Corresponding Authors: Ben Fei (benfei@cuhk.edu.hk) and Weidong
Yang (wdyang@fudan.edu.cn)

Precision in acquiring meteorological variable states at a
small scale is pivotal to weather forecasting, which endeavors to predict forthcoming meteorological conditions
by correlating current weather phenomena with subsequent
atmospheric states, further aiding citizens, businesses, and
nations in making informed decisions regarding future societal activities [6, 23, 33]. Therefore, enhancing the accuracy of weather forecasts holds considerable signiﬁcance
for enterprise production and daily life, which necessitates
extracting more accurate meteorological data on a ﬁner
scale [26, 28].
Downscaling is an effective method for capturing details meteorological data at a ﬁner scale, which aims to
transform low-resolution maps from meteorological data
such as ERA5 reanalysis dataset into corresponding highresolution maps at a small scale to obtain more accurate
and detailed meteorological data [1, 8, 11]. As shown in
Fig. 1 (a), in the task of downscaling meteorological data,
spatial interpolation-based methods such as linear and bilinear interpolations are common and feasible approaches.
These methods do not use learnable parameters to model
the downscaling process but instead obtain meteorological states at the detail level of small-scale maps through
interpolation from grid meteorological ﬁeld data. Consequently, achieving a highly satisfactory level of precision in
the downscaling process is challenging when dealing with
complex and high-resolution grid information. In recent
years, artiﬁcial intelligence technologies have demonstrated
remarkable performance in this task [38, 42]. For instance,
SwinRDM [5] utilizes diffusion models to recover high spatial resolution and ﬁner-scale atmospheric details. [35] utilized a high-resolution regional ocean circulation model to
dynamically downscale Earth System Models (ESMs) and
produce climate projections for the California Current System.
Existing methods rely only on the original meteorolog-

28071

