This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SlideChat: A Large Vision-Language Assistant for Whole-Slide Pathology Image
Understanding
Ying Chen1,2∗
1

Guoan Wang1,3∗ Yuanfeng Ji4∗† Yanjun Li1,3 Jin Ye1,5
Ming Hu1,5 Rongshan Yu2 Yu Qiao1 Junjun He1†

Tianbin Li1

Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 Xiamen University 3 East China Normal University
4
Stanford University 5 Monash University
Abstract

Despite the progress made by multimodal large language
models (MLLMs) in computational pathology, they remain
limited by a predominant focus on patch-level analysis,
missing essential contextual information at the whole-slide
level. The lack of large-scale instruction datasets and
the gigapixel scale of whole slide images (WSIs) pose
signiﬁcant developmental challenges. In this paper, we
present SlideChat, the ﬁrst vision-language assistant capable of understanding gigapixel whole-slide images, exhibiting excellent multimodal conversational capability and response complex instruction across diverse pathology scenarios. To support its development, we created SlideInstruction, the largest instruction-following dataset for
WSIs consisting of 4.2K WSI captions and 176K VQA
pairs with multiple categories. Furthermore, we propose SlideBench, a multimodal benchmark that incorporates captioning and VQA tasks to assess SlideChat’s capabilities in various settings such as microscopy, diagnosis and clinical. Compared to both general and specialized MLLMs, SlideChat exhibits exceptional capabilities,
achieving state-of-the-art performance on 18 of 22 tasks.
For example, it achieved an overall accuracy of 81.17% on
SlideBench-VQA (TCGA), and 54.15% on SlideBench-VQA
(BCNB). Our code, data, and model is publicly accessible
at https://uni-medical.github.io/SlideChat.github.io.

Figure 1. SlideChat is the ﬁrst large vision-language assistant speciﬁcally designed for whole-slide pathology analysis.
SlideChat can generate comprehensive descriptions of whole-slide
images and provide contextually relevant responses across various
applications.

momentum, mainly driven by breakthroughs in the visual
foundation model [9, 27, 30]. These models learn generalized representations by pre-training on large-scale data
and perform well in various downstream tasks, such as cancer detection and biomarker prediction. Building on this
base, integration with the powerful Large Language Models (LLMs) further advances the development of the Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLMs) [20], which has
made great strides in responding to more complex, openended visual queries, enabling it to serve as a versatile assistant at various stages of medical care, including clinical
decision-making, education, and research.

1. Introduction

Nevertheless, there are some major challenges that hinder the development and use of pathology MLLMs for realworld applications. First, it is challenging to develop a
MLLM architecture that can effectively be capable of gigapixel whole slides (e.g., 100,000 × 100,000 pixels). Existing models [20, 22, 26] often process whole slides by
extracting small patch/ROI-level data for subsequent analysis, resulting in a limited understanding of global slide con-

Computational pathology aims to improve the analysis of
digitized tissue samples [14, 24], such as whole slide images (WSIs), by applying artiﬁcial intelligence to aid in
the diagnosis, identiﬁcation, and understanding of disease.
Recently, the development of this ﬁeld has gained rapid
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding authors: yfj@stanford.edu, hejunjun@pjlab.org.cn.

5134

