This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlowRAM: Grounding Flow Matching Policy with Region-Aware Mamba
Framework for Robotic Manipulation
Sen Wang1 Le Wang1, Sanping Zhou1 Jingyi Tian1 Jiayi Li1 Haowen Sun1 Wei Tang2
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
University of Illinois at Chicago

Abstract
Previous

Robotic manipulation in high-precision tasks is essential for
numerous industrial and real-world applications where accuracy and speed are required. Yet current diffusion-based
policy learning methods generally suffer from low computational efficiency due to the iterative denoising process during inference. Moreover, these methods do not fully explore
the potential of generative models for enhancing information exploration in 3D environments. In response, we propose FlowRAM, a novel framework that leverages generative models to achieve region-aware perception, enabling
efficient multimodal information processing. Specifically,
we devise a Dynamic Radius Schedule, which allows adaptive perception, facilitating transitions from global scene
comprehension to fine-grained geometric details. Furthermore, we integrate state space models to integrate multimodal information, while preserving linear computational
complexity. In addition, we employ conditional flow matching to learn action poses by regressing deterministic vector
fields, simplifying the learning process while maintaining
performance. We verify the effectiveness of the FlowRAM in
the RLBench, an established manipulation benchmark, and
achieve state-of-the-art performance. The results demonstrate that FlowRAM achieves a remarkable improvement,
particularly in high-precision tasks, where it outperforms
previous methods by 12.0% in average success rate. Additionally, FlowRAM is able to generate physically plausible
actions for a variety of real-world tasks in less than 4 time
steps, significantly increasing inference speed.

Lose
Geometry
Details

ti = N

ti = 0

Sampling

FlowRAM

Flexible
Geometry
Granularity

ti = N

ti = 0
u

(0, I )

discrete

t = sigmoid (u)

prob.

pi = tix1 + (1 − ti )x0
t

ri = ti

Noised
Pose

x0

x1

GT
Pose

Figure 1. The diagram of the proposed FlowRAM. Consider
the insert USB in computer task. Previous arts have attempted to capture information about the geometric details of USB
and ports, but fail severely due to lacking task-relevant perception.
In contrast, FlowRAM equipped with a dynamic radius schedule
successfully preserves these geometric details and ensures accurate alignment of the USB and port. The pi , ri in the figure represent the center and radius of the region, respectively.

1. Introduction

tasks, agents must not only capture comprehensive semantic information about the environment but also have a finegrained geometric understanding of task-relevant regions.
This level of detail is essential, as even small errors in
perception or execution can result in significant failures in
high-precision tasks.
To address these challenges, previous arts have advanced
in both perception and policy learning. Regarding perception, 3D-based methods have been widely adopted for their
ability to accurately infer precise 3D positions and spatial
relations [5, 19, 27, 68]. In terms of policy learning, prevailing methods can be divided into two categories. The
first category comprises deterministic policies, which directly predict actions by outputting conditional probability
distributions. These distributions represent the likelihood
of different actions based on the current state or observa-

Designing agents for high-precision manipulation tasks has
attracted increasing attention in the field of robotics and
embodied AI [3, 16, 21, 43, 71]. To succeed in such
Corresponding author.

12176

