This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAM2Object: Consolidating View Consistency via SAM2 for
Zero-Shot 3D Instance Segmentation
Jihuai Zhao Junbao Zhuo* Jiansheng Chen Huimin Ma*
University of Science and Technology Beijing
jihuaizhao@xs.ustb.edu.cn, {junbaozhuo, jschen, mhmpub}@ustb.edu.cn

Abstract
In the field of zero-shot 3D instance segmentation, existing 2D-to-3D lifting methods typically obtain 2D segmentation across multiple RGB frames using vision foundation models, which are then projected and merged into
3D space. However, since the inference of vision foundation models on a single frame is not integrated with adjacent frames, the masks of the same object may vary across
different frames, leading to a lack of view consistency in the
2D segmentation. Furthermore, current lifting methods average the 2D segmentation from multiple views during the
projection into 3D space, causing low-quality masks and
high-quality masks to share the same weight. These factors can lead to fragmented 3D segmentation. In this paper,
we present SAM2Object, a novel zero-shot 3D instance segmentation method that effectively utilizes the Segment Anything Model 2 to segment and track objects, consolidating
view consistency across frames. Our approach combines
these consistent 2D masks with 3D geometric priors, improving the robustness of 3D segmentation. Additionally,
we introduce mask consolidation module to filter out lowquality masks across frames, which enables more precise
2D-to-3D matching. Comprehensive evaluations on ScanNetV2, ScanNet++ and ScanNet200 demonstrate the robustness and effectiveness of SAM2Object, showcasing its
ability to outperform previous methods. Our project page is
at https://jihuaizhaohd.github.io/SAM2Object.

Figure 1. View Consistency. Compared with performing frameby-frame segmentation on multi-view images, our method connects objects across multiple frames, ensuring that segmentation
results remain consistent across various views.

1. Introduction

This scarcity, in turn, greatly limits the development and
advancement of 3D vision models, often leading to models
with weak generalization capabilities, particularly in terms
of zero-shot generalization. Zero-shot capability is essential, particularly in indoor navigation scenarios [1, 29]. For
example, a robot misidentifying an unknown object, like a
stove, could pose a fire hazard and endanger people.
The relative ease of acquiring 2D annotated data has
led to the creation of numerous high-quality datasets, accelerating the advancement of 2D vision foundation models [3, 4, 19, 35]. Segment Anything Model (SAM) [19] is
a prime example of this progress. SAM is trained on the
extensive and high-quality SA-1B dataset [19], exhibiting
outstanding zero-shot performance across various types of
2D vision tasks.
Consequently, some methods [11, 14, 42, 46, 47] have
attempted to transfer the robust generalization ability of
SAM to 3D tasks by lifting its 2D segmentation into the
3D space. However, these methods often perform segmentation on a frame-by-frame manner, lacking inter-view consistency. Even slight changes in viewing angle can result in
inconsistent 2D masks for the same object across different
views. As shown in Fig. 1, the mask completely encapsulates the object in “View 1”, but only partially covers it
in “View i” and “View n”. Therefore, conflicts can arise
when merging 2D masks from different views, leading to

3D instance segmentation plays a crucial role in various applications such as autonomous driving, robotics and augmented reality. Most of previous works [16, 20, 25, 41, 45]
have predominantly relied on supervised learning, requiring high-quality 3D data and annotations for training. The
annotation process for 3D data is often labor-intensive and
costly, leading to the scarcity of high-quality 3D datasets.
* Corresponding authors.

19325

