This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Precise, Fast, and Low-cost Concept Erasure in Value Space:
Orthogonal Complement Matters
Yuan Wang1 *, Ouxiang Li1 *, Tingting Mu2 , Yanbin Hao3†, Kuien Liu4 , Xiang Wang1 , Xiangnan He1†
1
3

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 The University of Manchester,

Hefei University of Technology, 4 Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences

{wy1001, lioox}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, haoyanbin@hotmail.com, xiangnanhe@gmail.com
Original Image

40
concepts

Snoopy
Target Concept

Ours

SLD

Snoopy

Multi-Concept Erasure

Non-Target Concept

SDXL

SLD

Snoopy

40
concepts

DreamShaper

Ours

Target
Non-Target

Single-Concept Erasure

Chilloutmix

(a) Erasure Efficacy and Prior Preservation

(b) Transferability

Figure 1. The proposed Adaptive Value Decomposer (AdaVD) demonstrates a satisfactory balance between erasure efficacy and prior
preservation and an effective transferability across T2I diffusion models. (a) Compared to SLD [39], AdaVD enables precise concept
erasure without compromising prior knowledge for non-target concepts at both single- and multi-concept erasure. This is facilitated by a
precise disentanglement of target semantics (e.g., “Snoopy”) and a robust preservation of non-target ones (e.g., “Teddy”), with visualization
interpretation marked by . (b) AdaVD can be transferred to various T2I models, e.g., SDXL [31], DreamShaper [6], Chilloutmix [5].

Abstract

sure method, called Adaptive Vaule Decomposer (AdaVD),
which is training-free. Our method is grounded in a classical linear algebraic operation of computing orthogonal
complement, implemented in the value space of each crossattention layer within the UNet of diffusion models. We
design a shift factor to adaptively navigate the erasure
strength, enhancing effectively prior preservation without
sacrificing erasure efficacy. Extensive comparative experiments with both training-based and training-free state of
the arts demonstrate that the proposed AdaVD excels in
both single and multiple concept erasure, showing 2 to 10
times of improvement in prior preservation than the second best, meanwhile achieving the best or near best erasure efficacy. AdaVD supports a series of diffusion models
and downstream image generation tasks, with code available on: https://github.com/WYuan1001/AdaVD.

Recent success of text-to-image (T2I) generation and its increasing practical applications, enabled by diffusion models, require urgent consideration of erasing unwanted concepts, e.g., copyrighted, offensive, and unsafe ones, from
the pre-trained models in a precise, timely, and low-cost
manner. The twofold demand of concept erasure includes
not only a precise removal of the target concept (i.e., erasure efficacy) but also a minimal change on non-target
content (i.e., prior preservation), during generation. Existing methods face challenges in maintaining an effective balance between erasure efficacy and prior preservation, and they can be computationally costly. To improve, we propose a precise, fast, and low-cost concept era* Equal Contributions.
† Corresponding authors.

28759

