This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MC2 : Multi-concept Guidance for Customized Multi-concept Generation
Jiaxiu Jiang1

Yabo Zhang1 Kailai Feng1 Xiaohe Wu1 Wenbo Li2
Renjing Pei2 Fan Li2 Wangmeng Zuo1 B
Harbin Institute of Technology1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab2

Abstract

Textual
Inversion

Customized text-to-image generation, which synthesizes
images based on user-specified concepts, has made significant progress in handling individual concepts. However, when extended to multiple concepts, existing methods often struggle with properly integrating different models and avoiding the unintended blending of characteristics from distinct concepts. In this paper, we propose MC2 ,
a novel approach for multi-concept customization that enhances flexibility and fidelity through inference-time optimization. MC2 enables the integration of multiple singleconcept models with heterogeneous architectures. By adaptively refining attention weights between visual and textual
tokens, our method ensures that image regions accurately
correspond to their associated concepts while minimizing interference between concepts. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that MC2 outperforms training-based methods
in terms of prompt-reference alignment. Furthermore, MC2
can be seamlessly applied to text-to-image generation, providing robust compositional capabilities. To facilitate the
evaluation of multi-concept customization, we also introduce a new benchmark, MC++. The code is available at
https://github.com/JIANGJiaXiu/MC-2.

LoRA

DreamBooth
Reference Images

Single-Concept
Customized Models

photo of a <cat> with a <person>,
in front of a <lighthouse>

Figure 1. Overview of our method. MC2 composes separately
trained customized models to generate compositions of multiple
customized concepts. Here, we train a Textual Inversion [14]
model for <lighthouse>, a LoRA [21] for <person>, and
a DreamBooth [45] model for <cat> with the reference images
of each concept. The reference images are from the CustomConcept101 dataset[26].

a new concept. Merging single-concept customized models [16, 30, 39, 50] promisingly reduces the training cost.
Nonetheless, it is challenging for the above methods to integrate multiple heterogeneous single-concept customized
models, as they require specific network architectures and
access to training data. Users may obtain a large amount
of single-concept customized models from the community,
but cannot acquire their training data in most cases. Therefore, these models are difficult to be integrated to generate compositions of multiple customized concepts. Albeit
Cones 2 [31] does not require joint training or model merging for generating composition of customized concepts, it
introduces additional and inconvenient condition signals,
e.g., bounding boxes or segmentation masks. Encoderbased customization methods [33, 57] usually involve finetuning the pretrained text-to-image diffusion model to accept identity information extracted from the reference images, which are orthogonal to our work.
To address the above mentioned problems, we propose
the Multi-Concept guidance for customized Multi-Concept
generation, termed MC2 . Our proposed MC2 facilitates
the seamless integration of separately trained heterogeneous
single-concept customized models, allowing for the natural
synthesis of a composition of their distinct concepts without
additional training. As shown in Fig. 1, a Textual Inversion

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have facilitated advancements in creative
visual generation [19, 37, 41, 44, 47, 61]. Leveraging the
power of text-to-image diffusion models, customized generation [14, 16, 17, 26, 33, 39, 45, 50, 53–55, 57, 59] enables users to craft images aligned with their personalized
concepts. While earlier endeavors [14, 45, 53] predominantly address the intricacies of single-concept customization, the challenge persists when it comes to multi-concept
customization in terms of flexibility and fidelity.
Existing works performs customized multi-concept generation through joint training [17, 26] or merging singleconcept customized models [16, 30, 39, 50]. Joint training
[17, 26] requires access to the reference images of the specified concepts, and retrain all parameters when introducing

2802

