This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoAvatar: Geometrically-Consistent Multi-Person Avatar Reconstruction from
Sparse Multi-View Videos
Soohyun Lee†
†

Seoyeon Kim†

Sogang University

‡

HeeKyung Lee‡

Won-Sik Jeong‡

Joo Ho Lee†

Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute

Abstract
Multi-person avatar reconstruction from sparse multiview videos is challenging. The independent avatar reconstruction of each person often fails to reconstruct the
geometric relationship among multiple instances, resulting in inter-penetrations among avatars. Some researchers
resolve this issue via neural volumetric rendering techniques but they suffer from huge computational costs for
rendering and training. In this paper, we propose a multiperson avatar reconstruction method that reconstructs a 3D
avatar of each person while keeping the geometric relations
among people. Our 2D Gaussian Splatting (2DGS)-based
avatar representation allows us to represent geometricallyaccurate surfaces of multiple instances that support sharp
inside-outside tests. We utilize the monocular prior to alleviate the inter-penetration via surface ordering and to enhance the geometry in less-observed and textureless surfaces. We demonstrate the efficiency and performance of our
method quantitatively and qualitatively on a multi-person
dataset [49] containing close interactions.

1. Introduction
Human avatar reconstruction has been intensively studied,
as the novel view synthesis achieves unprecedented advances in the past half a decade [17, 23, 24, 26, 32, 42].
Single-person avatar reconstruction combines pose tracking and novel view synthesis, where the human appearance
is modeled in the canonical space articulated with the human skeleton [31]. The appearance in the target frame is
then obtained by warping from the canonical to the target
space based on the estimated target pose. The overall performance of single-person avatar reconstruction depends on
the accuracy of pose estimation and the fidelity of appearance reconstruction.
In contrast to single-person reconstruction, multi-person
scenarios present an additional challenge: inter-penetration
between body parts and inter-person occlusions. Interpenetrations occur when each avatar is processed indepen-

Train with mono. priors
2D Gaussian
Sparse multi-view
videos

Avatar reconstruction

Deformed Gaussians
Figure 1. Teaser. We represent multi-person avatars using planar Gaussian splats. To overcome the view sparsity, we utilize
the monocular priors during training. Our reconstruction achieves
state-of-the-art performance with fast training.

dently without the consideration of adjacent avatars. Previous approaches [7, 18, 26, 51] maintain geometric relationships by modeling the occlusion-aware image formation
model, detecting penetrating regions and pushing them outward. These methods require clear surface representations
such as mesh [18] or implicit surface [37] for the inner-outer
test which takes a huge computational cost. They may cause
the shape deviation as the skinning model does not address
the soft body deformation in contact regions.
The reconstruction becomes more challenging with
sparse views, where silhouettes provide the coarse geometry
bound of an avatar and triangulation-based depth priors become unreliable, particularly in less-observed and textureless areas. Recently, vision foundation models, especially
a human vision foundation model Sapiens [21], achieve
remarkable improvements in monocular geometric estimation. Inspired by MonoSDF [50], which shows that monocular inference improves static 3D reconstruction, we utilize the monocular prior to achieve geometrically consistent
multiple avatar reconstruction.
In this paper, we propose a method that reconstructs

21138

