This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Silence is Golden: Leveraging Adversarial Examples to Nullify Audio Control in
LDM-based Talking-Head Generation
Yuan Gan1 , Jiaxu Miao2 *, Yunze Wang3 , Yi Yang1
1
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University
2
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University
3
Department of Statistics, University of Wisconsin–Madison
Abstract
Advances in talking-head animation based on Latent Diffusion Models (LDM) enable the creation of highly realistic, synchronized videos. These fabricated videos are indistinguishable from real ones, increasing the risk of potential misuse for scams, political manipulation, and misinformation. Hence, addressing these ethical concerns has
become a pressing issue in AI security. Recent proactive
defense studies focused on countering LDM-based models
by adding perturbations to portraits. However, these methods are ineffective at protecting reference portraits from
advanced image-to-video animation. The limitations are
twofold: 1) they fail to prevent images from being manipulated by audio signals, and 2) diffusion-based puriﬁcation techniques can effectively eliminate protective perturbations. To address these challenges, we propose Silencer, a two-stage method designed to proactively protect the privacy of portraits. First, a nullifying loss is
proposed to ignore audio control in talking-head generation. Second, we apply anti-puriﬁcation loss in LDM
to optimize the inverted latent feature to generate robust
perturbations. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of Silencer in proactively protecting portrait
privacy. We hope this work will raise awareness among
the AI security community regarding critical ethical issues related to talking-head generation techniques. Code:
https://github.com/yuangan/Silencer.

1. Introduction
Talking-head animation [3, 14, 19, 49, 53, 61, 66, 67] enables the creation of synchronized and highly realistic facial expressions based on audio and portrait images, producing videos that are often indistinguishable from authentic visual recordings. Recent advances in diffusion models [7, 23, 35, 56, 64] have markedly improved the real* Corresponding author.

Original Portrait

Talking
Head
Generator

Protected Portrait

Audio

Generated Video

Figure 1. Overview of Our Motivation. Given an audio input,
talking-head animation models can be exploited to generate fabricated videos using any portrait. To safeguard portrait privacy, we
introduced Silencer, applying protective perturbations to ensure
the portrait’s mouth remains closed in generated talking videos.

ism of these animations. Consequently, this technological
advancement increases the risks of misusing AI-Generated
Content (AIGC) for scams, political manipulation, and misinformation. Mitigating these ethical risks has become a
critical priority in AIGC security.
To address the ethical risks associated with AIGC, there
are two primary approaches: passive defenses [8, 36, 43,
48, 59] and proactive defenses [27–29, 37, 39, 58]. Passive defenses focus on detecting whether a video has been
fabricated, making it useful for forensics. However, these
approaches cannot prevent the infringement of personal privacy by deepfakes. When victims realize their privacy has
been violated, the damage may already be irreparable. In
contrast, proactive defenses offer superior protection by
proactively shielding individuals from harm. These methods use adversarial perturbations on the input images to disrupt the outputs of the generative model.
Recent studies [28, 29, 39, 58] explored proactive defenses against diffusion models, particularly those mimicry
techniques based on Latent Diffusion Models (LDM). By
adding perturbations to input images, these approaches have
achieved copyright protection in diffusion-based mimicry.
However, existing methods fail to protect privacy in the

13434

