This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LeanGaussian: Breaking Pixel or Point Cloud Correspondence
in Modeling 3D Gaussians
Jiamin Wu1,2* Kenkun Liu3* Han Gao1

Xiaoke Jiang1# Yuan Yao2

Lei Zhang1

1

International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen

2

Abstract
Rencently, Gaussian splatting has demonstrated significant
success in novel view synthesis. Current methods often regress
Gaussians with pixel or point cloud correspondence, linking each Gaussian with a pixel or a 3D point. This leads
to the redundancy of Gaussians being used to overfit the
correspondence rather than the objects represented by the
3D Gaussians themselves, consequently wasting resources
and lacking accurate geometries or textures. In this paper,
we introduce LeanGaussian, a novel approach that treats
each query in deformable Transformer as one 3D Gaussian ellipsoid, breaking the pixel or point cloud correspondence constraints. We leverage deformable decoder to iteratively refine the Gaussians layer-by-layer with the image
features as keys and values. Notably, the center of each
3D Gaussian is defined as 3D reference points, which are
then projected onto the image for deformable attention in
2D space. On both the ShapeNet SRN dataset (category
level) and the Google Scanned Objects dataset (open-category
level, trained with the Objaverse dataset), our approach,
outperforms prior methods by approximately 6.1%, achieving a PSNR of 25.44 and 22.36, respectively. Additionally, our method achieves a 3D reconstruction speed of 7.2
FPS and rendering speed 500 FPS. Codes are available at
https://github.com/jwubz123/LeanGaussian.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis (NVS) from a single view at the object
level remains an unsolved computer vision problem, as evidenced by recent work on this task [24, 44, 52]. Recently, 3D
Gaussian splatting (3D GS) [15] has emerged as a efficient
3D representation that attains fast rendering speeds through
the use of explicit 3D Gaussian ellipsoids. Generation-based
* Equal contribution. Work done during an internship at IDEA.
# Corresponding author.

models [6, 46] often face issues of slow speed and distortion,
making them more appropriate for entertainment scenarios.
For non-generation single-forward methods, recent research
efforts [4, 40, 44, 45, 47, 49, 50, 58] have attained fast rendering speeds with a reliance solely on 2D supervision, yielding
outstanding outcomes.
Mainstream 3D Gaussian modeling methods falls into
two primary categories as shown in Fig. 1: the first involves direct feature lifting from individual pixels to 3D space
[4, 40, 44, 45, 47, 50], where each pixel is associated with one
Gaussian ellipsoid; the second method utilizes point clouds
and triplane features [49, 58], treating each Gaussian as a point
alongside its corresponding triplane feature. However, both
representations require alignment with other forms, be it 2D
pixels or 3D point clouds. This requirement leads to redundant
Gaussians being utilized to essentially overfit other representations rather than focusing on the 3D Gaussians themselves.
This clashes with the Gaussian splatting process since the
rendered pixels by Gaussian splatting has no one-to-one correspondence to the 3D Gaussians. As demonstrated in Fig. 1,
Splatter Image [44], the foremost pixel-aligned method, heavily concentrates (over half) 3D Gaussians in a single plane
(the background). Triplane-Gaussian [58], the most influenced
method combining point clouds with triplane features, complicates the modeling process by regressing dense point clouds
(Fig. 1 (a)). Furthermore, the triplane representation compresses 3D space, leading to a lack of detailed information
in the 3D structure and imposing a rigid grid alignment that
limits flexibility [36, 45]. Additionally, as illustrated in Fig. 1
(b), the computational complexity of Splatter Image increases
quadratically with the input resolution due to pixel alignment
regression, while Triplane-Gaussian has significantly higher
memory costs because of its dense point cloud and complex
Transformer design across triplane.
To address the overfitting resulting from pixel or point
cloud correspondence, we present LeanGaussian, a novel approach that breaks free from the correspondence constraint by
directly modeling 3D Gaussians. Inspired by the effective and
efficient Deformable-DETR (Detection Transformer) frame-

26641

