This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pow3R: Empowering Unconstrained 3D
Reconstruction with Camera and Scene Priors
Wonbong Jang* Philippe Weinzaepfel† Vincent Leroy†
Lourdes Agapito* Jerome Revaud†
*
†
UCL
Naver Labs Europe
{ucabwja,l.agapito}@ucl.ac.uk

firstname.lastname@naverlabs.com

DUSt3R

Pow3R

(RGB only)

(RGB,
intrinsics,
poses)

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of raw 3D reconstructions between DUSt3R and Pow3R for the image pair on the left. DUSt3R cannot
leverage auxiliary information potentially available at test time, resulting in noisy and low-resolution estimates, whereas Pow3R allows to
inject such priors at test time in a versatile manner, enabling new capabilities such as high-resolution processing as a direct by-product.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Building general models for 3D perception that can unify
different 3D vision tasks such as depth estimation, keypoint matching, dense reconstruction or camera pose prediction, remains a complex and exciting open challenge.
Traditional Structure from Motion (SfM) approaches such
as COLMAP [59] do not apply pre-learned priors, so each
scene must be optimized independently. On the other hand,
most learning-based approaches focus on specific 3D vision tasks such as depth completion [26, 52], monocular
and stereo depth estimation [46], pose estimation [73, 89]
or novel view synthesis [27, 42]. While these dedicated
approaches have been successful to some extent, this trend
contrasts with other domains such as natural language processing where a single model like ChatGPT [45], trained
with a vast collection of data, solves a range of different
tasks without requiring re-training. While some models like
CroCo-v2, DINOv2 or Stable Diffusion [15, 54, 77], trained
on large image datasets, have served as learned priors for
other tasks, including 3D vision ones, they are still far from
multi-purpose foundation models like ChatGPT is for NLP.
DUSt3R [75] marked a significant step forward in
regression-based 3D foundation models. DUSt3R performs

We present Pow3R, a novel large 3D vision regression
model that is highly versatile in the input modalities it accepts. Unlike previous feed-forward models that lack any
mechanism to exploit known camera or scene priors at test
time, Pow3R incorporates any combination of auxiliary information such as intrinsics, relative pose, dense or sparse
depth, alongside input images, within a single network.
Building upon the recent DUSt3R paradigm, a transformerbased architecture that leverages powerful pre-training, our
lightweight and versatile conditioning acts as additional
guidance for the network to predict more accurate estimates
when auxiliary information is available. During training we
feed the model with random subsets of modalities at each iteration, which enables the model to operate under different
levels of known priors at test time. This in turn opens up new
capabilities, such as performing inference in native image
resolution, or point-cloud completion. Our experiments on
3D reconstruction, depth completion, multi-view depth prediction, multi-view stereo, and multi-view pose estimation
tasks yield state-of-the-art results and confirm the effectiveness of Pow3R at exploiting all available information. The
project webpage is https://europe.naverlabs.com/pow3r.

1071

