This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Consistency of Video Large Language Models in Temporal Comprehension
Minjoon Jung1,2 * Junbin Xiao1† Byoung-Tak Zhang2

Angela Yao1

1

2

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
{mjjung, btzhang}@bi.snu.ac.kr,

{junbin, ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Video large language models (Video-LLMs) can temporally ground language queries and retrieve video moments.
Yet, such temporal comprehension capabilities are neither
well-studied nor understood. So we conduct a study on
prediction consistency – a key indicator for robustness and
trustworthiness of temporal grounding. After the model identifies an initial moment within the video content, we apply
a series of probes to check if the model’s responses align
with this initial grounding as an indicator of reliable comprehension. Our results reveal that current Video-LLMs are
sensitive to variations in video contents, language queries,
and task settings, unveiling severe deficiencies in maintaining consistency. We further explore common prompting and
instruction-tuning methods as potential solutions, but find
that their improvements are often unstable. To that end, we
propose event temporal verification tuning that explicitly
accounts for consistency, and demonstrate significant improvements for both grounding and consistency. Our data
and code are open-sourced at https://github.com/
minjoong507/Consistency-of-Video-LLM .

1. Introduction
Video large language models (Video-LLMs) [4, 16, 20, 23,
24, 41] have shown great promise for video understanding.
Yet they can follow only coarse-grained concepts and are
challenged by identifying specific video moments for finegrained comprehension. Recent works [8–10, 13, 29, 31, 33]
try to improve temporal comprehension in Video-LLMs to
handle time-related tasks, including video temporal grounding [7, 14], dense video captioning [14, 45], and grounded
video question answering [37]. Despite their effectiveness,
such capabilities of fine-grained temporal comprehension are
not necessarily robust and trustworthy. For example, Figure
1 shows that Video-LLMs are inconsistent when asked to
check their own video moment predictions, raising concern
* Work done during an internship at NUS
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Top: An example of inconsistent behavior of VideoLLMs, where the answer contradicts the initial temporal prediction
in self-verification. Bottom: We reveal that most Video-LLMs
struggle to reliably confirm their initial moment predictions, achieving a near chance-level consistency (50%).

about their capabilities in faithful temporal reasoning.
Consistency is a key indicator of robustness and trustworthiness, so we study how well current models maintain it
when conversing about fine-grained video moments. Specifically, we focus on video temporal grounding, where the task
involves identifying timestamps in a video that correspond to
language queries. Intuitively, a model that links a language
query to visual content in a specific temporal moment should
remain robust to rephrasing queries and temporal shifts in
the visual content. We refer to this quality as grounding
consistency. Furthermore, if a model can identify a specific
moment, its understanding should be bidirectional. As such,
the model should be able to confirm that the said event and
its components did occur within the predicted moment. We
refer to this quality as verification consistency.

13713

