This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HyperGS: Hyperspectral 3D Gaussian Splatting
Christopher Thirgood1 , Oscar Mendez1 , Erin Ling1 , Jon Storey2 , Simon Hadeld1
1
University of Surrey, 2 I3D Robotics
{c.thirgood, o.mendez, chao.ling, s.hadfield}@surrey.ac.uk, jstorey@i3drobotics.com

Figure 1. This image represents a novel hyperspectral image at the 70th channel of a 141-channel image predicted from the top three
models, HyperGS (Ours), 3DGS and MipNerf360 for the hyperspectral novel view synthesis task. Two random pixel reconstructions taken
from the novel view with corresponding border color for its plot and pixel location in the image represented by the stars.

Abstract
We introduce HyperGS, a novel framework for Hyperspectral Novel View Synthesis (HNVS), based on a new latent 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) technique. Our approach enables simultaneous spatial and spectral renderings by encoding material properties from multi-view 3D
hyperspectral datasets. HyperGS reconstructs high-delity
views from arbitrary perspectives with improved accuracy
and speed, outperforming currently existing methods. To
address the challenges of high-dimensional data, we perform view synthesis in a learned latent space, incorporating
a pixel-wise adaptive density function and a pruning technique for increased training stability and efciency. Additionally, we introduce the rst HNVS benchmark, implementing a number of new baselines based on recent SOTA
RGB-NVS techniques, alongside the small number of prior
works on HNVS. We demonstrate HyperGS’s robustness
through extensive evaluation of real and simulated hyperspectral scenes with a 14db accuracy improvement upon
previously published models.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in Novel View Synethesis (NVS),
particularly with implicit Neural Radiance Field modeling
(NeRFs) [22] and explicit Gaussian models (3DGS)[13],
have dramatically improved the delity of synthetically rendered views for conventional RGB images. However, RGB
imaging is fundamentally limited, as it cannot capture the
detailed material properties or non-visible scene characteristics critical for deeper scene understanding.
Hyperspectral imaging addresses these limitations by
capturing a continuous spectrum of light across narrow
bands for each pixel, providing valuable material properties
and subtle spectral signatures. This modality is crucial for
applications such as remote sensing, medical diagnostics,
environmental monitoring, and robotics [27], where spectral information is paramount. The demand for Hyperspectral Novel View Synthesis (HNVS) is driven by the need for
accurate, real-time spectral and spatial modeling. However,
synthesizing novel views from hyperspectral data presents
signicant challenges due to its high dimensionality and the
requirement for spectral consistency across different perspectives for each pixel.

5970

