This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CASP: Consistency-aware Audio-induced Saliency Prediction Model for
Omnidirectional Video
Zhaolin Wan1 , Han Qin2 , Zhiyang Li2 , Xiaopeng Fan1 *, Wangmeng Zuo1 , Debin Zhao1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
Dalian Maritime University, Dalian, China
zlwan@hit.edu.cn, qinhan@dlmu.edu.cn, lizy0205@dlmu.edu.cn,
fxp@hit.edu.cn, cswmzuo@gmail.com, dbzhao@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Omnidirectional videos (ODVs) present distinct challenges
for accurate audio-visual saliency prediction due to their
immersive nature, which combines spatial audio with
panoramic visuals to enhance the user experience. While
auditory cues are crucial for guiding visual attention across
the panoramic scene, the interaction between audio and
visual stimuli in ODVs remains underexplored. Existing
models primarily focus on spatiotemporal visual cues and
treat audio signals separately from their spatial and temporal contexts, often leading to misalignments between audio and visual content and undermining temporal consistency across frames. To bridge these gaps, we propose a
novel audio-induced saliency prediction model for ODVs
that holistically integrates audio and visual inputs through
a multi-modal encoder, an audio-visual interaction module, and an audio-visual transformer. Unlike conventional
methods that isolate audio cue locations and attributes, our
model employs a query-based framework, where learnable
audio queries capture comprehensive audio-visual dependencies, thus enhancing saliency prediction by dynamically
aligning with audio cues. Besides, we introduce a novel
consistency loss to enforce temporal coherence in saliency
regions across frames. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our model outperforms state-of-the-art methods in predicting audio-visual salient regions in ODVs, establishing
its robustness and superior performance.

Figure 1. Examples from the AVS-ODV dataset illustrate (a) the
strong correlation between sound object motion and audio-visual
saliency, and (b) how the saliency region shifts dynamically with
changes in the sound source, even when visual stimuli remain constant. The sound objects are highlighted with red boxes.

1. Introduction

which deepens user engagement but also introduces new
challenges in optimizing audio-visual synchronization and
saliency prediction [31].
Audio-visual saliency prediction, aimed at identifying
regions that attract human attention from both auditory and
visual perspectives, has gained significant attention, particularly in 2D videos [18, 28]. For ODVs, the audio component plays an important role by representing the distribution
of sound across the 3D viewing sphere, known as spatial audio [5]. This feature enables viewers to perceive sound from
all directions, dynamically adjusting in real-time to align
with the viewer’s position in the omnidirectional scene. Accurate prediction of audio-visual salient regions in ODVs
facilitates adaptive streaming, efficient encoding, and per-

Recent advancements in multimedia technologies have propelled omnidirectional videos (ODVs), also known as 360degree videos, into the spotlight [23]. These immersive
formats reshape user interaction by offering a complete
panoramic field of view, complemented by spatial audio,
* Corresponding Author

12605

