This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion Model is Effectively Its Own Teacher
Xinyin Ma

Runpeng Yu Songhua Liu Gongfan Fang
National University of Singapore

Xinchao Wang*

maxinyin@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

(a) DiT-XL/2 For ImageNet 512×512

(b) Stable Diffusion v1.5

Figure 1. Generated Images before (left) and after (right) our proposed self-distillation framework on DiT-XL/2 for ImageNet 512⇥512
and Stable Diffusion v1.5 with 10 DDIM sampling steps.

sion transformers of various sizes and across different sampling steps. Our results show that this novel self-distillation
paradigm can significantly enhance performance. Additionally, our method is compatible with the distillation method
designed for few-step inference. Notably, with iSSD trained
less than one epoch, we obtain a 32-step DiT-XL/2 achieving an FID of 1.99, outperforming the original 250-step
DiT-XL/2 with an FID of 2.26. We further validate the effectiveness of our method on text-to-image diffusion models,
such as Stable Diffusion, and also observe notable improvement in image quality.

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel self-distillation
paradigm for improving the performance of diffusion models. Previous studies have shown that introducing a teacher
to distill the diffusion model can enhance its sampling efficiency. We raise an intriguing question: can the diffusion
model itself serve as its teacher to further improve the performance of itself? To this end, we propose a new paradigm
called Self Step-Distillation (SSD). The core idea of SSD
is to integrate the predictions or the intermediate activations of the diffusion model at each timestep with its preceding timestep through a fusion mechanism. We propose
two forms, explicit SSD and implicit SSD (iSSD), to perform
N-step to N-step distillation from the diffusion model itself
to achieve improved image quality. We further elucidate
the relationship between SSD and high-order solver, highlighting their underlying relationship. The effectiveness of
SSD is validated through extensive experiments on diffu-

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author

Diffusion-based generative models [5, 16, 51] have gained
significant attention for their remarkable capability to generate diverse, high-fidelity outputs across various domains.
It has been proven effective in tasks such as image synthesis [42, 44, 46], video generation [1, 17, 18] and natural
language processing [27, 33]. Unlike previous generative
approaches like VAEs [24] and GANs [12], Diffusion Mod-

12901

