This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lessons and Insights from a Unifying Study of
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) in Visual Recognition
Zheda Mai1 , Ping Zhang1 , Cheng-Hao Tu1 ,
Hong-You Chen1 , Quang-Huy Nguyen1 , Li Zhang2 , Wei-Lun Chao1
1
The Ohio State University, 2 Google Research.
Abstract
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) has attracted significant attention due to the growth of pre-trained model
sizes and the need to fine-tune (FT) them for superior downstream performance. Despite a surge in new PEFT methods, a systematic study to understand their performance
and suitable application scenarios is lacking, leaving questions like “when to apply PEFT” and “which method to
use” largely unanswered, especially in visual recognition.
In this paper, we conduct a unifying empirical study of representative PEFT methods with Vision Transformers. We
systematically tune their hyperparameters to fairly compare
their accuracy on downstream tasks. Our study offers a
practical user guide and unveils several new insights. First,
if tuned carefully, different PEFT methods achieve similar
accuracy in the low-shot benchmark VTAB-1K. This includes
simple approaches like FT the bias terms that were reported
inferior. Second, despite similar accuracy, we find that PEFT
methods make different mistakes and high-confidence predictions, likely due to their different inductive biases. Such an
inconsistency (or complementarity) opens up the opportunity
for ensemble methods, and we make preliminary attempts
at this. Third, going beyond the commonly used low-shot
tasks, we find that PEFT is also useful in many-shot regimes,
achieving comparable or better accuracy than full FT while
using significantly fewer parameters. Lastly, we investigate
PEFT’s ability to preserve a pre-trained model’s robustness
to distribution shifts (e.g., CLIP). Perhaps not surprisingly,
PEFT approaches outperform full FT alone. However, with
weight-space ensembles, full FT can better balance target
distribution and distribution shift performance, suggesting a
future research direction for robust PEFT1 .

1. Introduction
Pre-training and then fine-tuning (FT) has become the standard practice to tackle visual recognition problems [9]. The
1 https://github.com/OSU-MLB/ViT_PEFT_Vision.

community-wide enthusiasm for open-sourcing has made it
possible to access large, powerful pre-trained models learned
from a gigantic amount of data, e.g., ImageNet-21K [79]
or LAION-5B [81]. More research focus has thus been on
how to FT such large models [101]. Among existing efforts,
parameter-efficient transfer learning (PEFT), has attracted
increasing attention lately [17, 28]. Instead of FT the whole
model (i.e., full FT) or the last fully connected layer (i.e.,
linear probing), PEFT approaches seek to update or insert
a relatively small number of parameters to the pre-trained
model [99]. Doing so has several noticeable advantages.
First, as named, PEFT is parameter-efficient. For one downstream task (e.g., recognizing bird species or car brands), it
only needs to learn and store a tiny fraction of parameters on
top of the pre-trained model. Second, accuracy-wise, PEFT
has been shown to consistently outperform linear probing
and often beat full FT, as reported on the commonly used
low-shot image classification benchmark VTAB-1K [104].
To date, a plethora of PEFT approaches have been proposed, bringing in inspiring ideas and promising results.
Along with this come several excellent surveys that summarize existing PEFT approaches [17, 99, 101]. Yet, a systematic understanding of the PEFT paradigm seems still
missing. For example, with so many PEFT approaches, there
is a lack of unifying references for when and how to apply
them. Though superior accuracy was reported on the lowshot benchmark VTAB-1K, there is not much discussion on
how PEFT approaches achieve it. Does it result from PEFT’s
ability to promote transferability or prevent over-fitting? The
current evaluation also raises the question of whether PEFT
is useful beyond a low-shot scenario. Last but not least, besides superior accuracy, do existing PEFT approaches offer
different, ideally, complementary information?
Attempting to answer these questions, we conduct a
unifying empirical study of representative PEFT methods
for Vision Transformers [19], including Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [37], Visual Prompt Tuning (VPT) [42],
Adapter [36], and ten other approaches. We systematically
tune their hyperparameters to fairly compare their accuracy on the low-shot benchmark VTAB-1K. This includes

14845

