This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Lanes and Points in Complex Scenarios
for Monocular 3D Lane Detection
Yifan Chang 1,3 , Junjie Huang 2 , Xiaofeng Wang1,3 , Yun Ye 2 ,
Zhujin Liang 2 , Yi Shan 2 , Dalong Du 2 , Xingang Wang 1,4 *
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 2 PhiGent Robotics, 3 UCAS
4
Luoyang Institute for Robot and Intelligent Equipment, Luoyang, China
{changyifan2023, wangxiaofeng2020, xingang.wang}@ia.ac.cn
junjie.huang@ieee.org
Abstract

accurately detecting 3D lanes remains a challenging task
due to complex road geometries, occlusions, and the lack
of sufficient 3D annotations [30]. This task is crucial for
applications like trajectory planning [49] and high-definition
map construction [6, 20, 26, 34]. However, detecting the
geometric structure and spatial location of 3D lanes solely
from monocular images is highly challenging due to the lack
of depth information.

Monocular 3D lane detection is a fundamental task in
autonomous driving. Although sparse-point methods lower
computational load and maintain high accuracy in complex
lane geometries, current methods fail to fully leverage the
geometric structure of lanes in both lane geometry representations and model design. In lane geometry representations,
we present a theoretical analysis alongside experimental
validation to verify that current sparse lane representation
methods contain inherent flaws, resulting in potential errors
of up to 20 m, which raise significant safety concerns for
driving. To address this issue, we propose a novel patching
strategy to completely represent the full lane structure. To enable existing models to match this strategy, we introduce the
EndPoint head (EP-head), which adds a patching distance
to endpoints. The EP-head enables the model to predict
more complete lane representations even with fewer preset
points, effectively addressing existing limitations and paving
the way for models that are faster and require fewer parameters in the future. In model design, to enhance the model’s
perception of lane structures, we propose the PointLane attention (PL-attention), which incorporates prior geometric
knowledge into the attention mechanism. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods
on various state-of-the-art models. For instance, in terms
of the overall F1-score, our methods improve Persformer by
4.4 points, Anchor3DLane by 3.2 points, and LATR by 2.8
points. The code will be available soon.

To advance this task, various methods have been proposed, including pixel-wise [52], grid-based [8, 48], curvebased [1, 2, 33], anchor-based [4, 16], and query-based approaches [29]. Among these, anchor-based and query-based
methods model lanes as sparse points, categorizing them as
sparse-point methods. Sparse-point methods not only significantly lower computational load but also maintain high
accuracy in complex lane geometries. However, existing
sparse-point methods do not fully consider the geometric
structure of lanes. In lane geometry representations, we find
that existing training ground truth generation methods fail
to represent the complete extent of the original ground truth.
Specifically, during the generation of training ground truth,
the original ground truth is truncated at the endpoints, as
shown in Fig. 1 (b). The truncated distance cannot be predicted by the model, which makes the model’s results inherently inaccurate. In model design, these methods do not fully
leverage prior geometric knowledge of lane structures. For
example, Anchor3DLane [16] imposes parallel constraints
on lanes, but these constraints are insufficient for handling
real-world complex scenarios. Although LATR [29] introduces 3D ground positional embedding priors and enhances
cross-attention, it lacks more detailed modeling of lane structures and modifications to self-attention.

1. Introduction

To this end, we propose two modules to enhance existing methods. In lane geometry representations, we first
introduce a novel endpoint patching strategy. This strategy increases the F1-score of training ground truth on the

In recent years, advances in autonomous driving have significantly improved vehicle perception and control. However,
* Corresponding author.

6802

