This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sensitivity-Aware Efficient Fine-Tuning via Compact Dynamic-Rank Adaptation
Tianran Chen1 , Jiarui Chen1 , Baoquan Zhang1 ,* Zhehao Yu1 , Shidong Chen1 , Rui Ye2 , Xutao Li1 , Yunming Ye1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Guizhou Power Grid Co., Ltd. Intelligent Operation Center
{23S151121, jiaruichen, 210110629, chenshidong}@stu.hit.edu.cn
{baoquanzhang, lixutao, yeyunming}@hit.edu.cn, {yeruigzyj}@163.com

Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) is a fundamental research problem in computer vision, which aims to
tune a few parameters for efficient storage and adaptation of pre-trained vision models. Recently, sensitivityaware parameter efficient fine-tuning method (SPT) addresses this problem by identifying sensitive parameters
and then leveraging its sparse characteristic to combine
unstructured and structured tuning for PEFT. However,
existing methods only focus on the sparse characteristic of sensitive parameters but overlook its distribution
characteristic, which results in additional storage burden
and limited performance improvement. In this paper, we
find that the distribution of sensitive parameters is not
chaotic, but concentrates on a small number of rows or
columns in each parameter matrix. Inspired by this fact, we
propose a Compact Dynamic-Rank Adaptation-based tuning method for Sensitivity-aware Parameter efficient fineTuning, called CDRA-SPT. Specifically, we first identify the
sensitive parameters that require tuning for each downstream task. Then, we reorganize the sensitive parameters by following its row and column into a compact subparameter matrix. Finally, a dynamic-rank adaptation is
designed and applied at sub-parameter matrix level for
PEFT. Its advantage is that the dynamic-rank characteristic of sub-parameter matrix can be fully exploited for PEFT.
Extensive experiments show that our method achieves superior performance over previous state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
With the development of large vision models on representation and generation, the paradigm of pre-training and finetuning has attracted increasing interest on computer vision
[5, 15, 22, 25, 41, 42]. A widely used fine-tuning technique is the full fine-tuning, which leverages the pre-trained
weights as the initial parameters and then tunes all param* Corresponding author.

Row

Abstract

Column
(a) Original Parameters.

(b) Reorganized Parameters.

Figure 1. Distribution illustration of of sensitive parameter. In fact,
the distribution of sensitive parameters is not chaotic on origin parameter but concentrates in a small number of rows or columns
(a). After reorganizing its row and column, these sensitive parameters will be clustered into a compact sub-parameter matrix (b).
Inspired by this fact, we propose to apply structured tuning at subparameter matrix levels instead of entire matrix. Its advantage is
the distribution character of sensitive parameters concentrating in
a small of row and column can be finely leveraged for PEFT.

eters for adaptation of downstream tasks. However, as the
number of model parameters increases, the full fine-tuning
method needs to store many parameters and takes lots of
computing power to tune pre-trained vision models for each
downstream task. This results in these method are difficult
to apply to resource-limited scenarios. To address this problem, parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) is proposed and
has received wide attention recently. PEFT, as a fundamental problem in computer vision, aims to achieve an efficient
transfer from a pre-trained vision model to target downstream tasks by freezing most of the pre-trained parameters
and only tuning a few model parameters [29, 31].
Existing studies [4, 6, 31, 43, 48] effectively address this
problem by selecting a subset of parameters (called unstructured tuning) [4, 6, 31, 43, 48] or adding a few additional
parameters (called structured tuning) [4, 6, 31, 43, 48] to
perform adaptation of downstream tasks. Although these
methods are all different, He et al. [14] recently found that
these unstructured and structured tuning methods can combine and then present sensitivity-aware parameter efficient
fine-tuning methods (called SPT [14]) for enhancing PEFT

9655

