This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Effective and Sparse Adversarial Attack on Spiking Neural Networks
via Breaking Invisible Surrogate Gradients
Li Lun1

Kunyu Feng2
Qinglong Ni3
Ling Liang1
Yuan Wang1
3∗
1
1∗
Ying Li
Dunshan Yu
Xiaoxin Cui
1
School of Integrated Circuits, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{lunli, lingliang, wangyuan, yuds, cuixx}@pku.edu.cn,
feng ky21@stu.pku.edu.cn, {niqinglong, liying1}@ime.ac.cn

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have shown their competence in handling spatial-temporal event-based data with
low energy consumption. Similar to conventional artificial neural networks (ANNs), SNNs are also vulnerable to
gradient-based adversarial attacks, wherein gradients are
calculated by spatial-temporal back-propagation (STBP)
and surrogate gradients (SGs). However, the SGs may be
invisible for an inference-only model as they do not influence the inference results, and current gradient-based attacks are ineffective for binary dynamic images captured by
the dynamic vision sensor (DVS). While some approaches
addressed the issue of invisible SGs through universal SGs,
their SGs lack a correlation with the victim model, resulting in sub-optimal performance. Moreover, the imperceptibility of existing SNN-based binary attacks is still insufficient. In this paper, we introduce an innovative potentialdependent surrogate gradient (PDSG) method to establish
a robust connection between the SG and the model, thereby
enhancing the adaptability of adversarial attacks across
various models with invisible SGs. Additionally, we propose the sparse dynamic attack (SDA) to effectively attack
binary dynamic images. Utilizing a generation-reduction
paradigm, SDA can fully optimize the sparsity of adversarial perturbations. Experimental results demonstrate that
our PDSG and SDA outperform state-of-the-art SNN-based
attacks across various models and datasets. Specifically,
our PDSG achieves 100% attack success rate on ImageNet,
and our SDA obtains 82% attack success rate by modifying
only 0.24% of the pixels on CIFAR10DVS. The code is available at https://github.com/ryime/PDSG-SDA.

Invisible surrogate gradients

Incompatible gradients

attacker

binary dynamic image

visible

weight.pth

invisible

victim SNN

neuron
attack

forward

floating-point gradients
backward

0.4

-1.2

0

0.1

0.2
0.5

0

0.9

-1.2

Figure 1. Illustration of the challenges of attacking SNNs. The invisible SGs hinder the attacker to perform gradient-based attacks.
The incompatible gradients describe that the floating-point gradients are difficult to be converted to binary perturbations.

1. Introduction
Brain-inspired spiking neural networks (SNNs), as the third
generation of neural network models, have attracted extensive attention in machine intelligence and neuromorphic
computing [48, 62]. In contrast to floating-point activation in conventional artificial neural networks (ANNs), neurons in SNNs utilize binary spike sequences for communication. The sparse and event-driven natures of spikes endow SNNs with the abilities of asynchronous processing
and low energy consumption [35, 60]. Nowadays, SNNbased neuromorphic hardware has emerged as low-power
and high-performance edge computing devices in resourceconstrained scenarios, such as TrueNorth [1], Loihi [10,
57], Tianjic [59], and Darwin [46, 47].
In practical applications, the security and robustness of
neural networks are required to be concerned [25, 84]. Previous studies [22, 49, 65] have highlighted the vulnerability of ANNs to gradient-based adversarial attacks, which

∗ Corresponding Authors.

3540

