This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SVG-IR: Spatially-Varying Gaussian Splatting for Inverse Rendering
Hanxiao Sun1

Yupeng Gao2
1

Jin Xie2
2

Nankai University

Jian Yang1

Beibei Wang2∗

Nanjing University

Copy

Flat Shading

Constant Gaussian

Interpolated Shading

Spatially-varying Gaussian

(Original)

Interpolate

Gaussian Normal

(Ours)

Gaussian Vertex

Gaussian Vertex Normal

Shading Point

Shading Normal

Material Attribute

Novel View Synthesis

Albedo & Normal

Relighting

Visibility & Indirect Shading

Figure 1. SVG-IR introduces a new spatially-varying Gaussian representation inspired by replacing flat shading for interpolated shading
in triangle rendering. Each spatially-varying Gaussian allows spatially-varying material and normal attributes by interpolating among
Gaussian vertices defined in the tangent space of a Gaussian. Compared to the original Gaussian (i.e., Constant Gaussian) with constant
attributes, SVG has a more powerful representation ability to produce high-quality NVS and relighting results.

SVG-IR framework significantly improves rendering quality, outperforming state-of-the-art NeRF-based methods by
2.5 dB in peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and surpassing
existing Gaussian-based techniques by 3.5 dB in relighting
tasks, all while maintaining a real-time rendering speed.
The source code is available at https://github.com/learnershx/SVG-IR.

Abstract
Reconstructing 3D assets from images, known as inverse
rendering (IR), remains a challenging task due to its illposed nature. 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has demonstrated impressive capabilities for novel view synthesis
(NVS) tasks. Methods apply it to relighting by separating radiance into BRDF parameters and lighting, yet produce inferior relighting quality with artifacts and unnatural
indirect illumination due to the limited capability of each
Gaussian, which has constant material parameters and normal, alongside the absence of physical constraints for indirect lighting. In this paper, we present a novel framework
called Spatially-vayring Gaussian Inverse Rendering (SVGIR), aimed at enhancing both NVS and relighting quality.
To this end, we propose a new representation—Spatiallyvarying Gaussian (SVG)—that allows per-Gaussian spatially varying parameters. This enhanced representation
is complemented by a SVG splatting scheme akin to vertex/fragment shading in traditional graphics pipelines. Furthermore, we integrate a physically-based indirect lighting
model, enabling more realistic relighting. The proposed
* Corresponding author.
1 College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2 School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University,
Suzhou, China

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D assets from images, or so-called inverse rendering (IR), is a longstanding task in computer
graphics and vision. While recent techniques (e.g., Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [22] and 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [16]) have brought great opportunities to this task,
it is still challenging due to its ill-posed nature and the complexity of both appearance and lighting.
Existing NeRF-based IR methods [2, 3, 8, 25, 27, 33, 35]
have achieved impressive relighting quality, at the cost of
long training and rendering time. Recently, several methods [6, 11, 19, 24] have incorporated 3DGS into IR by decoupling radiance into material parameters for a Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF) and environmental lighting to achieve relightability. Despite their
fast training and rendering speeds, the quality of relighting
often suffers from noticeable artifacts in both training and

16143

