This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sparse Point Cloud Patches Rendering via Splitting 2D Gaussians
Changfeng Ma1 , Ran Bi1 , Jie Guo1 , Chongjun Wang1 , Yanwen Guo12∗
1
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 School of Software, North University of China
{changfengma, 211250233}@smail.nju.edu.cn
{guojie,chjwang,ywguo}@nju.edu.cn
Car

NPBG++

TriVol

Indoor Scene

Generalize to Other Categories
Human

Shoe

Point Cloud
PFGS

Ours

GT
Sculpture

Figure 1. Our method excels in rendering intricate, photo-realistic images from point clouds of different categories. In this instance, our
model is trained on the Car category, utilizing 20K points as input.

Abstract

available at https://github.com/murcherful/GauPCRender.

Current learning-based methods predict NeRF or 3D Gaussians from point clouds to achieve photo-realistic rendering
but still depend on categorical priors, dense point clouds, or
additional refinements. Hence, we introduce a novel point
cloud rendering method by predicting 2D Gaussians from
point clouds. Our method incorporates two identical modules with an entire-patch architecture enabling the network
to be generalized to multiple datasets. The module normalizes and initializes the Gaussians utilizing the point cloud
information including normals, colors and distances. Then,
splitting decoders are employed to refine the initial Gaussians by duplicating them and predicting more accurate
results, making our methodology effectively accommodate
sparse point clouds as well. Once trained, our approach exhibits direct generalization to point clouds across different
categories. The predicted Gaussians are employed directly
for rendering without additional refinement on the rendered
images, retaining the benefits of 2D Gaussians. We conduct extensive experiments on various datasets, and the results demonstrate the superiority and generalization of our
method, which achieves SOTA performance. The code is
∗ Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Point clouds can be easily acquired using various types of
3D scanners, making them a recent research hotspot. Photorealistic rendering of point clouds is significant for many
applications such as visualization, virtual reality and automatic driving. However, the sparsity and discrete nature
of point clouds continue to pose challenges for achieving
photo-realistic rendering.
Traditional graphics rendering methods [2, 22] merely
project points as planes or spheres onto images. Consequently, their outcomes lack photo-realism and are riddled
with numerous holes. Previous deep learning-based works
[1, 8, 23] necessitate point clouds and corresponding images
from several views as input, which are difficult to acquire in
practice. These methods also require training or fine-tuning
for each scene or object. Recent works [13, 14] have focused on predicting NeRF [20] from given point clouds to
render images from arbitrary views. PFGS [28] predicts the
3D Gaussians [17] with features for point clouds. After rendering, PFGS refines the rendered images based on these
features. Although these methods can render point clouds

27285

