This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SplatFlow: Self-Supervised Dynamic Gaussian Splatting in Neural Motion Flow
Field for Autonomous Driving
Su Sun* 1 , Cheng Zhao* 2 , Zhuoyang Sun1 , Yingjie Victor Chen1 , Mei Chen2
1
Purdue University, 2 Microsoft

Abstract
Most existing Dynamic Gaussian Splatting methods for
complex dynamic urban scenarios rely on accurate objectlevel supervision from expensive manual labeling, limiting
their scalability in real-world applications. In this paper,
we introduce SplatFlow, a Self-Supervised Dynamic Gaussian Splatting within Neural Motion Flow Fields (NMFF)
to learn 4D space-time representations without requiring
tracked 3D bounding boxes, enabling accurate dynamic
scene reconstruction and novel view RGB/depth/flow synthesis. SplatFlow designs a unified framework to seamlessly integrate time-dependent 4D Gaussian representation within NMFF, where NMFF is a set of implicit functions to model temporal motions of both LiDAR points
and Gaussians as continuous motion flow fields. Leveraging NMFF, SplatFlow effectively decomposes static background and dynamic objects, representing them with 3D
and 4D Gaussian primitives, respectively. NMFF also models the correspondences of each 4D Gaussian across time,
which aggregates temporal features to enhance cross-view
consistency of dynamic components. SplatFlow further
improves dynamic object identification by distilling features from 2D foundation models into 4D space-time representation. Comprehensive evaluations conducted on the
Waymo and KITTI Datasets validate SplatFlow’s state-ofthe-art (SOTA) performance for both image reconstruction
and novel view synthesis in dynamic urban scenarios.

Figure 1. Top: Street GS [24]; Middle: PVG [1]; Bottom: Our
SplatFlow. SplatFlow eliminates the need for 3D Bboxes required
by Street GS, and enhances rendering quality compared to PVG.

1. Introduction

excellent visual and geometric accuracy. However, accurately and comprehensively reconstructing dynamic driving
scenes remains a major challenge, given the complexity of
real-world scenarios without dynamic object annotations.
Recent approaches advance NeRF-based representations
by incorporating object detection and tracking to model dynamic elements, enabling photo-realistic view generation of
dynamic urban street environments. Approaches [3, 8, 12,
18, 21, 23] create a scene graph, where both dynamic objects and the static background are represented as nodes, reconstructed within their canonical frames. Self-supervised
methods [19, 25] model dynamic driving scenes by combining static neural field and time-dependent neural field to
handle the static background and moving foreground objects separately. The SUDS [19] uses optical flow to ease
the strict requirement for object labeling, while EmerNerf [25] learns temporal attributes and features in a selfsupervision manner to avoid reliance on optical flow. However, these NeRF style methods face efficiency challenges
in both training and inference, which becomes a major bottleneck for large-scale scene reconstruction and rendering.
While NeRF has proven effective for driving scenes,
3DGS offers a promising alternative due to faster train-

As autonomous driving systems increasingly shift toward
end-to-end models, there is a growing need for scalable
simulation environments without domain gaps where these
systems can undergo closed-loop evaluations. A promising approach is real-world closed-loop evaluation, which
demands controllable sensor inputs, thereby driving the development of advanced scene reconstruction techniques. In
this context, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [10] and 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [7] have proven to be effective in creating high-quality 3D scene reconstructions with
* Equally contributed as co-first author.

27487

