This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Horizon-GS: Unified 3D Gaussian Splatting for Large-Scale
Aerial-to-Ground Scenes
Lihan Jiang1,3 * Kerui Ren2,3 * Mulin Yu3 Linning Xu4
Junting Dong3 Tao Lu5 Feng Zhao1† Dahua Lin3,4,7 Bo Dai6†
1
3

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
5

Brown University, 6 The University of Hong Kong, 7 CPII

Figure 1. Horizon-GS enables high-quality rendering and reconstruction of aerial-to-ground scenes with unprecedented fidelity across
scales, supporting drastic view changes. The colored camera trajectories in the center illustrate the novel viewpoints, while the reconstructed
mesh is overlaid on the scene. The surrounding images show the corresponding predicted images for each viewpoint. Explore more demos
on our project page: https://city-super.github.io/horizon-gs/.

perspectives with a new training strategy, overcoming viewpoint discrepancies to generate high-fidelity scenes. We
also curate a high-quality aerial-to-ground views dataset
encompassing both synthetic and real-world scene to advance further research. Experiments across diverse urban
scene datasets confirm the effectiveness of our method.

Abstract
Seamless integration of both aerial and street view images
remains a significant challenge in neural scene reconstruction and rendering. Existing methods predominantly focus on single domain, limiting their applications in immersive environments, which demand extensive free view exploration with large view changes both horizontally and vertically. We introduce Horizon-GS, a novel approach built
upon Gaussian Splatting techniques, tackles the unified reconstruction and rendering for aerial and street views. Our
method addresses the key challenges of combining these

1. Introduction

∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Modeling and rendering large-scale scenes has become essential across domains such as Embodied AI, digital twins,
and autonomous driving. Neural radiance fields [19] have
revealed the potential to realize this vision. Recently, 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) [8] has advanced this field further, achieving exceptional visual quality alongside realtime rendering speeds. These capabilities markedly accel-

26789

