This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Do We Really Need Curated Malicious Data for Safety Alignment in
Multi-modal Large Language Models?
Yanbo Wang, Jiyang Guan, Jian LiangB , Ran He
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
NLPR & MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
wangyanbo2023@ia.ac.cn liangjian92@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) have made
significant progress, yet their safety alignment remains limited. Typically, current open-source MLLMs rely on the
alignment inherited from their language module to avoid
harmful generations. However, the lack of safety measures specifically designed for multi-modal inputs creates
an alignment gap, leaving MLLMs vulnerable to visiondomain attacks such as typographic manipulation. Current
methods utilize a carefully designed safety dataset to enhance model defense capability, while the specific knowledge or patterns acquired from the high-quality dataset remain unclear. Through comparison experiments, we find
that the alignment gap primarily arises from data distribution biases, while image content, response quality, or the
contrastive behavior of the dataset makes little contribution to boosting multi-modal safety. To further investigate
this and identify the key factors in improving MLLM safety,
we propose finetuning MLLMs on a small set of benign
instruct-following data with responses replaced by simple,
clear rejection sentences. Experiments show that, without the need for labor-intensive collection of high-quality
malicious data, model safety can still be significantly improved, as long as a specific fraction of rejection data exists in the finetuning set, indicating the security alignment is
not lost but rather obscured during multi-modal pretraining
or instruction finetuning. Simply correcting the underlying
data bias could narrow the safety gap in the vision domain.
Warning: This paper contains harmful images and AIgenerated contents which may be offensive.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the multi-modal large language model
(MLLM) has experienced tremendous prosperity [11, 18,
45, 48, 51]. Companies and academics have proposed mulB Corresponding author.

19879

tiple models with their APIs, finetuning suites, and online
demos. However, although the multi-modal understanding
capability of these models is advancing steadily, the safety
alignment of these models attracts less attention. To be detailed, most MLLMs connect an image encoder and a pretrained large language model with a vision-language connector, which are attention structures at the beginning and
then replaced by MLPs [4, 5, 9, 50]. The safety alignment
focuses mainly on the large language model, where popular RLHF algorithms [2, 19, 30] such as DPO [36] and
PPO [38] are used to ensure that the chat model acts humanly. Nevertheless, such a workflow uncovers an obvious
disadvantage: both the pretraining and visual instruction
tuning stages do not contain a specific multi-modal safety
alignment procedure, and the safety defensive capability
could only be inherited from the LLM module. In addition,
researchers also find that finetuning models on benign data
may still sacrifice model safety [34]. They all challenge the
defense capability of MLLMs.
From the attackers’ point of view, jailbreaking these
MLLM models with multi-modal input seems more
straightforward than jailbreaking language models [21].
Instead of optimizing adversarial noise to elicit harmful
contents from vision language models with white-box accesses [28, 32], the typographic attack is a typical example to demonstrate the inferior safety of MLLMs. FigStep [13] directly transforms harmful requests into images
through typography to deceive the image encoder module
instead of the language module. With similar logic, MMSafetyBench [25] proposes to add harmful keywords at the
bottom of content-related diffusion-generated images, successfully inducing VLMs to generate inappropriate content
across multiple fields. To defend such a simple but effective attack, except for prompt engineering techniques at inference time, previous work approaches this by collecting
a safe multi-modal dataset with toxic queries and rejection
responses, and then finetuning the MLLMs either in the second finetuning stage or after their release [55]. Regardless
of a great success, current methods also leave a few ques-

