This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

JanusFlow: Harmonizing Autoregression and Rectiﬁed Flow
for Uniﬁed Multimodal Understanding and Generation
Yiyang Ma1,2 , Xingchao Liu1,† , Xiaokang Chen1,† , Wen Liu1,† , Chengyue Wu1,3 , Zhiyu Wu1 ,
Zizheng Pan1 , Zhenda Xie1 , Haowei Zhang1 , Xingkai Yu1 , Liang Zhao1 , Yisong Wang1,4 ,
Jiaying Liu2 , Chong Ruan1,‡
2
1
DeepSeek-AI Peking University 3 The University of Hong Kong 4 Tsinghua University
†
Equal Contribution ‡ Corresponding Author
Project Page: https://github.com/deepseek-ai/Janus
Abstract

ponents. Alternative approaches [86, 95, 97, 98, 106] propose training a single LLM for both tasks, typically incorporating either diffusion models [32, 81] or vector-quantized
autoregressive models [22, 84].

We present JanusFlow, a powerful framework that uniﬁes image understanding and generation in a single model.
JanusFlow introduces a minimalist architecture that integrates autoregressive language models with rectiﬁed ﬂow,
a state-of-the-art method in generative modeling. Our key
ﬁnding demonstrates that rectiﬁed ﬂow can be straightforwardly trained within the large language model framework,
eliminating the need for complex architectural modiﬁcations. To further improve the performance of our uniﬁed
model, we adopt two key strategies: (i) decoupling the understanding and generation encoders, and (ii) aligning their
representations during uniﬁed training. Extensive experiments show that JanusFlow achieves comparable or superior performance to specialized models in their respective
domains, while signiﬁcantly outperforming existing uniﬁed
approaches. This work represents a step toward more efﬁcient and versatile vision-language models.

Our approach builds upon recent breakthroughs in rectiﬁed ﬂow models [3, 23, 54, 60, 61], which provide a simple
framework for generative modeling while delivering exceptional empirical performance [23, 36, 44]. Building on these
advances, we propose JanusFlow, a powerful uniﬁed multimodal model that seamlessly integrates rectiﬁed ﬂow with
LLM architecture. Following a minimalist design principle,
our architecture requires only a lightweight encoder and decoder to adapt the LLM for rectiﬁed ﬂow operations. To
optimize JanusFlow’s performance, we implement two key
strategies: First, we maintain separate vision encoders for
understanding and generation tasks, preventing task interference and thus enhancing understanding capabilities. Second, we align the intermediate features between generation
and understanding modules during training, strengthening
semantic coherence in the generation process.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in learning diverse knowledge and generalizing to new scenarios [1, 7, 8, 68, 89]. Leveraging these capabilities, researchers have developed sophisticated models
specialized in image comprehension [2, 15, 46, 48, 55, 57]
and text-to-image generation [23, 72, 74, 77].
The ﬁeld has recently shifted toward creating uniﬁed systems capable of handling both tasks simultaneously. One
prominent direction involves utilizing pre-trained text-toimage models for high-quality generation while training
LLMs to generate conditions for these models [19, 25–
27, 85]. However, this approach introduces architectural
complexity and potentially constrains the model’s capabilities through maintaining separate LLM and generative com-

JanusFlow shows state-of-the-art performances in both
multimodal understanding and text-to-image generation
compared to existing uniﬁed approaches, and even outperforms several specialized methods. Speciﬁcally, on image generation benchmarks, MJHQ FID-30k [47], GenEval
[28] and DPG-Bench [34], JanusFlow achieves scores of
9.51, 0.63 and 80.09%, surpassing established text-toimage models including SDv1.5 [75] and SDXL [72]. In
multimodal comprehension benchmarks, JanusFlow attains
scores of 74.9, 70.5 and 60.3 on MMBench [62], SeedBench [45], and GQA [35], respectively, exceeding specialized models such as LLaVA-v1.5 [55] and Qwen-VLChat [4]. Notably, these results are achieved with a compact
LLM architecture with only 1.3B parameters.

7739

