This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Anyattack: Towards Large-scale Self-supervised Adversarial Attacks on
Vision-language Models
Jiaming Zhang1 Junhong Ye2 Xingjun Ma3 * Yige Li4 * Yunfan Yang2
Yunhao Chen3 Jitao Sang2,5 Dit-Yan Yeung1
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Beijing Jiaotong University
3
Fudan University 4 Singapore Management University 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
Project Page: https://jiamingzhang94.github.io/anyattack/
Existing Strategies

Abstract

supervision

target label

Due to their multimodal capabilities, Vision-Language
Models (VLMs) have found numerous impactful applications in real-world scenarios. However, recent studies have
revealed that VLMs are vulnerable to image-based adversarial attacks. Traditional targeted adversarial attacks require specific targets and labels, limiting their real-world
impact. We present AnyAttack, a self-supervised framework that transcends the limitations of conventional attacks through a novel foundation model approach. By pretraining on the massive LAION-400M dataset without label supervision, AnyAttack achieves unprecedented flexibility - enabling any image to be transformed into an attack vector targeting any desired output across different
VLMs. This approach fundamentally changes the threat
landscape, making adversarial capabilities accessible at
an unprecedented scale. Our extensive validation across
five open-source VLMs (CLIP, BLIP, BLIP2, InstructBLIP,
and MiniGPT-4) demonstrates AnyAttack’s effectiveness
across diverse multimodal tasks. Most concerning, AnyAttack seamlessly transfers to commercial systems including Google Gemini, Claude Sonnet, Microsoft Copilot and
OpenAI GPT, revealing a systemic vulnerability requiring
immediate attention.

dataset

Surrogate
Model

adversarial
noises

Generator

Our AnyAttack
Self-supervision
large-scale
dataset

Pre-trained
Generator
Fine-tuning

Surrogate
Model

adversarial
noises
random
images

Figure 1. Comparison of existing targeted adversarial attack strategies and the our proposed self-supervised method - AnyAttack.

1. Introduction

images designed to mislead the model into making incorrect predictions [20]. The evolution of adversarial attacks
has progressed from general untargeted attacks (causing arbitrary errors) to more concerning targeted attacks, where
adversaries can manipulate VLMs to produce specific, predetermined harmful outputs. For instance, a benign image
such as a landscape could be subtly altered to elicit harmful text descriptions such as “violence” or “explicit content”
from the model. Such manipulation could have severe implications for content moderation systems, potentially leading to the removal of legitimate content or the inappropriate
distribution of harmful material.
As VLMs become increasingly accessible to the public, facilitating the rapid proliferation of downstream applications, this vulnerability poses a significant threat to the
reliability and security of VLMs in real-world scenarios.
Therefore, exploring new targeted attack methods tailored
to VLMs is crucial to address these vulnerabilities. However, existing targeted attack methods on VLMs present

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have exhibited remarkable performance across a diverse array of tasks, primarily
attributed to the scale of training data and model size [9, 16,
35]. Despite their remarkable performance, these models,
heavily reliant on visual inputs, remain vulnerable to imagebased adversarial attacks1 , which are carefully crafted input
* Corresponding authors
1 For simplicity, we will refer to image-based adversarial attacks

as “adversarial attacks” in the remainder of this paper, distinguish-

ing them from text-based adversarial attacks.

19900

