This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Event-Based Object Detection: A Hybrid Neural Network with Spatial
and Temporal Attention
Soikat Hasan Ahmed*, Jan Finkbeiner†, Emre Neftci
Forschungszentrum Jülich, RWTH Aachen University
{s.ahmed, j.finkbeiner, e.neftci}@fz-juelich.de

Abstract
Event cameras offer high temporal resolution and dynamic range with minimal motion blur, making them
promising for robust object detection. While Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) on neuromorphic hardware are often
considered for energy efficient and low latency event-based
data processing, they often fall short of Artificial Neural
Networks (ANNs) in accuracy and flexibility. Here, we introduce Attention-based Hybrid SNN-ANN backbones for
event-based object detection to leverage the strengths of
both SNN and ANN architectures. A novel Attention-based
SNN-ANN bridge module captures sparse spatial and temporal relations from the SNN layer and converts them into
dense feature maps for the ANN part of the backbone. Additionally, we present a variant that integrates DWConvLSTMs to the ANN blocks to capture slower dynamics. This
multi-timescale network combines fast SNN processing for
short timesteps with long-term dense RNN processing, effectively capturing both fast and slow dynamics. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed method surpasses SNN-based approaches by significant margins, with
results comparable to existing ANN and RNN-based methods. Unlike ANN-only networks, the hybrid setup allows us
to implement the SNN blocks on digital neuromorphic hardware to investigate the feasibility of our approach. Extensive ablation studies and implementation on neuromorphic
hardware confirm the effectiveness of our proposed modules
and architectural choices. Our hybrid SNN-ANN architectures pave the way for ANN-like performance at a drastically reduced parameter, latency, and power budget.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, deep learning has made significant
advances in object detection. State-of-the-art approaches
predominantly rely on frame-based cameras which cap* Conceptual design, algorithm development and experimentation.
† Conceptual design, hardware analysis and deployment.

ture frames at a fixed rate. Frame cameras provide dense
intensity data but have limitations in dynamic range and
frame rates, leading to motion blur. Dynamic Vision
Sensors (DVS), or event cameras, offer an alternative by
asynchronously capturing pixel-level illumination changes,
achieving low latency (∼10µs), higher temporal resolution, and an extended dynamic range (140 dB vs. 60 dB)
[12]. These characteristics make them well-suited for
low-light and fast-motion scenarios. However, due to the
sparse, high-temporal-resolution data they generate, effectively processing event data for object detection remains a
challenging and emerging research area. Early adopters of
event-based object detection ANN models often naively repurpose architectures originally designed for frame-based
cameras [5, 18, 30, 35, 44]. ANN models generally achieve
good accuracy but tend to be large in terms of parameter
count and MAC operations, making them less suitable for
deployment on power-efficient edge or neuromorphic devices. Furthermore, the high sparsity and temporal resolution is often discarded in favor of dense representations
to leverage GPUs’ dense, vector-based representations. In
contrast, SNNs implemented in neuromorphic hardware are
ideally suited to leverage the sparsity of event-based inputs,
offering significant reductions in computational cost, power
consumption, and latency [4, 8, 34]. However, SNNs tend
to be less accurate at the task level compared to their ANN
counterparts.
In this work, we create a hybrid SNN-ANN-based backbone architecture to combine the efficient, event-driven processing of SNNs on neuromorphic hardware with the efficient learning and representation capabilities of ANNs. The
SNN extracts low-level features with high temporal resolution from the event-based sensors and converts them into intermediate features, which then change to slower timescales
before being processed by the ANN with dense activations.
Additionally, we feature a variant that adds DWConvLSTMs [14, 36] to the ANN block. This multi-timescale
RNN variant combines the sparse SNN processing of short
timesteps with long time horizon processing via the dense
RNN with the extracted long timesteps to efficiently cap-

13970

