This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Synthetic Prior for Few-Shot Drivable Head Avatar Inversion
Wojciech Zielonka1, 2, 3* Stephan J. Garbin3 Alexandros Lattas3
George Kopanas3 Paulo Gotardo3 Thabo Beeler3 Justus Thies1, 2 Timo Bolkart3
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
Technical University of Darmstadt 3 Google
https://zielon.github.io/synshot/

Figure 1. Given a few input images (left), SynShot generates a personalized 3D Gaussian avatar that renders from new viewpoints and
unseen expressions (right). To compensate for the missing information in the input images, we leverage a generative Gaussian head avatar
trained on a diverse synthetic head dataset as a 3D prior.

Abstract
We present SynShot, a novel method for the few-shot
inversion of a drivable head avatar based on a synthetic
prior. We tackle three major challenges. First, training a
controllable 3D generative network requires a large number of diverse sequences, for which pairs of images and
high-quality tracked meshes are not always available. Second, the use of real data is strictly regulated (e.g., under
the General Data Protection Regulation, which mandates
frequent deletion of models and data to accommodate a
situation when participant’s consent is withdrawn). Synthetic data, free from these constraints, is an appealing alternative. Third, state-of-the-art monocular avatar models
struggle to generalize to new views and expressions, lacking
a strong prior and often overfitting to a specific viewpoint
distribution. Inspired by machine learning models trained
solely on synthetic data, we propose a method that learns a
prior model from a large dataset of synthetic heads with diverse identities, expressions, and viewpoints. With few input
images, SynShot fine-tunes the pretrained synthetic prior
to bridge the domain gap, modeling a photorealistic head
∗ Work done while WZ was interning at Google in Zurich, Switzerland

avatar that generalizes to novel expressions and viewpoints.
We model the head avatar using 3D Gaussian splatting and
a convolutional encoder-decoder that outputs Gaussian parameters in UV texture space. To account for the different
modeling complexities over parts of the head (e.g., skin vs
hair), we embed the prior with explicit control for upsampling the number of per-part primitives. Compared to SOTA
monocular and GAN-based methods, SynShot significantly
improves novel view and expression synthesis.

1. Introduction
The ability to build high-fidelity drivable digital avatars is a
key enabler for virtual reality (VR) and mixed reality (MR)
applications. However, creating photorealistic human head
models [1, 53] using traditional rendering assets requires
sophisticated data capture and significant manual cleanup,
which is time-consuming and expensive.
The recent advancements in learning-based methods and
radiance fields [29, 43] have simplified the avatar creation
process, leading to impressive progress in quality and democratization of neural head avatars [19, 42, 62]. Such
progress is particularly noticeable in enhancing control

10735

