This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Recurrent Feature Mining and Keypoint Mixup Padding
for Category-Agnostic Pose Estimation
Junjie Chen1 Weilong Chen1 Yifan Zuo1 Yuming Fang1 *
1
Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics
{chenjunjie,chenweilong,zuoyifan,fangyuming}@jxufe.edu.cn

Abstract
Category-agnostic pose estimation aims to locate keypoints
on query images according to a few annotated support images for arbitrary novel classes. Existing methods generally extract support features via heatmap pooling, and obtain interacted features from support and query via crossattention. Hence, these works neglect to mine fine-grained
and structure-aware (FGSA) features from both support and
query images, which are crucial for pixel-level keypoint localization. To this end, we propose a novel yet concise
framework, which recurrently mines FGSA features from
both support and query images. Specifically, we design a
FGSA mining module based on deformable attention mechanism. On the one hand, we mine fine-grained features by
applying deformable attention head over multi-scale feature
maps. On the other hand, we mine structure-aware features
by offsetting the reference points of keypoints to their linked
keypoints. By means of above module, we recurrently mine
FGSA features from support and query images, and thus obtain better support features and query estimations. In addition, we propose to use mixup keypoints to pad various
classes to a unified keypoint number, which could provide
richer supervision than the zero padding used in existing
works. We conduct extensive experiments and in-depth studies on large-scale MP-100 dataset, and outperform SOTA
method dramatically (+3.2%PCK@0.05).

Figure 1. Overview of representative methods and ours. (a): Representative methods use zero padding to align keypoint number,
and rely on the heatmap pooling and cross-attention on singlescale features to produce support features and query estimations.
(b): Our method uses mixup padding, and recurrently mines FGSA
features from multi-scale features of support and query images,
which can produce better support features and query estimations.

1. Introduction
applied for novel classes, especially when they have different keypoint classes. Therefore, category-agnostic pose
estimation (CAPE) [52] is introduced to locate target keypoints for arbitrary classes given a few support images annotated with keypoints.
In CAPE, the query images come from novel classes, and
thus the target keypoints to be estimated are determined by
the annotated keypoints on support images. Consequently,
extracting high-quality features from both support images
and query images are fundamental issues in CAPE. As

Pose estimation is a fundamental and significant computer
vision task, which aims to produce the locations of predefined semantic part of object instance in 2D image. Recently, it has received increasing attention in the computer
vision community due to its wide applications in virtual reality, augmented reality, human-computer interaction, robot
and automation. However, most pose estimation methods
are trained with category-specific data and thus cannot be
* Corresponding author

22035

