This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FirePlace: Geometric Refinements of LLM Common Sense Reasoning
for 3D Object Placement
Ian Huang1,2 * Yanan Bao2 Karen Truong2
Howard Zhou
Cordelia Schmid2 Leonidas Guibas1,2 Alireza Fathi2
2

1

Stanford University

2

Google DeepMind

Figure 1. FirePlace enables multi-modal large language models (MLLMs)to place new 3D objects into complex, preexisting 3D scenes,
given (1) a 3D scene, (2) a 3D object, and (3) a language prompt. It uses a combination of MLLM common sense and low-level geometry
constraints through the process described in this paper. Object placements generated by FirePlace are shown in Red.

Abstract
Scene generation with 3D assets presents a complex challenge, requiring both high-level semantic understanding
and low-level geometric reasoning. While Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs) excel at semantic tasks,
their application to 3D scene generation is hindered by their
limited grounding on 3D geometry. In this paper, we investigate how to best work with MLLMs in an object placement
task. Towards this goal, we introduce a novel framework,

FirePlace, that applies existing MLLMs in (1) 3D geometric reasoning and the extraction of relevant geometric details from the 3D scene, (2) constructing and solving geometric constraints on the extracted low-level geometry, and
(3) pruning for final placements that conform to common
sense. By combining geometric reasoning with real-world
understanding of MLLMs, our method can propose object
placements that satisfy both geometric constraints as well
as high-level semantic common-sense considerations. Our
experiments show that these capabilities allow our method
to place objects more effectively in complex scenes with intricate geometry, surpassing the quality of prior work.

1 Work done during an internship at DeepMind. Correspondence to:
ianhuang@cs.stanford.edu.

13466

