This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Identifying and Mitigating Spurious Correlation in Multi-Task Learning
Junyi Chai, Shenyu Lu & Xiaoqian Wang*
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
{chai28,lu876,joywang}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Multi-task learning (MTL) is a paradigm that aims to improve the generalization of models by simultaneously learning multiple related tasks, leveraging shared representations and task-specific information to enhance performance
on individual tasks. However, existing work has shown that
MTL can potentially hinder generalization, with one key
factor being spurious correlations between tasks. Owing
to the knowledge-sharing property, the per-task predictors
are more likely to develop reliance on spurious features.
Most existing approaches address this issue through distributional robustness, aiming to maintain consistent performance across different distributions under unknown covariate shifts. However, this formulation lacks theoretical
guarantees and can be sensitive to the construction of covariate shifts. In this work, we propose a novel perspective, where we seek to identify spurious correlations between tasks. Drawing inspirations from conventional formulations on spurious correlation, for each task, we propose to distinguish its spurious tasks using the difference in
correlation coefficients between the empirical distribution
and class-wise resampled distributions, thereby capturing
the correlations between task labels w.r.t. each class. We
prove theoretically the feasibility of the resampling strategy in characterizing spurious correlations between tasks.
Furthermore, we propose a simple fine-tuning strategy, debiased adversarial training, where the per-task predictors
are adversarially trained to disregard information associated with their spurious tasks. Experimental results on six
benchmark datasets show that our method effectively mitigates spurious correlations and outperforms state-of-theart methods in improving generalization.

multi-task learning (MTL) has since become increasingly
important in various applications, particularly in computer
vision, demonstrating both improved accuracy and reduced
computational overhead. MTL aims to jointly learn multiple tasks, allowing each task to leverages the shared representations and domain knowledge between tasks, with the
goal of improving the generalization performance across all
tasks [19, 46]. Compared with single-task learning, which
focuses on optimizing over one specific objective, MTL
extracts common patterns that are beneficial across different but related objectives, potentially leading to better performance on individual tasks. This collaborative framework mitigates overfitting and enhances model robustness
through cross-task knowledge transfer [28, 29].
Despite the benefits in MTL, existing work has demonstrated that under certain circumstances, MTL could lead to
degraded performance in generalization, particularly when
different tasks do not experience high knowledge-sharing
[10, 36]. This abnormality has conventionally been attributed to the model capacity issue, where conflicting tasks
may compete during optimization [42, 44]. However, Recent studies have revealed a counterintuitive phenomenon
in MTL, where even under over-parametrization, a MTL
model might excel in minimizing training loss, yet surprisingly underperform single-task models in terms of generalization [14]. Accordingly, spurious correlations between
different tasks have been identified as an intrinsic problem that hurts generalization in MTL [14, 27]. Owing to
the multi-tasking property, the shared representations are
expected to encode knowledge across tasks; consequently,
when two tasks exhibit high label correlations despite having unrelated underlying knowledge, the per-task predictors
may erroneously leverage unrelated spurious knowledge,
potentially compromising generalization.
Most of existing work addressing spurious correlations
in MTL approaches this issue through the lens of invariant learning, aiming to ensure that models perform consistently across various empirical distributions [11, 14].
Specifically, the shared representations are expected to recover the ground-truth latent causal features, and by en-

1. Introduction
Stemming from Stein’s paradox [37] where the estimation
error decreases under joint estimation, formalized in [4],
* Corresponding author.

25698

