This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EfficientLLaVA: Generalizable Auto-Pruning for Large Vision-language Models
Yinan Liang1 , Ziwei Wang2 , Xiuwei Xu1 , Jie Zhou1 , Jiwen Lu1 *
1
2
Tsinghua University
Nanyang Technological University
{liangyn24, xxw21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

ziwei.wang@ntu.edu.sg

{jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
While multimodal large language models demonstrate strong
performance in complex reasoning tasks, they pose significant challenges related to model complexity during deployment, especially for resource-limited devices. In this paper,
we propose an automatic pruning method for large visionlanguage models to enhance the efficiency of multimodal
reasoning. Conventional methods rely on the training data
of the original model to select the proper pruning ratio for
different network components. However, these methods are
impractical for large vision-language models due to the unaffordable search costs caused by web-scale training corpus.
In contrast, our approach only leverages a small number of
samples to search for the desired pruning policy by maximizing its generalization ability on unknown training data
while maintaining the model accuracy, which enables the
achievement of an optimal trade-off between accuracy and
efficiency for large visual language models. Specifically, we
formulate the generalization gap of the pruning strategy using the structural risk minimization principle. Based on both
task performance and generalization capability, we iteratively search for the optimal pruning policy within a given
search space and optimize the vision projector to evolve
the search space with higher upper bound of performance.
We conduct extensive experiments on the ScienceQA, Vizwiz,
MM-vet, and LLaVA-Bench datasets for the task of visual
question answering. Using only 64 samples for pruning policy search, EfficientLLaVA achieves an accuracy of 83.05%
on ScienceQA, along with a × 1.8 speedup compared to
the dense LLaVA-v1.5-7B model. The code is available at:
https://github.com/liangynTHU/EfficientLLaVA

Figure 1. The trade-off between accuracy and inference speed on
ScienceQA with EfficientLLaVA.

systems [16]. Although they achieve excellent performance
in high-level tasks with rich commonsense, the inference
stage of large vision-language models (LVLMs) in deployment requires large memory footprint and long latency because of the tremendous neurons. In order to deploy the
powerful LVLMs on mobile devices such as cellphones, navigation robots, and autonomous vehicles with a strict computational resource limit, we are required to reduce the model
complexity without obvious degradation of performance.
Network pruning aims to remove unimportant components including layers [38], channels [25], tokens [41, 42],
and neurons [44] to reduce the storage and computational
complexity without harming the task performance, which
have been widely studied for computer vision [4, 13], natural language processing [25, 33] and system control [36].
The components importance can be defined as the l1 and
l2 magnitude of weights and activations [35], and the Jacobian and Hessian matrix regarding the loss functions [30].
Since different components usually have various sensitivity
to pruning in downstream tasks, automatic pruning assigns
the optimal pruning ratio to each component in order to
achieve higher accuracy-efficiency trade-off. In conventional
methods, the training data of the original model is leveraged
to evaluate the sampled pruning policy based on the accuracy and the model complexity, which provides feedback to

1. Introduction
Multimodal large language models have been widely adopted
in complex reasoning tasks such as visual question answering [10, 34], embodied task planning [12, 28] and dialogue
* Corresponding author

9445

