This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing Speech and Sound:
Distinguishing and Locating Audio Sources in Visual Scenes
Hyeonggon Ryu* Seongyu Kim* Joon Son Chung Arda Senocak
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology

Ours

Visual
Encoder

…

…

…

…

Simultaneous
Grounding
Audio
Encoder

DenseAV

“Look at the cello. I like that cello.”

“Look at the cello.”

“I like that cello.” 𝑡

Figure 1. Simultaneous Audio-Visual Grounding. We introduce a model for simultaneous grounding of mixed audio types — including
overlapping spoken language and non-speech sounds — within a visual scene. Our framework takes audio-visual grounding to the next
level, overcoming the limitations of existing methods that handle audio types independently or sequentially without overlapping.

Abstract

1. Introduction
We live in a world rich with multi-sensory signals. Our interactions with it rely on our natural multimodal perception,
drawing on auditory and visual cues as well as spoken language to gain a complete understanding of our surroundings. While we can actively limit or focus our field of view
in visual scenes, auditory signals are a mixture of different
types of sounds, such as speech, music, and a variety of
environmental or object sounds, all entering our ears as a
combined mix without any filtering. Despite this complexity, humans can still discern specific types of sounds and
associate them with their visual counterparts — for example, the sound of a “lion roaring”, someone saying the word
“lion”, or the song “Nants’ Ingonyama”1 linked with the visual of a lion. Remarkably, we do this without any direct
supervision.
This natural audio-visual association enables us to locate
which object a spoken word refers to or identify which object is producing a sound within a visual scene. Inspired by
the human ability to learn these localization skills from natural audio-visual correspondences without explicit supervision, extensive studies [11, 20, 21, 28, 29, 32–36] have

We present a unified model capable of simultaneously
grounding both spoken language and non-speech sounds
within a visual scene, addressing key limitations in current audio-visual grounding models. Existing approaches
are typically limited to handling either speech or nonspeech sounds independently, or at best, together but sequentially without mixing. This limitation prevents them
from capturing the complexity of real-world audio sources
that are often mixed. Our approach introduces a “mixand-separate” framework with audio-visual alignment objectives that jointly learn correspondence and disentanglement using mixed audio. Through these objectives, our
model learns to produce distinct embeddings for each audio type, enabling effective disentanglement and grounding across mixed audio sources. Additionally, we created
a new dataset to evaluate simultaneous grounding of mixed
audio sources, demonstrating that our model outperforms
prior methods. Our approach also achieves comparable
or better performance in standard segmentation and crossmodal retrieval tasks, highlighting the benefits of our mixand-separate approach.

1 Nants’ Ingonyama is the iconic opening song from The Lion King
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CF-c1K3WWg4

⇤ These authors contributed equally to this work.

13540

