This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Correlative and Discriminative Label Grouping for Multi-Label
Visual Prompt Tuning
Lei-Lei Ma1 *, Shuo Xu1 *, Ming-Kun Xie2†, Lei Wang3 , Dengdi Sun1 , Haifeng Zhao1†
1
Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Multimodal Cognitive Computation,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China
2
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China

Abstract
Modeling label correlations has always played a pivotal role
in multi-label image classification (MLC), attracting significant attention from researchers. However, recent studies
have overemphasized co-occurrence relationships among labels, which can lead to overfitting risk on this overemphasis,
resulting in suboptimal models. To tackle this problem, we
advocate for balancing correlative and discriminative relationships among labels to mitigate the risk of overfitting and
enhance model performance. To this end, we propose the
Multi-Label Visual Prompt Tuning framework, a novel and
parameter-efficient method that groups classes into multiple
class subsets according to label co-occurrence and mutual
exclusivity relationships, and then models them respectively
to balance the two relationships. In this work, since each
group contains multiple classes, multiple prompt tokens are
adopted within Vision Transformer (ViT) to capture the correlation or discriminative label relationship within each
group, and effectively learn correlation or discriminative
representations for class subsets. On the other hand, each
group contains multiple group-aware visual representations
that may correspond to multiple classes, and the mixture
of experts (MoE) model can cleverly assign them from the
group-aware to the label-aware, adaptively obtaining labelaware representation, which is more conducive to classification. Experiments on multiple benchmark datasets show
that our proposed approach achieves competitive results and
outperforms SOTA methods on multiple pre-trained models.

1. Introduction
Multi-label image classification (MLC) aims to assign multiple labels to a single instance [56]. As a fundamental
* Equal contribution.
† Correspondence to: Haifeng Zhao (senith@163.com), Ming-Kun Xie

(mkxie@nuaa.edu.cn)

Prediction

1.00

1.00 1.00

0.98 0.98

co-occur
balance

0.75
0.60

0.50
0.28

0.25
person

(a) predicted image

frisbee

dog

(b) predicted probability

Figure 1. This illustrates the negative impact of co-occurrence.
Due to the high co-occurrence probability p(dog|frisbee), e.g.,
0.23, the model incorrectly infers the presence of dog when the
label frisbee appears.

machine learning algorithm [31], MLC reflects real-world
scenarios and is an essential component in many applications,
e.g., face recognition [3], and scene understanding [57],
weakly-supervised semantic segmentation [2]. Compared
with single-label settings, the MLC presents significant challenges due to the exponential expansion of the output space,
which usually requires large-scale datasets [45].
In real-world scenarios, co-occurrence between labels
is prevalent, and numerous studies [47, 55] have leveraged
label relationships to address the challenges resulting from
complex label output spaces. In the context of deep learning,
pioneering works [41, 44] employ recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) to capture limited correlations between labels, while
later studies [7, 46] utilize graph convolutional networks
(GCNs) to capture global relationships in graphs or higherorder relationships in hypergraphs. More recently, for better
representations, most researchers employ attention architectures to decouple an image into multiple label-aware features,
as seen in methods like SSGRL [5], Q2L [30], etc.
Despite the great advantages these methods showcase,
two significant drawbacks require mitigation. ❶ The pretrained model in these methods needs to be fine-tuned,
leading to increased computational and resource demands.
Also, for large-scale pre-trained models (e.g., DINOv2 [35]),
full fine-tuning can negatively affect performance on down-

25434

