This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Art of Deception: Color Visual Illusions and Diffusion Models
Alexandra Gomez-Villa1,3
Kai Wang1
C.Alejandro Parraga1,2
Bart!omiej Twardowski1,2,4
Jesus Malo3
Javier Vazquez-Corral1,2
Joost van de Weijer1,2
2
Computer Vision Center, Spain
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain
3
4
Universitat de València, Spain
IDEAS-NCBR, Poland

a)

d)

b)

DDIM inversion

A

A

B

B

A

B

A

c)

DDIM inversion
A

A

B

B

e)

A

DDIM inversion

1

B

B

A

B

f)

"An avocado
chair, Van Gogh"

"Beautiful portrait of a
beautiful girl, beautiful
eyes, princess, insanely
detailed and intricate,
hypermaximalist,
elegant, ornate, luxury,
elite, James jean"

Figure 1. Observation: Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models (DDIM) have human-like visual illusions. Application: text-to-image
generated visual illusions. Examples (a) and (b) show how the responses to physically equal patches shift differently in the path to the
latent space. In contrast, (c) shows how physically different stimuli get more similar along the path, achieving color constancy. The
observation of this human-like behavior allows us to propose the use of text-to-image models to generate images in which physically
identical patches are perceived differently (examples d, e, f). We highly recommend to watch the illusions on a computer screen.

Abstract
Visual illusions in humans arise when interpreting outof-distribution stimuli: if the observer is adapted to certain statistics, perception of outliers deviates from reality.
Recent studies have shown that artificial neural networks
(ANNs) can also be deceived by visual illusions. This revelation raises profound questions about the nature of visual
information. Why are two independent systems, both human brains and ANNs, susceptible to the same illusions?
Should any ANN be capable of perceiving visual illusions?
Are these perceptions a feature or a flaw? In this work,
we study how visual illusions are encoded in diffusion models. Remarkably, we show that they present human-like
brightness/color shifts in their latent space. We use this
fact to demonstrate that diffusion models can predict visual illusions. Furthermore, we also show how to gen-

erate new unseen visual illusions in realistic images using text-to-image diffusion models. We validate this ability through psychophysical experiments that show how our
model-generated illusions also fool humans.

1. Introduction

18642

Visual illusions (VIs) serve as a fascinating window into the
complex workings of human visual perception, where our
interpretation of reality diverges significantly from physical
measurements. These phenomena can have a profound social impact, as demonstrated by viral phenomena such as
“The Dress” [9], which sparked global discussions on the
nature of perception. Beyond their intrinsic scientific value,
Corresponding Author ( ): Kai Wang (kwang@cvc.uab.es)
Code is available at https : / / alviur . github . io / color illusion-diffusion

