This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decentralized Diffusion Models
David McAllister1 * Matthew Tancik2
1

Jiaming Song2

University of California, Berkeley

2

Angjoo Kanazawa1†
Luma AI

Abstract
Dataset

Large-scale AI model training divides work across thousands of GPUs, then synchronizes gradients across them
at each step. This incurs a significant network burden that
only centralized, monolithic clusters can support, driving up
infrastructure costs and straining power systems. We propose Decentralized Diffusion Models, a scalable framework
for distributing diffusion model training across independent
clusters or datacenters by eliminating the dependence on a
centralized, high-bandwidth networking fabric. Our method
trains a set of expert diffusion models over partitions of the
dataset, each in full isolation from one another. At inference
time, the experts ensemble through a lightweight router. We
show that the ensemble collectively optimizes the same objective as a single model trained over the whole dataset. This
means we can divide the training burden among a number
of “compute islands,” lowering infrastructure costs and improving resilience to localized GPU failures. Decentralized
diffusion models empower researchers to take advantage
of smaller, more cost-effective and more readily available
compute like on-demand GPU nodes rather than central
integrated systems. We conduct extensive experiments on
ImageNet and LAION Aesthetics, showing that decentralized
diffusion models FLOP-for-FLOP outperform standard diffusion models. We finally scale our approach to 24 billion
parameters, demonstrating that high-quality diffusion models can now be trained with just eight individual GPU nodes
in less than a week.

Monolithic Diffusion Training

Decentralized Diffusion Training

Figure 1. Decentralized Diffusion Models (DDM). Left: Existing
diffusion models (monolithic) require synchronized, centralized
training across thousands of GPUs, making high-quality training
systems expensive and inaccessible. Right: DDM divides a diffusion model into an ensemble of expert models, each trained on its
own data cluster in complete isolation. This ensemble collectively
optimizes the same diffusion objective as a single model trained on
all the data. This enables flexible training across diverse cloud or
academic compute facilities. At inference, the ensemble delivers
improved performance at the same FLOP-cost, making high-quality
diffusion model training more efficient and accessible. See Figure 2
for large-scale DDM model samples.

1. Introduction

these resources. For instance, Meta’s Movie Gen trains on
up to 6,114 H100 GPUs [32]—nearly GPT-3 scale [6]. As
these models continue to grow in size and capability, they
encounter significant systems-level challenges that mirror
those faced in LLM training. High-bandwidth interconnect
becomes a critical bottleneck, storage systems must handle
massive streaming datasets and persistent hardware failures
can crash or silently slow the training process [1, 14]. The
result is a fragile integrated system where performance and
reliability depend on complex interactions between arrays of
accelerators and networking hardware. This is challenging
and costly for large industry labs—untenable for academics.
We present Decentralized Diffusion Models, a scalable
method for distributing the modeling burdening of diffusion across independent expert models, each trained on its
own “compute island” with no cross-communication. This
enables training with scattered resources, leveraging costeffective cloud compute or combining resources across multiple clusters. Decentralization is also helpful for training

Diffusion models achieve breakthrough results in image generation [36, 37], video modeling [4], and robotic control
through diffusion policies [10]. However, these models demand enormous training compute. Even early successes
in image diffusion underscored this, with Stable Diffusion
1.5’s training consuming over 6,000 A100 GPU days [7, 31].
Video diffusion models require a step-function increase in
* Work partially done when author was an intern at Luma AI
† Author is an advisor to Luma AI

23323

