This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ADU: Adaptive Detection of Unknown Categories
in Black-Box Domain Adaptation
Yushan Lai, Guowen Li, Haoyuan Liang, Juepeng Zheng*, and Zhiyu Ye
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Sun Yat-Sen University
{laiysh6, ligw8, lianghy68, yezhy26}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhengjp8@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Black-box Domain Adaptation (BDA) utilizes a black-box
predictor of the source domain to label target domain
data, addressing privacy concerns in Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA). However, BDA assumes identical label
sets across domains, which is unrealistic. To overcome
this limitation, we propose a study on BDA with unknown
classes in the target domain. It uses a black-box predictor to label target data and identify “unknown” categories,
without requiring access to source domain data or predictor parameters, thus addressing both data privacy and category shift issues in traditional UDA. Existing methods face
two main challenges: (i) Noisy pseudo-labels in knowledge
distillation (KD) accumulate prediction errors, and (ii) relying on a preset threshold fails to adapt to varying category shifts. To address these, we propose ADU, a framework that allows the target domain to autonomously learn
pseudo-labels guided by quality and use an adaptive threshold to identify “unknown” categories. Speciﬁcally, ADU
consists of Selective Ampliﬁcation Knowledge Distillation
(SAKD) and Entropy-Driven Label Differentiation (EDLD).
SAKD improves KD by focusing on high-quality pseudolabels, mitigating the impact of noisy labels. EDLD categorizes pseudo-labels by quality and applies tailored training strategies to distinguish “unknown” categories, improving detection accuracy and adaptability. Extensive experiments show that ADU achieves state-of-the-art results, outperforming the best existing method by 3.1% on VisDA in
the OPBDA scenario.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [12] aims to transfer knowledge from a well-labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain, which can ease the burden of manual labeling. Recently, UDA has been applied in a range
of computer vision tasks, including image classiﬁcation
* Corresponding author

[13, 33, 48], objection detection [7, 20, 56] and semantic
segmentation [6, 35, 47]. However, UDA methods may
raise concerns about data privacy and portability issues due
to their requirement for access to raw source data and source
model parameters. Therefore, source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) [19, 27, 58] is proposed to protect the source
data privacy. In the SFDA scenario, only the source model
is provided to the target domain without access to source
data. However, it still faces the issue of source information privacy, which can be compromised through techniques
such as white-box attacks [45, 46]. To mitigate these concerns, Black-box Domain Adaptation (BDA) [28, 61] has
been proposed recently, as shown in Figure 1(a), which aims
to learn a model solely using the unlabeled data from the
target domain, based on the predictions from a black-box
predictor trained on the source data. This setting can effectively mitigate data privacy issues related to data and model
parameter leakage.
However, traditional BDA [28, 57, 60] always assumes
that the source and target domains share identical category
sets, which frequently fails to apply in practice. In realworld scenarios, the target domain is typically unlabeled,
making it difﬁcult to satisfy this assumption due to potential category shifts. Currently, there are two UDA settings
that involve unknown classes in the target domain: OpenSet Domain Adaptation (OSDA) [36, 42] and Open-Partial
Domain Adaptation (OPDA) [25, 41, 59]. OSDA deals with
scenarios where the target domain contains private classes
that are unknown to the source domain, while OPDA handles cases where both the source and target domains each
have their own private classes. Black-box Domain Adaptation has been applied to OPDA recently [9]. As shown in
Figure 1(b), this setting is designed to learn a robust model
for the target domain that not only recognizes classes shared
by two domains but also identiﬁes “unknown” categories
absent in the source domain despite having no information
about difference of two label sets.
Currently, only one study has addressed the above problem. [9] applies knowledge distillation to train the target
model to mimic source predictor outputs and uses a man-

30588

