This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SegAgent: Exploring Pixel Understanding Capabilities in MLLMs by Imitating
Human Annotator Trajectories
Muzhi Zhu1,2 Yuzhuo Tian1 Hao Chen1 * Chunluan Zhou2
Qingpei Guo2 * Yang Liu1 Ming Yang2 Chunhua Shen1,2 *
1

Zhejiang University, China

Abstract

2

Ant Group

1. Introduction
Recent advancements [33, 43] in large language models
(LLMs) have brought them to near-human levels in many
domains. However, multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) still face
significant limitations in visual tasks [44, 45], especially
in complex pixel-level understanding [56], which restricts
their applicability in real-world scenarios. Despite efforts to
develop MLLM vision capabilities through tasks like Visual
Question Answering (VQA)[19, 20], and visual grounding
[2, 46], these tasks fail to assess fine-grained pixel-level
comprehension effectively. On the other hand, tasks like UI
Operations [64, 66] and Robotic Control [40] require pixellevel precision but are often constrained to specialized environments with limited, heterogeneous data, making them
difficult to scale to complex, open-world scenarios.
Segmentation [11, 28, 29, 68, 70–72] is one of the most
critical visual tasks for reflecting pixel-level understanding
capabilities. Moreover, there is a wealth of segmentation
data [15] available, which can sufficiently meet the needs of
complex open-world scenarios. Establishing a method that
enables MLLMs to effectively leverage this large-scale data
is essential to further explore and enhance their pixel-level
understanding capabilities. However, current approaches
[16, 38, 49, 50, 67] integrating MLLMs with segmentation
tasks often rely on implicit token outputs and require additional pixel decoders. While effective, these methods alter
the original MLLM output space, potentially compromising
semantic generalization by shifting away from languagebased outputs. The use of implicit tokens also limits extensibility, complicating efforts to implement a unified textual
framework across diverse tasks. Furthermore, reliance on
an extra pixel decoder makes it challenging to accurately reflect the MLLM’s intrinsic pixel understanding capabilities
[4, 41]. There are also methods [6, 18, 26, 36] that attempt
to perform segmentation using purely textual outputs, such
as polygon vertex sequences or sampled points along the
mask contour. However, this strategy limits mask precision,
and generating lengthy coordinate sequences is particularly
challenging. Even for a skilled human annotator, tracing

While MLLMs have demonstrated impressive image understanding capabilities, they still struggle with pixel-level
comprehension, limiting their practical applications. Current evaluation tasks such as VQA and visual grounding
remain too coarse to assess fine-grained pixel comprehension accurately. Although segmentation is foundational for
pixel-level understanding, existing methods often require
MLLMs to generate implicit tokens, decoded through external pixel decoders. This approach disrupts the MLLM’s
text output space, potentially compromising language capabilities and reducing flexibility and extensibility while failing to reflect the model’s intrinsic pixel-level understanding. Thus, we introduce the Human-Like Mask Annotation
Task (HLMAT), a new paradigm where MLLMs mimic human annotators using interactive segmentation tools. Modelling segmentation as a multi-step Markov Decision Process, HLMAT enables MLLMs to iteratively generate textbased click points, achieving high-quality masks without architectural changes or implicit tokens. Through this setup,
we develop SegAgent, a model fine-tuned on human-like annotation trajectories, which achieves performance comparable to SoTA methods and supports additional tasks like
mask refinement and annotation filtering. HLMAT provides a protocol for assessing fine-grained pixel understanding in MLLMs and introduces a vision-centric, multistep decision-making task that facilitates the exploration of
MLLMs’ visual reasoning abilities. Our adaptations of policy improvement method StaR and PRM guided tree search
further enhance model robustness in complex segmentation
tasks, laying a foundation for future advancements in finegrained visual perception and multi-step decision-making
for MLLMs. Code can be found at https://github.
com/aim-uofa/SegAgent.

* Correspondence should be addressed to HC, QG, CS.

3686

