This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GIVEPose: Gradual Intra-class Variation Elimination for RGB-based
Category-Level Object Pose Estimation
Ziqin Huang1

Gu Wang1
Chenyangguang Zhang1
1,2
Xiu Li
Xiangyang Ji1
1

Tsinghua University

2

Ruida Zhang1

Pengcheng Laboratory

{huang-zq24@mails., xyji@}tsinghua.edu.cn

Input Image

Abstract

NOCS map

Rotation & Translation

one-to-many

instance-specific models


(1) pixel-wise
aligned

Recent advances in RGBD-based category-level object pose
estimation have been limited by their reliance on precise
depth information, restricting their broader applicability.
In response, RGB-based methods have been developed.
Among these methods, geometry-guided pose regression
that originated from instance-level tasks has demonstrated
strong performance. However, we argue that the NOCS map
is an inadequate intermediate representation for geometryguided pose regression method, as its many-to-one correspondence with category-level pose introduces redundant
instance-specific information, resulting in suboptimal results. This paper identifies the intra-class variation problem inherent in pose regression based solely on the NOCS
map and proposes the Intra-class Variation-Free Consensus (IVFC) map, a novel coordinate representation generated from the category-level consensus model. By leveraging the complementary strengths of the NOCS map and
the IVFC map, we introduce GIVEPose, a framework that
implements Gradual Intra-class Variation Elimination for
category-level object pose estimation. Extensive evaluations on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate
that GIVEPose significantly outperforms existing state-ofthe-art RGB-based approaches, achieving substantial improvements in category-level object pose estimation. Our
code is available at https://github.com/ziqinh/GIVEPose.

Input Image

...

intra-class variation
and redundancy
(a)
one-to-one

IVFC map

Rotation & Translation

category-consensus model


not pixel-wise
aligned
Input Image

(2) intra-class variation-free
and no redundancy

NOCS map

(1)

Gruadual
Intra-class
Variation
Elimination

(b)

Rotation & Translation

IVFC map

(2)
(c)

Figure 1. Comparison of different coordinate representations as
intermediate supervision. (a) Category-level pose prediction from
the NOCS map alone suffers from intra-class variation and redundancy effects. (b) The prediction of intermediate coordinate maps
becomes intractable when utilizing IVFC map exclusively, due to
its lack of pixel-wise alignment with input images. (c) Our proposed gradual intra-class variation elimination strategy leverages
the complementary advantages of both maps, enabling more precise category-level pose estimation.

1. Introduction

yielding impressive results. However, this setting faced significant limitations due to its reliance on CAD models and
its inability to generalize to previously unseen objects. Consequently, category-level object pose estimation has been
proposed to estimate the poses of unseen objects within predefined categories.
Wang et al. [67] pioneered category-level pose estimation with the introduction of Normalized Object Coordinate
Space (NOCS) and proposed benchmark datasets for validation. Subsequently, numerous RGBD-based category-level
pose estimation methods [4, 36–38] have demonstrated remarkable performance. However, these approaches are constrained by their reliance on depth information, limiting
their broader applicability. To address this limitation, several recent studies [10, 29, 70, 78] have explored category-

The estimation of object pose is a critical task in computer
vision, with a wide range of applications in robotic manipulation [13, 14, 48, 71, 75], augmented reality [44, 57],
and autonomous driving [42, 72]. Over the past few
years, numerous deep learning-based approaches have been
developed to tackle this task. Initial research [33, 50–
52, 64, 65, 73] primarily focused on instance-level tasks,

22055

