This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flash3D: Super-scaling Point Transformers through Joint Hardware-Geometry
Locality
Liyan Chen1 , Gregory P. Meyer2 , Zaiwei Zhang2 , Eric M. Wolff2 , Paul Vernaza2
1
The University of Texas at Austin
2
Cruise LLC
liyanc@cs.utexas.edu, eric.wolff@getcruise.com, paul.vernaza@getcruise.com
https://github.com/liyanc/Flash3DTransformer

FA2

GPU
tile
(SM)

FA2

FA2

GPU
tile
(SM)

FA2

FA2

GPU
tile
(SM)

latency

Recent efforts recognize the power of scale in 3D learning (e.g. PTv3) and attention mechanisms (e.g. FlashAttention). However, current point cloud backbones fail to
holistically unify geometric locality, attention mechanisms,
and GPU architectures in one view. In this paper, we introduce Flash3D Transformer, which aligns geometric locality and GPU tiling through a principled locality mechanism based on Perfect Spatial Hashing (PSH). The common
alignment with GPU tiling naturally fuses our PSH locality mechanism with FlashAttention at negligible extra cost.
This mechanism affords flexible design choices throughout
the backbone that result in superior downstream task results. Flash3D outperforms state-of-the-art PTv3 results on
benchmark datasets, delivering a 2.25x speed increase and
2.4x memory efficiency boost. This efficiency enables scaling to wider attention scopes and larger models without additional overhead. Such scaling allows Flash3D to achieve
even higher task accuracies than PTv3 under the same compute budget.

xN
FA2

Zero-Overhead Bucket-Swin

Principled Locality Mechanism

Abstract

Flash3D: 20ms

PTv3: 45ms

Figure 1. Effectiveness our Flash3D transformer by unifying geometric locality, FlashAttention (FA2), and GPU tiling architecture. Our unified perspective leads to drastically improved speed
and scalability of point transformers.

In this paper, we tackle the challenges of efficient and
scalable point cloud backbones by introducing Flash3D
Transformer, a new architecture that unifies geometric locality with GPU memory locality. This is achieved through
a principled locality mechanism based on Perfect Spatial
Hashing (PSH). Flash3D is designed to align point cloud
backbones with the tiling architecture of GPUs, leading
to marked improvements in both efficiency and scalability. Our work integrates a locality mechanism that bridges
geometric and GPU memory locality, enabling an efficient
mapping of 3D points into compact memory spaces. Benefiting from compact memory layouts, Flash3D introduces
a multilevel attention grouping method, Bucket-and-Swin,
precisely aligned with GPU tiling, allowing zero overhead
region shifting fused with FlashAttention-2 [6]. The joint
locality and efficiency boost are illustrated in Figure 1.
Our key contributions are summarized as follows:

1. Introduction
Efficient and scalable processing of point clouds is crucial for a wide range of applications, including autonomous
driving [14, 15, 27, 35, 44], robotic navigation [24, 29, 38,
42, 45], and augmented reality [11, 30]. Point cloud backbones are essential architectures that extract meaningful
features from raw 3D data. Recent advancements [17, 18,
22, 39, 41] have explored various strategies to enhance the
performance of these backbones, particularly focusing on
how Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) mechanisms can
be optimized for 3D point clouds. Windowing MHSA and
region shifting (e.g., Swin Transformers [21, 43]) enable
efficient local-global feature extraction, but scaling point
cloud backbones to larger point cloud sizes and model capacities remains challenging [21, 39, 41].

• Unified geometric and GPU memory locality: Using
Perfect Spatial Hashing (PSH), we propose a principled
locality mechanism that brings together geometric and
memory locality, benefiting downstream feature quality
and operation throughput.

6595

