This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Consistent and Controllable Image Animation with Motion Diffusion Models
Xin Ma1† , Yaohui Wang2‡§ , Gengyu Jia3 , Xinyuan Chen2 ,
Tien-Tsin Wong1 , Yuan-Fang Li1 , Cunjian Chen1‡
1
2

Department of Data Science & AI, Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University,

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 3 Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications

Input image

Animated video frames

“People running”

“Doggy barking”

“Flames burning and light snow falling”

Temporal axis

“Man walking on the road”

Figure 1. Image animation from our model. Please visit the project page to visualize the animations.

of motion, we introduce a dynamics degree control design
for better control of the magnitude of motion. Altogether,
these strategies enable Cinemo to produce highly consistent, smooth, and motion-controllable results. Extensive
experiments compared with several state-of-the-art methods
demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our proposed approach. In the end, we also demonstrate how our
model can be applied for motion transfer or video editing of
any given video. The project page is available at https:
//maxin-cn.github.io/cinemo_project/.

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved significant progress in the
task of image animation due to their powerful generative
capabilities. However, preserving appearance consistency to
the static input image, and avoiding abrupt motion change in
the generated animation, remains challenging. In this paper,
we introduce Cinemo, a novel image animation approach
that aims at achieving better appearance consistency and
motion smoothness. The core of Cinemo is to focus on learning the distribution of motion residuals, rather than directly
predicting frames as in existing diffusion models. During the
inference, we further mitigate the sudden motion changes
in the generated video by introducing a novel DCT-based
noise refinement strategy. To counteract the over-smoothing

1. Introduction
Image animation, also known as Image-to-Video generation
(I2V), “animates” a given static image to transform it into
a video sequence, with the goal of preserving the original
content but injecting realistic and temporally coherent dynamics. Fig. 1 demonstrates some examples (please visit

‡ Corresponding authors. † Intern at Shanghai AI Lab. § Project lead.

7288

