This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SyncSDE: A Probabilistic Framework for Diffusion Synchronization
Hyunjun Lee1 *
1

Hyunsoo Lee1 *
2

ECE, Seoul National University

Sookwan Han1,2†

Republic of Korea Air Force

{hjl1013, philip21, jellyheadandrew}@snu.ac.kr

21

“Natural landscape in anime style illustration.”

3

3D Mesh Texturing

“an oil
painting of
a horse”

“a lithograph
of a table”

Long-horizon Motion Generation

Mask-based T2I Generation
“a lithograph of a
waterfall”

Ambiguous Image Generation
“an oil painting
of a snowy
mountain village”

Wide Image Generation

“a painting
of a beach
with a big
boat”

“a high
resolution photo
of the sky with
a big balloon”

Text-driven Real Image Editing

14
Input mesh
“A blue clutch bag”

Input mesh
“A hand carved wood turtle”

“a person keeps running forward”
→ “a person jumps forward”
→ “a person karate kicks”

“a small white dog cat
sitting in a basket
with flowers”

Figure 1. Applications of SyncSDE. SyncSDE analyzes diffusion synchronization to identify where the correlation strategies should be
focused, enabling coherent and high-quality results across diverse collaborative generation tasks.

Abstract

1. Introduction

There have been many attempts to leverage multiple diffusion
models for collaborative generation, extending beyond the
original domain. A prominent approach involves synchronizing multiple diffusion trajectories by mixing the estimated
scores to artificially correlate the generation processes.
However, existing methods rely on naive heuristics, such
as averaging, without considering task specificity. These
approaches do not clarify why such methods work and often
fail when a heuristic suitable for one task is blindly applied
to others. In this paper, we present a probabilistic framework for analyzing why diffusion synchronization works and
reveal where heuristics should be focused—modeling correlations between multiple trajectories and adapting them
to each specific task. We further identify optimal correlation models per task, achieving better results than previous
approaches that apply a single heuristic across all tasks
without justification.

Diffusion models [13, 14, 37, 45] have achieved remarkable
success in generating high-quality images [31, 33, 35], 3D
scenes [24, 40, 49], human and motion [10, 17, 18, 41, 42,
48], and videos [15, 22, 46]. Despite their success, these
models are typically trained on fixed-domain data, limiting
their ability to generate diverse data formats (e.g., varying
shapes or dimensions). This constraint reduces the flexibility
of diffusion models and narrows the range of generative
tasks they can effectively handle.
To harness the diverse generative capabilities of multiple diffusion models with varying characteristics, existing
approaches [7, 9, 16, 28] use heuristics to synchronize diffusion trajectories, ensuring consistency across the generations managed by each trajectory. For instance, Visual
Anagrams [7] generates images with optical illusions from
different perspectives, while SyncTweedies [16] explores
multiple heuristics to align generation paths, enabling the
creation of panoramic images and even 3D textures.
Although previous approaches with diverse synchronization heuristics demonstrate promising results in collaborative

* Equal Contributions.
† Project Lead.

17508

