This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SASep: Saliency-Aware Structured Separation of Geometry and Feature
for Open Set Learning on Point Clouds
Jinfeng Xu1 Xianzhi Li1,2 Yuan Tang1 Xu Han1 Qiao Yu1 Yixue Hao1 Long Hu1 * Min Chen3,4
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Guangdong Intelligent Robotics Institute
3
4
South China University of Technology
Pazhou Laboratory
{jinfengx, xzli, yuan tang, xhanxu, qiaoyu epic, yixuehao, hulong, minchen}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advancements in deep learning have greatly enhanced 3D object recognition, but most models are limited
to closed-set scenarios, unable to handle unknown samples
in real-world applications. Open-set recognition (OSR) addresses this limitation by enabling models to both classify
known classes and identify novel classes. However, current OSR methods rely on global features to differentiate
known and unknown classes, treating the entire object uniformly and overlooking the varying semantic importance of
its different parts. To address this gap, we propose SalienceAware Structured Separation (SASep), which includes (i) a
tunable semantic decomposition (TSD) module to semantically decompose objects into important and unimportant
parts, (ii) a geometric synthesis strategy (GSS) to generate pseudo-unknown objects by combining these unimportant parts, and (iii) a synth-aided margin separation (SMS)
module to enhance feature-level separation by expanding
the feature distributions between classes. Together, these
components improve both geometric and feature representations, enhancing the model’s ability to effectively distinguish known and unknown classes. Experimental results
show that SASep achieves superior performance in 3D OSR,
outperforming existing state-of-the-art methods. The codes
are available at https://github.com/JinfengX/SASep.

Input object Pc1

Input object Pc2

TSD

TSD

GSS
Important

Unimportant

Fc1

Unimportant

Dist ↓

Dist ↓

Important

Fc2

Unknown sample
SMS constraints

Synthetic sample

Class prototype

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Given input objects, the TSD module semantically decomposes them into important and unimportant parts based on
each point’s semantic relevance to classification. The important
parts enhance feature learning for known classes, while the unimportant parts are mixed in GSS to generate pseudo-unknown samples. The SMS module then constrains the features of objects and
their decomposed parts to improve inter-class separation and intraclass compactness.

In recent years, deep learning has significantly advanced 3D
object recognition, enabling its application in diverse areas
such as autonomous driving, robotics, augmented/virtual reality, etc. Most existing 3D recognition models [31, 44, 46]
are designed for closed-set scenarios, where all test classes
are assumed to have been seen during training. However, real-world applications usually present dynamic environments where unknown or unseen samples outside the

set of known classes may be encountered. These out-ofdistribution samples pose a significant challenge, as the
closed-set models are unable to handle these unknown samples appropriately, often misclassifying them as one of the
predefined known classes. To address this challenge, openset recognition (OSR) task has gained increasing attention
recently, as it aims to extend the capabilities of closed-set
models by enabling them to classify known classes and
identify unknown ones simultaneously.
Early 2D OSR approaches [13, 14, 24] aim to distinguish
between known and unknown classes by using discrimina-

* Corresponding author.

27295

