This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SOGS: Second-Order Anchor for Advanced 3D Gaussian Splatting
Jiahui Zhang1 Fangneng Zhan2, 3 Ling Shao4 Shijian Lu1
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Harvard University 3 MIT
4
UCAS-Terminus AI Lab, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
jiahui003@e.ntu.edu.sg
ling.shao@ieee.org

Rendered Images

fnzhan@seas.harvard.edu
shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg

Gradient Maps

Gradient Maps

Rendered Images

(a) Scaffold-GS

(b) SOGS

Figure 1. The proposed SOGS can render high-quality textures and geometries and reduce model size simultaneously. The illustrations in
(a) and (b) show Rendered Images and Gradient Maps which are produced by Scaffold-GS [25] and SOGS, respectively, for the samples
‘Stump’ and ‘Room’ from Mip-NeRF360 [2]. The Gradient Maps are extracted with the Sobel operator which highlight the texture and
geometry of imaged scenes.

Abstract
Anchor-based 3D Gaussian splatting (3D-GS) exploits
anchor features in 3D Gaussian prediction, which has
achieved impressive 3D rendering quality with reduced
Gaussian redundancy. On the other hand, it often encounters the dilemma among anchor features, model size, and
rendering quality – large anchor features lead to large 3D
models and high-quality rendering whereas reducing anchor features degrades Gaussian attribute prediction which
leads to clear artifacts in the rendered textures and geometries. We design SOGS, an anchor-based 3D-GS technique that introduces second-order anchors to achieve superior rendering quality and reduced anchor features and
model size simultaneously. Specifically, SOGS incorporates covariance-based second-order statistics and corre-

lation across feature dimensions to augment features within
each anchor, compensating for the reduced feature size and
improving rendering quality effectively. In addition, it introduces a selective gradient loss to enhance the optimization of scene textures and scene geometries, leading to highquality rendering with small anchor features. Extensive experiments over multiple widely adopted benchmarks show
that SOGS achieves superior rendering quality in novel
view synthesis with clearly reduced model size.

1. Introduction

* Shijian Lu is the corresponding author.

3D scene representation and rendering have been a pivotal task in 3D computer vision, playing a crucial role
in various applications such as virtual reality and scene
simulation. Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [27] and its
variants [1–3, 46] have been developed to model implicit

11167

