This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InteractAnything: Zero-shot Human Object Interaction Synthesis via LLM
Feedback and Object Affordance Parsing
Jinlu Zhang1,2 , Yixin Chen2 B , Zan Wang2,3 , Jie Yang2,4 , Yizhou Wang1,5,6,7 B , Siyuan Huang2 B
B
1
2
4

indicates corresponding authors

Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, School of Computer Science, Peking University

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
6

Institute for AI, Peking University

7

5

3

Beijing Institute of Technology

Nat’l Eng. Research Center of Visual Technology, Peking University

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

A person holds/pulls/lies on the chair…

A person grasps the
backpack/table/ball/knife…

A person lifts/rides/craddles the
tesla car/motorcycle/horse/baby…

(a) Diverse human interactions.

(b) Detailed interactions synthesis of open-set objects.

(c) Novel interactions given generative objects.

Figure 1. 3D human object interaction synthesis by InteractAnything. Given a simple text description with goal interaction and any
object mesh as input, our method enables the generation of diverse, natural, detailed, and novel interactions for open-set 3D objects in a
zero-shot manner. The orange and green boxes of (b) indicate detailed contact poses from different views.

Abstract

pling multiple hypotheses through multi-view SDS based on
the input text and object geometry. Finally, we introduce a
detailed optimization to generate fine-grained, precise, and
natural interaction, enforcing realistic 3D contact between
the 3D object and the involved body parts, including hands
in grasping. This is achieved by distilling human-level feedback from LLMs to capture detailed human-object relations
from the text instruction. Extensive experiments validate the
effectiveness of our approach compared to prior works, particularly in terms of the fine-grained nature of interactions
and the ability to handle open-set 3D objects. Project page:
jinluzhang.site/projects/interactanything.

Recent advances in 3D human-aware generation have made
significant progress. However, existing methods still struggle with generating novel Human Object Interaction (HOI)
from text, particularly for open-set objects. We identify
three main challenges of this task: precise human-object
relation reasoning, affordance parsing for any object, and
detailed human interaction pose synthesis aligning description and object geometry. In this work, we propose a novel
zero-shot 3D HOI generation framework without training
on specific datasets, leveraging the knowledge from largescale pre-trained models. Specifically, the human-object
relations are inferred from large language models (LLMs)
to initialize object properties and guide the optimization
process. Then we utilize a pre-trained 2D image diffusion model to parse unseen objects and extract contact
points, avoiding the limitations imposed by existing 3D asset knowledge. The initial human pose is generated by sam-

1. Introduction
Synthesizing the interaction of humans and any given object
holds great significance across diverse applications, including AR/VR, computer simulation, and animation. Tradi-

7015

