This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Aesthetic Post-Training Diffusion Models
from Generic Preferences with Step-by-step Preference Optimization
Zhanhao Liang1 , Yuhui Yuan5 , Shuyang Gu5 , Bohan Chen2 , Tiankai Hang3 ,
Mingxi Cheng4 , Ji Li4 , Liang Zheng1
1
The Australian National University 2 University of Liverpool
3
Southeast University 4 Microsoft 5 Microsoft Research Asia

Figure 1. Problem illustration of existing DPO methods. We show two denoising trajectories of a preferred image (a) and a dispreferred
image (b) generated from prompt “A cat jumps on a dog”. (1) Disagreement between generic preferences and aesthetic preference. While
(a) is preferred due to its better layout, its details are poorer than (b). Red boxes show the erroneous fusion of the cat’s leg and the dog’s
body. (2) Large sample differences between trajectories. This makes it difficult to identify subtle aesthetic-related differences at each step.

Abstract
Generating visually appealing images is fundamental to
modern text-to-image generation models. A potential solution to better aesthetics is direct preference optimization
(DPO), which has been applied to diffusion models to improve general image quality including prompt alignment
and aesthetics. Popular DPO methods propagate preference labels from clean image pairs to all the intermediate
steps along the two generation trajectories. However, preference labels provided in existing datasets are blended with
layout and aesthetic opinions, which would disagree with
aesthetic preference. Even if aesthetic labels were provided
(at substantial cost), it would be hard for the two-trajectory
methods to capture nuanced visual differences at different
steps. To improve aesthetics economically, this paper uses
existing generic preference data and introduces step-by-step
preference optimization (SPO) that discards the propagation strategy and allows fine-grained image details to be
assessed. Specifically, at each denoising step, we 1) sample a pool of candidates by denoising from a shared noise
latent, 2) use a step-aware preference model to find a suitable win-lose pair to supervise the diffusion model, and 3)
randomly select one from the pool to initialize the next de-

13199

noising step. This strategy ensures that diffusion models
focus on the subtle, fine-grained visual differences instead
of layout aspect. We find that aesthetics can be significantly enhanced by accumulating these improved minor differences. When fine-tuning Stable Diffusion v1.5 and SDXL,
SPO yields significant improvements in aesthetics compared
with existing DPO methods while not sacrificing imagetext alignment compared with vanilla models. Moreover,
SPO converges much faster than DPO methods due to the
use of more correct preference labels provided by the stepaware preference model. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/RockeyCoss/SPO.

1. Introduction
This paper aims to improve the ability of diffusion models in generating visually appealing images based on human preference data. That is, given a pool of image pairs
and human preference within each pair, we fine-tune diffusion models so that they are more likely to generate images
consistent with human aesthetic preference1 .
1 We fine-tune models using crowd-sourced preference data. We do not
discuss individual, cultural or political impact here.

