This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Multi-Object 4D Generation for In-the-wild Videos
Wen-Hsuan Chu1∗ Lei Ke1∗ Jianmeng Liu1∗ Mingxiao Huo1
Pavel Tokmakov2 Katerina Fragkiadaki1
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Toyota Research Institute

Abstract
We address the challenge of generating dynamic 4D
scenes from monocular multi-object videos with heavy occlusions and introduce GenMOJO, a novel approach that
integrates rendering-based deformable 3D Gaussian optimization with generative priors for view synthesis. While
existing view-synthesis models excel at novel view generation for isolated objects, they struggle with full scenes due
to their complexity and data demands. To overcome this,
GenMOJO decomposes scenes into individual objects, optimizing a differentiable set of deformable Gaussians per
object while capturing 2D occlusions from a 3D perspective through joint Gaussian splatting. Joint splatting ensures occlusion-aware rendering losses in observed frames,
while explicit object decomposition allows the usage of
object-centric diffusion models for object completion in unobserved viewpoints. To reconcile the differences between
object-centric priors and the global frame-centric coordinate system of the video, GenMOJO employs differentiable
transformations to unify the rendering and generative constraints within a single framework. The result is a model
capable of generating 4D objects across space and time
while producing 2D and 3D point tracks from monocular
videos. To rigorously evaluate the quality of scene generation and the accuracy of the motion under multi-object
occlusions, we introduce MOSE-PTS, a subset of the challenging MOSE benchmark, which we annotated with highquality 2D point tracks. Quantitative evaluations and perceptual human studies confirm that GenMOJO generates
more realistic novel views of scenes and produces more
accurate point tracks compared to existing approaches.
Project page: https://genmojo.github.io/.

reappearance. Recovering persistent and accurate 4D representations from monocular videos with multiple objects
is a highly under-constrained problem. However, it is critical for fine-grained video understanding, visual imitation in
robotics [12], and building causal world models of intuitive
physics [50] that can simulate the consequences of actions.
Recent view-predictive generative models [24, 40] provide powerful priors for novel view synthesis. However, existing video-to-4D generation works [5, 14, 55, 56] based on
these generative models often struggle to maintain temporal coherence and accurate 3D geometry in complex multiobject scenes due to the intricate dynamics involved, such
as heavy occlusions and fast motion.
In this paper, we propose GenMOJO, a compositional
method that enables Multi-Object JOint splatting for 4D
scene GENeration from monocular videos by combining frame-centric test-time rendering error optimization
with object-centric generative priors. GenMOJO decomposes a scene into individual foreground objects and background, representing each object with a differentiable and
deformable set of 3D Gaussians. We optimize the parameters of these Gaussians by: (1) jointly splatting all Gaussians to compute rendering errors in the input video frames,
accounting for occlusions; and (2) individually rendering
each object’s Gaussians from unobserved viewpoints to optimize a score distillation (SDS) objective. To bridge framecentric and object-centric coordinate frames, GenMOJO
employs differentiable affine transformations that align the
object-centric Gaussians with the frame-centric Gaussians.

1. Introduction

The work most closely related to ours is DreamScene4D [5], which also leverages object-centric generative priors to produce 4D scene completions from monocular video. However, their approach inpaints and optimizes the 3D deformable Gaussians for each object independently and only combine them during a final rendering
step to infer object depth ordering. This strategy struggles with cross-object occlusions, as rendering objects separately fails to account for occluders. As a result, their
method often produces unnatural, inter-penetrating artifacts
in scenes with multiple heavily occluded objects, as demonstrated in our experiments. In contrast, our approach unifies

Humans effortlessly perceive complete, coherent objects
and their motions from videos even though they only observe the pixels on the front surface of a dynamic scene,
which constantly changes due to motion, occlusion, and
*Equal contributions

22067

