This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fractal Calibration for long-tailed object detection
Konstantinos Panagiotis Alexandridis1,∗ , Ismail Elezi1 , Jiankang Deng2 , Anh Nguyen3 and Shan Luo4
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab; 2 Imperial College London; 3 University of Liverpool; 4 King’s College London
∗

konstantinos.alexandridis@huawei.com

Abstract
Real-world datasets follow an imbalanced distribution,
which poses significant challenges in rare-category object
detection. Recent studies tackle this problem by developing
re-weighting and re-sampling methods, that utilise the class
frequencies of the dataset. However, these techniques focus
solely on the frequency statistics and ignore the distribution
of the classes in image space, missing important information. In contrast to them, we propose FRActal CALibration
(FRACAL): a novel post-calibration method for long-tailed
object detection. FRACAL devises a logit adjustment
method that utilises the fractal dimension to estimate how
uniformly classes are distributed in image space. During
inference, it uses the fractal dimension to inversely downweight the probabilities of uniformly spaced class predictions achieving balance in two axes: between frequent and
rare categories, and between uniformly spaced and sparsely
spaced classes. FRACAL is a post-processing method and it
does not require any training, also it can be combined with
many off-the-shelf models such as one-stage sigmoid detectors and two-stage instance segmentation models. FRACAL
boosts the rare class performance by up to 8.6% and surpasses all previous methods on LVIS dataset, while showing good generalisation to other datasets such as COCO,
V3Det and OpenImages. We provide the code at https:
//github.com/kostas1515/FRACAL.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Previous works used class information ps (y) to align
the learned source distribution ps (y, u|x) with the balanced target
distribution pt (y, u|x), without considering the space u and class
y relationship i.e. ps (y, u). FRACAL captures ps (y, u), using
the fractal dimension, and embeds fractal margins during inference, aligning the learned distribution ps (y, u|x) with the target
pt (y, u|x) better than previous works.

In recent years, there have been astonishing developments
in the field of object detection [8, 10, 57]. Most of these
works utilise vast, balanced, curated datasets such as ImageNet1k [15], or MS-COCO [48] to learn efficient image
representations. However, in the real world, data are rarely
balanced, in fact, they follow a long-tailed distribution [55].
When models are trained with long-tailed data, they perform well for the frequent classes of the distribution but
they perform inadequately for the rare classes [46, 68, 78].
This problem poses significant challenges to the safe deployment of detection and instance segmentation models

15139

in real-world safe-critical applications such as autonomous
vehicles, medical applications, and industrial applications,
scenarios where rare class detection is paramount.
Many approaches address the long-tailed detection problem by employing adaptive re-weighting or data resampling
techniques to handle imbalanced distributions [76, 79, 90].
However all these methods require training. In contrast,
in long-tailed image classification, alternative methods focus on mitigating class imbalance during inference through
a post-calibrated softmax adjustment (PCSA) [3, 26, 68].
PCSA boasts strong performance, good compatibility with
many methods like data augmentation, masked image modeling, contrastive learning, and does not necessitate specialized loss function optimization, making it more user
friendly [11, 86, 102].
However, current PCSA methods utilise solely the train
set’s class frequency ps (y) as shown in Fig.1-top, overlooking the significance of the classes’ dependence on the location distribution ps (y, u). This is a significant limitation of
previous PCSA methods because the location information

