This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ev-3DOD: Pushing the Temporal Boundaries of 3D Object Detection
with Event Cameras
Hoonhee Cho∗ , Jae-Young Kang∗ , Youngho Kim, and Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST
{gnsgnsgml,mickeykang,kmax2001,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

(b) Ev-3DOD (Ours)

(a) Conventional 3D Detection
Large Motion

1

0

𝑡!→#

1

0

1
𝑡!→#

Large Motion

Blind
Time

0
Time

0

1

No Detection in Blind Time

0

1

Detection in Blind Time with Events

Figure 1. Comparison between the proposed Ev-3DOD and conventional 3D detection methods. Fixed frame rate sensors (e.g., LiDAR,
frame camera) inevitably have periods of “blind time” (t0→1 ) when they lack data between active timestamps (0 and 1). Consequently,
as shown in (a), conventional methods cannot detect objects during blind time, while other objects like vehicles can undergo significant
motion within these gaps. In contrast, as illustrated in (b), our method, Ev-3DOD, leverages the high temporal resolution of the event
camera, enabling accurate object detection even during the blind times of other sensors.

Abstract
Detecting 3D objects in point clouds plays a crucial role
in autonomous driving systems. Recently, advanced multimodal methods incorporating camera information have
achieved notable performance. For a safe and effective
autonomous driving system, algorithms that excel not only
in accuracy but also in speed and low latency are essential. However, existing algorithms fail to meet these requirements due to the latency and bandwidth limitations of
fixed frame rate sensors, e.g., LiDAR and camera. To address this limitation, we introduce asynchronous event cameras into 3D object detection for the first time. We leverage
their high temporal resolution and low bandwidth to enable high-speed 3D object detection. Our method enables
detection even during inter-frame intervals when synchronized data is unavailable, by retrieving previous 3D information through the event camera. Furthermore, we introduce the first event-based 3D object detection datasets, EvWaymo and DSEC-3DOD, both of which include ground

truth 3D bounding boxes at 100 FPS, establishing the
first benchmarks for event-based 3D detectors. The code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
mickeykang16/Ev3DOD.

1. Introduction

27197

3D object detection is a crucial task in autonomous driving. Multi-modal sensors like LiDAR and cameras are commonly used to understand scenes and handle complex road
scenarios. This sensor setup consists of synchronized sensors with a fixed frame rate and has limited speed due to
bandwidth limitations. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), the blind
time, which is the period when sensor information is unavailable (e.g., 100 milliseconds), is critical as cars can experience large motions as 3 meters during this time. Therefore, temporal resolution is a crucial factor that can directly
influence accident risk.
* The first two authors contributed equally.

