This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WildAvatar: Learning In-the-wild 3D Avatars from the Web
Zihao Huang1,2 , Shoukang Hu2 , Guangcong Wang3 , Tianqi Liu1,2 ,
Yuhang Zang4 , Zhiguo Cao1 , Wei Li2,† , Ziwei Liu2
1
School of AIA, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
2
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, 3 Great Bay University, 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
https://wildavatar.github.io/
H36M

RP
THU
HM DNA

IVS

21.5

WildAvatar

G-GS
SHERF

21.0

WildAvatar

10k #Subjects

1k

100

(b) Dataset Comparison

PSNR (Lab Tests)

#Scenes

10
ZJU

20.5

MPS-NeRF

20.0

NHP

17.5

18.0

18.5

PSNR (In-the-wild Tests)

19.0

19.5

(c) Improvement on Generalizable Methods

(a) Visualization of WildAvatar Dataset

Figure 1. Overview of WildAvatar. (a) Unlike previous laboratory datasets for 3D avatar creation, WildAvatar curates in-the-wild web
videos. (b) With 10k+ human subjects and scenes, WildAvatar is at least 10× richer than the previous datasets. (c) It contains high-quality
annotations and demonstrates impressive potential to boost the quality and generalizability of avatar-creation methods.

1. Introduction

Abstract
Existing research on avatar creation is typically limited to
laboratory datasets, which require high costs against scalability and exhibit insufficient representation of the real world.
On the other hand, the web abounds with off-the-shelf realworld human videos, but these videos vary in quality and
require accurate annotations for avatar creation. To this end,
we propose an automatic annotating pipeline with filtering
protocols to curate these humans from the web. Our pipeline
surpasses state-of-the-art methods on the EMDB benchmark,
and the filtering protocols boost verification metrics on web
videos. We then curate WildAvatar, a web-scale in-the-wild
human avatar creation dataset extracted from YouTube, with
10, 000+ different human subjects and scenes. WildAvatar
is at least 10× richer than previous datasets for 3D human
avatar creation and closer to the real world. To explore its
potential, we demonstrate the quality and generalizability
of avatar creation methods on WildAvatar. We will publicly
release our code, data source links and annotations to push
forward 3D human avatar creation and other related fields
for real-world applications.
†: Corresponding author.

3D Human Avatar creation has extensive applications in
VR/AR, film-making, metaverse, etc., attracting significant attention recently. With the advent of neural radiance fields (NeRF) [53, 72], recent research aims to recover 3D avatars from 2D observations, enabling the synthesis of novel images from arbitrary viewpoints and body
poses [19, 26, 28, 42, 55, 56, 79]. For example, many
works focus on reconstructing animatable human models
from well-annotated and calibrated multi-view images and
videos [55–57, 80], and have achieved photo-realistic results in laboratory datasets [3, 56, 60]. However, their
performances are restricted by small-scale indoor human
data, especially for generalizable creation. This is down
to the fact that current avatar creation datasets are mainly
collected via well-designed laboratory systems, which are
expensive and time-consuming to collect. In addition, there
still exists domain gaps between laboratory and real-world
scenarios. As shown in Table 1, existing human data collections mostly rely on annotations from advanced devices,
such as well-calibrated multi-view cameras [14, 52, 68, 90],
depth sensors [7, 30, 90, 95], IMUs [74], or expensive
scanners [60, 88], as well as specialized actors and light-

15963

