This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Diffusion Inverse Problem Solving with Decoupled Noise Annealing
Bingliang Zhang˚,1
Wenda Chu˚,1
Julius Berner2,:
Chenlin Meng3
Anima Anandkumar1
Yang Song4
1
2
3
California Institute of Technology
NVIDIA
Stanford University 4 OpenAI

Figure 1. Overview of Decoupled Annealing Posterior Sampling (DAPS). Our method provides a flexible and effective framework for
solving inverse problems through a decoupled posterior sampling process. In (a)(b), we present DAPS visual results on FFHQ and ImageNet
at a resolution of 256, and in (c), on natural images at a resolution of 768. In (d), we display DAPS results on compressed sensing multi-coil
MRI (CS-MRI). DAPS effectively addresses nonlinear inverse problems as well as medical imaging MRI challenges. Additionally, DAPS
can be enhanced using large-scale latent diffusion models (LDMs) [40], as shown in (c).

Abstract
Diffusion models have recently achieved success in solving
Bayesian inverse problems with learned data priors. Current methods build on top of the diffusion sampling process,
where each denoising step makes small modifications to samples from the previous step. However, this process struggles
to correct errors from earlier sampling steps, leading to
worse performance in complicated nonlinear inverse problems, such as phase retrieval. To address this challenge, we
propose a new method called Decoupled Annealing Posterior Sampling (DAPS) that relies on a novel noise annealing
process. Specifically, we decouple consecutive steps in a
diffusion sampling trajectory, allowing them to vary consid† Work partially done at the California Institute of Technology.
* These authors contributed equally to this work

erably from one another while ensuring their time-marginals
anneal to the true posterior as we reduce noise levels. This
approach enables the exploration of a larger solution space,
improving the success rate for accurate reconstructions. We
demonstrate that DAPS significantly improves sample quality
and stability across multiple image restoration tasks, particularly in complicated nonlinear inverse problems.

1. Introduction
Inverse problems are ubiquitous in science and engineering,
with applications ranging from image restoration [13, 30, 34,
44, 49, 59], medical imaging [10, 11, 17, 22, 23, 50] to astrophotography [1, 19, 51, 52]. Solving an inverse problem
involves finding the underlying signal x0 from its partial,
noisy measurement y. Since the measurement process is typically noisy and many-to-one, inverse problems do not have a

20895

