This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Identity-preserving Distillation Sampling by Fixed-Point Iterator
SeonHwa Kim1

Jiwon Kim1 Soobin Park2 Donghoon Ahn1 Jiwon Kang1
Seungryong Kim3 * Kyong Hwan Jin1 * Eunju Cha2 *
1
2
3
Korea University
Sookmyung Women’s University
KAIST
{sunkim0062, jwonkim, dhahn99, jiwon7258, kyong jin}@korea.ac.kr,
{psb1219j, eunju.cha}@sookmyung.ac.kr, seungryong.kim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Score distillation sampling (SDS) demonstrates a powerful capability for text-conditioned 2D image and 3D object generation by distilling the knowledge from learned
score functions. However, SDS often suffers from blurriness caused by noisy gradients. When SDS meets the image editing, such degradations can be reduced by adjusting
bias shifts using reference pairs, but the de-biasing techniques are still corrupted by erroneous gradients. To this
end, we introduce Identity-preserving Distillation Sampling
(IDS), which compensates for the gradient leading to undesired changes in the results. Based on the analysis that these
errors come from the text-conditioned scores, a new regularization technique, called fixed-point iterative regularization (FPR), is proposed to modify the score itself, driving
the preservation of the identity even including poses and
structures. Thanks to a self-correction by FPR, the proposed method provides clear and unambiguous representations corresponding to the given prompts in image-to-image
editing and editable neural radiance field (NeRF). The
structural consistency between the source and the edited
data is obviously maintained compared to other state-ofthe-art methods. Our code is https://github.com/
shhh0620/IDS

Figure 1. Trace of guided updating from source to target images
using delta denoising score (DDS) and identity-preserving distillation sampling (IDS). DDS moves a gradient of score function toward Mz manifold directed by stochastic direction ϵ. In contrast,
IDS moves a gradient with a corrected direction by a fixed-point
regularization.

Recently, Delta Denoising Score (DDS) [6] is proposed
to edit a source image by distilling the rich generative prior
of T2I diffusion models. It is based on the analysis of Score
Distillation Sampling (SDS) [20], originally developed to
optimize a parametric generator such as Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRFs) [16] by exploiting the learned score of the
diffusion models. Even though SDS offers remarkable performance in synthesizing 3D scenes, noisy gradients from
stochastic perturbations lead to significantly over-saturated
results that faithfully follow the given text prompts. In the
context of image editing, text prompts do not often include
information about the identity of the source image, such as
the background, the object’s pose, or the structure of the

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [4, 8, 9, 22, 25] have shown powerful representations on text-to-image (T2I) generative tasks. With
the advance of classifier guidance (CG) and classifier-free
guidance (CFG) paradigms [1, 4, 8, 10], diffusion models
improve the quality of generated samples [9, 25]. Such
high-quality image generators can be easily extended to
image editing by simply modifying forward/reverse iterations [14], applying CFG with a target prompt [2, 7] or interchanging attention layers [26].
* Corresponding author.

11115

