This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PhysicsGen: Can Generative Models Learn
from Images to Predict Complex Physical Relations?

1

Martin Spitznagel1 , Jan Vaillant2 and Janis Keuper1,3
IMLA, Offenburg University, 2 Herrenknecht AG, 3 Mannheim University
{first.last}@hs-offenburg.de

Abstract
The image-to-image translation abilities of generative
learning models have recently made significant progress in
the estimation of complex (steered) mappings between image distributions. While appearance based tasks like image
in-painting or style transfer have been studied at length, we
propose to investigate the potential of generative models in
the context of physical simulations. Providing a dataset of
300k image-pairs and baseline evaluations for three different physical simulation tasks, we propose a benchmark to
investigate the following research questions: i) are generative models able to learn complex physical relations
from input-output image pairs? ii) what speedups can be
achieved by replacing differential equation based simulations? While baseline evaluations of different current models show the potential for high speedups (ii), these results
also show strong limitations toward the physical correctness (i). This underlines the need for new methods to enforce physical correctness. Data, baseline models and evaluation code: http://www.physics-gen.org.

1. Introduction
The numerical simulation of physical processes and relations is a crucial tool in a wide range of scientific and engineering tasks. Traditionally depending on the solution of
various types of differential equations, research of physical
simulation methods is increasingly shifting towards datadriven and learnable approaches [9].
In this work, we focus on a narrow but practically important sub-field: the inference of physical relations from images. Extending Tenenbaum’s seminal idea of a intuitive
physics engine [2], where machine learning models have
been trained to predict coarse physical properties from images, we investigate the capabilities of modern generative
models to learn detailed, complex and physically correct
mappings from image pairs. Given such abilities, generative
models like GANs [15] and Diffusion models [19] could be

11125

Figure 1. Overview of the physical problems, baseline generative models and their evaluation. A: We introduce three complex
physical simulation tasks with 100k input-output image pairs each,
providing ground truth simulations based on differential equations
with varying complexity. B: We evaluate all tasks on independently trained image translation models; only results for the sound
propagation task are visualized in this figure. C: While the evaluation of the baseline models shows a general ability of generative
image models to learn physical relations from images, we observe
significant performance drops for tasks that require a higher order
term in the differential equations of their simulation.

