This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DepthSplat: Connecting Gaussian Splatting and Depth
Haofei Xu1,2

Songyou Peng1

Fangjinhua Wang1

Hermann Blum1,4

Andreas Geiger2 Marc Pollefeys1,3
1
ETH Zurich 2 University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center 3 Microsoft

4

Daniel Barath1
University of Bonn

Depth

DepthSplat

U

ns
up
e

Image 1: Depth

Image 2: Depth

Novel View

3DGS

in
g

Bet
ter

MVSplat

etry&Ren
om
d
Ge

ng
e ri

Input & GT

haofeixu.github.io/depthsplat

rai
rvis
ed Pre-t

n

Validation curves of depth prediction error

Figure 1. DepthSplat enables cross-task interactions between Gaussian splatting and depth. Left: Better depth leads to improved
Gaussian splatting reconstruction. Right: Unsupervised depth pre-training with Gaussian splatting leads to reduced depth prediction error.

Abstract
Gaussian splatting and single-view depth estimation are typically studied in isolation. In this paper, we present DepthSplat to connect Gaussian splatting and depth estimation
and study their interactions. More specifically, we first contribute a robust multi-view depth model by leveraging pretrained monocular depth features, leading to high-quality
feed-forward 3D Gaussian splatting reconstructions. We
also show that Gaussian splatting can serve as an unsupervised pre-training objective for learning powerful depth
models from large-scale multi-view posed datasets. We validate the synergy between Gaussian splatting and depth estimation through extensive ablation and cross-task transfer
experiments. Our DepthSplat achieves state-of-the-art performance on ScanNet, RealEstate10K and DL3DV datasets
in terms of both depth estimation and novel view synthesis,
demonstrating the mutual benefits of connecting both tasks.
In addition, DepthSplat enables feed-forward reconstruction
from 12 input views (512 × 960 resolutions) in 0.6 seconds.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis [4, 82] and depth prediction [20, 44]
are two fundamental tasks in computer vision, serving as the

driving force behind numerous applications ranging from
augmented reality to robotics and autonomous driving. There
have been notable advancements in both areas recently.
For novel view synthesis, 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [29] has emerged as a popular technique due to
its impressive real-time performance while attaining high
visual fidelity. Recently, advances in feed-forward 3DGS
models [7, 9, 48] have been introduced to alleviate the need
for tedious per-scene optimization, also enabling few-view
3D reconstruction. The state-of-the-art sparse-view method
MVSplat [9] relies on feature matching-based multi-view
depth estimation [65] to localize the 3D Gaussian positions,
which makes it suffer from similar limitations (e.g., occlusions, texture-less regions, and reflective surfaces) as other
multi-view depth methods [18, 25, 44, 56, 71].
On the other hand, significant progress has been made in
monocular depth estimation, with recent models [19, 22, 28,
40, 69, 74] achieving robust predictions on diverse in-thewild data. However, these depths typically lack consistent
scales across multiple views, constraining their performance
in downstream tasks like 3D reconstruction [59, 73].
The integration of 3DGS with single-view depth estimation presents a compelling solution to overcome the individual limitations of each technique while at the same
time enhancing their strengths. To this end, we introduce

16453

