This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V uniT: Visual Unit Tests for More Robust Visual Programming
Artemis Panagopoulou†, *
Honglu Zhou‡
Silvio Savarese‡
Caiming Xiong‡
†
†
Chris Callison-Burch
Mark Yatskar
Juan Carlos Niebles‡
‡
†
Salesforce AI Research
University of Pennsylvania
https://artemisp.github.io/viunit/
Abstract
Programming based approaches to reasoning tasks have
substantially expanded the types of questions models can answer about visual scenes. Yet on benchmark visual reasoning
data, when models answer correctly, they produce incorrect
programs 33% of the time. These models are often right for
the wrong reasons and risk unexpected failures on new data.
Unit tests play a foundational role in ensuring code correctness and could be used to repair such failures. We propose
Visual Unit Testing (ViUniT), a framework to improve the
reliability of visual programs by automatically generating
unit tests. In our framework, a unit test is represented as
a novel image and answer pair meant to verify the logical
correctness of a program produced for a given query. Our
method leverages a language model to create unit tests in
the form of image descriptions and expected answers, followed by image synthesis to produce corresponding images.
We conduct a comprehensive analysis of what constitutes
an effective visual unit test suite, exploring unit test generation, sampling strategies, image generation methods, and
varying the number of programs and unit tests. Additionally, we introduce four applications of visual unit tests: best
program selection, answer refusal, re-prompting, and unsupervised reward formulations for reinforcement learning.
Experiments with two models across three datasets in visual
question answering and image-text matching demonstrate
that ViUniT improves model performance by 11.4 points in
accuracy. Notably, it enables 7B open-source language models to outperform gpt-4o-mini in visual program generation
by an average of 7.7 points and reduces the occurrence of
programs that are correct for the wrong reasons by 40%.

1. Introduction
Visual Programming [15, 50], which involves generating
executable programs that leverage state-of-the-art specialist
systems (e.g. object detection, captioning, etc.), has emerged

as an effective method for tackling compositional reasoning tasks [16, 49]. Often correct visual programs must be
inferred without training programs because they are expensive to annotate. Recently, some methods improve the performance of visual program synthesis by leveraging programs that yield correct results on training data [24, 30].
While these approaches have shown improvements, a critical limitation persists: visual programs can be right for
the wrong reasons. For example, human inspection of 100
visual programs resulting in correct responses generated by
CodeLlama-7B1 for questions in GQA [21], showed that
only 33% of them were actually correct and 70% of the incorrect programs (23% of the total) would require significant
rewriting to be correct.
To mitigate this prevailing issue, we propose Visual
Unit Testing (ViUniT), a framework for automatically generating unit tests for visual programs. While automatic
unit test generation has gained momentum in text-based
tasks [2, 5, 13, 47, 51], its application to visual program
synthesis has been limited. Recent efforts toward visual unit
tests focused primarily on checking program return value
types (e.g. the output falling outside a range of options, like
yes or no) [26]. However, this approach does not assess the
program’s execution or logical correctness, limiting the types
of errors it can address. In this work, we bridge this gap by addressing challenges that have hindered unit test use in visual
question answering (VQA) and image-text-matching (ITM).
As seen in Figure 1, visual programming converts queries
to code that executes on test images to provide a response.
For such programs, unit tests take the form of images and
expected answers. Unit test are difficult to construct because
they need to have sufficient coverage to diagnose errors. To
solve this problem, we leverage language models to generate
candidate sets of descriptions of images that could test the
code (Section 3.2.1). We formulate an optimization criterion
to select ones that maximize coverage of possible program
inputs and outputs (Section 3.2.2), and convert selected descriptions to images (Section 3.2.3). Our approach is entirely
1 CodeLlama-7B [42] is a leading open source large language model (LLM)

* Work done during internship at Salesforce.

24646

