This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Motion Prompting: Controlling Video Generation with Motion Trajectories
Daniel Geng1,2,⇤ Charles Herrmann1,† Junhwa Hur1 Forrester Cole1 Serena Zhang1
Tobias Pfaff1 Tatiana Lopez-Guevara1 Yusuf Aytar1 Michael Rubinstein1
Chen Sun1,3 Oliver Wang1 Andrew Owens2 Deqing Sun1
1

Google DeepMind

2

University of Michigan

3

Brown University

https://motion-prompting.github.io/
Abstract

main control signal for generation, its limitations become
apparent when focusing on motion. Although effective for
describing static scenes in images or high level actions, text
struggles to convey the subtleties of motion: e.g., a prompt
like “a bear quickly turns its head” could be interpreted in
countless ways. How quick is “quickly”? What is the exact trajectory? Should it accelerate? Even detailed descriptions fail to capture nuances like ease-in-ease-out timing or
synchronized movements. These nuances are often better
conveyed through the motion itself.
Motivated by this, we explore motion as a powerful,
complementary control scheme to text. Our first observation is that in order to fully harness the expressiveness of
motion, we require a representation that can encode any
type of motion. To this end, we identify spatio-temporally
sparse or dense motion trajectories [22, 58] as an ideal candidate. Motion trajectories, a.k.a. particle video or point
tracks, track the movement and visibility of a set of points
throughout a video, offering a highly expressive encoding
of motion. This representation can capture the trajectories of any number of points, represent object-specific or
global scene motion, and even handle temporally sparse
motion constraints. Furthermore, recent advances in point
track estimation have yielded robust and efficient algorithms [12, 13, 36, 37] that are capable of processing diverse real-world videos to generate constraints for training.
Given the comprehensive and flexible nature of this motion
representation, akin to text, we designate our motion conditioning as motion prompts. We then train a motion trajectory ControlNet [87] on top of a pre-trained video diffusion
model [3] to accept the motion prompt conditioning.
While these motion prompts can define any type of video
motion, what is less clear is how a user would generate them
in practice. Sparse trajectories, which give the rough direction of a few pixels or patches, may be easy to specify with
mouse drags, but do not sufficiently constrain the generation
process and fall short with respect to fine-grained control.
Conversely, dense trajectories, though offering precise con-

Motion control is crucial for generating expressive and
compelling video content; however, most existing video
generation models rely mainly on text prompts for control, which struggle to capture the nuances of dynamic actions and temporal compositions. To this end, we train a
video generation model conditioned on spatio-temporally
sparse or dense motion trajectories. In contrast to prior
motion conditioning work, this flexible representation can
encode any number of trajectories, object-specific or global
scene motion, and temporally sparse motion; due to its
flexibility we refer to this conditioning as motion prompts.
While users may directly specify sparse trajectories, we
also show how to translate high-level user requests into detailed, semi-dense motion prompts, a process we term motion prompt expansion. We demonstrate the versatility of
our approach through various applications, including camera and object motion control, “interacting” with an image,
motion transfer, and image editing. Our results showcase
emergent behaviors, such as realistic physics, suggesting
the potential of motion prompts for probing video models
and interacting with future generative world models. Finally, we evaluate quantitatively, conduct a human study,
and demonstrate strong performance.

1. Introduction
In video generation, motion is paramount. It can elevate a
video from the uncanny valley to realistic or from amateur
to professional. Motion guides attention, enhances storytelling, and defines visual style. Skilled filmmakers, like
Kubrick and Kurosawa, masterfully use motion to create
captivating, immersive experiences. Achieving realistic and
expressive motion, coupled with granular control, is essential for generating compelling video. While text remains the
⇤ Work done as intern, † Project lead

1

