This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IndoorGS: Geometric Cues Guided Gaussian Splatting for
Indoor Scene Reconstruction
Cong Ruan
Yuesong Wang*
Tao Guan
School of Computer Science & Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{rc22, yuesongwang, qd gt}@hust.edu.cn

Bin Zhang
Shenzhen Smart City Technology Development Group Co., Ltd., China
zhangbin@smartcitysz.com

Lili Ju
Department of Mathematics, University of South Carolina, USA
ju@math.sc.edu

Figure 1. Our IndoorGS achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in indoor scene reconstruction. Compared to other methods that produce poor
geometric results, our approach generates well-structural geometries while preserving all details. We can achieve superior rendering quality thanks to our
precise geometry estimation.

Abstract

cues in indoor scenes to improve the reconstruction quality. Specifically, we first extract 2D lines from input images
and fuse them into 3D line cues via feature-based matching,
which can provide a structural understanding of the target
scene. We then apply the statistical outlier removal to refine
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) points, ensuring robust cues
in texture-rich areas. Based on these two types of cues, we
further extract reliable 3D plane-like cues for textureless regions. Such geometric information will be utilized not only
for initialization but also in the realization of a geometriccue-guided adaptive density control (ADC) strategy. The
proposed ADC approach is grounded in the principle of

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has shown impressive performance in scene reconstruction, offering high rendering
quality and rapid rendering speed with short training time.
However, it often yields unsatisfactory results when applied to indoor scenes due to its poor ability to learn geometries without enough textural information. In this paper, we propose a new 3DGS-based method “IndoorGS”,
that leverages the commonly found yet important geometric
* Corresponding author. Contact him at yuesongwang@hust.edu.cn.

844

