This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EdgeDiff: Edge-aware Diffusion Network for Building Reconstruction
from Point Clouds
Yujun Liu1 Ruisheng Wang1,† Shangfeng Huang2 Guorong Cai3
1
Shenzhen University 2 University of Calgary 3 Jimei University
yujunliu2024@mails.szu.edu.cn; ruiswang@szu.edu.cn;
shangfeng.huang@ucalgary.ca; guorongcai@jmu.edu.cn

Abstract

(a) Vertex Detection Methods

Building reconstruction is a challenging problem at the intersection of computer vision, photogrammetry and computer graphics. 3D wireframe presents a compelling representation for building modeling through its compact structure. Existing wireframe reconstruction methods employing vertex detection and edge regression have achieved
promising results. In this paper, we develop an Edgeaware Diffusion network, dubbed EdgeDiff. As a novel
paradigm for wireframe reconstruction, the EdgeDiff generates wireframe models from noise using a conditional
diffusion model. During the training process, the ground
truth wireframes firstly are formulated as a set of parameterized edges and then diffused into a random noise distribution. EdgeDiff learns both the noise reversal process
and the network structure simultaneously. During inference, EdgeDiff iteratively refines the generated edge distribution using the denoising diffusion implicit model, enabling flexible single- or multi-step denoising and dynamic
adaptation to buildings of varying complexity. Additionally,
given the unique structure of wireframes, we introduce an
edge attention module to extract point-wise attention from
point features, using it as auxiliary information to facilitate
learning of edge cues and guide the network toward improved edge awareness. Extensive experiments on the realworld Building3D dataset demonstrate that our approach
achieves state-of-the-art performance.

Point Cloud

Vertex Detection

Edge P di
rediction

(b) Edge Regression Methods

Point Cloud

Edge Regression

Post-processing

(c) Edge Diffusion Method (Ours)
ߜ ൌ ο‫ݔ‬௖௜ ǡ ο‫ݕ‬௖௜ ǡ ο‫ݖ‬௖௜

Point Cloud

Edge Attention

Noised Edges

Edge-aware Denoising

‫ ݌‬ൌ ‫ݔ‬௖௜ ǡ ‫ݕ‬ୡ௜ ǡ ‫ݖ‬௖௜

Post-processing

Figure 1. Comparison of building wireframe reconstruction
paradigms. Different from existing methods based on vertex detection (a) and edge regression (b), EdgeDiff (c) proposes a novel
noise-to-wireframe paradigm that iteratively refines edge parameters through edge-aware denoising.

1. Introduction

distance functions [4, 36], 3D wireframes [31, 32, 44] exhibit unique advantages through its compact yet expressive
point-line structure. However, reconstructing accurate wireframes from real-world point cloud data remains a challenging problem, primarily due to noise, incompleteness, and
irregular sampling in the input measurements.

Building reconstruction has emerged as a central challenge in computer vision and photogrammetry [9, 16], with
far-reaching implications across domains including smart
cities, autonomous navigation, and augmented and virtual
reality. Among various geometric representations for building modeling, like point clouds [7], meshes [8], and signed
† Corresponding author

Deep learning-based methods [14, 23, 26, 55] have
shown tremendous potential in building wireframe reconstruction. Existing approaches can be broadly categorized
into two paradigms: vertex detection methods [23, 26] and
edge regression methods [14, 55]. The former first detects

17008

