This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inversion Circle Interpolation:
Diffusion-based Image Augmentation for Data-scarce Classification
Yanghao Wang∗ Long Chen†
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Original training images
(a) Faithfulness
(b) Diversity
(c) Faithfulness and diversity
Figure 1. Given training images, data augmentation aims to generate new faithful and diverse synthetic images. (a) These synthetic images
are faithful but not diverse. (b) These synthetic images are diverse but not faithful. (c) These synthetic images are both faithful and diverse.

Abstract

1. Introduction

scenarios). For example, since the occurrence frequency of
various categories in nature follows a long-tailed distribution, there are many rare categories with only limited samples [30, 40]. To mitigate this data scarcity issue, a prevalent
and effective solution is Data Augmentation (DA). Based
on an original training set with limited samples, DA aims to
generate more synthetic samples to expand the training set.
For DA methods, there are two critical indexes: faithfulness and diversity [34]. They can not only show the quality
of synthesized samples, but also influence the final classification performance. More specifically, faithfulness indicates that the synthetic samples need to retain the characteristics of the corresponding category (cf ., Figure 1 (a)),
i.e., the faithfulness confirms that the model learns from
correct category knowledge. Diversity indicates that the
synthetic samples should have different contexts from the
original training set and each other (cf ., Figure 1 (b)), i.e.,
the diversity ensures that the model learns the invariable
characteristics of the category by seeing diverse samples.
With the photo-realistic image generation ability of today’s diffusion models [15, 28], a surge of diffusion-based
DA methods has dominated the image classification task1 .
Typically, diffusion-based DA methods reformulate image
augmentation as an image editing task, which consists of
two steps: 1) Noising Step: They first randomly sample an
image from the original training set as a reference image
and then add some noise to the reference image. 2) Denois-

Today’s visual recognition models can even outperform us
humans with sufficient training samples. However, in many
different real-world scenarios, it is not easy to collect adequate training data for some categories (i.e., data-scarce

∗ ywangtg@connect.ust.hk, † longchen@ust.hk (corresponding author). Codes: https://github.com/HKUST-LongGroup/Diff-II.
1 DA has been used in various image classification settings. In this paper, we focus on data-scarce scenarios (more discussions are in the Sec. 2).

Data Augmentation (DA), i.e., synthesizing faithful and diverse samples to expand the original training set, is an effective strategy to improve the performance of various datascarce tasks. With the powerful image generation ability,
diffusion-based DA has shown strong performance gains
on different image classification benchmarks. In this paper,
we analyze today’s diffusion-based DA methods, and argue
that they cannot take account of both faithfulness and diversity, which are two critical keys for generating high-quality
samples and boosting classification performance. To this
end, we propose a novel Diffusion-based DA method: DiffII. Specifically, it consists of three steps: 1) Category concepts learning: Learning concept embeddings for each category. 2) Inversion interpolation: Calculating the inversion for each image, and conducting circle interpolation
for two randomly sampled inversions from the same category. 3) Two-stage denoising: Using different prompts
to generate synthesized images in a coarse-to-fine manner. Extensive experiments on various data-scarce image
classification tasks (e.g., few-shot, long-tailed, and out-ofdistribution classification) have demonstrated their effectiveness over state-of-the-art diffusion-based DA methods.

25560

