This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perception Tokens Enhance Visual Reasoning in Multimodal Language Models
Mahtab Bigverdi1 Zelun Luo2 Cheng-Yu Hsieh1
Ethan Shen 1 Dongping Chen 1 Linda G. Shapiro1 Ranjay Krishna1
1
University of Washington, 2 Google Research
{mahtab,cydhsieh,ethans03,shapiro,ranjay}@cs.washington.edu,
alanzluo@gmail.com, cdp0612@uw.edu
Abstract
Multimodal language models (MLMs) still face challenges in fundamental visual perception tasks where specialized models excel. Tasks requiring reasoning about
3D structures benefit from depth estimation, and reasoning
about 2D object instances benefits from object detection.
Yet, MLMs can not produce intermediate depth or boxes to
reason over. Fine-tuning MLMs on relevant data doesn’t
generalize well and outsourcing computation to specialized vision tools is too compute-intensive and memoryinefficient. To address this, we introduce Perception Tokens, intrinsic image representations designed to assist reasoning tasks where language is insufficient. Perception tokens act as auxiliary reasoning tokens, akin to chain-ofthought prompts in language models. For example, in a
depth-related task, an MLM augmented with perception tokens can reason by generating a depth map as tokens, enabling it to solve the problem effectively. We propose AU RORA , a training method that augments MLMs with perception tokens for improved reasoning over visual inputs.
AURORA leverages a VQVAE to transform intermediate image representations, such as depth maps into a tokenized
format and bounding box tokens, which are then used in
a multi-task training framework. AURORA achieves notable improvements across counting benchmarks: +10.8%
on BLINK, +11.3% on CVBench, and +8.3% on SEEDBench, outperforming fine-tuning approaches in generalization across datasets. It also improves on relative depth:
over +6% on BLINK. With perception tokens, AURORA expands the scope of MLMs beyond language-based reasoning, paving the way for more effective visual reasoning capabilities. Code and data will be released at the project
page.

Figure 1. We introduce Perception Tokens, intermediate reasoning tokens that allow MLMs to go beyond using language in reasoning. With it, we develop AURORA, a framework that trains
multimodal language models to leverage visual perception tokens,
allowing them to use depth estimation and bounding box predictions while reasoning.

1. Introduction

attempting to interpret images as projections of indescribable 3D intrinsics, not just processing 2D arrays of language
patterns [9, 34, 35]. Towards this endeavor, early vision research developed a series of intermediate image representations—enabling geometric reasoning through depth estimation [42] and instance reasoning through bounding box
grounding [14]. As pointed out by recent work, we have
focused less on such perceptual representations and instead
tackled reasoning problems that require limited visual involvement [11, 40, 41]. This is likely because many traditional vision tasks remain ambiguous through natural language. Consider the task of identifying which of a set of
N points is furthest away from the camera. While language
doesn’t lend itself to reason over this problem, a depth estimation would provide the appropriate abstraction to reason
over.

In contrast to the growing emphasis on building multimodal
language models (MLMs), computer vision was originally

Numerous attempts have been made to enable MLMs to
reason over intrinsic image representations. The default ap-

3836

