This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HOTFormerLoc: Hierarchical Octree Transformer
for Versatile Lidar Place Recognition Across Ground and Aerial Views
Ethan Griffiths1,2 Maryam Haghighat1 Simon Denman1 Clinton Fookes1 Milad Ramezani2
1
Queensland University of Technology (QUT) 2 CSIRO Robotics, Data61, CSIRO
1
2

{maryam.haghighat, s.denman, c.fookes}@qut.edu.au

{ethan.griffiths, milad.ramezani}@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
We present HOTFormerLoc, a novel and versatile
Hierarchical Octree-based TransFormer, for large-scale
3D place recognition in both ground-to-ground and groundto-aerial scenarios across urban and forest environments.
We propose an octree-based multi-scale attention mechanism that captures spatial and semantic features across
granularities. To address the variable density of point distributions from spinning lidar, we present cylindrical octree attention windows to reflect the underlying distribution
during attention. We introduce relay tokens to enable efficient global-local interactions and multi-scale representation learning at reduced computational cost. Our pyramid attentional pooling then synthesises a robust global
descriptor for end-to-end place recognition in challenging environments. In addition, we introduce CS-WildPlaces, a novel 3D cross-source dataset featuring point
cloud data from aerial and ground lidar scans captured in
dense forests. Point clouds in CS-Wild-Places contain representational gaps and distinctive attributes such as varying
point densities and noise patterns, making it a challenging
benchmark for cross-view localisation in the wild. HOTFormerLoc achieves a top-1 average recall improvement of
5.5% – 11.5% on the CS-Wild-Places benchmark. Furthermore, it consistently outperforms SOTA 3D place recognition methods, with an average performance gain of 4.9%
on well-established urban and forest datasets. The code
and CS-Wild-Places benchmark is available at https://csirorobotics.github.io/HOTFormerLoc.

Environments
= Urban
= Forest
Collection
= Vehicle
= By foot
= Aerial
Point Density
= Sparse
= Dense
TransLoc3D

PPT-Net

CrossLoc3D

MinkLoc3Dv2

HOTFormerLoc

Figure 1. HOTFormerLoc achieves SOTA performance across
a suite of LPR benchmarks with diverse environments, varying
viewpoints, and different point cloud densities.

This capability is particularly crucial in autonomous navigation, where reliable PR helps locate the vehicle within a
prior map for global localisation [60]. When integrated with
metric localisation in Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping (SLAM), it helps to reduce drift, enhance map consistency and improve long-term navigation [61].
Despite considerable advancements, Visual Place
Recognition (VPR) [63] struggles with robustness against
variations in appearance, season, lighting, and viewpoint,
especially within large-scale urban and forested environments, where orthogonal-view scenarios can exacerbate the
challenge. This work specifically addresses the problem
of Lidar Place Recognition (LPR) in diverse conditions.
While recent LPR methods have achieved notable progress,
their primary focus has been on urban settings using
ground-to-ground view descriptors, leaving cross-view
lidar recognition, particularly in natural environments

1. Introduction
End-to-end Place Recognition (PR) has gained significant
attention in computer vision and robotics for its capacity to convert sensory data—such as lidar scans or images—into compact embeddings that effectively capture
distinctive scene features. During inference, these embeddings enable the system to match a query frame to stored
data, allowing it to recognise previously visited locations.

6648

