This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Devil is in Temporal Token: High Quality Video Reasoning Segmentation
Sitong Gong1 , Yunzhi Zhuge1 ,* Lu Zhang1 , Zongxin Yang2 , Pingping Zhang1 , Huchuan Lu1
1
IIAU, Dalian University of Technology, 2 Havard University
stgong@mail.dlut.edu.cn, zgyz@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing methods for Video Reasoning Segmentation rely
heavily on a single special token to represent the object
in the keyframe or the entire video, inadequately capturing spatial complexity and inter-frame motion. To overcome
these challenges, we propose VRS-HQ, an end-to-end video
reasoning segmentation approach that leverages Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) to inject rich spatiotemporal features into hierarchical tokens. Our key innovations include a Temporal Dynamic Aggregation (TDA)
and a Token-driven Keyframe Selection (TKS). Specifically,
we design frame-level <SEG> and temporal-level <TAK>
tokens that utilize MLLM’s autoregressive learning to effectively capture both local and global information. Subsequently, we apply a similarity-based weighted fusion
and frame selection strategy, then utilize SAM2 to perform keyframe segmentation and propagation. To enhance
keyframe localization accuracy, the TKS filters keyframes
based on SAM2’s occlusion scores during inference. VRSHQ achieves state-of-the-art performance on ReVOS, surpassing VISA by 5.9%/12.5%/9.1% in J &F scores across
the three subsets. These results highlight the strong temporal reasoning and segmentation capabilities of our method.
Code and model weights are available at VRS-HQ.

explicit descriptive phrases like “a person skateboarding”,
VRS leverages the extensive world knowledge and temporal
reasoning capabilities of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) to transform implicit intent-based expressions
into precise object masklets.
Despite recent advancements in Video Reasoning Segmentation (VRS), such as VISA [39] and VideoLISA [1],
significant challenges still exist. (i) Limited Temporal
Context: Existing methods [1, 39] typically rely on a single segmentation token from an MLLM for keyframe-based
segmentation (cf . Fig. 1 (a)), resulting in limited temporal
context and hindering the effective capture of inter-frame
variations and spatiotemporal features. (ii) Suboptimal
Keyframe Detection: The LLaMA-VID [19] model, used
by VISA for keyframe detection, can produce inaccurate
keyframes, particularly in videos requiring complex temporal reasoning. (iii) Decoupled Segmentation and Propagation: VISA’s reliance on separate, pre-trained models for
keyframe segmentation (SAM [16]) and mask propagation
(XMem [6]) prevents end-to-end training and inference.

1. Introduction

To address the above obstacles, we introduce several
strategies to strengthen the VRS model’s proficiency in perceiving spatial information and interpreting temporal dynamics. Firstly, current limitations arise from insufficient single-token representation capacity, which restricts
the model’s abilities to capture intra-frame spatial features
and maintain inter-frame temporal coherence. We hypothesize that encoding frame-level and temporal-level information into hierarchical tokens separately via MLLM and integrating them could effectively unify spatial details with
temporal dynamics, enhancing perceptual capability. Secondly, the occlusion score introduced by SAM2 [29] inspires us to incorporate the target confidence of each sampled frame as a criterion for keyframe determination. We
thus employ the temporal token in conjunction with SAM2
to generate the occlusion scores, applying temporal information for precise keyframe selection. As shown in Fig. 1
(b), our approach locates the cat more accurately compared
to VISA, boosting inference efficiency and segmentation
performance. Thirdly, leveraging SAM2’s integrated segmentation and propagation capabilities, we efficiently fine-

Reasoning segmentation [10, 17, 27, 30, 38], which aims
to generate segmentation results from complex query texts,
has advanced with multimodal foundation models [18, 21,
29]. However, existing methods [10, 17, 27, 30] focus primarily on image-level segmentation, leaving the more challenging domain of video-level segmentation, which requires
temporal reasoning of object relations and attributes, relatively unexplored. To address this gap, Video Reasoning Segmentation (VRS) [1, 39, 43] has recently emerged
as a promising approach. Unlike Referring Video Object
Segmentation (RVOS) methods [36, 37, 40], which rely on
* Corresponding Author

29183

