This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unified Dense Prediction of Video Diffusion
Lehan Yang1

Lu Qi2
1

Xiangtai Li3

Sheng Li1

Varun Jampani4

Ming-Hsuan Yang2

University of Virginia 2 University of California, Merced
3
Nanyang Technological University 4 Stability AI

Abstract

UDPDiff Framework
Depth Estimation

Entity Segmentation

We present a unified network for simultaneously generating videos and their corresponding entity segmentation
and depth maps from text prompts. We utilize colormap
to represent entity masks and depth maps, tightly integrating dense prediction with RGB video generation. Introducing dense prediction information improves video generation’s consistency and motion smoothness without increasing computational costs. Incorporating learnable task embeddings brings multiple dense prediction tasks into a single model, enhancing flexibility and further boosting performance. We further propose a large-scale dense prediction
video dataset Panda-Dense, addressing the issue that existing datasets do not concurrently contain captions, videos,
segmentation, or depth maps. Comprehensive experiments
demonstrate the high efficiency of our method, surpassing
the state-of-the-art in terms of video quality, consistency,
and motion smoothness.

Video

Dense

Video

Dense

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Visualization results of multi-task UDPDiff model on
image generation and dense prediction. Our model can generate
the video and the corresponding dense estimation. We incorporate
two tasks in one multi-task model, including video entity segmentation and video depth estimation. Both segmentation and depth
map have been encoded into RGB format as a video sequence, using Pixelplanes.

Video generation has witnessed substantial progress
through diffusion models [3, 4, 15, 16, 46, 52, 64] and autoregressive models [22, 47, 48, 54]. The main goal is to
create coherent video clips from text prompts, facilitating
diverse applications like video editing [2, 11] and production [12, 57]. These video generation techniques have a
wide range of use cases, ranging from creative content generation to immersive multimedia experiences.
While existing foundational models can generate coherent video clips, they often face consistency issues, such
as visual misalignment between frames and discrepancies
with text prompts, which hinder some downstream editing
tasks. Several approaches [10, 58, 63] have focused on effective module structures, such as 3D VAEs and MM-DiT
blocks, for various vision tasks. However, these models still
struggle to learn robust representations due to the complexCorrespondence to Lu Qi and Xiangtai Li.

ity of the video generation task. The work of REPA [60]
suggests that diffusion models can achieve faster and improved performance by aligning the representation with
self-supervised methods. Nevertheless, these representations remain implicit without explicit semantic or geometry reasoning. An effective training signal should interpret generated results and integrate seamlessly with diffusion models. This insight motivates incorporating explicit
signals into video diffusion training to enhance consistency,
smoothness, and realism. Inspired by the unified representations in Emu Edit [44] and UniGS [40], we utilize two
dense prediction signals: entity segmentation and depth estimation, both of which can be encoded as a unified representation, as shown in Fig. 1. Entity segmentation ensures
realistic object shapes and adherence to motion laws, while
depth estimation enhances the model’s perception of depth,
form, and positional differences, enabling more structured

28963

