This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BlenderGym: Benchmarking Foundational Model Systems for Graphics Editing
Yunqi Gu

Ian Huang

Jihyeon Je

Stanford University

Stanford University

Stanford University

yrichard@stanford.edu

ianhuang@stanford.edu

jihyeonj@stanford.edu

Guandao Yang

Leonidas Guibas

Stanford University

Stanford University

guandao@stanford.edu

guibas@cs.stanford.edu

Placement
Start
Goal

Geometry Nodes
Start
Goal

Lighting

Start

Initial Script
import bpy
lamp_on_the_cupboard.color = (.8, .7, .45)
lamp_on_shelf.color = (.8, .7, .45)
lamp_at_corner.color = (.9, .6, .7)
...

Goal

Blend Shape

Start

Goal

Material

Start

Goal

Start/Goal Image Render Pairs
VLM System

Edit Proposal

Evaluation

Figure 1. Example task instances of BlenderGym, a 3D graphics benchmark that tasks VLMs with 3D scene reconstruction through code
editing. BlenderGym consists of 245 handcrafted start-goal scene pairs across five key graphics editing tasks: object placement, lighting
adjustment, procedural material editing, blend shape manipulation, and procedural geometry editing.

Abstract
3D graphics editing is crucial in applications like movie
production and game design, yet it remains a timeconsuming process that demands highly specialized domain
expertise. Automating this process is challenging because
graphical editing requires performing a variety of tasks,
each requiring distinct skill sets. Recently, vision-language
models (VLMs) have emerged as a powerful framework for
automating the editing process, but their development and
evaluation are bottlenecked by the lack of a comprehensive benchmark that requires human-level perception and
presents real-world editing complexity. In this work, we

present BlenderGym, the first comprehensive VLM system
benchmark for 3D graphics editing. BlenderGym evaluates
VLM systems through code-based 3D reconstruction tasks.
We evaluate closed- and open-source VLM systems and observe that even the state-of-the-art VLM system struggles
with tasks relatively easy for human Blender users. Enabled
by BlenderGym, we study how inference scaling techniques
impact VLM’s performance on graphics editing tasks. Notably, our findings reveal that the verifier used to guide the
scaling of generation can itself be improved through inference scaling, complementing recent insights on inference
scaling of LLM generation in coding and math tasks. We
further show that inference compute is not uniformly effec-

18574

