This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProHOC: Probabilistic Hierarchical Out-of-Distribution Classification via
Multi-Depth Networks
Erik Wallin1,2 , Fredrik Kahl2 , Lars Hammarstrand2
1
Saab AB, 2 Chalmers University of Technology
{walline,fredrik.kahl,lars.hammarstrand}@chalmers.se

Abstract

Root

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection in deep learning has
traditionally been framed as a binary task, where samples are either classified as belonging to the known classes
or marked as OOD, with little attention given to the semantic relationships between OOD samples and the indistribution (ID) classes. We propose a framework for detecting and classifying OOD samples in a given class hierarchy. Specifically, we aim to predict OOD data to their
correct internal nodes of the class hierarchy, whereas the
known ID classes should be predicted as their corresponding leaf nodes. Our approach leverages the class hierarchy to create a probabilistic model and we implement
this model by using networks trained for ID classification
at multiple hierarchy depths. We conduct experiments on
three datasets with predefined class hierarchies and show
the effectiveness of our method. Our code is available at
https://github.com/walline/prohoc.

Dog

Cat
OOD Dog

ID French
Bulldog

ID Great
Dane

OOD Cat

ID Lynx

ID Leopard

Figure 1. Out-of-distribution detection in class hierarchies. Instead of simply predicting the unseen dog and cat types as OOD,
we aim to classify them as the high-level categories dog and cat.

1. Introduction

ples as their correct nodes in the class hierarchy. Hierarchical models for organizing and classifying objects are
widespread, from foundational examples like Linnaeus’
taxonomy in Systema Naturae [17] to modern structures
like WordNet [21] for semantic relations. While the deep
learning community has shown a growing interest in utilizing class hierarchies [4, 9], their application for OOD detection remains largely unexplored. However, such hierarchies can provide a foundation for enabling more informative OOD predictions. For instance, in the hierarchy shown
in Figure 1, the binary paradigm of OOD detection treats
the unseen cat and dog as simply OOD. In contrast, with
knowledge of the hierarchy, we can classify the unseen dog
as the broader dog category (while recognizing it as distinct
from previously seen breeds).
One of many motivating examples arises in the context
of an autonomous driving system. A sensor model might be
trained to classify objects such as bicycles, electric scooters,
and mopeds (among other classes). However, many system
components treat these objects similarly, grouping them as

Effectively handling out-of-distribution samples is important for deep-learning applications. Data outside the training domain often yield unpredictable results when fed
through deep neural networks [7], making it essential to
account for previously unseen data when deploying these
models in real-world settings to ensure robust performance
and avoid unexpected outcomes. Previous literature [31]
has focused on binary out-of-distribution detection, predicting data either as ID (in-distribution) or OOD (out-ofdistribution), without differentiating between OOD samples
that are semantically close or far from ID. For example, with
ID classes consisting of dog breeds, this binary paradigm
would treat an image of an unknown dog the same as an image of an airplane, overlooking the varying degrees of semantic similarity these samples have to the known classes.
We explore a new setting of OOD detection, utilizing
class hierarchies to predict semantically close OOD sam-

20612

