This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Granularity Class Prototype Topology Distillation for Class-Incremental
Source-Free Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Peihua Deng1,5 *, Jiehua Zhang2 , Xichun Sheng3 , Chenggang Yan1†, Yaoqi Sun1 , Ying Fu4 , Liang Li5†
1
Hangzhou Dianzi University, 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University, 3 Macao Polytechnic University
4
Beijing Institute of Technology, 5 Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
peihuadeng@hdu.edu.cn, jiehua.zhang@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, cgyan@hdu.edu.cn, liang.li@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

Labeled Source Data

Session 3

Train

Train

Train

CIL Model

CIL Model
...

...

...

...

...

Initialize

Train
Source Model

Session 2

CIL Model
...

This paper explores the Class-Incremental Source-Free
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (CI-SFUDA) problem,
where the unlabeled target data come incrementally without
access to labeled source instances. This problem poses two
challenges, the interference of similar source-class knowledge in target-class representation learning and the shocks
of new target knowledge to old ones. To address them, we
propose the Multi-Granularity Class Prototype Topology
Distillation (GROTO) algorithm, which effectively transfers the source knowledge to the class-incremental target
domain. Concretely, we design the multi-granularity class
prototype self-organization module and the prototype topology distillation module. First, we mine the positive classes
by modeling accumulation distributions. Next, we introduce multi-granularity class prototypes to generate reliable
pseudo-labels, and exploit them to promote the positiveclass target feature self-organization. Second, the positiveclass prototypes are leveraged to construct the topological
structures of source and target feature spaces. Then, we
perform the topology distillation to continually mitigate the
shocks of new target knowledge to old ones. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on three public datasets.

Unlabeled Target Data (Incremental Target Classes)
Session 1

Source Data

Test

Test

Test

Test Set 1

Test Set 2

Test Set 3

...

...

old

new

old

new

Figure 1. An illustration of Class-Incremental Source-Free Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (CI-SFUDA) problem, where the
labeled source data contain all classes while unlabeled target data
come incrementally without access to source instances, and the
previously learned target data are unavailable for later adaptations.

1. Introduction

tion (SFUDA) [11, 24, 26, 41].
To facilitate knowledge transfer, most SFUDA works
adapt target distributions with self-training methods, where
pseudo-labels are generated by a non-parameter classifier
based on the similarity between image features and class
prototypes. However, these works are established on the
identical label space between source and target domains. In
fact, the model often trains on a labeled large-scale dataset
and then transfers knowledge to the unlabeled small-scale
target domain [1, 15]. In such a non-identical label space
scenario, traditional SFUDA works may push the unlabeled
target data toward similar source-class clusters outside the
target label space. Although the latest source-free universal domain adaptation (SF-UniDA) works can adapt target
domain distribution in the case of inconsistent label space
through feature decomposition and knowledge distillation
methods [28, 34], they assume the availability of all target
data in advance. In a dynamically changing environment,
all the target data cannot be easily collected at once and always come in streams of different classes [13, 16, 25]. In
such a case, existing SF-UniDA works cannot continually
adapt to class shifts. When new class data arrive, they re-

With the development of deep learning [20, 38, 45, 46],
transfer learning has made great progress. Unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA) [2, 9, 44, 50] relies on labeled
source data to mitigate the domain gap. However, in some
practical applications, it is infeasible to access source data
when training on the target domain, while only the pretrained source model and unlabeled target data are provided, known as source-free unsupervised domain adapta* This work is done during the intern in VIPL group, ICT, CAS.
† Corresponding authors.

30566

