This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

COAP: Memory-Efficient Training with Correlation-Aware Gradient Projection
Jinqi Xiao1,2,∗ , Shen Sang1 , Tiancheng Zhi1 , Jing Liu1 ,
Qing Yan1 , Linjie Luo1 , Bo Yuan2
1

ByteDance Inc., 2 Rutgers University

Abstract

↑ Accuracy 1.2%, 4x speedup
↑ Accuracy 25.7%, 1.3x speedup
LDM

LLaVA-7B

B
A-1

LDM

LL

↓

D

FI

LLaMA-7B

SiT-XL/2 LLaVA-7B

8

6.

LLaVA-7B

AP

/2 ↑ m

-XL
SiT

-1B 6
MA
3.
LLa PPL
↓

aM

DDPM

0
-100

A-7B

LLaMA-1B

52.

DDPM

LLaVA-7B

9

Performance Gain ↑

ControlNet-XL

LLaM

Training large-scale neural networks in vision, and multimodal domains demands substantial memory resources,
primarily due to the storage of optimizer states. While
LoRA, a popular parameter-efficient method, reduces memory usage, it often suffers from suboptimal performance due
to the constraints of low-rank updates. Low-rank gradient
projection methods (e.g., GaLore, Flora) reduce optimizer
memory by projecting gradients and moment estimates into
low-rank spaces via singular value decomposition or random projection. However, they fail to account for interprojection correlation, causing performance degradation,
and their projection strategies often incur high computational costs. In this paper, we present COAP (COrrelationAware Gradient Projection), a memory-efficient method
that minimizes computational overhead while maintaining
training performance. Evaluated across various vision, language, and multimodal tasks, COAP outperforms existing
methods in both training speed and model performance.
For LLaMA-1B, it reduces optimizer memory by 61% with
only 2% additional time cost, achieving the same PPL
as AdamW. With 8-bit quantization, COAP cuts optimizer
memory by 81% and achieves 4x speedup over GaLore for
LLaVA-v1.5-7B fine-tuning, while delivering higher accuracy. https://byteaigc.github.io/coap/

-101

COAP (Ours)

ControlNet-XL
-102

ControlNet-XL

SiT-XL/2
0

101

GaLore
LoRA

SiT-XL/2

Additional Training Time (%) ↓

Flora

102

Figure 1. Comparison between COAP and other low-rank-based
methods. The X-axis shows additional training time, with lower
values being better. The Y-axis shows performance (e.g., FID,
PPL) changes compared to the original optimizer (e.g., Adam [19],
Adafactor [39]), with higher values indicating better performance.

1. Introduction

memory, with optimizer states consuming 40% of the total,
while the model and gradients each take up 20%. Combining engineering and system efforts, e.g., activation checkpointing [6] and LOMO [29] can significantly reduce the
memory usage of activations and gradients. This makes optimizer a critical bottleneck that needs to be addressed. To
tackle this issue, low-rank training has proven effective in
minimizing the memory footprint of optimizer states by performing training within a low-rank subspace [14, 16, 56].
Current low-rank training approaches can generally be
categorized into two main types: parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) and training with low-rank gradients. The
most common method in PEFT is Low-Rank Adaptation
(LoRA) [16], which adds trainable low-rank matrices to
a frozen pre-trained model’s weights, allowing for efficient model adaptation with significantly fewer parameters
than full fine-tuning. While low-rank updates can reduce
memory consumption, extensive empirical evidence [3, 10,
26, 45, 46, 53] shows that the low-rank constraint diminishes the model’s representation capacity, resulting in suboptimal performance compared to full fine-tuning. In addition, its pre-training alternative ReLoRA [23], which periodically updates the model using previously learned low-

Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success
across vision [11, 21, 32, 33, 38], language [1, 13, 43, 44],
and multi-modality domains [12, 24, 25, 41], driven by the
increasing scale of these models. While scaling up model
size significantly contributes to these advancements [18],
it also leads to considerable memory constraints, particularly due to the optimizer states. For instance, training an
LLaVA-7B [24] model with the Adam [19] optimizer at
BF16 numerical format requires at least 63.8GB of GPU
∗ Work done during internship at ByteDance.

30116

