This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Critic-V: VLM Critics Help Catch VLM Errors in Multimodal Reasoning
Di Zhang1,2 *† , Jingdi Lei2∗†, Junxian Li3,2∗† , Xunzhi Wang4,2∗† , Yujie Liu5,2† , Zonglin Yang6,2† , Jiatong Li7,2
Weida Wang8,2† , Suorong Yang9,2† , Jianbo Wu10 , Peng Ye11 , Wanli Ouyang2 , Dongzhan Zhou2‡
1

Fudan University,2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 3 Shanghai Jiaotong University, 4 Nankai University,

5

Shanghai University, 6 Nanyang Technological University 7 Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 8 Tongji University,
9

Nanjing University, 10 University of California, Merced, 11 Chinese University of Hong Kong
zhoudongzhan@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract

timodal applications such as autonomous driving and embodied intelligence. Our data and code are released at
https://github.com/kyrieLei/Critic-V.

Vision-language models (VLMs) have shown remarkable
advancements in multimodal reasoning tasks. However,
they still often generate inaccurate or irrelevant responses
due to issues like hallucinated image understandings or
unrefined reasoning paths. To address these challenges,
we introduce Critic-V, a novel framework inspired by the
Actor-Critic paradigm to boost the reasoning capability
of VLMs. This framework decouples the reasoning process and critic process by integrating two independent components: the Reasoner, which generates reasoning paths
based on visual and textual inputs, and the Critic, which
provides constructive critique to refine these paths. In this
approach, the Reasoner generates reasoning responses according to text prompts, which can evolve iteratively as a
policy based on feedback from the Critic. This interaction
process was theoretically driven by a reinforcement learning framework where the Critic offers natural language critiques instead of scalar rewards, enabling more nuanced
feedback to boost the Reasoner’s capability on complex
reasoning tasks. The Critic model is trained using Direct
Preference Optimization (DPO), leveraging a preference
dataset of critiques ranked by Rule-based Reward (RBR)
to enhance its critic capabilities. Evaluation results show
that the Critic-V framework significantly outperforms existing methods, including GPT-4V, on 5 out of 8 benchmarks,
especially regarding reasoning accuracy and efficiency.
Combining a dynamic text-based policy for the Reasoner
and constructive feedback from the preference-optimized
Critic enables a more reliable and context-sensitive multimodal reasoning process. Our approach provides a promising solution to enhance the reliability of VLMs, improving their performance in real-world reasoning-heavy mul-

1. Introduction

How many
fruits are in
the picture?

Reasoner VLM

There are 4 fruits
in the picture.

There are 4.5 fruits
in the picture.

Initial Response

Refined Response

Image & Question
(𝑦𝑤1 , 𝑦𝑙1 )
(𝑦𝑤2 , 𝑦𝑙2 )
(𝑦𝑤3 , 𝑦𝑙3 )

…

(𝑦𝑤𝑖 , 𝑦𝑙𝑖 )

critiques

DPO
Critic VLM

The answer is
incorrect, you left
out half of the fruit.

Our data

Figure 1. Offline training of critic model and response supervision
i
for VLM. yw
is preferred critique and yli is disfavored critique.

In recent years, Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have
achieved significant advances in multimodal understanding and reasoning [7, 9, 23, 36, 38, 50, 51]. A major
breakthrough has been the alignment of language and visual modalities, facilitated by techniques such as instruction tuning [1, 2, 70]. This alignment allows VLMs to
progress beyond basic image recognition, enabling them
to perform dynamic content reasoning and handle complex question-answering based on visual inputs [12, 59, 64].
These advancements are pivotal for applications in embodied AI [11, 19] and autonomous driving [15, 18]. Despite
this progress, VLMs still encounter challenges, including
a tendency to generate errors or irrelevant outputs that are
unanchored in visual content [25, 27, 42, 53]. They may
also over-rely on internal knowledge, sometimes neglecting
the visual context [71]. Additionally, their sequential rea-

* These authors contributed equally.
† This work was done during his internship at Shanghai Artificial Intel-

ligence Laboratory.
‡ Corresponding author

9050

