This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DifIISR: A Diffusion Model with Gradient Guidance for
Infrared Image Super-Resolution
Xingyuan Li1† , Zirui Wang1† , Yang Zou2 , Zhixin Chen3 ,
Jun Ma1 , Zhiying Jiang4 , Long Ma1 , Jinyuan Liu1 *
1

School of Software Technology & DUT-RU International School of ISE, Dalian University of Technology
2
3

School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University

Graduate School of Information, Production, and Systems, Waseda University

4

College of Information Science and Technology, Dalian Maritime University
xingyuan lxy@163.com atlantis918@hotmail.com

Start

Visual Space

ȔBuildingȕ

ȔBuildingȕ

ȔBuildingȕ

LR Infrared
Image Space
Visual Guidance Visual
blur

noise

Perceptual

Low Contrast

Visual

Visual Optimal

Perceptual Guidance

Vanilla Guidance

Visual Suboptimal

Perceptual
Start

Perceptual Optimal

DAT

ȔPoleȕ
DAT

Missing

Proposed
DifIISR

SinSR

ȔPoleȕ
SinSR

ȔPoleȕ
Missing

Proposed
DifIISR

Perceptual Suboptimal
Start
Missing

Perceptual Space

Figure 1. The left side shows a comparison between existing super-resolution methods and our proposed DifIISR. Our method introduces
additional visual guidance based on the Fourier Transform, as well as foundational model-based perception guidance. The right side
demonstrates that our method outperforms other methods in both detection and segmentation tasks.

Abstract

perceptual priors into the noise during the reverse process.
Speciﬁcally, we introduce an infrared thermal spectrum distribution regulation to preserve visual ﬁdelity, ensuring that
the reconstructed infrared images closely align with highresolution images by matching their frequency components.
Subsequently, we incorporate various visual foundational
models as the perceptual guidance for downstream visual
tasks, infusing generalizable perceptual features beneﬁcial
for detection and segmentation. As a result, our approach
gains superior visual results while attaining State-Of-TheArt downstream task performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/zirui0625/DifIISR

Infrared imaging is essential for autonomous driving and
robotic operations as a supportive modality due to its reliable performance in challenging environments. Despite
its popularity, the limitations of infrared cameras, such
as low spatial resolution and complex degradations, consistently challenge imaging quality and subsequent visual
tasks. Hence, infrared image super-resolution (IISR) has
been developed to address this challenge. While recent developments in diffusion models have greatly advanced this
ﬁeld, current methods to solve it either ignore the unique
modal characteristics of infrared imaging or overlook the
machine perception requirements. To bridge these gaps, we
propose DifIISR, an infrared image super-resolution diffusion model optimized for visual quality and perceptual
performance. Our approach achieves task-based guidance
for diffusion by injecting gradients derived from visual and

1. Introduction
The objective of infrared image super-resolution (IISR) is to
reconstruct a high-resolution (HR) infrared image from its
low-resolution (LR) counterpart [51]. The consistent performance of infrared imaging under challenging conditions
allows its application to span various ﬁelds [31, 44, 45],

† Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.

7534

