This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Spiking Self-Attention Mechanism: Implementing α-XNOR
Similarity Calculation in Spiking Transformers
Yichen Xiao1, ‡
Shuai Wang1, ‡
Dehao Zhang1
Wenjie Wei1
2
1
1
Yimeng Shan
Xiaoli Liu
Yulin Jiang
Malu Zhang1,*
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 2 Liaoning Technical University
{xiaoyichen, wangshuai718, zhangdh}@std.uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

(a) Spiking
Self-Attention
𝐗

Transformers significantly raise the performance limits
across various tasks, spurring research into integrating
them into spiking neural networks. However, a notable
performance gap remains between existing spiking Transformers and their artificial neural network counterparts.
Here, we first analyze the cause of this gap and attribute
it to the dot product’s ineffectiveness in measuring similarity between spiking queries and keys, due to numerous nonspiking events. To address this, we propose a novel α-XNOR
similarity measure tailored for spike trains. It redefines the
correlation between non-spike pairs as a specific value α,
effectively overcoming the limitations of dot-product similarity. Furthermore, considering the sparse nature of spike
trains where spikes carry more information than non-spikes,
the α-XNOR similarity correspondingly highlights the distinct importance of spikes over non-spikes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that α-XNOR similarity significantly
improves performance across different spiking Transformer
architectures on various static and neuromorphic datasets,
further revealing the potential of spiking Transformers.

Linear & BN

𝐐

𝐊

𝐕

maluzhang@uestc.edu.cn

(b) Dot-product Similarity Calculation

𝑞"

CM: 3

𝑘"

SS: 3

𝑞!

CM: 6

𝑘!

SS: 2

𝑞#

CM: 8

𝑘#
weighted
values

SS: 0
Spike
Non-spike

Matching
Values

CM: Count of Matches
SS: Similarity Score

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of the Spiking Self-Attention (SSA)
mechanism. (b) Similarity calculation in SSA, highlighting dotproduct limitations with three spike train pairs: (1) q 1 and k1 have
3 matching values and a consistent score of 3; (2) q 2 and k2 have
6 matching values but only score 2; and (3) identical all-zero train
q 3 and k3 yield a clearly unreasonable score of 0.

Spiking neurons fire only when activated and remain silent
in others. This event-driven mechanism [5] greatly enhances energy efficiency by promoting sparse synaptic operations and avoiding multiply-accumulate (MAC) computations [7, 34, 49]. Recently, numerous researchers focus
on developing spiking Transformer models, such as Spikformer [54], Spike-driven Transformers [44, 46], and SpikingResformer [36]. These approaches enhance SNNs’ performance limits in various aspects. However, a substantial
performance gap remains compared to their ANNs’ counterparts [40]. Through theoretical analysis, we attribute this
gap to the unsuitability of dot-product similarity for the binary nature of spike trains in existing spiking Transformers.
In ANNs, self-attention calculates token similarities by
taking the dot product of Queries (Q) and Keys (K), assigning similarity scores to Values (V) to model human selective
attention [12]. However, the sparse, event-driven nature of
SNNs results in numerous non-spikes (represented as 0) and
a limited number of spikes (represented as 1) in spiking Q

1. Introduction
Transformer in Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) [10, 11,
31, 38] offers an effective method for processing long sequences in parallel, significantly improving performance in
various tasks [6, 10, 16, 23, 37]. However, its reliance on
large-scale parameters [31] and the complexity of its selfattention mechanism [52] result in high energy consumption and hardware costs [18, 41]. Consequently, developing
energy-efficient and high-performance Transformer [3, 24]
remains a prominent research focus.
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) [17, 26, 32, 33], as
the third generation of neural networks, gain significant
attention due to their superior energy efficiency [33, 42].
* Corresponding author, ‡ Equal contribution.

5444

