This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LEDiff: Latent Exposure Diffusion for HDR Generation
Chao Wang1

Zhihao Xia2

Thomas Leimkühler1
1
MPI Informatik

Karol Myszkowski1
2
Adobe

Xuaner Zhang2

{chaowang, karol, thomas.leimkuehler}@mpi-inf.mpg.de {cezhangxer, zhihao.zach.xia}@gmail.com

(a) “A wine glass on a wooden surface, illuminated by a warm light, creating
re!ections and shadows” generated from Stable Di"usion.

(b) a real photo with over-exposure

(c) a real photo with under-exposure

(d) LEDi" output

(e) LEDi" output

(#) LEDi" output

Figure 1. LEDiff enables high dynamic range (HDR) content generation with photorealistic details in both over- and under-exposed regions
by performing exposure fusion in latent space, making it applicable to generated content and real photos mapped to the latent space. While
existing generative models (e.g., Stable Diffusion) are restricted to low dynamic range (a) and standard cameras struggle to capture full
scene dynamic range, causing clipping in highlights (b) and shadows (c), LEDiff restores both detail and dynamic range (d)–(f), as shown
in scanline plots. All HDR images are tone-mapped for visualization and are best viewed on an HDR display. See the supplemental for
more details.

Abstract

LDR-to-HDR converter, expanding the dynamic range of
existing low-dynamic range images. Our approach uses a
small HDR dataset to enable a pretrained diffusion model
to recover detail and dynamic range in clipped highlights
and shadows. LEDiff brings HDR capabilities to existing
generative models and converts any LDR image to HDR,
creating photorealistic HDR outputs for image generation,
image-based lighting (HDR environment map generation),
and photographic effects such as depth of field simulation,
where linear HDR data is essential for realistic quality.

While consumer displays increasingly support more than
10 stops of dynamic range, most image assets — such
as internet photographs and generative AI content — remain limited to 8-bit low dynamic range (LDR), constraining their utility across high dynamic range (HDR) applications. Currently, no generative model can produce high-bit,
high-dynamic range content in a generalizable way. Existing LDR-to-HDR conversion methods often struggle to
produce photorealistic details and physically-plausible dynamic range in the clipped areas. We introduce LEDiff, a
method that enables a generative model with HDR content
generation through latent space fusion inspired by imagespace exposure fusion techniques. It also functions as an

1. Introduction
Generative models today can produce highly realistic and
creative visual content, yet they remain largely confined

453

