This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Number it: Temporal Grounding Videos like Flipping Manga
Yongliang Wu1,2,4 *†
Wenbo Zhu5

Xinting Hu3 *
Fengyun Rao4
1

2

Yuyang Sun1,2 Yizhou Zhou4‡
Bernt Schiele3 Xu Yang1,2§

Southeast University

Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and

Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
4

5

WeChat Vision, Tencent Inc.

University of California, Berkeley

yongliang0223@gmail.com xuyang palm@seu.edu.cn

when does the woman begin to eat?
She begins to eat at

1

?

I don’t know how to describe
timestamp information …

…

2

…

During which frames can we see the woman eating?

when does the woman begin to eat?
She begins to eat at figure 3!

3

4

1

2

The figures on the manga are
annotated with numbers …

3

4

5

…

12

…

During which frames can we see the woman eating?

Sorry, I don’t know the timestamp information.
(a)

I can see the frame numbers. From 3 to 12!
(b)

Figure 1. Effectiveness of Adding Frame Numbers for Temporal Grounding: (a) Without numbered images or frames, both humans
and Vid-LLMs struggle to locate specific timestamps accurately. (b) Once numbered, grounding temporal cues becomes as intuitive as
flipping manga, where timestamps are accessible at a glance.

Abstract
Video Large Language Models (Vid-LLMs) have made remarkable advancements in comprehending video content
for QA dialogue. However, they struggle to extend this
visual understanding to tasks requiring precise temporal
localization, known as Video Temporal Grounding (VTG).
To address this, we introduce Number-Prompt (NumPro),
a novel method that empowers Vid-LLMs to bridge visual comprehension with temporal grounding by adding
unique numerical identifiers to each video frame. Treating
a video as a sequence of numbered frame images, NumPro
transforms VTG into an intuitive process: flipping through
manga panels in sequence. This allows Vid-LLMs to “read”
event timelines, accurately linking visual content with cor-

responding temporal information. Our experiments demonstrate that NumPro significantly boosts VTG performance
of top-tier Vid-LLMs without additional computational cost.
Furthermore, fine-tuning on a NumPro-enhanced dataset
defines a new state-of-the-art for VTG, surpassing previous
top-performing methods by up to 6.9% in mIoU for moment
retrieval and 8.5% in mAP for highlight detection. The code
is available at https://github.com/yongliangwu/NumPro.

1. Introduction

‡ Project Leader.
§ Corresponding Author.
* Equal Contribution.
† Work done during an internship at WeChat Vision, Tencent Inc.

Imagine you are watching a cooking video, and trying to
locate the exact moment when the chef stirs in the spices.
While recognizing such actions is feasible, translating that
visual information into precise timing, i.e., a specific second or frame number, is surprisingly difficult. This chal-

13754

