This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Memories of Forgotten Concepts
Matan Rusanovsky1 *

Shimon Malnick1 *
1

Amir Jevnisek1 *
2

Tel Aviv University

Ohad Fried2

Shai Avidan1

Reichman University

https://matanr.github.io/Memories_of_Forgotten_Concepts

Abstract

introduced with the text describing the erased concept. But,
does this mean the concept is erased? Can the model still
generate images of the erased concept in some other way?
In our work, forgetting an image means the ablated
model can no longer generate it (e.g., a specific church image) with a reasonable likelihood. A more interesting extension is forgetting a concept, which means that an ablated
model can no longer produce images that are categorized
as belonging to the ablated concept (say, the model can no
longer produce any image containing any church) with a
reasonable likelihood. Here we take memory to mean that
the model can generate an image or a concept, regardless of
whether that image was part of the training process, or part
of the generalization capabilities of the model.
To date, the analysis of ablated models is mainly done
on the output image, as shown in Fig. 1(left). Given an ablated text (i.e., “Starry Night”) and a random seed, a model
devoid of Van Gogh’s style produces an image that is not
in the style of Van Gogh. Analysis done on this image will
confirm that this is indeed the case. In contrast, we test the
following hypothesis:
Hypothesis: An ablated model should not have a high
likelihood seed vector that can be used to generate a highquality ablated image.
This paper deals with ways to analyze this hypothesis. In
our analysis, we assume that both the ablated text prompt
and the target ablated image are given. We then measure
both the likelihood, in latent space, of the corresponding
seed, and the quality of the generated image (Fig. 1(right)).
For an effectively erased model, it should not be possible to
identify a latent seed that is both likely and yields a highquality ablated image. However, our analysis shows that
the opposite holds true. Models that were ablated using
state-of-the-art methods can still generate high-quality ablated images from high-likelihood seeds (Fig. 5).
Technically, to do that, we use diffusion inversion to find
a latent seed vector that corresponds to the ablated image.
We further analyze the identified seed vectors and find that
they are as likely, in latent space, as seeds of normal (i.e.,
non-ablated) images. This suggests that ablated models do

Diffusion models dominate the space of text-to-image generation, yet they may produce undesirable outputs, including explicit content or private data. To mitigate this, concept ablation techniques have been explored to limit the
generation of certain concepts. In this paper, we reveal
that the erased concept information persists in the model
and that erased concept images can be generated using the
right latent. Utilizing inversion methods, we show that there
exist latent seeds capable of generating high quality images
of erased concepts. Moreover, we show that these latents
have likelihoods that overlap with those of images outside
the erased concept. We extend this to demonstrate that for
every image from the erased concept set, we can generate
many seeds that generate the erased concept. Given the
vast space of latents capable of generating ablated concept
images, our results suggest that fully erasing concept information may be intractable, highlighting possible vulnerabilities in current concept ablation techniques.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have emerged as a prominent tool for textto-image tasks, extending their importance beyond the research community. Researchers have developed methods
to utilize diffusion models for text-guided image editing,
increasing their popularity even further. However, it has
been demonstrated [38] that these models can generate undesirable content, such as violent and explicit material. This
highlights the importance of ablating (i.e., forget or erase)
specific concepts (e.g., objects, styles).
A plethora of studies have focused on erasing concepts
from diffusion models. Erased concepts are described
by text, and the weights of the model are steered away
from generating images that are associated with these texts.
Then, the ablated model is expected to generate images that
do not belong to the population of the erased concept, when
* Equal contribution.

2966

