This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AI-Face: A Million-Scale Demographically Annotated AI-Generated Face Dataset
and Fairness Benchmark
Li Lin1 , Santosh1 , Mingyang Wu1 , Xin Wang2 , Shu Hu1†
Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA {lin1785, santosh2, wu2415, hu968}@purdue.edu
2
University at Albany, State University of New York, New York, USA xwang56@albany.edu

1

Abstract

1 3 5

8

AI-Face(Ours)

37

GenData

DF,
GAN

A-DFDC

DF

Generation Category

AI-generated faces have enriched human life, such as entertainment, education, and art. However, they also pose
misuse risks. Therefore, detecting AI-generated faces becomes crucial, yet current detectors show biased performance across different demographic groups. Mitigating
biases can be done by designing algorithmic fairness methods, which usually require demographically annotated face
datasets for model training. However, no existing dataset
encompasses both demographic attributes and diverse generative methods simultaneously, which hinders the development of fair detectors for AI-generated faces. In this work,
we introduce the AI-Face dataset, the first million-scale demographically annotated AI-generated face image dataset,
including real faces, faces from deepfake videos, and faces
generated by Generative Adversarial Networks and Diffusion Models. Based on this dataset, we conduct the first
comprehensive fairness benchmark to assess various AI face
detectors and provide valuable insights and findings to promote the future fair design of AI face detectors. Our AI-Face
dataset and benchmark code are publicly available at https:
//github.com/Purdue-M2/AI-Face-FairnessBench.

GAN,
DM

DF,
GAN,DM

# Generation Method

DF-Platter
DeepPhy

A-Celeb-DF-v2
DF-1.0
Gender

A-FF++
A-DFD
A-DF-1.0
Gender,
Gender, Age,
Age
Skin Tone
Demographic Annotation

Figure 1. Comparison between AI-Face and other datasets in terms
of demographic annotation, generation category, and the number
of generation methods. ‘DF’, ‘GAN’, and ‘DM’ stand for Deepfake
Videos, Generative Adversarial Networks, and Diffusion Models.

encourage African Americans to vote Republican are spreading online [11]. This could distort public opinion and erode
people’s trust in media [12, 13], necessitating the detection
of AI-generated faces for their ethical use.
However, one major issue existing in current AI face
detectors [24–27] is biased detection (i.e., unfair detection
performance among demographic groups [19, 28–30]). Mitigating biases can be done by designing algorithmic fairness
methods, but they usually require demographically annotated
face datasets for model training. For example, works like
[29, 30] have made efforts to enhance fairness in the detection based on A-FF++ [19] and A-DFD [19]. However, both
datasets are limited to containing only faces from deepfake
videos, which could cause the trained models not to be applicable for fairly detecting faces generated by GANs and DMs.
While some datasets (e.g., GenData [17], DF40 [31]) include
GAN and DM faces, they either lack demographic annotations or provide only limited demographic attributes. Most
importantly, no existing dataset offers sufficient diversity in
generation methods while also providing demographic labels.
A comparison of existing datasets is shown in Fig. 1. These
limitations of existing datasets hamper the development of
fair technologies for detecting AI-generated faces.

1. Introduction
AI-generated faces are created using sophisticated AI technologies that are visually difficult to discern from real
ones [1]. They can be summarized into three categories:
deepfake videos [2] created by typically using Variational
Autoencoders (VAEs) [3, 4], faces generated from Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [5–8], and Diffusion
Models (DMs) [9]. These technologies have significantly
advanced the realism and controllability of synthetic facial
representations. Generated faces can enrich media and increase creativity [10]. However, they also carry significant
risks of misuse. For example, during the 2024 United States
presidential election, fake face images of Donald Trump surrounded by groups of black people smiling and laughing to
† Corresponding author

3503

