This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UWAV: Uncertainty-weighted Weakly-supervised Audio-Visual Video Parsing
Yung-Hsuan Lai1,† , Janek Ebbers3 , Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,2 , François Germain3 ,
Michael Jeffrey Jones3 , Moitreya Chatterjee3,‡ ,
1

Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering, National Taiwan University
3
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs (MERL)
†

2

NVIDIA, Taiwan

r10942097@ntu.edu.tw ‡ metro.smiles@gmail.com

Abstract
Audio-Visual Video Parsing (AVVP) entails the challenging task of localizing both uni-modal events (i.e., those occurring exclusively in either the visual or acoustic modality of a video) and multi-modal events (i.e., those occurring in both modalities concurrently). Moreover, the prohibitive cost of annotating training data with the class labels of all these events, along with their start and end
times, imposes constraints on the scalability of AVVP techniques unless they can be trained in a weakly-supervised
setting, where only modality-agnostic, video-level labels
are available in the training data. To this end, recently proposed approaches seek to generate segment-level pseudolabels to better guide model training. However, the absence of inter-segment dependencies when generating these
pseudo-labels and the general bias towards predicting labels that are absent in a segment limit their performance.
This work proposes a novel approach towards overcoming these weaknesses called Uncertainty-weighted Weaklysupervised Audio-visual Video Parsing (UWAV). Additionally, our innovative approach factors in the uncertainty associated with these estimated pseudo-labels and incorporates a feature mixup based training regularization for improved training. Empirical results show that UWAV outperforms state-of-the-art methods for the AVVP task on multiple metrics, across two different datasets, attesting to its
effectiveness and generalizability. 1

1. Introduction
Events that occur in the real world, often leave their imprint
on the acoustic and visual modalities. Humans rely heavily
on the synergy between their senses of sight and hearing to
interpret such events. Audio-visual learning, which seeks
to equip machines with a similar synergy, has emerged as
one of the most important research areas within the multi1 Code is available at: https://github.com/Franklin905/
UWAV.

Time

...

...

Visual
Classes

Audio
Classes

: Cello

: Acoustic guitar

: Violin

Training (Video-level Labels)
Acoustic guitar, Cello, Violin

Figure 1. A weakly-supervised AVVP task example. Events,
considered in this task, might be unimodal or multimodal. Even
multimodal events, may not be temporally aligned in the audio
and visual modalities, e.g. the cello might only be visible in the
first few seconds but might produce music, throughout the video.

modal machine learning community. It aims to leverage
both these senses (modalities) jointly, to enhance machine
perception and understanding of real-world events. Various
audio-visual learning tasks have been studied towards this
end, including audio-visual segmentation [19, 49], sound
source localization [24, 32], audio-visual event localization [29, 34], and audio-visual sound separation [3, 7, 43].
However, many of these tasks assume that audio and visual
streams would always be temporally aligned. This assumption often fails in real-world scenarios, where the sonic and
visual imprints of events may not perfectly overlap. For
instance, one might hear an emergency siren approaching
from a distance before it appears in the field of view.
In this work, in order to better understand the events
occurring in a video, we explore the task of Audio-Visual
Video Parsing (AVVP) [35]. Its goal is to recognize and localize all audio, visual, and audio-visual events occurring in
the video. See Figure 1 for an example of this task. The task
setup is to perform this prediction for every one-second segment of a video. This task poses two principal challenges,

13561

