This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GaPT-DAR: Category-level Garments Pose Tracking via Integrated 2D
Deformation and 3D Reconstruction
Li Zhang 1,2,3 ,

Mingliang Xu* 1 , Jianan Wang 3 , Qiaojun Yu 4 , Lixin Yang 4 ,
Yonglu Li 4 , Cewu Lu 4 , Rujing Wang 2†, Liu Liu 5†
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Hefei Institute of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Astribot, Shenzhen, China. 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
5
Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
zanly20@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Figure 1. Category-level Garments Pose Tracking framework with integrated 2D Deformation And 3D Reconstruction (GaPT-DAR).
Given the partial point clouds from adjacent frames and pose prediction result from the previous frame, we propose a garment pose
tracking pipeline consisting of 3D-2D projection, 2D deformation learning, and 2D-3D reconstruction steps. The output is the tracked pose
(complete point cloud) of garments in task space.

Abstract
Garments are common in daily life and are important for
embodied intelligence community. Current category-level
garments pose tracking works focus on predicting pointwise canonical correspondence and learning a shape deformation in point cloud sequences. In this paper, motivated by the 2D warping space and shape prior, we propose GaPT-DAR, a novel category-level Garments Pose
Tracking framework with integrated 2D Deformation And
3D Reconstruction function, which fully utilize 3D-2D projection and 2D-3D reconstruction to transform the 3D
point-wise learning into 2D warping deformation learning. Specifically, GaPT-DAR firstly builds a Voting-based
Project module that learns the optimal 3D-2D projection
plane for maintaining the maximum orthogonal entropy

during point projection. Next, a Garments Deformation
module is designed in 2D space to explicitly model the garments warping procedure with deformation parameters. Finally, we build a Depth Reconstruction module to recover
the 2D images into 3D warp field. We provide extensive
experiments on VR-Folding dataset to evaluate our GaPTDAR and the results show obvious improvements on most
of the metrics compared to state-of-the-arts (i.e. GarmentNets [8] and GarmentTracking [32]). More details are
available at https://sites.google.com/view/
gapt-dar.

1. Introduction

* Li Zhang and Mingliang Xu contribute equally to this work. This work
was done when Li Zhang was an intern at Astribot.
† Joint Corresponding Authors.

Garments, as a type of non-rigid object, are pervasive
in daily life. Visual pose tracking for garments is crucial for the embodied intelligence community and beneficial for many downstream tasks such as interactive perception [36], object manipulation [31], imitation learning [38],

22638

