This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Multimodal Survival Prediction with Conditional Latent Differentiation
Variational AutoEncoder
Junjie Zhou, Jiao Tang, Yingli Zuo, Peng Wan, Daoqiang Zhang, Wei Shao*
The College of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
The Key Laboratory of Brain-Machine Intelligence Technology, Ministry of Education
junjiezhou@nuaa.edu.cn, dqzhang@nuaa.edu.cn, shaowei20022005@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
The integrative analysis of histopathological images and
genomic data has received increasing attention for survival
prediction of human cancers. However, the existing studies
always hold the assumption that full modalities are available. As a matter of fact, the cost for collecting genomic
data is high, which sometimes makes genomic data unavailable in testing samples. A common way of tackling
such incompleteness is to generate the genomic representations from the pathology images. Nevertheless, such strategy still faces the following two challenges: (1) The gigapixel whole slide images (WSIs) are huge and thus hard
for representation. (2) It is difﬁcult to generate the genomic
embeddings with diverse function categories in a uniﬁed
generative framework. To address the above challenges,
we propose a Conditional Latent Differentiation Variational
AutoEncoder (LD-CVAE) for robust multimodal survival
prediction, even with missing genomic data. Speciﬁcally,
a Variational Information Bottleneck Transformer (VIBTrans) module is proposed to learn compressed pathological representations from the gigapixel WSIs. To generate
different functional genomic features, we develop a novel
Latent Differentiation Variational AutoEncoder (LD-VAE)
to learn the genomic and function-speciﬁc posteriors for the
genomic embeddings with diverse functions. Finally, we use
the product-of-experts technique to integrate the genomic
posterior and image posterior for the joint latent distribution estimation in LD-CVAE. We test the effectiveness of our
method on ﬁve different cancer datasets, and the experimental results demonstrate its superiority in both complete and
missing modality scenarios. The code is released † .

1. Introduction
Survival analysis aims at estimating the survival time for
an individual or a group of patients, which is a valid solu* Corresponding author
† https://github.com/JJ-ZHOU-Code/RobustMultiModel

澵澷濈澻澵澷濈
澻濈澻澵澷澵澷
濈濈澻澵澷澻澵
澷濈澻澵澷濈濈

Inference

WSIs
澵澷濈澻澵澷濈
澻濈澻澵澷澵澷
濈濈澻澵澷澻澵
澷濈澻澵澷濈濈

WSIs

Training

Model

Genomics

Only Complete Data

Survival Prediction

(a) Traditional Multimodal Survival Prediction Method

Genomics

Complete Data
Inference

Missing

LD-CVAE

WSIs
Model

Genomics

Complete / Missing Data

Survival Prediction

(b) Our Robust Multimodal Survival Prediction Method

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) traditional and (b) our proposed multimodal survival prediction methods, where the traditional methods require the complete multi-modal data while our
method is still effective if the genomic data is missing.

tion for cancer treatment and precision medicine [13, 29].
So far, diverse biomarkers are veriﬁed to be sensitive to the
survival prediction of human cancers, and these biomarkers can be broadly classiﬁed into two categories, i.e., image biomarkers and genomic biomarkers [1, 33]. Among
all image biomarkers, the histopathological images provide
rich visual information for the assessment of histological
features, cellular organization, and other phenotypic characteristics that are generally considered as the golden standard for cancer prognosis [21, 24]. Besides histopathological images, genomic data also offers insights into the
underlying molecular mechanisms of cancer [9, 44], and
thus many researchers leverage patients’ molecular proﬁles
such as genetic alterations and gene expression signatures
to drive prognostic practice [28, 35].
In many clinical and research studies, it is common to
acquire multiple biomarkers for a more accurate assessment
of disease status and progression stages [10]. Recently, researches also explore to combine both pathological images
and genomic markers for the prognosis of cancer [4–6]. For
instance, the authors in [5, 46] have presented different integrative survival prediction models based on the co-attention
transformer framework. Zuo et al. [48] explore the interactions among different tumor micro-environment components and propose an explainable multi-modal fusion frame-

10384

