This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Depth Estimation for Unstable Stereo Camera Systems on AR Glasses
Yongfan Liu
Hyoukjun Kwon
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA, USA
{yongfal, hyoukjun.kwon}@uci.edu

Abstract

deployed [31] rather than mono depth estimation due to its
superior accuracy and the ease of deploying stereo cameras
on the each side of AR glasses frames. Due to the realtime
nature of AR applications [18], one key objective for depth
estimation models for AR is low latency, in addition to good
performance. However, since AR glasses are in a compute
resource-constrained wearable form factor, enabling desired
latency (less than 100 ms on device) is not trivial.

Stereo depth estimation is a fundamental component in
augmented reality (AR), which requires low latency for realtime processing. However, preprocessing such as rectification and non-ML computations such as cost volume require
significant amount of latency exceeding that of an ML model
itself, which hinders the real-time processing required by
AR. Therefore, we develop alternative approaches to the
rectification and cost volume that consider ML acceleration
(GPU and NPUs) in recent hardware. For pre-processing,
we eliminate it by introducing homography matrix prediction network with a rectification positional encoding (RPE),
which delivers both low latency and robustness to unrectified images. For cost volume, we replace it with a grouppointwise convolution-based operator and approximation
of cosine similarity based on layernorm and dot product.
Based on our approaches, we develop MultiHeadDepth
(replacing cost volume) and HomoDepth (MultiHeadDepth
+ removing pre-processing) models. MultiHeadDepth provides 11.8-30.3% improvements in accuracy and 22.925.2% reduction in latency compared to a state-of-the-art
depth estimation model for AR glasses from industry. HomoDepth, which can directly process unrectified images, reduces the end-to-end latency by 44.5%. We also introduce
a multi-task learning method to handle misaligned stereo
inputs on HomoDepth, which reduces the AbsRel error by
10.0-24.3%. The overall results demonstrate the efficacy
of our approaches, which not only reduce the inference latency but also improve the model performance. Our code
is available at https://github.com/UCI- ISALab/MultiHeadDepth-HomoDepth

One challenge towards the latency optimization originates from the preprocessing, which is a indispensable step
for achieving high model performance in practical applications. Examples include camera calibration and rectification using camera intrinsic and extrinsic. In addition to
preprocessing, traditional algorithms embedded into depth
estimation models (e.g, cost volume [8, 31]) also imposes
another challenge to the latency optimization. We present
their significance in latency in Fig. 1, which shows that preprocessing accounts for 30.2% and cost volume accounts
for 29.3% of the total latency of a state-of-the-art (SOTA)
model, A RGOS [31]. Note that preprocessing latency can be
more dominant when camera intrinsic and extrinsic parameters are unknown, which results in 200 to 2000 ms latency to
solve for the extrinsic parameters and subsequently process
the images [17, 34]. This aggravates the long preprocessing
latency challenge further.
Therefore, to reduce depth estimation model latency for
AR glasses, we propose new methodologies that significantly reduce the preprocessing (online stereo rectification
not required) and cost volume latency, as shown in Fig. 1.
Our approach for the cost volume is (1) to replace traditional algorithm with group-pointwise convolutions, which
are highly optimized in hardware and compilers and (2)
adopt an efficient approximation of cosine similarity using layernorm and dot product. For preprocessing (stereo
matching), we adopt homography matrix-based approximation and estimate homography using a head attached to the
depth estimation model, which allows to utilize homography matrix-based approximation with dynamically varying
extrinsic parameters in unstable AR glasses platform or no
access to camera extrinsic parameters.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation serves as a foundational component in
augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR) [18] with many
downstream algorithms, which include novel-view rendering [16, 31], occlusion reasoning [19], world locking for AR
object placement [20], and determining the scale of AR objects [3]. In the AR domain, stereo depth estimation is often

6252

