This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Quantization without Tears
Minghao Fu Hao Yu Jie Shao Junjie Zhou Ke Zhu Jianxin Wu*
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{fumh, yuh, shaoj, zhoujj, zhuk}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@gmail.com

Abstract

are also an urgent need in real-world deployments and applications.
Among various research efforts in this direction, network quantization [28] is arguably the most practical one.
Different from unstructured pruning [16], it is well supported by existing hardware. Compared to structured pruning [19, 22], its compression ratio is higher and its loss is
relatively smaller. For example, the INT8 quantization of
both FP32 weights and activations leads to roughly 4× reduction in network size and 4× speedup with almost zero
accuracy loss in many applications [26], which far exceeds
structured pruning. Existing methods are often categorized
as Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) [27, 31, 32, 37, 46, 52]
or Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) [13, 21, 25, 33, 54],
where the difference is whether training is required (‘no’ for
PTQ and ‘yes’ for QAT).
Quantization, however, is not as perfect as it seems to be.
There are also obvious drawbacks and pitfalls in existing
quantization methods.
• The speed-accuracy dilemma: PTQ can be thousands
of times faster than QAT during the quantization process,
but QAT may well be 10 percentage points higher than
PTQ in accuracy during inference.
• Complexity: Quantization methods are often delicate and
tricky. They often have tons of hyperparameters to tune
for each specific task, and even one improperly set hyperparameter value may ruin the quantized model.
• Missing generality: Relevant to their complexities, an
existing method is often geared toward a specific model
and/or task. Different models/tasks require different
quantization methods.
Given the status quo, at this moment it does not seem unreasonable to treat the act of network quantization as an art
rather than an established engineering tool.
In this paper, we propose a Quantization without Tears
(QwT) method to address these drawbacks, which achieves
quantization speed, accuracy, simplicity and generality simultaneously.
The key to achieve these goals simultaneously is to
slightly change the quantization paradigm. Suppose a net-

Deep neural networks, while achieving remarkable success across diverse tasks, demand significant resources, including computation, GPU memory, bandwidth, storage,
and energy. Network quantization, as a standard compression and acceleration technique, reduces storage costs
and enables potential inference acceleration by discretizing network weights and activations into a finite set of
integer values. However, current quantization methods
are often complex and sensitive, requiring extensive taskspecific hyperparameters, where even a single misconfiguration can impair model performance, limiting generality
across different models and tasks. In this paper, we propose Quantization without Tears (QwT), a method that simultaneously achieves quantization speed, accuracy, simplicity, and generality. The key insight of QwT is to incorporate a lightweight additional structure into the quantized
network to mitigate information loss during quantization.
This structure consists solely of a small set of linear layers, keeping the method simple and efficient. More importantly, it provides a closed-form solution, allowing us to improve accuracy effortlessly under 2 minutes. Extensive experiments across various vision, language, and multimodal
tasks demonstrate that QwT is both highly effective and versatile. In fact, our approach offers a robust solution for network quantization that combines simplicity, accuracy, and
adaptability, which provides new insights for the design of
novel quantization paradigms.

1. Introduction
Along with their extraordinary breakthroughs in various vision [18], language [10] and multimodal [41] tasks, deep
neural networks [11, 17] also exhibit ferocious greed for
various resources: compute, GPU memory, bandwidth,
storage, energy, etc. Hence, compressing and accelerating
deep nets have not only attracted interests in academia, but
* J. Wu is the corresponding author.

4462

