This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeSplat: Decomposed Gaussian Splatting for Distractor-Free Rendering
Yihao Wang1,∗ , Marcus Klasson2 , Matias Turkulainen2 , Shuzhe Wang2 , Juho Kannala2,3 , Arno Solin2
1
2
3
Technical University of Munich
Aalto University
University of Oulu
johanna.wang@tum.de

{firstname.lastname}@aalto.fi

Distractor
Gaussians
Moving objects in the
views easily break
multi-view consistency

Figure 1. DeSplat: Gaussian Splatting struggles with floaters and artifacts when image sequences violate photometric consistency
assumptions. Unlike existing distractor-free methods which rely on external semantic features, we propose a fully splatting-based solution
grounded in photometric consistency that decomposes 3DGS scenes into static components and per-view distractors.

1. Introduction

Abstract

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS, [9]) is a popular framework
for novel view synthesis for its fast rendering and training
speeds with high-quality results. However, learning accurate
scene reconstructions with 3DGS from images of non-static
scenes containing distractors [13, 26, 29]—e.g., moving people, vegetation, or transient effects [18] remains challenging.
Vanilla 3DGS is optimized to satisfy a static volumetric rendering constraint even though reference images can contain
multi-view inconsistent distractors. This results in spurious
floaters being generated close to camera views or as thin
view-specific effects appearing in only a few views. This
lack of robustness limits applying 3DGS to unstructured image collections, e.g. crowd-sourced images [32], and casually
captured videos [23, 38].
Prior work in 3DGS and Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs,
[19]) for distractor-free rendering aims to detect which pixels in reference images belong to distractors and to reduce
their influence during optimization. RobustNeRF [29] computes robust masks that detect where distractors are present

Gaussian splatting enables fast novel view synthesis in static
3D environments. However, reconstructing real-world environments remains challenging as distractors or occluders
break the multi-view consistency assumption required for accurate 3D reconstruction. Most existing methods rely on external semantic information from pre-trained models, introducing additional computational overhead as pre-processing
steps or during optimization. In this work, we propose a
novel method, DeSplat, that directly separates distractors
and static scene elements purely based on volume rendering of Gaussian primitives. We initialize Gaussians within
each camera view for reconstructing the view-specific distractors to separately model the static 3D scene and distractors in the alpha compositing stages. DeSplat yields
an explicit scene separation of static elements and distractors, achieving comparable results to prior distractor-free
approaches without sacrificing rendering speed. We demonstrate DeSplat’s effectiveness on three benchmark data sets
for distractor-free novel view synthesis. See the project website at https://aaltoml.github.io/desplat/.

∗ Work partially done during internship at Aalto University.

722

