This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Visual State Space Model for Image Deblurring
Lingshun Kong1 , Jiangxin Dong1 , Jinhui Tang1 , Ming-Hsuan Yang2,3 , Jinshan Pan1,†
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
University of California, Merced 3 Google DeepMind

Abstract

of the image contents and cannot explore non-local information that is beneficial for deblurring.

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and Vision Transformers (ViTs) have achieved excellent performance in image restoration. While ViTs generally outperform CNNs by
effectively capturing long-range dependencies and inputspecific characteristics, their computational complexity increases quadratically with image resolution. This limitation hampers their practical application in high-resolution
image restoration. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective visual state space model (EVSSM) for image deblurring, leveraging the benefits of state space models (SSMs)
for visual data. In contrast to existing methods that employ several fixed-direction scanning for feature extraction,
which significantly increases the computational cost, we
develop an efficient visual scan block that applies various
geometric transformations before each SSM-based module, capturing useful non-local information and maintaining high efficiency. In addition, to more effectively capture
and represent local information, we propose an efficient discriminative frequency domain-based feedforward network
(EDFFN), which can effectively estimate useful frequency
information for latent clear image restoration. Extensive
experimental results show that the proposed EVSSM performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods on benchmark datasets and real-world images.

In contrast to the convolution operation, the selfattention mechanism [39] in Transformers can capture
global information by computing correlations between each
token and all other tokens, which can extract better features
for image deblurring. However, the self-attention mechanism (i.e., the scaled dot-product attention) entails quadratic
space and time complexity regarding the number of tokens, which becomes unacceptable when handling highresolution images. Although the local window-based methods [23, 43], transposed attention [48], and the frequency
domain-based approximation [19] have been developed to
reduce the computational cost, these approaches sacrifice
their abilities to model non-local information [23, 43] and
spatial information [19, 48], which thus affects the quality
of restored images. Therefore, it is of great need to develop
an efficient approach that can explore non-local information
for high-quality deblurring performance while not significantly increasing the computational cost.

1. Introduction

Recently, state space models (SSMs) [15, 16] have
demonstrated significant potential in modeling long-range
dependencies for natural language processing (NLP) tasks
with linear or near-linear computational complexity. The
improved SSM, specifically Mamba [13], develops a selective scanning mechanism (S6) and can remember relevant information and ignore irrelevant content while achieving linear computational complexity. This motivates us to
utilize SSMs to efficiently explore valuable non-local information for improved image deblurring. However, since
Mamba is designed to handle one-dimensional (1D) sequences, it requires first flattening of the image data to a
1D image sequence if Mamba is easily applied to visual
tasks [6, 10]. This disrupts the spatial structure of the image,
making it difficult to capture local information from various
adjacent pixels. Several approaches adopt a multi-direction
scan mechanism to utilize the state space model in visual
applications [17, 24, 32]. However, the multi-direction scan
mechanism significantly increases the computational cost.

Image deblurring aims to restore sharp images from blurry
ones, which is drawing much attention due to the popularization of various cameras and handheld imaging devices.
This task is challenging, as only the blurred images are
available while losing access to the blur and latent images.
Significant progress has been made due to the development of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [2, 4,
11, 35, 47]. However, as the main operation in CNNs, the
convolution is spatially invariant and has limited receptive
fields. This does not capture the spatially variant properties

In this paper, we propose an effective and efficient visual
state space model for image deblurring. We find that ex-

† Corresponding author

12710

