This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exact: Exploring Space-Time Perceptive Clues for Weakly Supervised
Satellite Image Time Series Semantic Segmentation
Hao Zhu1 , Yan Zhu1 , Jiayu Xiao1 , Tianxiang Xiao1 , Yike Ma1 , Yucheng Zhang1 , Feng Dai1†
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zhuhao22z, fdai}@ict.ac.cn

(a) Spatial Noise Perturbation

Abstract
Automated crop mapping through Satellite Image Time Series (SITS) has emerged as a crucial avenue for agricultural
monitoring and management. However, due to the low resolution and unclear parcel boundaries, annotating pixel-level
masks is exceptionally complex and time-consuming in SITS.
This paper embraces the weakly supervised paradigm (i.e.,
only image-level categories available) to liberate the crop
mapping task from the exhaustive annotation burden. The
unique characteristics of SITS give rise to several challenges
in weakly supervised learning: (1) noise perturbation from
spatially neighboring regions, and (2) erroneous semantic
bias from anomalous temporal periods. To address the above
difficulties, we propose a novel method, termed exploring
space-time perceptive clues (Exact). First, we introduce a
set of spatial clues to explicitly capture the representative
patterns of different crops from the most class-relative regions. Besides, we leverage the temporal-to-class interaction
of the model to emphasize the contributions of pivotal clips,
thereby enhancing the model perception for crop regions.
Building upon the space-time perceptive clues, we derive
the clue-based CAMs to effectively supervise the SITS segmentation network. Our method demonstrates impressive
performance on various SITS benchmarks. Remarkably, the
segmentation network trained on Exact-generated masks
achieves 95% of its fully supervised performance, showing
the bright promise of weakly supervised paradigm in crop
mapping scenario. Our code will be publicly available here.

Dog (Natural Image)
Barley (SITS)

over-activation

under-activation

(b) Temporal Erroneous Semantic Bias

Temporal Clips

Figure 1. Illustration of the two inherent issues arised from
spatial and temporal perspectives in SITS. (a) shows noise perturbation from the spatial perspective. We visualize the high-level
feature manifold of Dog (natural image) and Barley (SITS) to reveal
the distinct spatial properties. The feature dimensions are reduced
by t-SNE [48]. (b) shows the erroneous semantic bias induced by
anomalous temporal clips. We denote the parcel regions with ⋆.
The white circles refer to false positive activation regions in CAMs.

ping [6, 14, 22, 28, 35, 56]. The core of crop mapping lies in
the semantic segmentation of crop parcels. Recently, many
efforts are devoted to exploiting the versatile and powerful relation modeling capability of deep neural networks
for this task [20, 21, 34, 46]. While such methods have
shown a significant progress, they rely heavily on pixel-level
manual annotation, which is notoriously complex and timeconsuming [49]. The low resolution of satellite images and
the indistinct boundaries between crop parcels complicate
the annotation process. Even worse, the varying phenologi-

1. Introduction
The launch of numerous public and commercial satellites
provides broader opportunities to record, analyze, and predict the evolution of crop land [5, 17, 47, 50]. In this context, Satellite Image Time Series (SITS) with 10m resolution offered by the high-frequency Sentinel-2 (S2) satellites
serve as a valuable data source for automated crop map† Corresponding author.

14036

