This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RASP: Revisiting 3D Anamorphic Art for Shadow-Guided Packing of
Irregular Objects
Soumyaratna Debnath1 * Ashish Tiwari1 * Kaustubh Sadekar 2 Shanmuganathan Raman1
1
Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar 2 Portland State University
{debnathsoumyaratna, ashish.tiwari, shanmuga}@iitgn.ac.in, ksadekar@pdx.edu

Figure 1. (a) An ensemble of arbitrary shapes casting the shadow of alphabets CVPR and numbers 2025, (b) a set of irregular objects
packed inside a face-shaped container, (c) an assembly of parts of a vessel obtained through multi-view shadow guidance via RASP.

Abstract

1. Introduction
For centuries, artists have used their expressions to redefine
the boundaries of visual art, demonstrating how art shapes
reality and influences human perception. Their work has
also broadly impacted technology, design, and engineering.
In this work, we explore using a unique visual art form,
3D Anamorphic Art, to tackle challenges in irregular object
packing and extend this approach to part assembly.
Interestingly, we are not alone in using (and, in fact,
developing) artistic expressions to address applications in
computer vision. For example, DeepDream [24] uses GANbased style transfer to apply the style of classical paintings,
like those of Van Gogh or Picasso, to contemporary images. RePaint [34] leverages deep learning and 3D printing
to replicate the colors and textures of paintings by optimizing ink layering. ScribGen [7] creates human-like scribbles and hand-strokes in different styles. Beyond images,
researchers have expanded artistic techniques into 3D analysis and understanding, as in Shadow Art [23], which uses
shadows for 3D reconstruction, sketch-based 3D generation
[32], expressive hand movements [8], and the design of knot
configurations for realistic visual effects [9]. In this work,
we draw upon insights from 3D Anamorphic Art to address
an important problem of packing arbitrarily shaped objects
within a 3D bounding volume (or container). Packing has

Recent advancements in learning-based methods have
opened new avenues for exploring and interpreting art
forms, such as shadow art, origami, and sketch art, through
computational models. One notable visual art form is 3D
Anamorphic Art in which an ensemble of arbitrarily shaped
3D objects creates a realistic and meaningful expression
when observed from a particular viewpoint and loses its coherence over the other viewpoints. In this work, we build on
insights from 3D Anamorphic Art to perform 3D object arrangement. We introduce RASP, a differentiable-renderingbased framework to arrange arbitrarily shaped 3D objects
within a bounded volume via shadow (or silhouette)-guided
optimization with an aim of minimal inter-object spacing
and near-maximal occupancy. Furthermore, we propose
a novel SDF-based formulation to handle inter-object intersection and container extrusion. We demonstrate that
RASP can be extended to part assembly alongside object packing considering 3D objects to be “parts” of another 3D object. Finally, we present artistic illustrations of
multi-view anamorphic art, achieving meaningful expressions from multiple viewpoints within a single ensemble.
* Equal Contribution | Project Page

5849

