This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VladVA: Discriminative Fine-tuning of LVLMs
Yassine Ouali*1 Adrian Bulat*1,2 Alexandros Xenos1,3 Anestis Zaganidis1
Ioannis Maniadis Metaxas1 Brais Martinez1 Georgios Tzimiropoulos1,3
1
Samsung AI Cambridge 2 Technical University of Iasi 3 Queen Mary University of London

Abstract

of compositionality, and manifest a bag of words behavior [26, 52]. For example, even with bag of words behavior,
VLMs have shown remarkable zero-shot retrieval accuracy
on the Flickr [51] and COCO [34] datasets. Still, they perform poorly on a simple word order permutation task on the
same datasets [52]. Unfortunately, these issues persist even
when the model and the dataset size increase [18].

Contrastively-trained Vision-Language Models (VLMs) like
CLIP have become the de facto approach for discriminative
vision-language representation learning. However, these
models have limited language understanding, often exhibiting a “bag of words” behavior. At the same time, Large
Vision-Language Models (LVLMs), which combine vision
encoders with LLMs, have been shown to be capable of detailed vision-language reasoning, yet their autoregressive
nature renders them less suitable for discriminative tasks.
In this work, we propose to combine “the best of both
worlds”: a new training approach for discriminative finetuning of LVLMs that results in strong discriminative and
compositional capabilities. Essentially, our approach converts a generative LVLM into a discriminative one, unlocking its capability for powerful image-text discrimination
combined with enhanced language understanding.
Our contributions include (1) A carefully designed training/optimization framework that utilizes image-text pairs of
variable length and granularity for training the model with
both contrastive and next-token prediction losses. This is
accompanied by ablation studies that justify the necessity
of our framework’s components. (2) A parameter-efficient
adaptation method using a combination of soft prompting
and LoRA adapters. (3) Significant improvements over
state-of-the-art CLIP-like models of similar size, including standard image-text retrieval benchmarks and notable
gains in compositionality.

Concomitantly, inspired by the success of LLMs [5, 48]
in acting as generalist assistants [14], a series of works
combine pretrained vision encoders and LLMs [27, 28, 55]
to construct Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) capable of performing interactive multi-modal conversations.
Among others, these models have been shown capable
of exhibiting strong reasoning and vision-language understanding capabilities, offering fine-grained and detailed responses [10, 12, 27, 28]. However, they are trained with
a next-token prediction loss in an autoregressive manner,
which appears less suitable for direct utilization in discriminative image-text tasks (e.g. image-text retrieval).
To our knowledge, the very recent (concurrent) work
[22] is the first one to show that, with appropriate prompting, LVLMs can serve as zero-shot discriminative models.
Importantly, [22] advocates for a text-text optimization approach, stating that contrastive image-text fine-tuning has a
detrimental effect on the model’s performance. In contrast
to [22], we propose a new training framework for discriminative image-text fine-tuning of LVLMs, aiming to convert
the original generative LVLM into a discriminative one,
thereby significantly enhancing its capability for image-text
discrimination while preserving the compositional strengths
of the original model.

1. Introduction

In our approach, following the (independent) two-towers
paradigm, the vision embeddings are produced by passing
the image through the entire LVLM, and the text embeddings by passing the text through the LLM of the LVLM.
Intuitively, for the vision embedding, the LLM acts as an
information processor that refines the visual information
while simultaneously aligning it with the textual representations. We coin our approach VladVA: Vision-Language
Adaptation for Discriminative Visual Assistant. Our main
contributions are:

Contrastively-trained Vision Language Models (VLMs)
(e.g. CLIP [40]) have become the predominant direction
for vision-language representation learning, exhibiting remarkable zero-shot abilities [20, 29, 32, 40, 53]. However,
the great success of these models in many vision-language
and vision tasks, even in a zero-shot manner, “sweeps under
the rug” some of their important limitations. Specifically,
such models struggle to exhibit advanced language understanding capabilities, suffer from a limited understanding

4101

