This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Take the Bull by the Horns: Learning to Segment Hard Samples
Yuan Guo, Jingyu Kong, Yu Wang, Yuping Duan*
Center for Applied Mathematics, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P.R.China
Key Laboratory of Digital Technology in Medical Diagnostics of Zhejiang Province, 310030, P.R.China
School of Mathematical Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, P.R.China
guoyuan6060@163.com;kjyanhui@163.com;flimanadam@gmail.com;doveduan@gmail.com
pathological
normal sample structural changes variations artifacts and noise

Medical image segmentation is vital for clinical applications, with hard samples playing a key role in segmentation accuracy. We propose an effective image segmentation framework that includes mechanisms for identifying
and segmenting hard samples. It derives a novel image segmentation paradigm: 1) Learning to identify hard samples:
automatically selecting inherent hard samples from different datasets, and 2) Learning to segment hard samples:
achieving the segmentation of hard samples through effective feature augmentation on dedicated networks. We name
our method ‘Learning to Segment hard samples’ (L2S). The
hard sample identification module comprises a backbone
model and a classifier, which dynamically uncovers inherent dataset patterns. The hard sample segmentation module utilizes the diffusion process for feature augmentation
and incorporates a more sophisticated segmentation network to achieve precise segmentation. We justify our motivation through solid theoretical analysis and extensive experiments. Evaluations across various modalities show that
our L2S outperforms other SOTA methods, particularly by
substantially improving the segmentation accuracy of hard
samples. On ISIC dataset, our L2S improves the Dice score
on hard samples and overall segmentation by 8.97% and
1.01%, respectively, compared to SOTA methods. The code
is available at https://github.com/TqlYuanGie/L2S.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation is vital in medicine for identifying regions of interest to aid diagnosis and treatment planning.
While traditional methods struggle with image complexity,
deep learning excels in automatically extracting high-level
features and capturing intricate patterns.
Deep learning-based image segmentation methods can
be broadly categorized into end-to-end and coarse-to-fine
* Corresponding author.

Instances distributation

Abstract

Frequent

Class index

Rare

Figure 1. Illustration of Hard samples. Several types of challenges
that lead to hard samples are provided, which exhibit a long-tail
distribution.

approaches. End-to-end methods, such as U-Net [30], VNet [27], and nnU-Net [18], map input images directly to
segmentation outputs within a unified framework, often using CNNs as benchmarks. Recent transformer-based models, like TransUNet [5] and Swin-UNet [4], improve performance by capturing long-range dependencies. However,
these models struggle with segmenting small anatomical
structures or pathological regions where fine details and
precise boundaries are crucial.
Coarse-to-fine methods, on the other hand, begin with
rough segmentation and progressively refine it, allowing the
model to capture broader context before focusing on intricate details [6, 20, 43, 45]. This approach effectively addresses some limitations of end-to-end methods in segmenting small or complex structures. However, these models can
still struggle with hard samples in medical image segmentation, as the quality of refinement depends on the coarse predictions, which may fail to capture subtle features essential
for complex cases.
Hard samples, such as heterogeneous tumor regions,
vessel bifurcations, stenosis, imaging artifacts (e.g., MRI
motion artifacts), and rare data in training sets, present
significant challenges for accurate segmentation and often

15642

