This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TAGA: Self-supervised Learning for Template-free
Animatable Gaussian Articulated Model
Zhichao Zhai* , Guikun Chen* , Wenguan Wang†, Dong Zheng, Jun Xiao
Zhejiang University
https://github.com/zhichao-zhai/TAGA/

1. Introduction
Creating animatable articulated 3D models is crucial for enhancing immersion and interactivity in VR, gaming, etc [1–
5]. While significant progress has been made using categoryspecific parametric templates [2, 6, 7], building these templates is expensive. Moreover, existing templates focus
primarily on a narrow range of object categories, neglect* The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding Author: Wenguan Wang.

(b) Canonical

Decoupling from customized parametric templates
represents a crucial step toward the creation of fully flexible,
animatable articulated models. While existing template-free
methods can achieve high-fidelity reconstruction in observed
views, they struggle to recover plausible canonical models,
resulting in suboptimal animation quality. This limitation
stems from overlooking the fundamental ambiguity in
canonical reconstruction, where multiple canonical models
could explain the same observed views. By revealing the entanglement between the canonical ambiguity and incorrect
skinning, we present a self-supervised framework that learns
both plausible skinning and accurate canonical geometry
using only sparse pose data. Our method, TAGA, uses
explicit 3D Gaussians as skinning carriers and characterizes
the ambiguity as “Ambiguous Gaussians” with incorrect
skinning weights. TAGA then corrects ambiguous Gaussians
in the observation space using anomaly detection. With the
corrected ones, we enforce cycle consistency constraints
on both geometry and skinning to refine the corresponding
Gaussians in the canonical space through a new backward
method. Compared to existing state-of-the-art template-free
methods, TAGA delivers superior visual fidelity for novel
views and poses, while significantly improving training and
rendering speeds. Experiments on challenging datasets with
limited pose variations further demonstrate the robustness
and generality of TAGA.

(a) Observation

Abstract

Figure 1. Canonical ambiguity: Gaussians render observed poses
well (a), but produce significant artifacts in canonical space (b).

ing those challenging to parameterize, such as animals and
robotic arms [8–10]. Recent template-free methods seek to
overcome this constraint by using only keypoint skeletons to
learn category-agnostic 3D articulated models and skinning.
A fundamental aspect of template-free articulated model
reconstruction is the construction of an accurate canonical
model, a consistent, pose-independent representation that
enables smooth animation across diverse poses [11–14].
Although existing methods can faithfully reconstruct models
in observation space (Fig. 1(a)), they struggle to recover
accurate canonical models w/o extensive, high-quality pose
data [9]. In real-world scenarios, pose data is often sparse,
rendering canonical model recovery a highly ill-posed problem. This data scarcity introduces ambiguity in canonical reconstruction, as multiple canonical models can fit the limited
observations after forward transformation. Methods relying
solely on visual inputs are unable to detect this canonical
ambiguity, let alone correct it to refine the reconstruction.
Ambiguity in reconstructing canonical models from observations remains a significant challenge. In this work,
we investigate such an ambiguity from its cause, definition,
and correction. Our key insight is that canonical ambiguity
can only be transformed into accurate observation reconstructions under the control of incorrect skinning weights.
Therefore, addressing ambiguity is recast as detecting and

21159

