This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DejaVid: Encoder-Agnostic Learned Temporal Matching for Video Classification
Darryl Ho
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge MA, USA

Samuel Madden
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge MA, USA

darrylho@csail.mit.edu

madden@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
In recent years, large transformer-based video encoder
models have greatly advanced state-of-the-art performance
on video classification tasks. However, these large models typically process videos by averaging embedding outputs from multiple clips over time to produce fixed-length
representations. This approach fails to account for a variety of time-related features, such as variable video durations, chronological order of events, and temporal variance
in feature significance. While methods for temporal modeling do exist, they often require significant architectural
changes and expensive retraining, making them impractical
for off-the-shelf, fine-tuned large encoders. To overcome
these limitations, we propose DejaVid, an encoder-agnostic
method that enhances model performance without the need
for retraining or altering the architecture. Our framework
converts a video into a variable-length temporal sequence
of embeddings (TSE). A TSE naturally preserves temporal
order and accommodates variable video durations. We then
learn per-timestep, per-feature weights over the encoded
TSE frames, allowing us to account for variations in feature
importance over time. We introduce a new neural network
architecture inspired by traditional time series alignment
algorithms for this learning task. Our evaluation demonstrates that DejaVid substantially improves the performance
of a state-of-the-art large encoder, achieving leading Top-1
accuracy of 77.2% on Something-Something V2, 89.1% on
Kinetics-400, and 88.6% on HMDB51, while adding fewer
than 1.8% additional learnable parameters and requiring
less than 3 hours of training time. Our code is available at
https://github.com/darrylho/DejaVid.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. DejaVid system diagram. We first transform a video
into a variable-length temporal sequence of embeddings (TSE)
then use Dynamic Time Warping Barycenter Averaging (DBA)
[21] to calculate a reasonably “average” TSE per class for its
centroid initialization. We then learn per-timestep, per-feature
weights for the encoded TSE frames, enabling us to accommodate variations in feature importance over time, as well as finetune
the centroid TSE for each output class. For this task, we introduce
a new neural network architecture inspired by traditional time series alignment algorithms. In testing, we freeze the post-training
centroids and weights and use the same pre-training pipeline to
generate TSEs to feed into DejaVid for predictions.

Video action recognition has seen remarkable progress with
the rise of transformer-based video models [2, 7, 10]. To
improve their performance, one of the most straightforward and effective approaches is to upscale the model
and training data [33]. As such, the leaderboards of major action recognition benchmarks have come to be dom-

24023

inated by 100M–1B+ parameter large video transformers
[14, 16, 18, 22, 28–30].

