This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Single Domain Generalization for Few-Shot Counting
via Universal Representation Matching

Xianing Chen

Si Huo

Borui Jiang

Hailin Hu*

Xinghao Chen*

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
sdxianing@gmail.com, {huosi,jiangborui,hailin.hu,xinghao.chen}@huawei.com

Abstract
Few-shot counting estimates the number of target objects
in an image using only a few annotated exemplars. However, domain shift severely hinders existing methods to generalize to unseen scenarios. This falls into the realm of single domain generalization that remains unexplored in fewshot counting. To solve this problem, we begin by analyzing
the main limitations of current methods, which typically follow a standard pipeline that extract the object prototypes
from exemplars and then match them with image feature
to construct the correlation map. We argue that existing
methods overlook the significance of learning highly generalized prototypes. Building on this insight, we propose
the first single domain generalization few-shot counting
model, Universal Representation Matching, termed URM.
Our primary contribution is the discovery that incorporating universal vision-language representations distilled from
a large scale pretrained vision-language model into the correlation construction process substantially improves robustness to domain shifts without compromising in domain performance. As a result, URM achieves state-of-the-art performance on both in domain and the newly introduced domain generalization setting.

(a) domain generalization for few-shot counting

(b) extract-then-match

1. Introduction
Few-shot counting (FSC) [46] is the task of estimating the
number of target objects in an image using only a few annotated exemplars or without any exemplar at all. Although
many proposed approaches [40, 65] have achieved satisfactory results, they experience severe performance degradation when tested on data from unseen scenarios in realworld deployment due to the domain shift [24] problem.
This shift arises from the deviation from the source domain
training data to unseen target domain testing data, such as
* Corresponding authors.
** Code is available at https://github.com/jbr97/URM.

(c) universal representation matching

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) domain generalization for few-shot
counting, (b) the vanilla extract-then-match pipeline, and (c) our
proposed universal representation matching.

changes in camera position and weather condition [59, 74],
as well as biases introduced during data collection. For instance, images in the FSC147 [46] show each target object
clearly while scenes in FSCD-LIVS [35] feature more oc-

4639

