This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking End-to-End 2D to 3D Scene Segmentation in Gaussian Splatting
Runsong Zhu1

Shi Qiu1 Zhengzhe Liu2,3 Ka-Hei Hui1 Qianyi Wu4
Pheng-Ann Heng1 Chi-Wing Fu1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Lingnan University
3
Carnegie Mellon University 4 Monash University

Abstract

different views, e.g., the same object may have different IDs
when viewed from different angles, leading to conflicting
supervision. Besides, inferior segmentations, e.g., under- or
over-segmentation, make the lifting process challenging.

Lifting multi-view 2D instance segmentation to a radiance
field has proven effective to enhance 3D understanding. Existing works rely on direct matching for end-to-end lifting, yielding inferior results, or employ a two-stage solution constrained by complex pre- or post-processing. In
this work, we design Unified-Lift, a new end-to-end objectaware lifting approach that aims for high-quality 3D segmentation based on our object-aware 3D Gaussian representation. To start, we augment each Gaussian point with
a Gaussian-level feature learned using a contrastive loss to
encode instance information. Importantly, we introduce a
learnable object-level codebook to account for individual
objects in the scene for an explicit object-level understanding and associate the encoded object-level features with
the Gaussian-level point features for segmentation predictions. While promising, achieving effective codebook learning is nontrivial and a naive solution leads to degraded
performance. Hence, we formulate the association learning module and the noisy label filtering module for effective and robust codebook learning. We conduct experiments
on three benchmarks LERF-Masked, Replica, and Messy
Rooms. Both qualitative and quantitative results manifest
that our Unified-Lift clearly outperforms existing methods
in terms of segmentation quality and time efficiency.

Various strategies have been proposed to address the
above issues. An early work Panoptic Lifting [33] trains a
NeRF to render instance predictions in an end-to-end manner and matches the model’s 3D predictions with the initial 2D segmentation masks to provide supervision. However, this approach tends to produce multi-view inconsistent segmentation as it is highly sensitive to the variances
of matching results. Subsequently, [23, 39] propose object
association techniques as a preprocessing to prepare viewconsistent 2D segmentation maps with improved multiview consistency (see Fig. 1 (b)). However, the preprocessing stage often struggles to produce accurate results
and the accumulated error can further degrade the performance. The recent state-of-the-art methods [1, 40] encode
instance information in the feature field using contrastive
learning and apply a clustering as a postprocessing to produce the final segmentations (see Fig. 1 (c)). Though significant improvements are achieved, their performance is always constrained by the naive clustering postprocess, which
is hyperparameter-sensitive and also induces error accumulation. Given the above concerns, we come up with this
question: “Can we have an end-to-end lifting framework
for accurate 3D scene segmentation, without the need of
pre- or post-processing?”

1. Introduction

In this work, we propose Unified-Lift, a new end-toend object-aware lifting method for accurate 3D scene segmentation, facilitating the generation of coherent and viewconsistent instance segmentation across different views. We
exploit recent advancement of the radiance field, i.e., 3D
Gaussian splatting (3D-GS) [12], as the 3D scene representation due to its superior efficiency and rendering quality. Specifically, we augment each Gaussian point in 3DGS with a Gaussian-level feature and learn these features
using contrastive learning defined in individual views. In
particular, we introduce a novel global object-level codebook to represent each object in the 3D scene. This code-

Accurate 3D scene segmentation enhances scene understanding and facilitates scene editing, benefiting many
downstream applications in virtual reality, augmented reality, and robotics. However, accurate 3D scene segmentation is challenging to obtain, due to limited 3D dataset
size and labor-intensive manual labeling in 3D. To bypass
these challenges, recent studies [1, 33, 44] suggest lifting
2D segmentations predicted by foundation models [3, 15]
to the 3D scene modeled by a radiance field for instancelevel understanding. Yet, 2D instance segmentations predicted by models like SAM [15] lack consistency across

3656

