This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Noise-Resistant Video Anomaly Detection via RGB Error-Guided Multiscale
Predictive Coding and Dynamic Memory
Han Hu1 , Wenli Du1,2 *, Peng Liao1 , Bing Wang1 , Siyuan Fan2
1 State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, ECUST, China
2 Huzhou Institute of Industrial Control Technology, China

{han.hu, pengliao}@mail.ecust.edu.cn, {wldu, wangb07}@ecust.edu.cn, siyuanfan2001@outlook.com

Abstract

Abnormal

28.4

30.2

23.6

13.0

34.1

39.5

28.3

16.5

3.9

51.7

46.4

Ours

MGSTRL

HSC

Due to the interference of background noise, existing
video anomaly detection methods are prone to detect some
normal events in complex scenes as anomalies. Meanwhile,
we note that the diversity of normal patterns has not been
adequately considered, i.e., the normal events that are worthy of reference in the test data have not been properly
utilized, which raises the risk of missed and false detections. In this work, we combine the tasks of next-frame
prediction and predicted-frame reconstruction to propose
a noise-resistant video anomaly detection method. For the
prediction task, we develop an RGB Error-Guided Multiscale Predictive Coding (EG-MPC) framework to overcome
the interference of background noise on the learning of appearance and motion features of objects at various scales,
thus achieving high-quality frame prediction. For the reconstruction task, we introduce the Dynamic Memory Modules (DMMs) into the reconstruction network, and design
sparse aggregation and selective update strategies for the
memory items in the DMMs to effectively represent diverse
normal patterns while increasing the difficulty of reconstructing anomalies, thus making it easier to distinguish between normal and abnormal frames. Extensive experiments
on four benchmark datasets demonstrate that our proposed
method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches, especially
in complex scenarios.

Ground Truth

Normal

(a)

(b)

(c)

Normal background but with large errors

22.3
(d)
Abnormal region

Figure 1. Visualization results of frame reconstruction RGB error maps for different methods (from top to bottom: HSC [40],
MGSTRL [51], and our method). From left to right, we show
RGB error maps for (a) the normal data of ShanghaiTech [26] and
the abnormal data of (b) Avenue [25], (c) ShanghaiTech and (d)
UCF-Crime [38]. The number in each error map denote the sumsquare-error compared to the ground truth. Best viewed in color.

1. Introduction

pervised methods [3, 13, 22, 33, 39, 40, 51] that rely solely
on unlabeled normal samples. In this work, we focus on
the latter because adding annotations to video data in realworld scenarios is time-consuming and expensive, whereas
collecting normal samples is very convenient.
Existing unsupervised VAD methods learn normal patterns in videos mainly by constructing single proxy task
[4, 13, 21, 39, 40] or hybridizing multiple proxy tasks
[11, 22, 35, 51], and identify samples that are difficult to
describe by the model as anomalies at test time. Although
these methods are able to detect most of the anomalies, the
task still faces several challenges. Firstly, the spatial scale
of abnormal events is variable and usually occurs in localized regions within frames, how to learn the appearance and

Video anomaly detection (VAD) has attracted extensive
attention from researchers due to the great demand for intelligent security in various public places. It aims to efficiently
recognize abnormal events in videos to reduce the workload of surveillance personnel. The popular VAD methods
mainly include weakly supervised methods [6, 10, 27, 50]
that utilize video-level or clip-level label learning and unsu* Corresponding author.

19109

