This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Can Large Vision-Language Models Correct Semantic Grounding Errors By
Themselves?
1

Yuan-Hong Liao1 , Rafid Mahmood2,3 , Sanja Fidler1,2 , David Acuna2
University of Toronto, Vector Institute 2 NVIDIA 3 University of Ottawa

answer@cs.toronto.edu, mahmood@telfer.uottawa.ca, {sfidler, dacunamarrer}@nvidia

Abstract
Improving semantic grounding in Vision-Language Models
(VLMs) often involves collecting domain-specific training
data, refining the network architectures, or modifying the
training recipes. In this work, we venture into an orthogonal
direction and explore self-correction in VLMs focusing on semantic grounding. We find that VLMs can correct their own
semantic grounding mistakes when properly prompted and
framed for the task, without any fine-tuning or even access to
oracle feedback. We also introduce a self-correction framework in an iterative setting which consistently improves performance across all models investigated. Overall, we show
that iterative self-correction consistently improves VLM performance in semantic grounding by up to 8.4 accuracy points
across all models investigated, without requiring fine-tuning,
additional architectural changes, or external data. Our
exploration of self-correction also reveals that, even after
several rounds of feedback, strong models like GPT-4V and
GPT-4o retain limited capability in leveraging oracle feedback, suggesting promising directions for further research.

1. Introduction
The evolution of Large Language Models (LLMs) to encompass multimodal inputs has given rise to an emerging
paradigm of general-purpose models that can solve multimodal understanding problems via user-prompt interaction [39, 49–51, 58]. Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
are a growing family of multimodal models that simultaneously understand both visual and language cues. These
models have demonstrated strong zero-shot performance
on tasks including image classification [9], captioning [61],
visual question answering [1, 14], reasoning [62, 63] and
robotics [7, 41].
Despite VLMs’ strong visual-language understanding
abilities, fine-grained visual grounding remains challenging.
Specifically, VLMs struggle to comprehend region-specific
information within complex scenes, such as when prompted

to describe specific objects in a crowded image [5, 57, 60]
(see Fig. 1). Prior works address this limitation using additional in-domain data [16, 28, 31], finetuning, or architectural changes [30, 35]. However, these approaches require
significant computational resources [4, 60].
On the other hand, adjacent LLM literature has demonstrated that LLMs correct their own mistakes [37, 45], suggesting a potential way to improve VLMs without additional
training. This behavior is termed self-correction, a framework that refines LLM responses using LLMs during inference, possibly with external tools or knowledge [6, 13]. However, follow-up works in LLMs [19, 21] argue that LLMs
struggle to self-correct without access to oracle feedback.
Currently, there is no clear consensus on when LLMs can
effectively perform self-correction [21]. Prior work suggests
that self-correction is limited by feedback quality [13, 43]
and is more reliable with tools like search engines or compilers [19].
In this work, we explore self-correction in VLMs with a
focus on multi-modal understanding, connecting language to
visual concepts—a largely unexplored area to date. Specifically, we investigate self-correction within semantic grounding tasks, as illustrated in Fig.1. Semantic grounding is wellsuited for this exploration because it demands the integration
of language and visual concepts, requires fine-grained visual understanding, and involves multi-modal reasoning, all
of which have significant real-world applications as well
as the task itself [10, 40, 52]. More importantly, VLMs
have demonstrated the ability to provide useful feedback in
some visual tasks [36, 67], leaving the door open for selfcorrection in VLMs. Specifically, we focus on two key
questions: (i) Can VLMs receive and understand grounding
feedback? (ii) Can VLMs provide grounding feedback? We
then combine the key findings from these two questions to
evaluate whether VLMs can self-correct their mistakes by
leveraging another instance of the same model during inference. To mitigate the high difficulty of generating reliable
feedback, we identify that semantic grounding can be decomposed into easier binary verification tasks, therefore, getting
more reliable feedback.

14667

