This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniGuard: Hybrid Manipulation Localization via Augmented
Versatile Deep Image Watermarking
Xuanyu Zhang1,2 * , Zecheng Tang1 * , Zhipei Xu1 * , Runyi Li1 , Youmin Xu1 ,
Bin Chen1 , Feng Gao3 B , Jian Zhang1,2,4 B
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School-Rabbitpre AIGC Joint Research Laboratory
3
School of Arts, Peking University
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology,
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
Container Image
EditGuard
(CVPR 2024)

Abstract
With the rapid growth of generative AI and its widespread
application in image editing, new risks have emerged regarding the authenticity and integrity of digital content. Existing versatile watermarking approaches suffer from tradeoffs between tamper localization precision and visual quality. Constrained by the limited flexibility of previous framework, their localized watermark must remain fixed across
all images. Under AIGC-editing, their copyright extraction accuracy is also unsatisfactory. To address these challenges, we propose OmniGuard, a novel augmented versatile watermarking approach that integrates proactive embedding with passive, blind extraction for robust copyright
protection and tamper localization. OmniGuard employs
a hybrid forensic framework that enables flexible localization watermark selection and introduces a degradationaware tamper extraction network for precise localization
under challenging conditions. Additionally, a lightweight
AIGC-editing simulation layer is designed to enhance robustness across global and local editing. Extensive experiments show that OmniGuard achieves superior fidelity, robustness, and flexibility. Compared to the recent state-ofthe-art approach EditGuard, our method outperforms it by
4.25dB in PSNR of the container image, 20.7% in F1-Score
under noisy conditions, and 14.8% in average bit accuracy.

Tampered Image

Predicted Mask

39.74 dB

OmniGuard
(Ours)

43.60 dB

Figure 1. Comparison between OmniGuard and typical versatile watermarking method [66]. We paste a moon onto the container image (tampering) and reduce the overall brightness (degradation). Under AIGC-Editing or simple tampering, our method
significantly outperforms EditGuard [66] across multiple metrics.

40, 65]. This powerful generative and editing capability is a
double-edged sword and has introduced significant risks to
the authenticity and integrity of information. For instance,
illegal infringers may steal images generated by others and
claim ownership, making it increasingly challenging to protect intellectual copyrights. Additionally, fraudsters might
use AI tools to alter online images to generate misleading
content, presenting new challenges for court forensics.
As a classic and widely adopted technique, watermarking has drawn growing attention due to its critical role in
protecting image copyrights, detecting unauthorized usage,
and tracking tampering. Robust watermarking, for instance,
focuses on resilience, aiming to keep the embedded watermark intact and detectable even after significant distortions,
such as JPEG compression [25] or screen shooting [12].
In contrast, fragile watermarking prioritizes sensitivity, ensuring that the embedded watermark responds to even minor or specific alterations [27, 34, 35, 44]. Recently, with
the development of deep learning, deep watermarking has
shown significant advantages in terms of capacity [54], robustness [20], and fidelity [26]. It holds great potential to
withstand numerous AIGC editing methods while enabling
pixel-wise tamper localization. Notably, some watermark-

1. Introduction
With the support of massive datasets and the advancement
of large-scale model technologies, generative AI has empowered many industries, creating numerous text-to-image
models [16, 45, 46] and image-editing algorithms [7, 32,
*: Equal contribution, B: Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology (No. 2024B1212010006) and Shenzhen General Research Project (No. JCYJ20241202125904007).

3008

