This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP-driven Coarse-to-fine Semantic Guidance for Fine-grained Open-set
Semi-supervised Learning
Xiaokun Li, Yaping Huang* , Qingji Guan*
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Mining and Embodied Intelligence, Beijing Jiaotong University
22110102@bjtu.edu.cn, yphuang@bjtu.edu.cn, qjguan@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

（a）Coarse-grained OSSL

ImageNet-30

100

97.97
90
Accuracy(%)

Fine-grained open-set semi-supervised learning (OSSL) investigates a practical scenario where unlabeled data may
contain fine-grained out-of-distribution (OOD) samples.
Due to the subtle visual differences among in-distribution
(ID) samples, as well as between ID and OOD samples,
it is extremely challenging to separate the ID and OOD
samples. Recent Vision-Language Models, such as CLIP,
have shown excellent generalization capabilities. However, it tends to focus on general attributes, and thus
is insufficient to distinguish the fine-grained details. To
tackle the issues, in this paper, we propose a novel CLIPdriven coarse-to-fine semantic-guided framework, named
CFSG-CLIP, to progressively focus on the distinctive finegrained clues. Specifically, CFSG-CLIP comprises a
coarse-guidance branch and a fine-guidance branch derived from the pre-trained CLIP model. In the coarseguidance branch, we design a semantic filtering module
to initially filter and highlight local visual features guided
by cross-modality features. Then, in the fine-guidance
branch, we further design a visual-semantic injection strategy, which embeds category-related visual cues into the visual encoder to further refine the local visual features. By
the designed dual-guidance framework, local subtle cues
are progressively discovered to distinct the subtle difference between ID and OOD samples. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that CFSG-CLIP achieves competitive performance on multiple fine-grained datasets. The source code
is available at https://github.com/LxxxxK/CFSG-CLIP.

80

78.55

81.43

70
60

50
FixMatch IOMatch

（b）Fine-grained OSSL

FGVCAircraft

70

61.09

60
Accuracy(%)

CLIP

52.43

50
40

31.37

30

20
10

9.70

10.40

0
FixMatch IOMatch

CLIP

MaPLe

Ours

Figure 1. Comparison of open-set semi-supervised learning
(OSSL) methods on coarse-grained and fine-grained classification
tasks. (a) On the coarse-grained ImageNet-30 dataset, some outstanding methods (e.g., FixMatch [30], IOMatch [22]) achieve excellent performance. CLIP [27] trained on the large-scale imagetext pairs dataset achieves high performance as expected. (b) On
the fine-grained FGVCAircraft dataset, the generalization capabilities of CLIP remain effective but limited, as it tends to focus on
general attributes while failing to capture the fine-grained details.

1. Introduction

ples cause the decision boundary of the model to deviate
from the distribution of the original labeled data, thereby
reducing its robustness in practical applications.
Most existing OSSL methods [6, 11, 22, 28, 30, 35,
36, 40] verify their effectiveness mainly on coarse-grained
datasets such as MNIST [20], CIFAR-10/100 [17] and ImageNet [5]. However, the more challenging and realistic finegrained OSSL task remains under-explored. Large variance in the same subcategory and small variance between
different subcategories lead to a reduction in the effectiveness of semi-supervised (SSL) methods that rely on pseudolabeling [21, 25] or consistency regularization [19, 29, 33].
Even worse, as shown in Fig. 1, the tight decision bound-

Open-set semi-supervised learning (OSSL) extends traditional semi-supervised learning by addressing more realistic scenarios, where the unlabeled data contains both indistribution (ID) and out-of-distribution (OOD) samples
drawn from different distributions [40]. These OOD sam* Corresponding author.

30312

