This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ZoomLDM: Latent Diffusion Model for multi-scale image generation
Srikar Yellapragada* Alexandros Graikos* Kostas Triaridis
Prateek Prasanna Rajarsi Gupta Joel Saltz Dimitris Samaras
Stony Brook University

[

[Scale]

ZoomLDM

Any-Scale
Patch Generation

Super-Resolution

5x

0.3125x

10x

1.25x

20x

4096

0.15625x

1024

Large Image
Generation

256

Diffusion models have revolutionized image generation, yet
several challenges restrict their application to large-image
domains, such as digital pathology and satellite imagery.
Given that it is infeasible to directly train a model on
’whole’ images from domains with potential gigapixel sizes,
diffusion-based generative methods have focused on synthesizing small, fixed-size patches extracted from these images.
However, generating small patches has limited applicability
since patch-based models fail to capture the global structures and wider context of large images, which can be crucial for synthesizing (semantically) accurate samples. To
overcome this limitation, we present ZoomLDM, a diffusion model tailored for generating images across multiple
scales. Central to our approach is a novel magnificationaware conditioning mechanism that utilizes self-supervised
learning (SSL) embeddings and allows the diffusion model
to synthesize images at different ’zoom’ levels, i.e., fixedsize patches extracted from large images at varying scales.
ZoomLDM synthesizes coherent histopathology images that
remain contextually accurate and detailed at different zoom
levels, achieving state-of-the-art image generation quality across all scales and excelling in the data-scarce setting of generating thumbnails of entire large images. The
multi-scale nature of ZoomLDM unlocks additional capabilities in large image generation, enabling computationally tractable and globally coherent image synthesis up to
4096 × 4096 pixels and 4× super-resolution. Additionally,
multi-scale features extracted from ZoomLDM are highly
effective in multiple instance learning experiments. 1

Context Scale,
Detail Scale

256

[

Abstract

Figure 1. ZoomLDM can generate synthetic image patches at multiple scales (left). It can generate large images that preserve spatial
context (center) and perform super-resolution (right), without any
additional training. Large images from prior work [17, 26] suffer
from blurriness and lack of global context.

1. Introduction

age generation by introducing a two-step process that first
compresses the images with a learned encoder and then
trains the generative diffusion model in that encoder’s latent space. In the natural image domain, LDMs like Stable Diffusion XL [36], which generates 1024 × 1024 images, have made high-resolution generation fast and cheap.
Although such models demonstrate the potential of further
scaling image diffusion to larger sizes, large-image domains
such as digital histopathology and satellite imagery are beyond their feasible scope as images there are typically in the
gigapixel scale (e.g. 32, 000 × 32, 000 pixels).
Apart from scale, large-image domains also lack paired
image-annotation data with sufficient detail, which has been
key to the success of text-to-image diffusion models. Without access to a conditioning signal during training and inference, the performance of diffusion models degrades significantly [32]. At the same time, obtaining annotations for
large images can be complex as it is both a laborious process for specialized fields, such as medical images, and of-

Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in photorealistic image synthesis [3], benefiting from the availability of vast multi-modal datasets [5, 40] and sophisticated
conditioning techniques [20, 36]. Latent Diffusion models (LDMs) [38] have further advanced high-resolution im* Equal contribution. Correspondence to srikary@cs.stonybrook.edu
1 Code is available at github.com/cvlab-stonybrook/ZoomLDM.

23453

