This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sparse Voxels Rasterization: Real-time High-fidelity Radiance Field Rendering
Cheng Sun1

Jaesung Choe1
1

NVIDIA

Charles Loop1
2

Wei-Chiu Ma2
3

Cornell University

Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,3

National Taiwan University

FPS Ours

Neural-free
voxel grids

2D VFM feature

3D VFM feature

2D semantic

3D semantic

3DGS
variants
NeRF
variants
*Our FPS comparison to 3DGS is highly scene dependent.
* The actual voxel sizes are much smaller.

(a) Volume rendering by rasterizing sparse voxels.

LPIPS
(b) Novel-view rendering on Mip-NeRF360 scenes.

TSDF Fusion
Marching Cubes
(c) 2D-to-3D made easy.

Figure 1. We propose SVRaster, a novel framework for multi-view reconstruction and novel view synthesis. (a) Sparse voxel representation effectively captures the volume density and radiance field of the scene, without the need for neural networks, 3D Gaussians, and
sparse-points prior. (b) Using our customized sparse voxel rasterizer, we can learn the underlying 3D scene efficiently and achieve state-ofthe-art performance in both rendering quality and speed. (c) Notably, lifting 2D modal to the trained sparse voxels is simple and efficient by
integrating the classic Volume Fusion [7, 8, 34]. We show examples of vision foundation model feature field from RADIO [38], semantic
field from Segformer [52], and signed distance field from rendered depth, making it flexible and suitable for a wide range of applications.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Gaussian splatting [20] has emerged as one of the most
promising solutions for novel view synthesis. It has drawn
wide attention across multiple communities due to its exceptional rendering speed and ability to capture the nuanced
details of a scene. Nevertheless, Gaussian splatting in its
base form has two key limitations: first, sorting Gaussians
based on their centers does not guarantee proper depth ordering. It may result in popping artifacts [37] (i.e., sudden color changes for consistent geometry) when changing views. Second, the volume density of a 3D point is
ill-defined when covered by multiple Gaussians. This ambiguity makes surface reconstruction non-trivial.

We propose an efficient radiance field rendering algorithm
that incorporates a rasterization process on adaptive sparse
voxels without neural networks or 3D Gaussians. There
are two key contributions coupled with the proposed system. The first is to adaptively and explicitly allocate sparse
voxels to different levels of detail within scenes, faithfully
reproducing scene details with 655363 grid resolution while
achieving high rendering frame rates. Second, we customize a rasterizer for efficient adaptive sparse voxels rendering. We render voxels in the correct depth order by using ray direction-dependent Morton ordering, which avoids
the well-known popping artifact found in Gaussian splatting. Our method improves the previous neural-free voxel
model by over 4db PSNR and more than 10x FPS speedup,
achieving state-of-the-art comparable novel-view synthesis
results. Additionally, our voxel representation is seamlessly
compatible with grid-based 3D processing techniques such
as Volume Fusion, Voxel Pooling, and Marching Cubes, enabling a wide range of future extensions and applications.
Code: github.com/NVlabs/svraster

On the other hand, grid representations inherently avoid
these issues—both ordering and volume are well-defined.
However, due to ray casting, the rendering speed of these
methods [4, 5, 24, 43, 44, 51] is slower than that of Gaussian
Splatting. This raises the question: is it possible to take
the best of both worlds? Can we combine the efficiency of
Gaussian splatting with the well-defined grid properties?

16187

Fortunately, the answer is yes. Our key insight is to revisit voxels—a well-established primitive with decades of

