This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffLocks: Generating 3D Hair
from a Single Image using Diffusion Models
Radu Alexandru Rosu1, * Keyu Wu2,∗,†
1

Meshcapade

2

Zhejiang University

3

Yao Feng1,3

Stanford University

4

Youyi Zheng2

Michael J. Black4

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

Abstract
3 seconds

We address the task of generating 3D hair geometry from
a single image, which is challenging due to the diversity of hairstyles and the lack of paired image-to-3D hair
data. Previous methods are primarily trained on synthetic
data and cope with the limited amount of such data by
using low-dimensional intermediate representations, such
as guide strands and scalp-level embeddings, that require
post-processing to decode, upsample, and add realism.
These approaches fail to reconstruct detailed hair, struggle with curly hair, or are limited to handling only a
few hairstyles. To overcome these limitations, we propose DiffLocks, a novel framework that enables detailed
reconstruction of a wide variety of hairstyles directly from
a single image. First, we address the lack of 3D hair
data by automating the creation of the largest synthetic
hair dataset to date, containing 40K hairstyles. Second,
we leverage the synthetic hair dataset to learn an imageconditioned diffusion-transfomer model that generates accurate 3D strands from a single frontal image. By using
a pretrained image backbone, our method generalizes to
in-the-wild images despite being trained only on synthetic
data. Our diffusion model predicts a scalp texture map in
which any point in the map contains the latent code for an
individual hair strand. These codes are directly decoded
to 3D strands without post-processing techniques. Representing individual strands, instead of guide strands, enables the transformer to model the detailed spatial structure of complex hairstyles. With this, DiffLocks can recover
highly curled hair, like afro hairstyles, from a single image
for the first time. Data and code is available at https:
//radualexandru.github.io/difflocks/.

1. Introduction
Realistic 3D hair is a crucial component of digital humans
[1, 2, 8, 12, 18, 38, 45], which have wide applications in
* Joint first author
†Work done during an internship at Meshcapade

Synthetic hair dataset

Real image

3D hair

Figure 1. Given a single RGB image DiffLocks generates accurate 3D strands using a diffusion model. The model is trained on
a novel synthetic hair dataset containing RGB images and corresponding 3D strands.

games, media and entertainment. Accurate hair representation greatly enhances the character’s realism and overall
visual quality. Unfortunately, both generating realistic hair
and reconstructing it from an image are challenging due to
the complex 3D geometry and the wide variety of hairstyles.
Since the release of the first 3D synthetic hair dataset
[11], numerous methods for hair reconstruction have been
proposed. Multi-view capture methods [17, 29, 31, 54, 57]
and video-based approaches [24, 41, 49] are able to reconstruct high-fidelity 3D hair but are time-intensive and challenging to deploy due to their reliance on expensive capture
equipment or strict capture conditions.
In contrast, single-view methods [3, 37, 48, 51, 55],
which reconstruct 3D hair from a single image, are faster,
more accessible, and user-friendly. These methods, however, often produce low-detail hair and handle only a restricted range of hairstyles. Furthermore, these methods
struggle to handle male-pattern baldness and very curly hair
such as afro-like hairstyles, which have a complex geometric structure (see [47]). Previous methods suffer from a lack
of diverse and comprehensive hairstyle training datasets.
To increase training set diversity, GroomGen [56], HAAR
[42] and Fake It Till You Make It [46] use artist-created
hairstyles together with data augmentation techniques to
train their methods. However, their datasets are not released, do not have paired RGB images, or the creation pro-

10847

