This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Nested Diffusion Models Using Hierarchical Latent Priors
Xiao Zhang⇤1

Ruoxi Jiang⇤1

Rebecca Willett1,2

Michael Maire1

Figure 1. Image generation via diffusion models nested along a hierarchical semantic chain. We synthesize images using a sequence of
diffusion models to generate a hierarchy of latent representations, starting from a low-dimensional semantic feature embedding and refining
to a detailed image. At each hierarchical level, synthesis of a higher-dimensional latent from noise is conditioned on the more abstract latents
generated at levels above. Here, each successive row visualizes resulting images when fixing latents up to some level and resampling those
at subsequent levels; images (darker background) are produced by resampling only the more detailed levels of the hierarchical representation
of a specific image in the preceding row (lighter background). Trained on ImageNet-1K, our multi-level generation system, free of any
external conditioning (i.e., no class labels), learns a hierarchy that transitions from reflecting abstract semantic similarities to fine visual
details. Our code is available.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We introduce nested diffusion models, an efficient and powerful hierarchical generative framework that substantially
enhances the generation quality of diffusion models, particularly for images of complex scenes. Our approach employs
a series of diffusion models to progressively generate latent variables at different semantic levels. Each model in
this series is conditioned on the output of the preceding
higher-level models, culminating in image generation. Hierarchical latent variables guide the generation process along
predefined semantic pathways, allowing our approach to
capture intricate structural details. To construct these latent
variables, we leverage a pre-trained visual encoder, which
learns strong semantic visual representations, and modulate
its capacity via dimensionality reduction and noise injection.
Across multiple datasets, our system demonstrates significant enhancements in image quality for both unconditional
and class/text conditional generation. Moreover, our unconditional generation system substantially outperforms the
baseline conditional system. These advancements incur minimal computational overhead as the more abstract levels of
our hierarchy work with lower-dimensional representations.

Figure 2. Image generation quality when scaling our nested diffusion models on ImageNet-1K dataset. The deeper hierarchies
we build lead to a slight increase in computational overhead (particularly when L  4), as measured by GFlops, while significantly
improving the generation quality. Compared to the single-level
baseline model using comparable GFlops, our 5-level unconditional
system significantly improves the performance w/o classifier-free
guidance (CFG) by reducing FID from 45.19 to 11.05, exceeding
the class-conditional baseline of 19.74.

The modern era of computer vision opened with deep networks driving advances in representation learning: mapping
images, patches, or pixels to feature vectors that encode semantic information and support a range of downstream tasks
such as classification [22, 39, 60], segmentation [20, 45],

* Equal contribution. 1 Department of Computer Science, The Univer-

sity of Chicago 2 Department of Statistics, The University of Chicago.
Correspondence to: Xiao Zhang <zhang7@uchicago.edu>, Ruoxi Jiang
<roxie62@uchicago.edu>.

2502

