This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VL-RewardBench: A Challenging Benchmark for Vision-Language Generative
Reward Models
Lei Li1∗ Yuancheng Wei2∗
Chenxin An1 Tianyu Liu4
1

HKU

2

Zhihui Xie1∗ Xuqing Yang3∗
Sujian Li4 Bill Yuchen Lin5,6
SCUT

3

SJTU

4

PKU

5

UW

Yifan Song4 Peiyi Wang4
Lingpeng Kong1 Qi Liu1
6

Allen AI

{nlp.lilei, wyc528813339, zhxieml, catalpabungeiyang}@gmail.com

Query: How many sinks and mirrors
are there in the public restroom?

Abstract

Answer 1 (Chosen)
:
There are three sinks and three mirrors
in the public restroom.

Vision-language generative reward models (VLGenRMs) play a crucial role in aligning and evaluating
multimodal AI systems, yet their own evaluation remains
under-explored. Current assessment methods primarily
rely on AI-annotated preference labels from traditional VL
tasks, which can introduce biases and often fail to effectively challenge state-of-the-art models. To address these
limitations, we introduce VL-RewardBench, a comprehensive benchmark spanning general multimodal queries,
visual hallucination detection, and complex reasoning
tasks. Through our AI-assisted annotation pipeline that
combines sample selection with human verification, we
curate 1,250 high-quality examples specifically designed
to probe VL-GenRMs limitations. Comprehensive evaluation across 16 leading large vision-language models
demonstrates VL-RewardBench’s effectiveness as a challenging testbed, where even GPT-4o achieves only 65.4%
accuracy, and state-of-the-art open-source models such
as Qwen2-VL-72B, struggle to surpass random-guessing.
Importantly, performance on VL-RewardBench strongly
correlates (Pearson’s r > 0.9) with MMMU-Pro accuracy
using Best-of-N sampling with VL-GenRMs. Analysis
experiments uncover three critical insights for improving
VL-GenRMs: (i) models predominantly fail at basic
visual perception tasks rather than reasoning tasks; (ii)
inference-time scaling benefits vary dramatically by model
capacity; and (iii) training VL-GenRMs to learn to judge
substantially boosts judgment capability (+14.7% accuracy
for a 7B VL-GenRM). We believe VL-RewardBench along
with the experimental insights will become a valuable
resource for advancing VL-GenRMs.
Project page:
https://vl-rewardbench.github.io.

Answer 2 (Rejected)
:
In the image, there are two sinks and
four mirrors equipped with sensor taps
alongside a matching set of hand dryers
hanging above.
Qwen2-VL-7B

Answer 2 is better, which accurately
states that there are two sinks and
four mirrors in the image.

Llama-3.2-90B

Answer 2 is better because it
accurately describes the visual
elements in the image, fully addresses
all aspects of the question.

Claude-3.5-Sonnet

Answer 2 provides a more accurate,
complete, and informative response
to the question while maintaining
clarity and relevance. It correctly
identifies the number of sinks and
mirrors and offers additional details
about the restroom that enhance the
overall understanding of the space.

Figure 1. An example from our VL-RewardBench asking the visual details in a restroom. Open-source VL-GenRMs (Qwen2VL-7B [48] and Llama-3.2-90B [13]) and the commercial model
(Claude-3.5-Sonnet [3]) all fail to provide accurate judgments.

1. Introduction

∗ Core contributors.

Large vision-language models (LVLMs) such as GPT4o [34] have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across
diverse multimodal perception and cognition tasks [15, 16,
61]. Building on these capabilities, LVLMs are increasingly being deployed as vision-language generative reward
models (VL-GenRMs) to automatically assess model responses [27, 55, 65]. This LVLM-as-a-judge paradigm has
emerged as a scalable solution for model alignment, enabling efficient model ranking and high-quality sample selection [21, 60, 71].
The development of reliable VL-GenRMs is fundamental to three key aspects of LVLM advancement. First, robust
evaluation metrics enable systematic and scalable assessment of model performance, crucial for tracking progress
and identifying areas for improvement [17, 19]. Second,
high-quality automated judges facilitate synthetic training

24657

