This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Foundation Model-Agnostic Slide-Level Representation Learning
Tim Lenz1 *, Peter Neidlinger1 ∗ , Marta Ligero1 , Georg Wölﬂein1,2 , Marko van Treeck1 ,
Jakob N. Kather1,3,4
1
EKFZ for Digital Health TU Dresden, 2 University of St Andrews,
3
Heidelberg University Hospital, 4 University Hospital Dresden
{tim.lenz,peter.neidlinger,jakob nikolas.kather}@tu-dresden.de

Abstract
Representation learning of pathology whole-slide images
(WSIs) has primarily relied on weak supervision with Multiple Instance Learning (MIL). This approach leads to slide
representations highly tailored to a speciﬁc clinical task.
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has been successfully applied to train histopathology foundation models (FMs) for
patch embedding generation. However, generating patient
or slide level embeddings remains challenging. Existing approaches for slide representation learning extend the principles of SSL from patch level learning to entire slides by
aligning different augmentations of the slide or by utilizing
multimodal data. By integrating tile embeddings from multiple FMs, we propose a new single modality SSL method
in feature space that generates useful slide representations.
Our contrastive pretraining strategy, called C OBRA, employs multiple FMs and an architecture based on Mamba2. C OBRA exceeds performance of state-of-the-art slide
encoders on four different public Clinical Protemic Tumor
Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) cohorts on average by at
least +4.4% AUC, despite only being pretrained on 3048
WSIs from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Additionally, C OBRA is readily compatible at inference time with
previously unseen feature extractors. Code available at
https://github.com/KatherLab/COBRA.

1. Introduction
In recent years, self-supervised learning (SSL) has emerged
as a foundational approach in Computational Pathology
(CPath), providing the basis for weakly supervised models
to achieve remarkable results in diagnostic, prognostic, and
treatment response prediction tasks [3, 4, 10, 11, 19, 24, 26–
28, 32, 37, 39, 41, 44, 47]. By capturing informative, lowdimensional representations from unannotated whole-slide
images (WSIs), SSL has enabled weakly supervised mod* Equal contribution

els to use these features for downstream tasks, effectively
bridging the gap between high-resolution data and the limited availability of fully annotated datasets. SSL excels in
generating low-dimensional feature representations for gigapixel WSIs, which can reach dimensions of 150,000 ×
150,000 pixels (px), making them challenging to process
with Vision Transformers (ViTs) [8] due to memory constraints. Consequently, most CPath approaches tessellate
WSIs into smaller patches and extract low-dimensional embeddings for these patches using pretrained histopathology
foundation models (FMs) [23]. Typically, these patch embeddings are used in weakly-supervised models for downstream classiﬁcation tasks via multiple-instance learning
(MIL) [7, 16, 35].
In addition to patch-based representations, SSL can also
generate slide-level embeddings without any human annotations [20, 21, 46]. Pretrained SSL models can be leveraged
to achieve impressive results on downstream tasks with
minimal labeled data for task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning, offering
practical advantages like reduced labeling costs, elimination
of noisy labels inherent to inter-observer variability, and improved generalizability through label-free representations.
Central to SSL is the alignment of multiple representations
of WSIs or related modalities (e.g., morphological text descriptions) into a shared latent space using contrastive learning or other similarity-based pretraining methods. However,
generating effective augmentations to create these representations remains challenging. While image-level augmentations have been widely explored for patch-based learning,
they may fail to produce diverse feature augmentations, as
many modern FMs are designed to be invariant to these
transformations [29, 43]. Other approaches, such as using different stainings (e.g., hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
combined with immunohistochemistry (IHC)), have shown
potential but are limited by the availability of multi-stained
tissue samples [18]. Similarly, aligning multiple modalities,
such as text or gene expression data, has produced promising results but is constrained by the limited availability of
such datasets and requires additional compute to process the

30807

