This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sonic: Shifting Focus to Global Audio Perception in Portrait Animation
Xiaozhong Ji1* Xiaobin Hu1*B Zhihong Xu2 Junwei Zhu1† Chuming Lin1 Qingdong He1
Jiangning Zhang1 Donghao Luo1 Yi Chen1 Qin Lin1 Qinglin Lu1 Chengjie Wang1
1
Tencent 2 Zhejiang University
High Lip Sync

Ref Image

Vivid Facial Expressions

Ref Image

Input audio: An educational conversation

Input audio: A soulful Cantonese song

Diverse Head Motion

Stable Long Video Generation
Input audio: A
concert with
multiple songs

Parallel generating

Ref Image

…

Input audio:
An impassioned
speech

Ref Image

1s

10s

…

1min

…

10min

Figure 1. Sonic excels in producing vivid portrait animation videos given a reference image and an audio clip. Beyond its fundamental
lip-syncing capabilities, Sonic demonstrates proficiency in creating a diverse spectrum of facial expressions and adaptable head movements.
Notably, when dealing with extented videos, Sonic can yield stable and seamless outcomes in a parallel fashion, all while maintaining an
unified paradigm focusing on global audio perception.

Abstract

which long-range intra-clip temporal audio knowledge is
extracted to provide facial expression and lip motion priors implicitly expressed as the tone and speed of speech.
2). Motion-decoupled controller, in which the motion of
the head and expression movement are disentangled and independently controlled by intra-audio clips. Most importantly, for inter-clip audio perception, as a bridge to connect the intra-clips to achieve the global perception, Timeaware position shift fusion, in which the global inter-clip
audio information is considered and fused for long-audio
inference via through consecutively time-aware shifted windows. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the novel
audio-driven paradigm outperform existing SOTA methodologies in terms of video quality, temporally consistency, lip
synchronization precision, and motion diversity.

The study of talking face generation mainly explores the
intricacies of synchronizing facial movements and crafting
visually appealing, temporally-coherent animations. However, due to the limited exploration of global audio perception, current approaches predominantly employ auxiliary visual and spatial knowledge to stabilize the movements, which often results in the deterioration of the naturalness and temporal inconsistencies. Considering the
essence of audio-driven animation, the audio signal serves
as the ideal and unique priors to adjust facial expressions
and lip movements, without resorting to interference of any
visual signals. Based on this motivation, we propose a novel
paradigm, dubbed as Sonic, to shift focus on the exploration of global audio perception. To effectively leverage
global audio knowledge, we disentangle it into intra- and
inter-clip audio perception and collaborate with both aspects to enhance overall perception. For the intra-clip audio perception, 1). Context-enhanced audio learning, in

1. Introduction
Talking Face Animation is a technique aimed at creating a
lifelike representation of a speaking person by animating
a still image in sync with speech audio. This technology
holds great potential in enhancing the realism of virtual re-

* Equal Contribution, † Project Leader
B Corresponding Author
Project page: https://jixiaozhong.github.io/Sonic/.

193

