This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Wonderland: Navigating 3D Scenes From a Single Image
Hanwen Liang1,2* Junli Cao2,3* Vidit Goel2 Guocheng Qian2 Sergei Korolev2
Demetri Terzopoulos3 Konstantinos N. Plataniotis1 Sergey Tulyakov2 Jian Ren2
1

University of Toronto

2

Snap Inc.

3

University of California, Los Angeles

3D Space & Novel Views

Feed-forward 3D Reconstruction

Video latent space
3DGS

View 1

3DGS

View 2

View 1

3DGS

3DGS

View 1

View 2

View 2

View 1

View 2

Figure 1. Visual results generated by Wonderland. Given a single image, Wonderland reconstructs 3D scenes from the latent space of a
camera-guided video diffusion model in a feed-forward manner.

Abstract

generic 3D scenes. Extensive evaluations across various
datasets affirm that our model significantly outperforms existing single-view 3D scene generation methods, especially
with out-of-domain images. Thus, we demonstrate for the
first time that a 3D reconstruction model can effectively be
built upon the latent space of a diffusion model in order to
realize efficient 3D scene generation. Project page:

How can one efficiently generate high-quality, wide-scope
3D scenes from arbitrary single images? Existing methods
suffer several drawbacks, such as requiring multi-view data,
time-consuming per-scene optimization, distorted geometry
in occluded areas, and low visual quality in backgrounds.
Our novel 3D scene reconstruction pipeline overcomes
these limitations to tackle the aforesaid challenge. Specifically, we introduce a large-scale reconstruction model that
leverages latents from a video diffusion model to predict
3D Gaussian Splattings of scenes in a feed-forward manner. The video diffusion model is designed to create videos
precisely following specified camera trajectories, allowing
it to generate compressed video latents that encode multiview information while maintaining 3D consistency. We
train the 3D reconstruction model to operate on the video
latent space with a progressive learning strategy, enabling
the efficient generation of high-quality, wide-scope, and

https://snap-research.github.io/wonderland/

1. Introduction
Humans have an innate ability to perceive 3D information
from single images, effortlessly estimating distances, interpreting spatial arrangements, and mentally filling in occluded or neighboring regions of wide-scope 3D scenes.
Replicating this capability with learnable algorithms, however, is extremely difficult because of the limited geometric and contextual information in a single view. Recent advancements in learnable scene representations (e.g., Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [68] and 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [47]) show promise for rendering photo-realistic

* Equal contribution.

798

