This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Physics From Video:
Unsupervised Physical Parameter Estimation for Continuous Dynamical Systems
Alejandro Castañeda Garcia

Jan Warchocki
Jan van Gemert
Delft University of Technology

Daan Brinks

Nergis Tömen

Abstract
Extracting physical dynamical system parameters from
recorded observations is key in natural science. Current
methods for automatic parameter estimation from video train
supervised deep networks on large datasets. Such datasets
require labels, which are difficult to acquire. While some
unsupervised techniques–which depend on frame prediction–
exist, they suffer from long training times, initialization instabilities, only consider motion-based dynamical systems,
and are evaluated mainly on synthetic data. In this work,
we propose an unsupervised method to estimate the physical parameters of known, continuous governing equations
from single videos suitable for different dynamical systems
beyond motion and robust to initialization. Moreover, we
remove the need for frame prediction by implementing a
KL-divergence-based loss function in the latent space, which
avoids convergence to trivial solutions and reduces model
size and compute. We first evaluate our model on synthetic
data, as commonly done. After which, we take the field
closer to reality by recording Delfys75: our own real-world
dataset of 75 videos for five different types of dynamical
systems to evaluate our method and others. Our method
compares favorably to others. Code and data are available online: https://github.com/Alejandroneuro/Learning_physics_from_video.

Figure 1. We propose a novel unsupervised approach to physical
parameter estimation from videos. Black squares are video frames
with different states of a white pendulum. Starting from a frame
at time t (center) an encoder estimates the dynamical states zt .
A learnable physics block (Physics ODE) solves the dynamical
system equations to predict future states ẑt+1 in latent space (blue
lines). Previous state-of-the-art methods (left) then use decoders
and a reconstruction loss (L, purple left) to train the physics ODE
block. In contrast, our method (right) completely avoids the need
for a decoder by leveraging a loss function in the latent space (L,
blue right). Our loss function minimizes the distance between the
estimated states ẑt+1 and zt+1 .

1. Introduction
Estimating dynamical parameters of physical and biological
systems from videos allows relating visual data to known
governing equations which can be used to make predictions,
improve mathematical models, understand diseases, and,
in general, advance our knowledge in science and technology [7, 20, 37]. Use cases include trajectory prediction for
celestial objects [17], healthy and diseased tissue characterization [16], and physical model validation [7, 8].
Fitting governing equations is an inverse problem [2],
which often requires using additional sensors to directly
measure system states. Video-based measurements can eliminate the need for additional sensors, yet, require manually

labelling pixels or video frames which is time-consuming
and expensive. Therefore, automated and unsupervised methods are key to extract dynamics from videos and accurately
estimate physical parameters [7, 17, 19, 20, 37].
Recent work addressed parameter estimation from video
by deep learning [7, 8, 43] or reinforcement learning [3].
Supervised methods rely on datasets with extensive and
high precision labels which are exceedingly difficult to obtain [1, 4, 29, 31, 40]. To avoid labeling, current unsupervised methods for estimating physical parameters build
on encoder-decoder network designs: reconstructing video
frames from low-dimensional representations. However,

27924

