This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PLeaS — Merging Models with Permutations and Least Squares
Anshul Nasery† *
†

⋄

University of Washington

Abstract
The democratization of machine learning systems has made
the process of fine-tuning accessible to practitioners, leading to a wide range of open-source models fine-tuned on
specialized tasks and datasets. Recent work has proposed to
merge such models to combine their functionalities. However, prior approaches are usually restricted to models that
are fine-tuned from the same base model. Furthermore,
the final merged model is typically required to be of the
same size as the original models. In this work, we propose a new two-step algorithm to merge models—termed
PLeaS—which relaxes these constraints. First, leveraging the Permutation symmetries inherent in the two models, PLeaS partially matches nodes in each layer by maximizing alignment. Next, PLeaS computes the weights of
the merged model as a layer-wise Least Squares solution
to minimize the approximation error between the features
of the merged model and the permuted features of the original models. PLeaS allows a practitioner to merge two
models sharing the same architecture into a single performant model of a desired size, even when the two original
models are fine-tuned from different base models. We also
demonstrate how our method can be extended to address a
challenging scenario where no data is available from the
fine-tuning domains. We demonstrate our method to merge
ResNet and ViT models trained with shared and different label spaces, and show improvement over the state-of-the-art
merging methods of up to 15 percentage points for the same
target compute while merging models trained on DomainNet and fine-grained classification tasks1 .

1. Introduction
With the widespread democratization of machine learning, there has been a rapid increase in the availability of
open-source models trained by the community on specific
tasks and datasets. Such specialized models exhibit unique
* Equal Contribution. Correspondence to anasery@cs.washington.edu
1 Code open-sourced at https://github.com/SewoongLab/

PLeaS-Merging

Pang Wei Koh†⋄

Jonathan Hayase† *

Sewoong Oh†

Allen Institute for AI

strengths and weaknesses. For example, Code Llama [25]
(fine-tuned from Llama-2) is specialized for coding, while
Vicuña 1.3 [3] (fine-tuned from Llama-1) is specialized for
chat. They have the same architecture but are fine-tuned
starting from different pre-trained models: Llama-1 and
Llama-2. Such diversity in the combination of pre-training
data and fine-tuning tasks will only increase as decentralized marketplaces for models become increasingly more
common, e.g., [24], providing practitioners with more options.
This presents an opportunity to combine such specialized
models in order to create a single general-purpose model
that can handle multiple tasks. Traditional approaches
for combining trained models, such as ensembling [7] or
domain-specific mixture-of-experts (e.g. [13]), take a step
towards this goal. However, these methods need to store all
the component models at inference time, leading to an increased memory footprint. Practitioners with limited memory capacity cannot use such approaches with high and fixed
memory costs, especially when combining large models,
deploying to resource-constrained environments, or for applications demanding a memory-performance trade-off.
To this end, recent works [12, 33, 35, 36] have proposed
new algorithms tackling this problem of model merging.
However, their scope is limited to merging models finetuned from the same pretrained model. Further, some recent works [28] also need access to the training data used
to fine-tune the component models, which limits their applicability in situations where such data is not available due to,
for example, privacy or legal reasons [5]. In this paper, we
address the problem of merging models (sharing the same
architecture) trained on different datasets starting from different initializations. This is motivated by prior work (e.g.,
[10, 28, 34]), which we compare with in Section 5 for merging ResNet and ViT models. To address the above limitations of prior work in this space, we present PLeaS—an
algorithm which adaptively merges models for different inference compute budgets, and can work without using the
fine-tuning data of the component models.
PLeaS (short for Permutations and Least Squares) is a
two-stage algorithm which works with models having the

30493

