This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fitted Neural Lossless Image Compression
Zhe Zhang1 Zhenzhong Chen1∗ Shan Liu2
1
Wuhan University, China 2 Tencent Media Lab, USA
{zhe zhang, zzchen}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural lossless image compression methods have recently achieved impressive compression ratios by fitting
neural networks to represent data distributions of large
datasets. However, these methods often require complex
networks to capture intricate data distributions effectively,
resulting in high decoding complexity. In this paper, we
present a novel approach named Fitted Neural Lossless Image Compression (FNLIC) that enhances efficiency through
a two-phase fitting process. For each image, a latent variable model is overfitted to optimize the representation of
the individual image’s probability distribution, which is inherently simpler than the distribution of an entire dataset
and requires less complex neural networks. Additionally,
we pre-fit a lightweight autoregressive model on a comprehensive dataset to learn a beneficial prior for overfitted models. To improve coordination between the pre-fitting
and overfitting phases, we introduce independent fitting for
the pre-fitter and the adaptive prior transformation for the
overfitted model. Extensive experimental results on highresolution datasets show that FNLIC achieves competitive
compression ratios compared to both traditional and neural
lossless image compression methods, with decoding complexity significantly lower than other neural methods of similar performance. The code is at https://github.
com/ZZ022/FNLIC.

via fitting neural networks to represent the distributions of
images from large training datasets. With the effective architecture design, they have achieved superior compression
ratios compared to traditional codecs [28, 49]. However,
the complexity of high-dimensional distributions in large
datasets means that current methods require intricate neural
network architectures to effectively represent these distributions. This reliance on complex architectures results in limited decoding efficiency and high computational demands,
which limits their practical use.
Recently, an alternative approach for lossy compression
based on overfitting has been introduced [8]. Rather than
fitting for a dataset, these methods optimize for every image. Originally, the distorted image is represented by network parameters that mapped from coordinates to pixel values. During encoding, network parameters are overfitted to
the image and encoded into the bitstream. Subsequently,
the Cool-Chic series [17, 24, 25] proposes representing the
distorted image via mappings from latent variables to pixel
values, with latent variables encoded using autoregressive
models. In this approach, both network parameters and
latent variables are overfitted and encoded, significantly
improving compression ratios to rival advanced standards
such as VVC [6], while having significantly lower decoding complexity compared with other neural codecs.

1. Introduction

Motivated by the success of the Cool-Chic series [17,
24, 25] in lossy compression, we introduce the overfittingbased method for lossless image compression to offer competitive compression ratios with low complexity. Instead of
representing the distorted image, we represent the image’s
probability distribution through overfitted latent variables
and network parameters. This approach can be viewed as an
overfitted form of the latent variable model, a method commonly used in neural lossless compression [27, 34]. Once
the image’s probability distribution is established, the image can be encoded using entropy coding techniques [7, 42].
Since each neural network only needs to represent the distribution of a single image, rather than a large dataset, the
overall complexity is significantly reduced, resulting in a
more efficient compression process.

Image compression is essential for efficient storage and
transmission of images. Various sectors, such as medical
imaging and remote sensing, demand strict standards for
image fidelity. In these fields, lossless compression techniques are critical because they reduce file size without introducing any distortion while meeting the high demands
for accuracy and quality.
Built upon Shannon’s source coding theorem [31], current neural lossless compression methods compress images
∗ Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by National
Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62036005) and Tencent.

However, the network parameters in overfitted latent

23249

