This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gen3DEval: Using vLLMs for Automatic Evaluation of Generated 3D Objects
Shalini Maiti*†
*

Lourdes Agapito†

Meta AI

†

Filippos Kokkinos*

University College London

Evaluation on Appearance

Evaluation on Text Fidelity

Evaluation on Surface Quality

Object 1

Object 2

Object 1

Object 1

Object 2

Object 1

Object 2

Object 1

Object 2

Object 2

Prompt: "A human ninja with a mask and dual katanas”

Gen3DEval

Object 1 is preferred over Object 2

Wθ

Figure 1. Gen3DEval: A holistic ranking metric to assess the quality of generated 3D objects on appearance, surface quality and text
fidelity using a vision large language model (vLLM) which is trained to choose the better out of two objects on the three evaluation
dimensions (appearance, text fidelity or surface quality).

Abstract

1. Introduction
The domain of text-to-3D generation has advanced significantly in recent years, driven by the rise of scalable architectures like diffusion models [43], neural radiance fields
(NeRF) [36], and Gaussian splatting [25]. However, the
field lacks standardized, human-aligned evaluation metrics
that can reliably assess these assets and the methods that
produce them. Existing metrics—such as CLIP [42] scores
evaluate only limited aspects of the output like text fidelity
and similarity-based measures like Peak-Signal-To-Noise
Ratio (PSNR), SSIM [55], Chamfer Distance, and Fréchet
Inception Distance (FID) [20] depend on ground-truth data
making them inadequate and impractical for text-to-3D generation, where diverse outputs may correspond to a single
prompt. In such cases, a unique, universally applicable reference does not exist, as multiple plausible 3D outputs can
vary widely in style, appearance, and fidelity to the text.
Meanwhile, FID computes a distributional similarity, which
poses other challenges. Currently, there is no standardized
large-scale validation set to serve as the ground-truth distri-

Rapid advancements in text-to-3D generation require robust and scalable evaluation metrics that align closely with
human judgment, a need unmet by current metrics such as
PSNR and CLIP, which require ground-truth data or focus only on prompt fidelity. To address this, we introduce
Gen3DEval, a novel evaluation framework that leverages
vision large language models (vLLMs) specifically finetuned for 3D object quality assessment. Gen3DEval evaluates text fidelity, appearance, and surface quality by analyzing 3D surface normals, without requiring ground-truth
comparisons, bridging the gap between automated metrics
and user preferences. Compared to state-of-the-art taskagnostic models, Gen3DEval demonstrates superior performance in user-aligned evaluations, placing it as a comprehensive and accessible benchmark for future research on
text-to-3D generation. The project page can be found here:
https://shalini-maiti.github.io/gen3deval.github.io/.

18552

