This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-Rejective Open-Set SAR Image Registration
Shasha Mao1 , Shiming Lu1 , Zhaolong Du1 , Licheng Jiao1∗ , Shuiping Gou1 , Luntian Mou2 ,
Xuequan Lu3 , Lin Xiong4 , Yimeng Zhang1∗
1
2
Xidian University, Beijing University of Technology, 3 University of Western Australia, 4 ShensiliCon

Abstract
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) image registration is an essential upstream task in geoscience applications, in which
pre-detected keypoints from two images are employed as
observed objects to seek matched-point pairs. In general, the registration is regarded as a typical closed-set
classification, which forces each keypoint to be classified into the given classes, but ignoring an essential issue
that numerous redundant keypoints are beyond the given
classes, which unavoidably results in capturing incorrect
matched-point pairs. Based on this, we propose a CrossRejective Open-set SAR Image Registration (CroR-OSIR)
method. In this work, these redundant keypoints are regarded as out-of-distribution (OOD) samples, and we formulate the registration as a special open-set task with two
modules: supervised contrastive feature-tuning and crossrejective open-set recognition (CroR-OSR). Unlike traditional open-set recognition, all samples, including OOD
samples, are available in the CroR-OSR module. CroROSR conducts the closed-set classifications in individual
open-set domains from two images, meanwhile employing
the cross-domain rejection during training, to exclude these
OOD samples based on confidence and consistency. Moreover, a new supervised contrastive tuning strategy is incorporated for feature-tuning. Especially, the cross-domain estimation labels obtained by CroR-OSR are fed back to the
feature-tuning module for feature-tuning, to enhance feature discriminability. The experimental results illustrate
that the proposed method achieves more precise registration than the state-of-the-art methods. The code is released
at https://github.com/XDyaoshi/CroR-OSIR-main.

Figure 1. An illustration of Closed-Set Registration and CroR
Open-Set Registration. Here, there are eight and seven predetected keypoints respectively marked on two SAR images, including three matched-point pairs labeled in red boxes and nine
redundant keypoints labeled in blue boxes. It is seen that these
redundant keypoints are forcefully classified to the seven classes
given in closed-set registration, but they would be excluded into
the reject-domain in CroR Open-Set Registration.

1. Introduction

views or phases, resulting in inevitable diversities among
them even in the same region, which increases the difficulty
of SAR image processing [9]. Therefore, SAR image registration [31] has become an indispensable task in SAR image
processing, especially when different images are analyzed
simultaneously, and the registration precision of SAR images is essential for other downstream tasks, such as change
detection [23], target tracking [8], image fusion [28], etc.
In SAR image registration, a common workflow involves first detecting keypoints on two SAR images and
then employing them as observed objects to seek out the
matched-point pairs between two images for registration.
The matched-point pairs are more accurate, the registration
is more precise. At present, the deep learning-based (DLbased) registration has become a research hotspot of SAR
image registration. Earlier, in most DL-based registration
methods [17, 26, 39, 43, 45], SAR image registration is
treated as a classical binary classification problem that predicts whether a pair of keypoints are matched or not, and
the predicted matched-point pairs are used to estimate the
registration matrix. Recently, researchers have considered
each keypoint as an independent category [6, 18] and then

Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) [20] has rich imaging
characteristics with all-weather and high-resolution, and it
has been widely applied in military and civilian fields. Nevertheless, SAR images are generally captured in different
∗ Corresponding Authors.

E-mail:lchjiao@mail.xidian.edu.cn; zhangyimeng@xidian.edu.cn

23027

