This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-party Collaborative Attention Control for Image Customization
Han Yang1,2

Chuanguang Yang1∗
Qiuli Wang3
Zhulin An1∗
Weilun Feng1,2
Libo Huang1
Yongjun Xu1
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Department of Radiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Army Medical University, Chongqing, China
{yanghan22s, yangchuanguang, anzhulin, huanglibo, fengweilun24s, xyj}@ict.ac.cn
{wangqiuli@tmmu.edu.cn}

image condition or text condition

Abstract

Self-attention layer

The rapid advancement of diffusion models has increased
the need for customized image generation. However, current customization methods face several limitations: 1)
typically accept either image or text conditions alone; 2)
customization in complex visual scenarios often leads to
subject leakage or confusion; 3) image-conditioned outputs tend to suffer from inconsistent backgrounds; and 4)
high computational costs. To address these issues, this paper introduces Multi-party Collaborative Attention Control
(MCA-Ctrl), a tuning-free method that enables high-quality
image customization using both text and complex visual
conditions. Specifically, MCA-Ctrl leverages two key operations within the self-attention layer to coordinate multiple parallel diffusion processes and guide the target image
generation. This approach allows MCA-Ctrl to capture the
content and appearance of specific subjects while maintaining semantic consistency with the conditional input. Additionally, to mitigate subject leakage and confusion issues
common in complex visual scenarios, we introduce a Subject Localization Module that extracts precise subject and
editable image layers based on user instructions. Extensive
quantitative and human evaluation experiments show that
MCA-Ctrl outperforms existing methods in zero-shot image
customization, effectively resolving the mentioned issues.

or “a cat in the snow”

condition

subject image

image
condition
MCA-Ctrl

MCA-Ctrl

text
condition

Figure 1. The pipeline of MCA-Ctrl.

there has been an increasing demand for customized image
creation [11, 18, 21, 28].
Image customization involves maintaining the identity
and essence of a subject from a reference image while creating new representations under text or visual conditions.
Traditionally, this has involved inverting the visual representation of the subject into a textual latent space and reconstructing new subject images through placeholders [11, 28].
However, this process often requires extensive fine-tuning
or costly optimization for each subject. To address these
challenges, certain approaches, such as IP-Adapter [35] and
BLIP-Diffusion [19], have been developed to reduce training costs and enhance zero-shot performance by training a
multimodal encoder and an alignment projection layer between image and text representations. BLIP-Diffusion [19]
incorporates the transformed image representation into the
prompt to guide image generation and editing. The series of
works on IP-Adapter [35] treats the image representation as
another form of prompt, employing the same cross-attention
mechanism with text to introduce consistency.
However, whether subject representation is derived
through inversion or a multimodal encoder, several limitations remain: (1) Lower controllability, primarily textdriven. Some works [5, 11, 16, 28, 35] are driven solely by
text, which introduce uncertainties in the background, layout, and other elements. Some recent studies [12, 20] suggest using image condition to enhance control over back-

1. Introduction
Recent advances in generative artificial intelligence
(GenAI) have greatly enhanced text-to-image (T2I) models
[8–10, 15, 23, 24, 26, 27, 33, 36], enabling them to generate
realistic images from user prompts. As T2I models evolve,
∗ Corresponding author.
Code: https://github.com/yanghan-yh/MCA-Ctrl

7942

