This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vision-Guided Action: Enhancing 3D Human Motion Prediction with
Gaze-informed Affordance in 3D Scenes

1

Ting Yu1
Yi Lin1 Jun Yu 2
Zhenyu Lou3
Qiongjie Cui4†
2
Hangzhou Normal University, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
3
Zhejiang University, 4 Singapore University of Technology and Design
yut@hznu.edu.cn

qiongjie_cui@sutd.edu.sg

Figure 1. The proposed GAP3DS: Gaze-informed Affordance for human pose Prediction in 3D Scenes. Compared to the state-of-theart SIF3D [41] utilizing the position of human gaze (yellow cross), GAP3DS is able to identify the intended object (green) and infer its
affordance, where both position and affordance information are used to guide the motion prediction. It therefore achieves more accurate
predicted poses, and performs significant gains for those poses where human-object interaction is expected (as highlighted in circled areas).

Abstract

1. Introduction

Recent advances in human motion prediction (HMP) have
shifted focus from isolated motion data to integrating
human-scene correlations. In particular, the latest methods leverage human gaze points, using their spatial coordinates to indicate intent—where a person might move within
a 3D environment. Despite promising trajectory results,
these methods often produce inaccurate poses by overlooking the semantic implications of gaze, specifically the affordances of observed objects, which indicate the possible interactions. To address this, we propose GAP3DS, an
affordance-aware HMP model that utilizes gaze-informed
object affordances to improve HMP in complex 3D environments. GAP3DS incorporates a gaze-guided affordance
learner to identify relevant objects in the scene and infer
their affordances based on human gaze, thus contextualizing future human-object interactions. This affordance information, enriched with visual features and gaze data, conditions the generation of multiple human-object interaction
poses, which are subsequently decoded into final motion
predictions. Extensive experiments on two datasets demonstrate that GAP3DS outperforms state-of-the-art methods in
both trajectory and pose accuracy, producing more physically consistent and contextually grounded predictions. For
more details and code, please refer to the project page.

Human motion prediction (HMP) aims to forecast future
human movements based on observed sequences of a person’s action. It is a crucial task in fields such as autonomous
driving, and human-robot interaction, which facilitates the
seamless and immediate responses of intelligent systems to
human behaviors [8, 36, 41, 42, 45, 71, 73].
Standard HMP approaches have primarily relied on
single-modality data, i.e., predicting future sequences based
solely on human motion, without considering additional
contextual cues or external information [9, 32, 41, 42, 44,
45, 66]. Within this framework, researchers develop various
architectures, including RNNs [6, 14, 44], CNNs [35, 52],
and MLPs [18], to capture temporal dependencies and spatial dynamics in motion data. Notably, Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCNs) [9, 36, 42, 67] have demonstrated particular effectiveness in HMP due to their ability to model
the human skeleton’s topological structure. Although these
single-modality methods have become standard, their isolated approach limits their effectiveness in complex realworld scenarios, where human actions are frequently influenced by surrounding objects and environmental context.

† The corresponding author.

Recent studies have increasingly focused on incorporating contextual cues—such as environmental structures
[20, 22, 65] and human gaze [41, 78]—to enhance the accuracy and realism of motion prediction. Notably, [41] utilizes real-captured point clouds to represent physical scenes

12335

