This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text Embedding is Not All You Need: Attention Control for Text-to-Image
Semantic Alignment with Text Self-Attention Maps
Jeeyung Kim→ , Erfan Esmaeili*, and Qiang Qiu
Purdue University
{jkim17, efakhabi, qqiu}@purdue.edu

Abstract
In text-to-image diffusion models, the cross-attention map
of each text token indicates the specific image regions attended. Comparing these maps of syntactically related tokens provides insights into how well the generated image
reflects the text prompt. For example, in the prompt, “a
black car and a white clock”, the cross-attention maps for
“black” and “car” should focus on overlapping regions to
depict a black car, while “car” and “clock” should not. Incorrect overlapping in the maps generally produces generation flaws such as missing objects and incorrect attribute
binding. Our study makes the key observations investigating
this issue in the existing text-to-image models: (1) the similarity in text embeddings between different tokens—used as
conditioning inputs—can cause their cross-attention maps
to focus on the same image regions; and (2) text embeddings often fail to faithfully capture syntactic relations already within text attention maps. As a result, such syntactic
relationships can be overlooked in cross-attention module,
leading to inaccurate image generation. To address this,
we propose a method that directly transfers syntactic relations from the text attention maps to the cross-attention
module via a test-time optimization. Our approach leverages this inherent yet unexploited information within text
attention maps to enhance image-text semantic alignment
across diverse prompts, without relying on external guidance. Our project page and code are available at: https:
//t-sam-diffusion.github.io/

Figure 1. The overview of our method. We leverage text selfattention matrix and optimize the latent noise (zt ) by minimizing
the distance between the cross-attention similarity matrix (S) and
the text self-attention matrix (T). This encourages integrating syntactic relationships into text-to-image diffusion models.

Prior studies [10] demonstrated that the cross-attention
map of each token in text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models
highlights the attended regions in the image and provides
clues about the spatial placement of elements corresponding to the tokens. In particular, [1, 21, 28] suggest that spatial alignment in cross-attention maps among related words
influences the fidelity of images to text prompts in Stable
Diffusion (SD) [29], as we also demonstrate in Section 4.1.
For instance, in the prompt a black car and a white clock, if
the cross-attention maps for car and clock overlap, unique
token contributions can dilute, potentially omitting one object. Conversely, if the maps for black (or white) and car
(or clock) diverge too much, attribute mis-binding can occur. This implies syntactically related words should ideally
have spatially aligned cross-attention maps, as discussed in
[8, 28]. However, the factors determining this spatial alignment between the maps remain poorly understood.
In our study, we first investigate the factors that con-

1. Introduction
Recent diffusion models can generate images from diverse
text prompts [4, 7, 29]. However, semantic discrepancies
often arise between the text and generated images, raising problems such as missing objects—where certain elements are overlooked—and attribute mis-binding—where
attributes are incorrectly assigned to subjects.
* Equal contribution.

8031

