This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Inbetweening through Frame-wise Conditions-Driven
Video Generation
Tianyi Zhu1

Dongwei Ren2, B Qilong Wang2 Xiaohe Wu1 Wangmeng Zuo1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Tianjin University

1

Abstract
Generative inbetweening aims to generate intermediate
frame sequences by utilizing two key frames as input. Although remarkable progress has been made in video generation models, generative inbetweening still faces challenges
in maintaining temporal stability due to the ambiguous interpolation path between two key frames. This issue becomes particularly severe when there is a large motion gap
between input frames. In this paper, we propose a straightforward yet highly effective Frame-wise Conditions-driven
Video Generation (FCVG) method that significantly enhances the temporal stability of interpolated video frames.
Specifically, our FCVG provides an explicit condition for
each frame, making it much easier to identify the interpolation path between two input frames and thus ensuring temporally stable production of visually plausible video
frames. To achieve this, we suggest extracting matched
lines from two input frames that can then be easily interpolated frame by frame, serving as frame-wise conditions
seamlessly integrated into existing video generation models. In extensive evaluations covering diverse scenarios
such as natural landscapes, complex human poses, camera movements and animations, existing methods often exhibit incoherent transitions across frames. In contrast, our
FCVG demonstrates the capability to generate temporally
stable videos using both linear and non-linear interpolation curves. Our project page and code are available at
https://fcvg-inbetween.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Given the presence of low framerate videos, the generation of high framerate videos has emerged as an active research area with a wide range of applications that demands
smooth and stable visual contents. Video interpolation or
inbetweening, which focuses on synthesizing intermediate
frames between two given frames, has been extensively
studied in the literature [7, 22, 23, 38, 61]. However, traditional video interpolation methods are inherently limited
in dealing with significant motions due to their reliance on

27968

optical flow for modeling frame motion. Recently, generative image-to-video (I2V) models have made remarkable
progress in generating coherent videos [4, 31], offering potential solutions to enhance framerates through generative
inbetweening [47, 53]. Compared to traditional video interpolation, generative inbetweening leverage the creative
ability of generative models and focuses more on handling
scenarios with larger time intervals.
When start and end frames are provided, it is a straightforward task to separately generate two coherent videos using an I2V model, but the challenge of inbetweening lies
in the ambiguity of the interpolation path caused by large
motions. To address this issue, a time reversal strategy [8]
is proposed to average the fusion of bidirectional diffusion
denoising steps conditioned on start and end frames. Then,
temporal attention layers in the I2V model are fine-tuned to
enhance motion coherence [47]. More recently, Yang et al.
[53] introduced a multi-channel sampling strategy to substitute direct average fusion. However, the ambiguity of interpolation path remains severe and often results in incoherent
transitions in generated videos, as shown in Fig. 1.
In this paper, our aim is to mitigate the ambiguity in interpolation path and achieve temporal stability in video generation. We propose a straightforward yet highly effective
Frame-wise Conditions-driven Video Generation (FCVG)
method. Our FCVG model provides an explicit condition
when generating each frame using an I2V model, making
it easier to identify the interpolation path between start and
end frames, and thus ensuring temporally stable production
of visually plausible video frames. Firstly, we extract two
conditions from the input key frames to establish robust correspondences between start and end frames using matched
lines. In addition, pose skeletons can be incorporated into
the conditions to better capture human poses. Subsequently,
linear interpolation is employed on a frame-by-frame basis
to interpolate the start and end conditions. These framewise conditions effectively alleviate ambiguity in determining the interpolation path, and can be seamlessly integrated
into the I2V model as control for video frame generation.
The linear frame-wise conditions for generative inbetweening are generally feasible from two perspectives: (i)

