This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Go-with-the-Flow:
Motion-Controllable Video Diffusion Models Using Real-Time Warped Noise
Ryan Burgert1,3 Yuancheng Xu1,4 Wenqi Xian1 Oliver Pilarski1 Pascal Clausen1
Mingming He1 Li Ma1 Yitong Deng2,5 Lingxiao Li2 Mohsen Mousavi1 Michael Ryoo3
Paul Debevec1 Ning Yu1†
1

Netflix Eyeline Studios 2 Netflix 3 Stony Brook University
4
University of Maryland 5 Stanford University
https://eyeline-research.github.io/Go-with-the-Flow/
Local object motion control

Abstract

x

Generative modeling aims to transform random noise
into structured outputs. In this work, we enhance video
diffusion models by allowing motion control via structured
latent noise sampling. This is achieved by just a change
in data: we pre-process training videos to yield structured noise. Consequently, our method is agnostic to diffusion model design, requiring no changes to model architectures or training pipelines. Specifically, we propose a
novel noise warping algorithm, fast enough to run in real
time, that replaces random temporal Gaussianity with correlated warped noise derived from optical flow fields, while
preserving the spatial Gaussianity. The efficiency of our
algorithm enables us to fine-tune modern video diffusion
base models using warped noise with minimal overhead,
and provide a one-stop solution for a wide range of userfriendly motion control: local object motion control, global
camera movement control, and motion transfer. The harmonization between temporal coherence and spatial Gaussianity in our warped noise leads to effective motion control
while maintaining per-frame pixel quality. Extensive experiments and user studies demonstrate the advantages of our
method, making it a robust and scalable approach for controlling motion in video diffusion models. Please see our
project webpage; source code and checkpoints are available on GitHub.

Input Image

Input Video

Depth Map

Global camera movement control

Optical Flows

Motion Transfer
Image-To-Video: Edited First Frame

Text-To-Video: “An outdoor hot tub”

Motion Transfer

Figure 1. Go-with-the-Flow presents a simple yet effective method
for motion-controllable video diffusion models based on optical
flow and noise warping. It only requires fine-tuning video diffusion models as a black box using warped noise patterns. Leveraging our models, we can (1) control the motion of individual objects
or parts of those objects, (2) direct the camera movement by providing global flow fields corresponding to the desired movements,
and (3) transfer the motion from input videos to target contexts.

The essence of generative modeling lies in producing order from chaos, learning to transform random noise from
latent space into structured outputs that align with the distribution of training data. In this paper, we propose a novel
approach to enhance generative model learning by proactively introducing partial order into latent space sampling.
Our work is motivated by the remarkable progress in
video diffusion generative models [3, 4, 6, 14, 15, 60]
and the equally significant challenges they face in terms
of controllability beyond text and image guidance. Finegrained interactive control over motion dynamics remains
an under-explored area due to the intricate spatiotemporal
correlations among video frames. The complexity of modern video diffusion architectures [6, 60], which leverage 3D
autoencoders [64] and spatiotemporal tokenizers [33], further complicates efforts to adapt models for effective motion

1. Introduction
“We adore chaos because we love to produce order.” — M. C. Escher, Dutch artist
† Project lead

13

