This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VELOCITI: Benchmarking Video-Language Compositional Reasoning
with Strict Entailment
Darshana Saravanan1

!

1

Varun Gupta1
Vineet Gandhi1

!

Darshan Singh1
Makarand Tapaswi1

!

Zeeshan Khan2

2
CVIT, IIIT Hyderabad, India
Inria, Paris, France
katha-ai.github.io/projects/velociti

Abstract
Action
Adversarial

A fundamental aspect of compositional reasoning in a
video is associating people and their actions across time.
Recent years have seen great progress in general-purpose
vision/video models and a move towards long-video understanding. While exciting, we take a step back and ask: are
today’s models good at compositional reasoning on short
videos? To this end, we introduce VELOCITI, a benchmark to study Video-LLMs by disentangling and assessing
the comprehension of agents, actions, and their associations across multiple events. We adopt the Video-Language
Entailment setup and propose StrictVLE that requires correct classification (rather than ranking) of the positive and
negative caption. We evaluate several models and observe
that even the best, LLaVA-OneVision (44.5%) and Gemini1.5-Pro (49.3%), are far from human accuracy at 93.0%.
Results show that action understanding lags behind agents,
and negative captions created using entities appearing in
the video perform worse than those obtained from pure
text manipulation. We also present challenges with ClassicVLE and multiple-choice (MC) evaluation, strengthening
our preference for StrictVLE. Finally, we validate that our
benchmark requires visual inputs of multiple frames making
it ideal to study video-language compositional reasoning.

Action
Manner

Action
Binding

Agent
Random

Agent
Binding

Event
Chronology

Agent
Coreference

Figure 1. A Venn diagram grouping VELOCITI’s seven tests (in
black) that evaluate a Video-LLM across different facets: Agent
Understanding, Action Understanding, and Multi-event Understanding. The benchmark is formulated as video-language entailment, where negative captions are created by manipulating text
(Text-inspired Negation) or from other parts of the same video (InVideo Negation). Best seen in color.

1. Introduction

ity to perform compositional reasoning. For video-language
models, we scope this in two steps: (i) comprehend atomic
entities, e.g. people and actions; and (ii) reason about them
compositionally and across time by building associations1 .
In recent years, strong visual (image) encoders are combined with powerful Large Language Models (LLMs) to
advance general-purpose vision [5, 9, 11, 23, 45]. A
similar approach is adapted for videos to create VideoLLMs [23, 28, 45, 48]. Keeping pace with the development
of new models, there is a flurry of work on evaluating them
(Tab. 1). Video researchers are also creating benchmarks to
study long video comprehension [7, 13, 15, 37]. However,
we take a step back and ask, are today’s Video-LLMs ready
to take on such challenges? Specifically, are they good at
compositional reasoning in short videos, arguably a prerequisite to tackle complex and long videos?
To this end, we introduce the VELOCITI, a benchmark

Near a parking lot, a man in a black hat smiles in a friendly
way at a woman in a purple shirt. To a reader, this dense description paints a clear picture about a short snippet (event)
of a video clip. We build a mental model of two people (referred here by their clothing), at a specified location, and a
short interaction between them. Reading further, the woman
claps as a man in grey pants spins on one leg. We are able
to associate that it is the same woman who is now cheering
at a third person (likely) that is performing stunts.
The above example illustrates an intelligent agent’s abil! Equal contribution

1 Associations can be thought as implicit tuples that a model attempts to
build while watching a video. Some examples include person-attribute
tuples: (man1, black hat), (woman, purple shirt), (man2, grey pants);
agent-action tuples: (man1, smiles at, woman), (man2, spins on one leg),
(woman, claps at, man2); or action-manner tuples: (smile, friendly way).

18914

