This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Minimizing Labeled, Maximizing Unlabeled:
An Image-Driven Approach for Video Instance Segmentation
Fangyun Wei1 * Jinjing Zhao1 * Kun Yan2† Chang Xu1†
1
The University of Sydney 2 Peking University
{fwei8714,jzha0100}@uni.sydney.edu.au

kyan2018@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Labeled Video Set (Large)

Traditional video instance segmentation (VIS) models rely
on extensive per-frame video annotations, which are both
time-consuming and costly. In this paper, we present MinMaxVIS, a novel VIS framework that reduces the dependency on fully labeled video datasets by utilizing a small
set of labeled images from the target domain along with a
large volume of general-domain, unlabeled images. MinMaxVIS operates in three stages: first, a preliminary segmentation model is trained on the small labeled set from
the target domain; this model then retrieves relevant instances from the unlabeled dataset to build a high-quality
pseudo-labeled set, ensuring a rich content alignment with
the target domain while avoiding the inefficiencies of largescale semi-supervised learning across the entire unlabeled
set. Finally, we train MinMaxVIS on a combination of labeled and pseudo-labeled data, addressing challenges such
as noise in pseudo-labels and instance association across
frames. To simulate object continuity, we augment static
images to create paired frames, allowing MinMaxVIS to
capture instance associations effectively. MinMaxVIS outperforms the prior image-driven approach, MinVIS, achieving superior mAP scores with significantly reduced labeled
data. For instance, MinMaxVIS with a Swin-L backbone attains 62.2 mAP on YouTube-VIS 2019 using only 2% labeled
data and additional unlabeled images from SA-1B. This surpasses MinVIS, which uses the same backbone trained on
fully labeled YouTube-VIS 2019, by 0.6 mAP.

(a) Traditional video-based VIS training.
Labeled Set
(Small)

General-Domain Unlabeled Set
(Huge)

(b) MinMaxVIS image-based training.
Figure 1. (a) Traditional VIS models rely on fully labeled video
frames with instance association across frames, demanding extensive manual annotations. (b) MinMaxVIS enables effective video
instance segmentation using only a small set of labeled targetdomain images and a vast amount of unlabeled general-domain
images, significantly reducing annotation costs while maximizing
data efficiency.

tation labels, class labels, and association labels that link
instances across frames. This approach, while effective,
demands extensive labeling, which is both time-consuming
and costly, especially for high-quality datasets with detailed
annotations.
In this paper, we introduce a novel VIS framework
that reduces dependency on fully labeled video data. As
shown in Figure 1, instead of relying on labeled video sequences, our approach, MinMaxVIS, requires only a minimal amount of labeled images from the target domain and

1. Introduction
The objective of video instance segmentation (VIS) is to
identify, segment, and consistently track each unique object instance across frames in a video sequence. Traditional
VIS methods [18, 20, 21, 25, 40] primarily rely on fully
labeled video datasets, where each frame requires segmen* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

19304

