This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Graph-Embedded Structure-Aware Perceptual Hashing for Neural Network
Protection and Piracy Detection

1

Ruiheng Liu1 , Haozhe Chen2, *, Boyao Zhao1 , Kejiang Chen1 , Weiming Zhang1 ,
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Digital Security, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Anhui University
{liurh2023@mail., zby26754980@mail., chenkj@, zhangwm@}ustc.edu.cn

23085@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract
The advancement of AI technology has significantly influenced production activities, increasing the focus on copyright protection for AI models. The perceptual hashing of
the model offers an efficient solution for retrieve the pirated
models. Existing methods, such as handcrafted featurebased and dual-branch network-based perceptual hashing,
have proven effective in detecting pirated models. However,
these approaches often struggle to differentiate nonpirated
models, leading to frequent false positives in model authentication and protection. To address this challenge, this paper proposes a structurally-aware perceptual model hashing technique that achieved reduced false positives while
maintaining high true positive rates. Specifically, we introduce a method for converting the diverse neural network
structures into graph structures suitable for DNN processing, then utilize a graph neural network to learn their structural features representation. Our approach integrates perceptual parameter-based model hashing, achieving robust
performance with higher detection accuracy and fewer false
positives. The experimental results show that the proposed
method has only 3% false alarm rate when detecting the
non-pirated model, and the detection accuracy of the pirated model reaches more than 98%.

Figure 1. An illustration of model perceptual hash for copyright
protection and model verification. The left subfigure illustrates
a scenario in which false positives occur in a model pirated detection scenario. User1 and User2 have their own models, which
have completely different structures. The model hash vulnerability leads to misidentification of similar models during the discrimination due to the hash distance less than threshold T . The right
subfigure depicts the application in a model authentication scenario. The adversary creates a backdoor model and wishes to exploit a vulnerability in the model hash to authenticate it as a legitimate model. The adversary crafts a model modification so that its
backdoor model matches the hash of the authenticated legitimate
model, fooling the authentication system.

1. Introduction
In recent years, a wide variety of neural networks [4, 5, 10,
13, 25, 31] have emerged and been applied to many aspects
of daily life. Out of respect for human intelligence and to
protect human ethics, the growing importance of neural network certification calls for specialized technologies to assist
developers in verifying their models and in identifying potential misuse, such as fine-tuning, pruning, or tampering
with replicated models.
* Corresponding author

Currently, three main techniques are used for model authentication and protection: model watermarking [6, 33],
model fingerprinting [17, 23] and model perceptual hashing [2, 28]. Model watermarking embeds copyright information into a model’s parameters, enabling legitimate users
to extract the watermark and confirm the model’s origin.
To avoid the need for retraining, researchers have proposed
model fingerprinting, which does not modify model parameters but instead designs adversarial examples to protect in-

20169

