This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rashomon Sets for Prototypical-Part Networks: Editing Interpretable Models in
Real-Time
Jon Donnelly
Duke University

Zhicheng Guo
Duke University

Alina Jade Barnett
Duke University

jon.donnelly@duke.edu

zhicheng.guo@duke.edu

alina.barnett@duke.edu

Hayden McTavish
Duke University

Chaofan Chen
University of Maine

Cynthia Rudin
Duke University

hayden.mctavish@duke.edu

chaofan.chen@maine.edu

cynthia@cs.duke.edu

Abstract

  





 
  

 
  

Interpretability is critical for machine learning models in
high-stakes settings because it allows users to verify the
model’s reasoning. In computer vision, prototypical part
models (ProtoPNets) have become the dominant model type
to meet this need. Users can easily identify ﬂaws in ProtoPNets, but ﬁxing problems in a ProtoPNet requires slow,
difﬁcult retraining that is not guaranteed to resolve the issue. This problem is called the “interaction bottleneck.” We
solve the interaction bottleneck for ProtoPNets by simultaneously ﬁnding many equally good ProtoPNets (i.e., a draw
from a “Rashomon set”). We show that our framework –
called Proto-RSet – quickly produces many accurate, diverse ProtoPNets, allowing users to correct problems in
real time while maintaining performance guarantees with
respect to the training set. We demonstrate the utility of
this method in two settings: 1) removing synthetic bias introduced to a bird-identiﬁcation model and 2) debugging a
skin cancer identiﬁcation model. This tool empowers nonmachine-learning experts, such as clinicians or domain experts, to quickly reﬁne and correct machine learning models
without repeated retraining by machine learning experts.



Ideal
Model


  
  

 

  






Final
Model

Figure 1. How Proto-RSet addresses the interaction bottleneck.
(Bottom) Without Proto-RSet, incorporating user feedback such
as “this prototype does not make sense, this other one would be
a better option” requires practitioners to make complicated adjustments to their training regime and train a whole new model.
This process can take hours, and be prohibitively slow when multiple rounds of feedback are required. (Top) Proto-RSet allows
practitioners to incorporate user feedback in real time by selecting different candidate models, eliminating the interaction bottleneck. Moreover, Proto-RSet guarantees that user constraints are
met, producing their ideal model.

totypes. The similarity of each prototype to a part of the input image is used to form a prediction. This allows users to
examine prototypes to check whether the model has learned
undesirable concepts and to identify cases that the model
considers similar, but that may not be meaningfully related.
As such, users can easily identify problems in a trained ProtoPNet. However, they cannot easily ﬁx problems in a ProtoPNet because incorporating feedback into a ProtoPNet requires changing model parameters. In the classic paradigm
for model troubleshooting, one would retrain the model
with added constraints or loss terms to encode user preferences, but reformulating the problem is time-consuming,

1. Introduction
In high stakes decision domains, there have been increasing calls for interpretable machine learning models [14–
16, 37]. This demand poses a challenge for image classiﬁcation, where deep neural networks offer far superior performance to traditional interpretable models.
Fortunately, case-based deep neural networks have been
developed to meet this challenge. These models — in particular, ProtoPNet [7] — follow a simple reasoning process
in which input images are compared to a set of learned pro-

4528

