This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Insightful Instance Features for 3D Instance Segmentation
Wonseok Roh1 Hwanhee Jung1 Giljoo Nam2 Dong In Lee1
Hyeongcheol Park1 Sang Ho Yoon3 Jungseock Joo4 Sangpil Kim1 *
1

Korea University

2

3

Meta

Abstract

KAIST

4

UCLA

Recent 3D Instance Segmentation methods typically encode hundreds of instance-wise candidates with instancespecific information in various ways and refine them into
final masks. However, they have yet to fully explore the
benefit of these candidates. They overlook the valuable
cues encoded in multiple candidates that represent different parts of the same instance, resulting in fragments. Also,
they often fail to capture the precise spatial range of 3D instances, primarily due to inherent noises from sparse and
unordered point clouds. In this work, to address these challenges, we propose IKNE, a novel instance-wise knowledge
enhancement approach. We first introduce an Instance-wise
Knowledge Aggregation (IKA) to associate scattered single
instance details by optimizing correlations among candidates representing the same instance. Moreover, we present
an Instance-wise Structural Guidance (ISG) to enhance the
spatial understanding of candidates using structural cues
from ambiguity-reduced features. Here, we utilize a simple
yet effective truncated singular value decomposition algorithm to minimize inherent noises of 3D features. In our
extensive experiments on large-scale datasets, ScanNetV2,
ScanNet200, S3DIS, and STPLS3D, IKNE outperforms existing works. We validate the effectiveness of our modules
in both kernel-based and transformer-based architectures.

tering algorithms (bottom-up) [6, 24, 45]. However, they
presuppose that the intermediate processes, such as bounding box detection [18] or heuristic voting mechanism [34],
generate near perfect results, which is often not the case.
Recently, kernel-based [19, 20, 32, 48] and transformerbased [29, 31, 39, 43] 3DIS approaches have been proposed, aiming to overcome the limitations of traditional
frameworks. Kernel-based methods leverage instanceaware kernels for dynamic convolution, which decodes instance masks. They represent instances as kernels, replacing clustering algorithms with point sampling processes.
On the other hand, transformer-based methods train instance queries to identify features about individual objects
using attention mechanisms. These queries enable the direct prediction of per-point categories and instance labels.
In both architectures, models utilize hundreds of instancewise candidate features, to estimate the final instance mask.
For example, ISBNet [32] (kernel-based) produces 256 instance kernels, and MAFT [29] (transformer-based) leverages 400 instance queries. However, despite the significant
improvements based on their architectural advantages, they
have yet to fully optimize the handling of these numerous
candidates and still face several challenges, as illustrated in
Fig. 1. To tackle these challenges, we introduce two main
modules, IKA and ISG, each thoughtfully designed to enhance the informativeness of instance candidate features.
First, we empirically observe that multiple candidates
from previous works often encode cues from the same single instance, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). These candidates are
then typically decoded into considerable fragment masks
representing different components of each instance, such as
the backrest or armrest of the sofa. In this work, to estimate the complete coverage of each instance, we introduce
an Instance-wise Knowledge Aggregation (IKA) network,
which integrates the scattered intelligence from multiple
fragments beyond relying solely on a few fragments based
on confidence scores. Specifically, we optimize the correlations among instance-wise candidate features, encouraging
the network to be aware of the distributed instance-specific
knowledge. We initially identify candidates representing
the same instance based on the similarity of their features, as

1. Introduction
3D Instance Segmentation (3DIS) is a fundamental 3D
computer vision task that significantly contributes to realworld applications. Given 3D point cloud scenes, the 3DIS
task identifies respective instances and assigns semantic
class labels with the goal of comprehensively understanding entire spatial environments. In real-life 3D scenarios,
substantial occlusion and truncation commonly arise, especially when objects are overlapped or obscured by others. To tackle these challenges, early approaches mainly
focused on accurately generating region proposals (topdown) [21, 50, 52] or effectively grouping points with clus* Corresponding author (spk7@korea.ac.kr)

14057

