This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MARBLE: Material Recomposition and Blending in CLIP-Space
Ta Ying Cheng*
University of Oxford

Prafull Sharma
MIT CSAIL

Mark Boss
Stability AI

Varun Jampani
Stability AI

Material Blending
Material 2

Material 1
25%

50%

Material Transfer and Parametric Control

75%

Material

Context

Material Edited Image

Decrease

Metallic

Increase

Figure 1. Overview. We present MARBLE, a method for performing various material editing in images such as material blending (top row)
and parametric control of material properties (bottom row) leveraging CLIP-space and pre-trained generative models. Given two material
exemplar images, we can achieve a controllable blend of materials on the object by blending the material representation in CLIP-space. For
parametric material attribute control, we learn a shallow network using synthetic data to predict the direction in CLIP-space for changing
specific material properties such as metallic.

Abstract
Editing materials of objects in images based on exemplar
images is an active area of research in computer vision and
graphics. We propose MARBLE, a method for performing
material blending and recomposing fine-grained material
properties by finding material embeddings in CLIP-space
and using that to control pre-trained text-to-image models.
We improve exemplar-based material editing by finding a
block in the denoising UNet responsible for material attribution. Given two material exemplar-images, we find directions in the CLIP-space for blending the materials. Further,
we can achieve parametric control over fine-grained material attributes such as roughness, metallic, transparency,
and glow using a shallow network to predict the direction
for the desired material attribute change. We perform qual-

itative and quantitative analysis to demonstrate the efficacy
of our proposed method. We also present the ability of our
method to perform multiple edits in a single forward pass
and applicability to painting.

1. Introduction

13061

Editing object materials such as diffuse albedo, roughness, etc. in images is instrumental for graphics and vision
applications such as game design, advertising, and visual
content creation. Performing material editing in a single
image using traditional graphics techniques requires understanding of several object and environment properties such
* Work was done during internship at Stability AI.

