This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UPME: An Unsupervised Peer Review Framework for
Multimodal Large Language Model Evaluation
Qihui Zhang1,3* Munan Ning1* Zheyuan Liu1,3 Yue Huang4 Shuo Yang1
Yanbo Wang1 Jiayi Ye1 Xiao Chen5 Yibing Song2,3 Li Yuan1†
1

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Peking University 2 Hupan Lab
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 4 University of Notre Dame 5 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Benchmark

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have
emerged to tackle the challenges of Visual Question Answering (VQA), sparking a new research focus on conducting objective evaluations of these models. Existing evaluation methods face limitations due to the significant human workload required to design Q&A pairs for visual images, which inherently restricts the scale and scope of evaluations. Although automated MLLM-as-judge approaches
attempt to reduce the human workload through automatic
evaluations, they often introduce biases. To address these
problems, we propose an Unsupervised Peer review MLLM
Evaluation framework. It utilizes only image data, allowing models to automatically generate questions and conduct peer review assessments of answers from other models, effectively alleviating the reliance on human workload.
Additionally, we introduce the vision-language scoring system to mitigate the bias issues, which focuses on three aspects: (i) response correctness; (ii) visual understanding
and reasoning; and (iii) image-text correlation. Experimental results demonstrate that UPME achieves a Pearson
correlation of 0.944 with human evaluations on the MMstar
dataset and 0.814 on the ScienceQA dataset, indicating that
our framework closely aligns with human-designed benchmarks and inherent human preferences.

p Complex data
annotation
p Risk of data
leakage

How to judge a model?
UPME

1. Q-A Generation
Question

I think…

I think…

MLLM-as-a-Judge
2. VL-judgement Score

p Self-preference
p Verbosity bias

Human

Principle

Mr. Green
is better!!

3. Consistency Optimization
ℒ!"#

p High cost (money)
p Cold-start (time)
Weight !

Score #"

Figure 1. Existing methods for evaluating MLLMs face various
challenges. Our proposed UPME framework addresses these limitations by leveraging a peer review mechanism, reducing annotation costs, and aligning closely with human judgment.

cess known as LLM-as-a-Judge [55]. With the integration
of vision encoders [36], Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [24, 32] can incorporate multiple modalities
(e.g., text, image, and audio) [23, 56] and showcase remarkable performance in downstream applications, including visual conversation [7] and embodied intelligence [16]. Furthermore, they can act as agents to interact with GUI [9, 18].
Subsequently, the challenge of conducting objective
and comprehensive evaluations of MLLMs while providing users with authoritative guidelines has emerged as a
key research focus. A common approach involves constructing benchmarks based on Visual Question Answering
(VQA), which assess the performance of MLLMs across
various dimensions by setting image-based questions and
answers [10, 28, 52, 53]. However, most of these works
heavily depend on substantial human involvement in creating Q&A pairs for images [21, 44], leading to limited evaluation volume and making it insufficient for a comprehen-

1. Introduction
Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have made significant strides in reasoning and application capabilities [3,
32, 47], enabling diverse applications such as text and code
generation [1, 19, 40, 48]. Notably, due to the exceptional
natural language understanding capabilities of LLMs, they
are increasingly employed for automated evaluations, a pro* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author
{maskhui1003, munanning}@gmail.com
yuanli-ece@pku.edu.cn

9165

