This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Improved Text-Aligned Codebook Learning:
Multi-Hierarchical Codebook-Text Alignment with Long Text
Guotao Liang1,2 , Baoquan Zhang1 *, Zhiyuan Wen2 , Junteng Zhao1 , Yunming Ye1 , Kola Ye3 , Yao He3
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 SiFar Company
lianggt@pcl.ac.cn, {baoquanzhang, yeyunming}@hit.edu.cn, 23S051042@stu.hit.edu.cn,
{wenzhiyuan2012, kolaygm, heyao18818}@gmail.com

Original Caption: A zebra grazing on lush green grass in a field.

Abstract

Zebra Mane
Color-Position:
The zebra's mane,
a contrasting shade
of brown, stands
erect on its neck.

Zebra Body Color :
adorned with a striking
pattern of black and
white stripes.

Image quantization is a crucial technique in image generation, aimed at learning a codebook that encodes an image
into a discrete token sequence. Recent advancements have
seen researchers exploring learning multi-modal codebook
(i.e., text-aligned codebook) by utilizing image caption semantics, aiming to enhance codebook performance in crossmodal tasks. However, existing image-text paired datasets
exhibit a notable flaw in that the text descriptions tend to
be overly concise, failing to adequately describe the images and provide sufficient semantic knowledge, resulting
in limited alignment of text and codebook at a fine-grained
level. In this paper, we propose a novel Text-Augmented
Codebook Learning framework, named TA-VQ, which generates longer text for each image using the visual-language
model for improved text-aligned codebook learning. However, the long text presents two key challenges: how to encode text and how to align codebook and text. To tackle two
challenges, we propose to split the long text into multiple
granularities for encoding, i.e., word, phrase, and sentence,
so that the long text can be fully encoded without losing
any key semantic knowledge. Following this, a hierarchical
encoder and novel sampling-based alignment strategy are
designed to achieve fine-grained codebook-text alignment.
Additionally, our method can be seamlessly integrated into
existing VQ models. Extensive experiments in reconstruction and various downstream tasks demonstrate its effectiveness compared to previous state-of-the-art approaches.

Zebra Position:
The zebra is positioned
towards the left side of
the image, its body
oriented towards the
right.

Picture Content Description:
In the serene expanse of a grassy field, a
zebra is captured in the act of grazing.
The zebra's head is lowered towards the
ground, indicating its engagement in
grazing. The entire scene paints a
tranquil picture of life in the wild.

Background:
The field itself is
a vibrant green.

Long Text: In the serene expanse of a grassy field, a zebra, adorned
with a striking pattern of black and white stripes, is captured in the act
of grazing. The zebra's mane, a contrasting shade of brown, stands
erect on its neck, adding to its majestic appearance. The zebra is
positioned towards the left side of the image, its body oriented towards
the right, as if gazing into the distance.The field itself is a vibrant green.

Figure 1. Example of comparing origin caption and long text. The
original caption is brief and primarily provides a general description of the image. It lacks detail about the background and certain
key elements within the image. In contrast, the long text can offer a more comprehensive image description, including zebra body
color, position, mane color position, and background description.
This additional text offers richer context, contributing to more robust and effective text-aligned codebook learning.

quantizer-decoder framework. Under this paradigm, the
learned codebook, capturing rich image features, can be
leveraged to generate high-fidelity images through autoregression [12, 13, 46] or discrete diffusion methods[17].
To further enhance the performance of VQ-based methods, several innovative techniques and ideas [18, 31, 34]
have been introduce to learn a more robust codebook representation, such as introducing adversarial loss [13], learning compact code sequence [22, 23], or dealing with codebook collapse [24, 48, 59, 62, 64]. Different from the
aforementioned methods that only learn single-modal codebook, Liang et al. [29] propose LG-VQ, which incorporates
pre-trained text semantics to learn text-aligned codebook,
thereby improving the performance of VQ-based models in

1. Introduction
In recent years, vector quantization (VQ)-based image modeling has emerged as a prominent technique in the field of
image generation [50]. VQ-based image modeling aims
to encode continuous images into discrete code sequences
using a trainable visual codebook within an encoder* Corresponding Authors

4060

