This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatiotemporal Decoupling for Efficient Vision-Based Occupancy Forecasting
Jingyi Xu1 * Xieyuanli Chen2 * Junyi Ma3 Jiawei Huang4 Jintao Xu4 Yue Wang5 Ling Pei1†
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Navigation and Location Based Services, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
College of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology
3
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 HAOMO.AI
5
State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control and Technology, Zhejiang University

Abstract
The task of occupancy forecasting (OCF) involves utilizing past and present perception data to predict future
occupancy states of autonomous vehicle surrounding environments, which is critical for downstream tasks such as
obstacle avoidance and path planning. Existing 3D OCF
approaches struggle to predict plausible spatial details for
movable objects and suffer from slow inference speeds due
to neglecting the bias and uneven distribution of changing
occupancy states in both space and time. In this paper,
we propose a novel spatiotemporal decoupling vision-based
paradigm to explicitly tackle the bias and achieve both effective and efficient 3D OCF. To tackle spatial bias in empty
areas, we introduce a novel spatial representation that decouples the conventional dense 3D format into 2D bird’seye view (BEV) occupancy with corresponding height values, enabling 3D OCF derived only from 2D predictions
thus enhancing efficiency. To reduce temporal bias on static
voxels, we design temporal decoupling to improve end-toend OCF by temporally associating instances via predicted
flows. We develop an efficient multi-head network EfficientOCF to achieve 3D OCF with our devised spatiotemporally decoupled representation. A new metric, conditional
IoU (C-IoU), is also introduced to provide a robust 3D OCF
performance assessment, especially in datasets with missing or incomplete annotations. The experimental results
demonstrate that EfficientOCF surpasses existing baseline
methods on accuracy and efficiency, achieving state-of-theart performance with a fast inference time of 82.33 ms
with a single GPU. Our code is released at: https:
//github.com/BIT-XJY/EfficientOCF.

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

This work was funded by Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (24DZ3101300, 24TS1402600, 24TS1402800).

Figure 1. Unlike the traditional 3D vision-based OCF pipeline, our
proposed paradigm implements spatiotemporal decoupling, thus
achieving the efficiency of 2D OCF methods with the instanceaware capability of 3D OCF approaches.

1. Introduction
Accurately estimating occupancy states in the surrounding environment based on visual inputs is crucial for autonomous mobile systems, as it enables the identification
of general obstacles, including objects absent from semantic databases. Most existing vision-based occupancy estimation methods [3, 7, 9, 10, 17, 34, 39] rely on complex
model architectures but often overlook temporal changes in
occupancy states. To address this, occupancy forecasting
(OCF) approaches [1, 8, 12, 15, 25, 38] incorporate the prediction of surrounding object movements over time. These
methods use past observations to forecast occupancy states
in the present and near future, providing valuable information in advance for downstream tasks such as planning and
control in autonomous driving.
Existing vision-based OCF methods predict future occupancy states for the entire 3D scene, as illustrated in
Fig. 1(a). These methods process all voxel grids in each
scene through end-to-end 3D feature encoding and decod-

22338

