This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MirrorVerse: Pushing Diffusion Models to Realistically Reflect the World
Ankit Dhiman1,2 * Manan Shah1 * R Venkatesh Babu1
1

Vision and AI Lab, IISc Bangalore

a)Input

2

Samsung R & D Institute India - Bangalore

b) HD-Painter

c) MirrorFusion

d) Ours

Figure 1. Our model MirrorFusion 2.0, trained on our enhanced dataset SynMirrorV2 surpasses previous state-of-the-art diffusion-based
inpainting models at the task of generating mirror reflections. All images were created by appending the prompt: “A perfect plane mirror
reflection of ” to the object description. All text prompts can be found in the supplementary.

Abstract
Diffusion models have become central to various image
editing tasks, yet they often fail to fully adhere to physical laws, particularly with effects like shadows, reflections,
and occlusions. In this work, we address the challenge of
generating photorealistic mirror reflections using diffusionbased generative models. Despite extensive training data,
existing diffusion models frequently overlook the nuanced
details crucial to authentic mirror reflections. Recent approaches have attempted to resolve this by creating synthetic datasets and framing reflection generation as an inpainting task; however, they struggle to generalize across
different object orientations and positions relative to the

mirror. Our method overcomes these limitations by introducing key augmentations into the synthetic data pipeline:
(1) random object positioning, (2) randomized rotations,
and (3) grounding of objects, significantly enhancing generalization across poses and placements. To further address
spatial relationships and occlusions in scenes with multiple objects, we implement a strategy to pair objects during dataset generation, resulting in a dataset robust enough
to handle these complex scenarios. Achieving generalization to real-world scenes remains a challenge, so we introduce a three-stage training curriculum to develop the MirrorFusion 2.0 model to improve real-world performance.
We provide extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations to support our approach. The project page is available
at: https://mirror-verse.github.io/.

*Equal Contribution.

11239

