This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Less is More: Efficient Model Merging with Binary Task Switch
Biqing Qi1 , Fangyuan Li2 , Zhen Wang3 , Junqi Gao1,3, ,* Dong Li1,3 , Peng Ye1 , Bowen Zhou1,4, *
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
2
Department of Control Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology,
3
School of Mathematics, Harbin Institute of Technology,
4
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
{qibiqing7,jacklee19900212,wz443534070,gjunqi97,arvinlee826}@gmail.com,
20110720039@fudan.edu.cn,zhoubowen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

As an effective approach to equip models with multitask capabilities without additional training, model merging has garnered significant attention. However, existing
merging methods face challenges of redundant parameter
conflicts and the excessive storage burden of fine-tuned parameters. In this work, through controlled experiments, we
reveal that for fine-tuned task vectors, only those parameters with magnitudes above a certain threshold contribute
positively to the task, exhibiting a pulse-like characteristic. We then attempt leveraging this pulse-like characteristic to binarize the task vectors and reduce storage overhead. Further controlled experiments show that the binarized task vectors incur almost no decrease in fine-tuning
and merging performance, and even exhibit stronger performance improvements as the proportion of redundant parameters increases. Based on these insights, we propose
Task Switch (T-Switch), which decomposes task vectors into
three components: 1) an activation switch instantiated by a
binarized mask vector, 2) a polarity switch instantiated by a
binarized sign vector, and 3) a scaling knob instantiated by
a scalar coefficient. By storing task vectors in a binarized
form, T-Switch alleviates parameter conflicts while ensuring efficient task parameter storage. Furthermore, to enable automated switch combination in T-Switch, we further
introduce Auto-Switch, which enables training-free switch
combination via retrieval from a small query set. Experiments indicate that our methods achieve significant performance improvements over existing baselines, requiring only
1-3% of the storage space of full-precision parameters.

Figure 1. Left: Challenges of model merging: conflicts in task
vectors and the burden of parameter storage. Right: Our method
eliminates redundancy while enabling the storage of binarized,
lightweight task vectors.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding authors.

With the thriving of open-source communities [5, 46], a
growing number of pre-trained and fine-tuned models are
being widely used [2, 41]. Directly leveraging these models to address specific tasks becomes a mainstream practice. However, facing a multitude of task scenarios, deploying dedicated fine-tuned models for each task incurs significant storage and computational costs, becoming impractical in scenarios with limited resources. To address the challenge of efficiently managing and applying models in multitask scenarios, model merging [16, 30] offers a promising solution. By merging parameters of multiple taskspecific model, model merging effectively integrates knowledge from different tasks, enhancing the model’s adaptability in multi-task settings without additional training.
Current model merging approaches can be broadly classified into two types: static merging [16, 18, 30] and dynamic merging [15, 27]. Static merging strategies, such as
Task-Arithmetic [16], involve linearly combining the differences between the weights of different fine-tuned models and the pre-trained weights (referred to as task vectors). Techniques like RegMean [18] minimize the difference between the parameter matrix and input vector products before and after merging. These methods maintain

15265

