This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Explaining in Diffusion: Explaining a Classifier with Diffusion Semantics
Tahira Kazimi†
Virginia Tech

Ritika Allada†
Virginia Tech

Pinar Yanardag
Virginia Tech

tahirakazimi@vt.edu

ritika88@vt.edu

pinary@vt.edu

https://explain-in-diffusion.github.io

Figure 1. DiffEx explains the decisions of domain-specific classifiers by identifying the most influential semantics affecting their predictions. Classifier scores for each example are displayed in the top-left corner, demonstrating how classifier predictions change in response
to the manipulation of different semantics (original images are shown with red borders). Our approach is capable of explaining classifiers
that concentrate on individual concepts such as faces or animals (top row) as well as those that manage complex scenes involving multiple
objects, such as a formal/casual fit in a fashion context (bottom row).

Abstract
Classifiers are important components in many computer
vision tasks, serving as the foundational backbone of a
wide variety of models employed across diverse applications. However, understanding the decision-making process of classifiers remains a significant challenge. We propose DiffEx, a novel method that leverages the capabilities
of text-to-image diffusion models to explain classifier decisions. Unlike traditional GAN-based explainability models,
which are limited to simple, single-concept analyses and
typically require training a new model for each classifier,
our approach can explain classifiers that focus on single
concepts (such as faces or animals) as well as those that
handle complex scenes involving multiple concepts. DiffEx
employs vision-language models to create a hierarchical list
of semantics, allowing users to identify not only the overarching semantic influences on classifiers (e.g., the ‘beard’
semantic in a facial classifier) but also their sub-types, such
as ‘goatee’ or ‘Balbo’ beard. Our experiments demonstrate

that DiffEx is able to cover a significantly broader spectrum
of semantics compared to its GAN counterparts, providing
a hierarchical tool that delivers a more detailed and finegrained understanding of classifier decisions.

1. Introduction

† Equal contributions.

Classifiers are fundamental to computer vision tasks, forming the backbone of many models used in a broad spectrum of applications [15, 21, 30, 32, 52]. Their ability to generalize across tasks and adapt to new domains
with minimal retraining makes them highly transferable,
and thus they are employed extensively in fields such as
healthcare [37, 39, 42, 69], finance [38, 60, 62], security
[2, 29, 33], and autonomous systems [5, 59, 65]. Despite
their versatility and widespread utility, understanding the
decision-making process of classifiers remains a significant challenge [3, 44, 50, 74, 76]. This challenge comes
mainly from their “black box” nature. As images move
through the deep layers of the network, the features used
for classification become more abstract and harder to understand. The lack of interpretable features in such mod-

14799

