This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CH3 Depth: Efficient and Flexible Depth Foundation Model with Flow Matching
Jiaqi Li* Yiran Wang* Jinghong Zheng Junrui Zhang
Liao Shen Tianqi Liu Zhiguo Cao†
School of AIA, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{lijiaqi mail,zgcao}@hust.edu.cn

Ours(2Steps 0.36s)

DepthFM(3Steps 0.69s)

Ours(1Step 0.25s)

Lotus(1Step 0.20s)

Ours
(3Steps 0.43s)

RGB

Temporal
Slice

Ours

DepthCrafter

RGB

Temporal
Slice

Ours

NVDS

Marigold
(50Steps 4.45s)

Figure 1. Top Half: We qualitatively compare the SOTA image depth estimation models and the inference time. CH3 Depth achieves
meticulous details and reasonable structure in results with balanced efficiency. Bottom Half: The comparison of video methods is presented
with temporal slices showing the depth of the vertical red line in videos over time to evaluate the temporal stability. CH3 Depth is compatible
with image and video depth estimation, achieving meticulous, accurate and consistent prediction results. (Zoom-in for best view)

Abstract

(InDI) to improve accuracy. 2) To enhance efficiency, we
propose non-uniform sampling to achieve better prediction
with fewer sampling steps. 3) We design the Latent Temporal Stabilizer (LTS) to enhance temporal consistency by
aggregating latent codes of adjacent frames, enabling our
method to be lightweight and compatible for video depth estimation. CH3 Depth achieves state-of-the-art performance
in zero-shot evaluations across multiple image and video
datasets, excelling in prediction accuracy, efficiency, and
temporal consistency, highlighting its potential as the next
foundation model for depth estimation.

Depth estimation is a fundamental task in 3D vision. An
ideal depth estimation model is expected to embrace meticulous detail, temporal consistency, and high efficiency. Although existing foundation models can perform well in certain specific aspects, most of them fall short of fulfilling
all the above requirements simultaneously. In this paper,
we present CH3 Depth, an efficient and flexible model for
depth estimation with flow matching to address this challenge. Specifically, 1) we reframe the optimization objective of flow matching as the Inversion by Direct Iteration
* Equal contribution, † Corresponding author.

7222

