This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Acc3D: Accelerating Single Image to 3D Diffusion Models via Edge Consistency
Guided Score Distillation
Hui Liu2
Junhui Hou1†
Kendong Liu1
Zhiyu Zhu1 *
1
2
City University of Hong Kong
Saint Francis University
{kdliu2-c,zhiyuzhu2-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk
h2liu@sfu.edu.hk jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk
https://acc3d-object.github.io/

Figure 1. Visual illustration of the generated high-quality multiview images and normal maps from a given single-view image by our
Acc3D through fewer than four inference steps. ü Zoom in for details.

Abstract
We present Acc3D to tackle the challenge of accelerating
the diffusion process to generate 3D models from single images. To derive high-quality reconstructions through fewstep inferences, we emphasize the critical issue of regularizing the learning of score function in states of random
noise. To this end, we propose edge consistency, i.e., consistent predictions across the high signal-to-noise ratio region, to enhance a pre-trained diffusion model, enabling a
distillation-based refinement of the endpoint score function.
Building on those distilled diffusion models, we propose an
adversarial augmentation strategy to further enrich the gen-

eration detail and boost overall generation quality. The
two modules complement each other, mutually reinforcing
to elevate generative performance. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our Acc3D not only achieves over a 20×
increase in computational efficiency but also yields notable
quality improvements, compared to the state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author and Equation contribution.
† This work was supported in part by the NSFC Excellent Young Sci-

Single image-based 3D reconstruction stands as a pivotal
domain within the realms of 3D computer vision and computer graphics [5, 19, 31, 33], boasting extensive applications in virtual reality, 3D gaming, content creation, and
precision robotics. Despite humans’ innate ability to perceive three-dimensional structures from a single image, the
swift and accurate generation of consistent content remains
a formidable challenge.
Diffusion models [9] have demonstrated their strong
capability in image generation and video synthesis [15],

entists Fund 62422118, in part by the Hong Kong RGC under Grants
11219324 and 11219422, and in part by the Hong Kong UGC under Grants
UGC/FDS11/E02/22 and UGC/FDS11/E03/24.

18031

