This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-AVS: LiDAR-based 3D Auto-Vocabulary Segmentation
Weijie Wei∗ , Osman Ülger∗ , Fatemeh Karimi Nejadasl, Theo Gevers, Martin R. Oswald
University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands

Pre-defined, Fixed Vocabulary

Abstract
Open-vocabulary segmentation methods offer promising capabilities in detecting unseen object categories, but the category must be aware and needs to be provided by a human, either via a text prompt or pre-labeled datasets, thus
limiting their scalability. We propose 3D-AVS, a method
for Auto-Vocabulary Segmentation of 3D point clouds for
which the vocabulary is unknown and auto-generated for
each input at runtime, thus eliminating the human in the
loop and typically providing a substantially larger vocabulary for richer annotations. 3D-AVS first recognizes semantic entities from image or point cloud data and then segments all points with the automatically generated vocabulary. Our method incorporates both image-based and pointbased recognition, enhancing robustness under challenging
lighting conditions where geometric information from LiDAR is especially valuable. Our point-based recognition
features a Sparse Masked Attention Pooling (SMAP) module to enrich the diversity of recognized objects. To address the challenges of evaluating unknown vocabularies
and avoid annotation biases from label synonyms, hierarchies, or semantic overlaps, we introduce the annotationfree Text-Point Semantic Similarity (TPSS) metric for assessing generated vocabulary quality. Our evaluations on
nuScenes and ScanNet200 demonstrate 3D-AVS’s ability to
generate semantic classes with accurate point-wise segmentations.

Vocabulary
Size

3D-AVS (Ours)

3D-AVS
(Ours)

Reference Images

Figure 1. Pre-defined Vocabulary vs. Auto-Vocabulary. 3DAVS automatically generates a vocabulary for which it predicts
segmentation masks, offering greater semantic precision. Our predictions identify specific classes e.g. building and signboard (highlighted in red boxes), which are annotated with ambiguous terms
like manmade. Quantitatively, 3D-AVS recognizes 671 unique
categories on the validation set of nuScenes [4], significantly surpassing nuScenes’s original 16 categories. Left: Vocabulary for a
single scene, Right: Vocabulary for the entire dataset.

1. Introduction
Existing perception methods [3, 24, 27, 46, 59, 61] for autonomous driving often rely on an inclusiveness assumption that all potential categories of interest must exist in the
training dataset. Nevertheless, public datasets often annotate instances with pre-defined categories, which can vary
from three (e.g. vehicle, cyclist and pedestrian) [31, 44] to
several dozen types [2, 4], and fail to annotate rare objects

with correct semantic labels. Failing to recognize atypical
objects or road users poses a significant risk to the perception model’s adaptability to diverse real-life scenarios.
The development of Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
strengthens the connection between vision and language
modalities and promotes progress in multi-modal tasks,
such as zero-shot image classification [39], image search

∗ Co-first author

8910

