This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open Set Label Shift with Test Time Out-of-Distribution Reference
Changkun Ye1,2 , Russell Tsuchida3 ,* Lars Petersson2 , Nick Barnes1
1
Australian National University, 2 Data61 CSIRO, ACT, Australia,
3
Data Science and AI Group, Monash University
{changkun.ye, nick.barnes}@anu.edu.au, russell.tsuchida@monash.edu, lars.petersson@csiro.au

Abstract
Open set label shift (OSLS) occurs when label distributions
change from a source to a target distribution, and the target distribution has an additional out-of-distribution (OOD)
class. In this work, we build estimators for both source
and target open set label distributions using a source domain in-distribution (ID) classifier and an ID/OOD classifier. With reasonable assumptions on the ID/OOD classifier, the estimators are assembled into a sequence of three
stages: 1) an estimate of the source label distribution of
the OOD class, 2) an EM algorithm for Maximum Likelihood estimates (MLE) of the target label distribution, and
3) an estimate of the target label distribution of OOD class
under relaxed assumptions on the OOD classifier. The sampling errors of estimates in 1) and 3) are quantified with a
concentration inequality. The estimation result allows us to
correct the ID classifier trained on the source distribution to
the target distribution without retraining. Experiments on a
variety of open set label shift settings demonstrate the effectiveness of our model. Our code is available at https://
github.com/ChangkunYe/OpenSetLabelShift.

Figure 1. Open Set Label Shift (OSLS) set up, where source
and target domain have different label distributions p(y) but identical conditional distribution of data given label p(x|y). OSLS
extends the Closed Set Label Shift (CSLS) with an extra Out-ofDistribution (OOD) class on the target domain.

data; 3) correction: adapt a classifier trained on the source
domain to a target domain. The label shift problem has been
widely studied in the closed set setting, where the source
domain and target domain have identical class label set [1].
The state-of-the-art (SOTA) Closed Set Label Shift (CSLS)
models estimate label shift via either solving a linear system
[2, 32] or running an EM algorithm [47, 62].

1. Introduction

Open Set Label Shift (OSLS): Benefiting from the success in the Closed Set Label Shift problem, the more challenging but realistic Open Set Label Shift problem has recently begun to attract research interest [14]. In the OSLS
problem, the target domain includes data from both indistribution (ID) classes that are identical to the source
domain and an extra out-of-distribution (OOD) class. To
tackle this problem, Garg et al. 14 analyze the problem under a domain adaptation perspective and propose a model
that aims to estimate the target domain label distribution for
ID class and the OOD class and correct label shift.

Modern deep learning models demonstrate superior performance over classical models and even human beings in a
variety of classification tasks. Despite this, real world application of these models can still suffer from unsatisfactory
performance due to distribution shift between training data
and real world testing data.
Label shift: Label shift is a common type of distribution
shift, where the marginal distribution of label p(y) is shifted
between source (train) and target (test) domain whereas the
conditional distribution p(x|y) is invariant. Three main subproblems of the broader label shift problem are: 1) detection: detect if label shift happens; 2) estimation: estimate
the target domain label distribution given target unlabeled
* Work done while at Data61 CSIRO.

Contributions: This work focuses on the OSLS estimation and correction problems. We propose a novel method
for estimating and correcting label shift with an ID classifier
and an ID/OOD classifier, without retraining or fine-tuning,
where the ID/OOD classifier can be imported from the vast
suite of methods available in the OOD detection/Open-Set
Recognition literature. We derive EM algorithms for the
Maximum Likelihood Estimate (MLE) or Maximum a Posteriori (MAP) estimate of the target label distribution and

30619

