This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedSPA : Generalizable Federated Graph Learning under Homophily
Heterogeneity
Guancheng Wan1∗ Wenke Huang1 * He Li1 Guibin Zhang3
Carl Yang4 Mang Ye1,2†
1
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
2
Taikang Center for Life and Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore
4
Department of Computer Science, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA
{zihantan,guanchengwan,wenkehuang,lihe404,yemang}@whu.edu.cn,
guibinz@outlook.com, j.carlyang@emory.edu
Zihan Tan1∗

Abstract
Federated Graph Learning (FGL) has emerged as a solution to address real-world privacy concerns and data silos
in graph learning, which relies on Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs). Nevertheless, the homophily level discrepancies
within the local graph data of clients, termed homophily
heterogeneity, significantly degrade the generalizability of a
global GNN. Existing research ignores this issue and suffers
from unpromising collaboration. In this paper, we propose
FedSPA, an effective framework that addresses homophily
heterogeneity from the perspectives of homophily conflict
and homophily bias. In the first place, the homophily conflict arises when training on inconsistent homophily levels across clients. Correspondingly, we propose Subgraph
Feature Propagation Decoupling (SFPD), thereby achieving collaboration on unified homophily levels across clients.
To further address homophily bias, we design Homophily
Bias-Driven Aggregation (HBDA) which emphasizes clients
with lower biases. It enables the adaptive adjustment of
each client contribution to the global GNN based on its
homophily bias. The superiority of FedSPA is validated
through extensive experiments. The code is available at
https://github.com/OakleyTan/FedSPA.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [28, 30, 31, 53, 56, 61, 82] offers the ability to conduct distributed collaborative machine
learning without leaking privacy [26, 32–35]. However, in
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Problem illustration. The homophily level of a graph
determines the proportion of edges connecting nodes with the
same label. Discrepancies in homophily levels across clients,
namely homophily heterogeneity, introduce two main challenges.
(a) Homophily conflict: Under inconsistent homophily levels,
client i tends to overfit its local level hi , resulting in a conflict
of feature propagation scheme and degrading global generalizability. (b) Homophily bias: client i with lower homophily level bias
di = |hg −hi | is more closely aligned with the global optimization
direction, thus having a greater contribution to the globe.

real-world scenarios, a considerable amount of data generated by edge devices are graph-structured [7, 78, 84, 89],
such as epidemiology [49] and scene graph [3, 10, 77, 91].
Therefore, Federated Graph Learning (FGL) emerges to
address the challenges of leaking privacy and data silos
[18, 23, 48, 85] and has become a promising direction.

15464

