This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Human Perception: Understanding Multi-Object World
from Monocular View
†

†

Keyu Guo1* , Yongle Huang1* , Shijie Sun1 , Xiangyu Song1 , Mingtao Feng2 , Zedong Liu1 ,
Huansheng Song1 , Tiantian Wang1 , Jianxin Li1 , Naveed Akhtar3 , Ajmal Saeed Mian4
1
Chang’an University, China 2 Xidian University, China 3 The University of Melbourne, Australia
4
University of Western Australia, Australia
keyuguo@chd.edu.cn

yongle.h@chd.edu.cn

shijieSun@chd.edu.cn

Visual
Encoder

Abstract
···

3D
Detector

···

PM
Visual
Embedding

Joint
Embedding

PM
PM

Textual
Encoder

1st Stage:
Detector & Encoder

Kolmogorov-Arnold
Network

Fusion

Textual
Embedding

All cars facing
towards me.

···

···

···
···

···

···

Language and binocular vision play a crucial role in human understanding of the world. Advancements in artificial intelligence have also made it possible for machines to
develop 3D perception capabilities essential for high-level
scene understanding. However, only monocular cameras
are often available in practice due to cost and space constraints. Enabling machines to achieve accurate 3D understanding from a monocular view is practical but presents
significant challenges. We introduce MonoMulti-3DVG,
a novel task aimed at achieving multi-object 3D Visual
Grounding (3DVG) based on monocular RGB images, allowing machines to better understand and interact with the
3D world. To this end, we construct a large-scale benchmark dataset, MonoMulti3D-ROPE, and propose a model,
CyclopsNet that integrates a State-Prompt Visual Encoder
(SPVE) module with a Denoising Alignment Fusion (DAF)
module to achieve robust multi-modal semantic alignment and fusion. This leads to more stable and robust
multi-modal joint representations for downstream tasks.
Experimental results show that our method significantly
outperforms existing techniques on the MonoMulti3DROPE dataset. Our dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/JasonHuang516/MonoMulti-3DVG

xiangyu.song@chd.edu.cn

𝒐𝒃𝒋𝒆𝒄𝒕

𝝁𝒊

getting
closer

𝝁𝒋𝒐𝒊𝒏𝒕
𝝁𝒕𝒙𝒕
2nd Stage:
Text & Object Matching

Figure 1. Overview of our two-stage inference procedure. We
model the object, textual, and multi-modal representations as
Gaussian distributions, where ’PM’ stands for probabilistic modeling. By converging these distributions in pairs, we mitigate uncertainties in multi-modal alignment and fusion amplification, resulting in robust multi-modal representations for object-text matching.

With recent advancements in multi-modal technologies [4, 11, 23, 30, 37], 3DVG has gained increasing attention. For example, the 3DVG-Transformer [50] leverages LiDAR data to model relational grounding within point
clouds, while PQ3D [52] adopts a query-based framework
to unify 3D vision and language understanding. However,
these methods often rely on high-cost sensors, limiting their
broad applicability in real-world scenarios.
Humans rely on binocular disparity [7, 12, 28, 31] to
generate depth perception [6, 27, 32, 38], which is essential
for accurately interpreting 3D information about objects.
Moreover, human attentional resources [5, 14, 36, 40] are
limited, making it difficult to focus on multiple objects of
interest simultaneously, e.g., imagine simultaneously track-

1. Introduction
Human understanding of the world relies on the complementary relationship between visual and linguistic information. To enable machines to simulate human-like visual reasoning, the 3D Visual Grounding (3DVG) [3, 15, 34, 44, 47]
task has emerged. 3DVG aims to accurately locate objects
or regions within a 3D scene based on natural language descriptions, effectively bridging the gap between linguistic
modality and 3D visual perception.
∗ Equal Contribution. † Corresponding authors.

3751

