This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Twinner: Shining Light on Digital Twins in a Few Snaps
Jesus Zarzar2,3

Tom Monnier3

Roman Shapovalov3

Andrea Vedaldi1,3
1

David Novotny3

VGG, University of Oxford

2

KAUST

3

Meta AI

Figure 1. We present Twinner, the first large reconstruction model capable of predicting a scene’s illumination as well as an object’s
geometry and material properties from a few posed images. This enables tasks such as realistic relighting of objects in novel scenes in a
few seconds by replacing costly per-scene optimizations with a single forward pass.

Abstract

existing feed-forward reconstruction networks and comparable to slower per-scene optimization methods.

We present Twinner, the first large reconstruction model capable of recovering a scene’s illumination as well as an
object’s geometry and material properties from only a few
posed images. Twinner is based on the Large Reconstruction Model and innovates in three key ways: 1) We introduce
a memory-efficient voxel-grid transformer whose memory
scales only quadratically with the size of the voxel grid. 2)
To address the scarcity of high-quality ground-truth PBRshaded models, we introduce a large, fully synthetic dataset
of procedurally generated PBR-textured objects lit with varied illumination. 3) To bridge the synthetic-to-real gap, we
finetune the model on real-world datasets using a differentiable physically based shading model, eliminating the
need for ground-truth illumination or material properties,
which are challenging to obtain in real-world scenarios.
We demonstrate the efficacy of our model on the real-world
StanfordORB benchmark, where, given a few input views,
we achieve reconstruction quality significantly superior to

1. Introduction
The creation of digital twins, i.e., the conversion of realworld objects into virtual 3D assets, is an important problem in virtual and augmented reality, gaming, conservation,
education, advertisement, and general 3D content creation.
In recent years, new techniques such as NeRF [31] and
3D Gaussian Splatting [24], along with their feed-forward
counterparts [18, 49, 60, 63], have significantly improved
the quality, speed, and generality of digital twinning. However, most of these techniques still bake illumination into
the scene’s appearance as radiance. As a consequence, the
resulting assets cannot be relit and appear out of place when
visualized under different lighting conditions.
To address this limitation, one must also reconstruct the
field of Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Functions
(BRDF), which describe the optical properties of materi-

5859

