This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FisherTune: Fisher-Guided Robust Tuning of Vision Foundation Models for
Domain Generalized Segmentation
Dong Zhao1 , Jinlong Li2 , Shuang Wang1 B , Mengyao Wu, Qi Zang1 B , Nicu Sebe2 , Zhun Zhong3
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Shaanxi, China
2
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento, Italy
3
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, China

Abstract
Vision Foundation Models (VFMs) excel in generalization due to large-scale pretraining, but fine-tuning them for
Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation (DGSS) while
maintaining this ability remains a challenge. Existing approaches either selectively fine-tune parameters or freeze
the VFMs and update only the adapters, both of which may
underutilize the VFMs’ full potential in DGSS tasks. We
observe that domain-sensitive parameters in VFMs, arising from task and distribution differences, can hinder generalization. To address this, we propose FisherTune, a
robust fine-tuning method guided by the Domain-Related
Fisher Information Matrix (DR-FIM). DR-FIM measures
parameter sensitivity across tasks and domains, enabling
selective updates that preserve generalization and enhance
DGSS adaptability. To stabilize DR-FIM estimation, FisherTune incorporates variational inference, treating parameters as Gaussian-distributed variables and leveraging pretrained priors. Extensive experiments show that FisherTune achieves superior cross-domain segmentation while
maintaining generalization, outperforming both selectiveparameter and adapter-based methods.

1. Introduction
Vision Foundation Models (VFMs), such as CLIP [46],
DINOv2 [5], and EVA02 [15], have emerged as powerful tools in computer vision, achieving remarkable generalization across diverse downstream tasks, including crossdomain perception [35, 53, 56, 71, 76], few-shot [37, 65, 70,
79] and zero-shot perception [26, 31, 54, 72]. Pre-trained
on massive data fields, VFMs encapsulate rich visual repreThis work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China No. 62271377, the Key Research and Development Program of Shannxi Program No. 2021ZDLGY0106 and
No. 2022ZDLGY0112, the Key Scientific Technological Innovation Research Project by Ministry of Education, the MUR PNRR project FAIR
(PE00000013) funded by the NextGenerationEU and the EU Horizon
projects ELIAS (No. 101120237) and AI4Trust (No. 101070190).
B Co-corresponding author.

Source Data

: Extra adapters

VFMs

(a) Adapter Tuning

Source Data

VFMs

Source Data

VFMs

: Handmade parameters

: Domain-sensitive parameters

(b) Selective Tuning

(c) Fisher Tuning (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of principles for different VFM adjustment
methods: (a) tuning by adapter insertion [60, 66], (b) tuning by
manually selected [57] or automatically selected parameters [55],
(c) our method for tuning domain-sensitive parameters.

sentations that can be transferred to numerous applications
with minor adaptation [61, 66]. Despite this, when it comes
to Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation (DGSS),
where the goal is to segment unseen domain images without
explicit access to their training data, effectively fine-tuning
VFMs while preserving their strong generalization capabilities remains an open challenge.
Existing methods for adapting VFMs to DGSS tasks typically involve fine-tuning via adapter layers to remap pretrained tokens, as shown in Fig. 1 (a) [60, 66]. While this
approach reduces overfitting, it does not fully leverage the
internal representations of the VFM, as the core content of
the model remains unchanged. Furthermore, when the pretraining tasks of the VFM (e.g., MAE, DINOv2) significantly deviate from the DGSS task, the adaptation improvement is limited. An alternative solution is to fine-tune a subset of parameters related to the target DGSS task, which activates the representations of VFMs, as illustrated in Fig. 1
(b). However, we observe that traditional parameter selection methods, whether manually defined [57] or automatically chosen [36, 62], fail to guarantee the generalization
ability of the VFM, and in fact, perform even worse than
simply adding adapters, as shown in Fig. 2.

15043

