This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Learning for Color Spike Camera Reconstruction
Yanchen Dong1 , Ruiqin Xiong1 ,* Xiaopeng Fan2 , Zhaofei Yu3 , Yonghong Tian1,4,5 , Tiejun Huang1,3
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory
yanchendong@stu.pku.edu.cn, {rqxiong, yuzf12, yhtian, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn, fxp@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

ally require the scene to be still during the exposure time for
photoelectric signal accumulation. The motion of captured
objects will bring undesirable blur to snapshot images of the
cameras, limiting their applications in high-speed imaging.
Spike camera [7, 8, 10, 22, 35] is a type of neuromorphic camera mimicking the structure of the human visual
system. Benefiting from its ultra-high temporal resolution
(e.g., 40,000Hz), the spike camera shows great potential in
recording high-speed scenes. Different from another kind
of neuromorphic camera called event camera [25, 26], the
spike camera captures absolute light intensity instead of
light intensity changes. The first-generation spike camera
is the gray-scale spike camera (GSC). To capture color information of dynamic scenes, the Bayer-pattern color filter
array (CFA) is employed on the sensor, resulting in the color
spike camera (CSC) [9, 11–14]. How to restore high-quality
color images from the Bayer-pattern spike stream is still an
open task, with the following challenges:

Spike camera is a kind of neuromorphic camera with
ultra-high temporal resolution, which can capture dynamic
scenes by continuously firing spike signals. To capture color
information, a color filter array (CFA) is employed on the
sensor of the spike camera, resulting in Bayer-pattern spike
streams. How to restore high-quality color images from the
binary spike signals remains challenging. In this paper, we
propose a motion-guided reconstruction method for spike
cameras with CFA, utilizing color layout and estimated motion information. Specifically, we develop a joint motion
estimation pipeline for the Bayer-pattern spike stream, exploiting the motion consistency of channels. We propose to
estimate the missing pixels of each color channel according
to temporally neighboring pixels of the corresponding color
along the motion trajectory. As the spike signals are read
out at discrete time points, there is quantization noise that
impacts the image quality. Thus, we analyze the correlation
of the noise in spatial and temporal domains and propose
a self-supervised network utilizing a masked spike encoder
to handle the noise. Experiments on real-world captured
Bayer-pattern spike streams show that our method can restore color images with better visual quality, compared with
state-of-the-art methods. The source codes are available at
https://github.com/csycdong/SSL-CSC.

• Missing pixels of each color channel. According to the
Bayer-pattern color layout, 75% (red and blue) or 50%
(green) pixels are missing in each color channel.
• High-speed motion. Spikes fired by a certain pixel do
not always describe the same point of the object due to
high-speed motion. Thus, it is likely to introduce blur.
• Quantization noise in spike signals. The spike signals
are read out at discrete time points, bringing fluctuation
and randomness to continuous photoelectric accumulation and resulting in quantization noise.

1. Introduction

Some spike camera reconstruction methods [12, 36, 37,
40, 42] tend to employ end-to-end convolutional neural networks (CNNs). As it is hard to collect spike streams with
corresponding high-quality ground truth, they tried to synthesize massive training pairs from videos. However, there
are gaps between synthetic data and real-world captured
data, reducing the practical performance.
In this paper, we develop a motion-guided reconstruc-

With the development of machine vision, there has been
an increasing demand for high-speed imaging, especially
in some emerging applications, such as autonomous driving and unmanned aerial vehicles. How to capture dynamic
scenes with high-speed motion and respond quickly becomes a key challenge. Conventional digital cameras usu* Corresponding author.

6231

