This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PreciseCam: Precise Camera Control for Text-to-Image Generation
Edurne Bernal-Berdun1 , Ana Serrano1 , Belen Masia1 ,
Matheus Gadelha2 , Yannick Hold-Geoffroy2 , Xin Sun2 , Diego Gutierrez1
1

2

Universidad de Zaragoza, I3A

{edurnebernal, anase, bmasia, diegog}@unizar.es

A photograph of an inviting reading room

Roll

with a large armchair, a low wooden table,

Pitch

and floor-to-ceiling bookshelves packed

vFov

with books, softly lit by a standing lamp.

ξ

Adobe Research

{gadelha, holdgeof, xinsun}@adobe.com

Roll
An impressionist painting of a
serene lakeside at dawn. Soft
brushstrokes blend the colors
of the sky, water, and distant
mountains. The lake reflects
the pastel hues of the rising
sun, and small details of trees
and boats blur into the overall
mood of tranquility.

Pitch
A colorful autumn park with
leaves of orange, red, and
yellow scattered across a
winding path.

Figure 1. Our approach enhances the artistic expression of text-to-image generative models by incorporating precise control over camera
angles and lens distortion effects. Left: Our input consists of a standard text prompt along with extrinsic (roll and pitch) and intrinsic (vertical field of view and distortion ξ) camera parameters, which are translated into a suitable and efficient representation for learning camera
views. Right: Examples varying roll (top) and pitch (bottom) with the same prompt, while keeping the remaining camera parameters fixed.

Abstract

vey dramatically different messages; for example, a low angle may portray dominance or epicness, while a Dutch angle
(about 45 degrees) creates unease or tension.
Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models have the ability
to generate detailed images based on prompts. However,
they often produce a flat horizon in the center of the image,
which can limit creative expression. This limitation can hinder graphic designers, artists, and photographers from effectively conveying emotions, sensations, or messages. To
unlock the capabilities of generative models, it is essential
to have precise control over camera parameters.
Camera views are defined by intrinsic and extrinsic parameters such as field of view (FoV), pitch, roll, etc. However, most text-to-image models are not designed for precise
camera view control, making prompt engineering the primary method to achieve desired visual results. This timeconsuming approach requires significant expertise and offers limited control.
Recently, diffusion models like Firefly [2] have allowed
users to control camera views with general instructions such
as wide angle or closeup. However, these controls are im-

Images as an artistic medium often rely on specific camera angles and lens distortions to convey ideas or emotions;
however, such precise control is missing in current text-toimage models. We propose an efficient and general solution
that allows precise control over the camera when generating both photographic and artistic images. Unlike prior
methods that rely on predefined shots, we rely solely on four
simple extrinsic and intrinsic camera parameters, removing
the need for pre-existing geometry, reference 3D objects,
and multi-view data. We also present a novel dataset with
more than 57,000 images, along with their text prompts and
ground-truth camera parameters. Our evaluation shows
precise camera control in text-to-image generation, surpassing traditional prompt engineering approaches.

1. Introduction
Images are versatile mediums where content and camera
language are crucial. Different camera parameters can con-

2724

