This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shadow Generation Using Diffusion Model with Geometry Prior
Haonan Zhao1 , Qingyang Liu1 , Xinhao Tao1 , Li Niu1,2 ,* Guangtao Zhai1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 miguo.ai
1

{2zz-n-24,narumimaria,taoxinhao,ustcnewly,zhaiguangtao}@sjtu.edu.cn

Figure 1. The visual comparison with the state-of-the-art diffusion-based method SGDiffusion [20] on DESOBAv2 dataset. Our method
significantly outperforms SGDiffusion in terms of geometry details.

Abstract

in fields such as filmmaking, photo editing, and digital art
design [27]. To achieve a more natural-looking composite
result, generating realistic shadow for inserted foreground
objects remains a challenging task, which has not been satisfactorily addressed by existing methods. In this paper, we
focus on the above shadow generation task, aiming to substantially improve the quality of generated shadow from a
geometric perspective.
The existing shadow generation methods can be divided into GAN-based methods [11, 17] and diffusionbased methods [20]. GAN-based methods ensure the precision and authenticity of generated shadow through the
combined supervision of reconstruction loss and adversarial loss. However, they generally require training the model
from scratch on limited paired data, which restricts the generalization ability. In contrast, diffusion-based methods initialize the foundation models with rich prior knowledge,
thus significantly outperforming GAN-based methods and
generating more plausible shadow. Overall, the quality of
generated shadow could be evaluated from two aspects: appearance and geometry. The diffusion-based method [20] is
adept at generating shadow with realistic appearance (e.g.,
shadow intensity, boundary transition), but still performs
poorly in terms of shadow geometry (e.g., location, scale,
shape) in the challenging cases as shown in Figure 1.
To improve the shadow geometry, we propose to assist
diffusion-based methods with geometry priors. Our method
has two stages. In the first stage, we employ a multi-task ge-

Image composition involves integrating foreground object into background image to obtain a composite image. One of the key challenges is to produce realistic shadow for the inserted foreground object. Recently,
diffusion-based methods have shown superior performance
compared to GAN-based methods in shadow generation.
However, they are still struggling to generate shadows
with plausible geometry in complex cases. In this paper, we focus on promoting diffusion-based methods by
leveraging geometry priors. Specifically, we first predict
the rotated bounding box and matched shadow shapes
for the foreground shadow. Then, the geometry information of rotated bounding box and matched shadow
shapes is injected into ControlNet to facilitate shadow
generation. Extensive experiments on both DESOBAv2
dataset and real composite images validate the effectiveness of our proposed method. The code and model are
released at https://github.com/bcmi/GPSDiffusion-ObjectShadow-Generation.

1. Introduction
Image composition [25], which aims to appropriately insert a given foreground object into the target background
image to obtain a composite image, serves a crucial role

7603

