This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Detect Objects from Multi-Agent
LiDAR Scans without Manual Labels
Qiming Xia1, 2 Wenkai Lin1,2 Haoen Xiang1,2 Xun Huang1,2
Siheng Chen3 Zhen Dong4 Cheng Wang1,2 Chenglu Wen1,2 *
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efﬁcient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China 4 Wuhan University, China
ϳϬ

1. Introduction
Learning-based 3D object perception, a key autonomous
driving task, has recently seen rapid development in both
the industrial and academic ﬁelds. A critical component
* Corresponding author, clwen@xmu.edu.cn

Kz^dZ
Kƚ

ϱϬ
'$3 

Unsupervised 3D object detection serves as an important solution for ofﬂine 3D object annotation. However,
due to the data sparsity and limited views, the clusteringbased label ﬁtting in unsupervised object detection often
generates low-quality pseudo-labels. Multi-agent collaborative dataset, which involves the sharing of complementary
observations among agents, holds the potential to break
through this bottleneck. In this paper, we introduce a
novel unsupervised method that learns to Detect Objects
from Multi-Agent LiDAR scans, termed DOtA, without using labels from external. DOtA ﬁrst uses the internally
shared ego-pose and ego-shape of collaborative agents to
initialize the detector, leveraging the generalization performance of neural networks to infer preliminary labels. Subsequently, DOtA uses the complementary observations between agents to perform multi-scale encoding on preliminary labels, then decodes high-quality and low-quality labels. These labels are further used as prompts to guide
a correct feature learning process, thereby enhancing the
performance of the unsupervised object detection task. Extensive experiments on the V2V4Real and OPV2V datasets
show that our DOtA outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised 3D object detection methods. Additionally, we also
validate the effectiveness of the DOtA labels under various
collaborative perception frameworks. The code is available
at https://github.com/xmuqimingxia/DOtA.

DK^d
W

ϲϬ

/DEHO3UHFLVLRQ 

Abstract

ϰϬ

ϭϲ͘ϴϯ

DK^d
Kz^dZ
W
Kƚ
^ŝŶŐůĞͲǀŝĞǁ

ϯϬ
ϮϬ
ϭϬ
Ϭ

Ϭ͘ϯ

Ϭ͘ϱ

Ϭ͘ϳ

,R8 7KUHVKROG

ǀŐ͘

Ϭ

Ϭ͘ϭ

Ϭ͘Ϯ

Ϭ͘ϯ

Ϭ͘ϰ

Ϭ͘ϱ

Ϭ͘ϲ

/RFDOL]DWLRQ1RLVH P

Figure 1. Comparison of the performance of various methods
under multi-view synchronous observation. (a) On the left, Our
DOtA achieves best performance on the real-world collaborative
V2V4Real [56] dataset (more details are in Tab. 2). (b) On the
right, we adhere to the localization noise parameters established
in Where2comm[10], and conducted experiments on the simulation dataset OPV2V [55] to assess the robustness of our approach
against realistic localization noise. DOtA is more robust to the localization noise than previous SOTAs.

of it is the ofﬂine 3D object automatic annotation, which
generates accurate labels for unlabeled data [8]. Depending on the speciﬁc requirements, there are many different ofﬂine schemes. Among them, one extreme emphasizes raising the upper bound of label quality, which uses
a pre-trained detector and information from future frames
[8, 28, 33, 59] to infer accurate labels. However, this strategy relies on costly manual labeling to pre-train a powerful
detector [20, 34, 42, 68], which is too expensive to scale
up. Other solutions, abandoning manual labeling, leverage common-sense information to generate labels from the
point cloud distribution [27, 43, 63, 66]. However, due to
the data sparsity and limited views of LiDAR scans, the
distribution of foreground points is often incomplete, especially for moving objects (Fig. 2 (b,c)), severely impacting
the performance of these unsupervised methods.
In this paper, we propose a novel orthogonal approach
of improving unsupervised 3D object detection by explor-

1418

