This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GigaHands: A Massive Annotated Dataset of Bimanual Hand Activities
Rao Fu1∗ Dingxi Zhang2∗ Alex Jiang1 Wanjia Fu1
Austin Funk1 Daniel Ritchie1 Srinath Sridhar1†
∗

Equal contribution

†

1

Brown University

Corresponding author
2

ETH Zurich

https://ivl.cs.brown.edu/research/gigahands.html

Give a thumbs-up
gesture.

Intersect your fingers
and pull gently to
stretch.

Deliver the fry
to your mouth.

Strum the ukelele strings with your right hand

Figure 1. GigaHands is a massive dataset of human bimanual activities with paired text annotations. Each column above shows an
activity sequence from the dataset. The dataset covers diverse 3D hand activities, including hand-object interactions (blue) across object
scales, gestures (orange), and self-interactions (red). Each clip is paired with descriptive text and 51 camera views, enabling radiance field
reconstruction. The bottom row show other annotations in the dataset including hand shape, object shape and pose (left half images). The
right half images show novel views from dynamic radiance field fitting.

Abstract
Understanding bimanual human hand activities is a critical problem in AI and robotics. We cannot build large models of bimanual activities because existing datasets lack the
scale, coverage of diverse hand activities, and detailed annotations. We introduce GigaHands, a massive annotated
dataset capturing 34 hours of bimanual hand activities from
56 subjects and 417 objects, totaling 14k motion clips derived from 183 million frames paired with 84k text annota-

tions. Our markerless capture setup and data acquisition
protocol enable fully automatic 3D hand and object estimation while minimizing the effort required for text annotation.
The scale and diversity of GigaHands enable broad applications, including text-driven action synthesis, hand motion
captioning, and dynamic radiance field reconstruction.

1. Introduction
“The human hand is a marvel of evolution, whose intricate
structures and capabilities have allowed us to manipulate

17461

