This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AC3D: Analyzing and Improving 3D Camera Control
in Video Diffusion Transformers
Sherwin Bahmani→1,2,3 Ivan Skorokhodov→3 Guocheng Qian3 Aliaksandr Siarohin3
Willi Menapace3 Andrea Tagliasacchi1,4 David B. Lindell1,2 Sergey Tulyakov3
1

University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 Snap Inc. 4 SFU
*equal contribution

https://snap-research.github.io/ac3d

Figure 1. Camera-controlled video generation. Our method enables precise
camera controllability in pre-trained video diffusion transformers, allowing joint
conditioning of text and camera sequences. We synthesize the same scene with
two different camera trajectories as input. The inset images visualize the cameras
for the videos in the corresponding columns. The left camera sequence consists
of a rotation to the right, while the right camera visualizes a zoom-out and up
trajectory.

Abstract
Numerous works have recently integrated 3D camera control into foundational text-to-video models, but the resulting
camera control is often imprecise, and video generation
quality suffers. In this work, we analyze camera motion
from a first principles perspective, uncovering insights that
enable precise 3D camera manipulation without compromising synthesis quality. First, we determine that motion
induced by camera movements in videos is low-frequency
in nature. This motivates us to adjust train and test pose
conditioning schedules, accelerating training convergence
while improving visual and motion quality. Then, by probing
the representations of an unconditional video diffusion transformer, we observe that they implicitly perform camera pose
estimation under the hood, and only a sub-portion of their
layers contain the camera information. This suggested us to
limit the injection of camera conditioning to a subset of the

architecture to prevent interference with other video features,
leading to a 4→ reduction of training parameters, improved
training speed, and 10% higher visual quality. Finally, we
complement the typical dataset for camera control learning
with a curated dataset of 20K diverse, dynamic videos with
stationary cameras. This helps the model distinguish between camera and scene motion and improves the dynamics
of generated pose-conditioned videos. We compound these
findings to design the Advanced 3D Camera Control (AC3D)
architecture, the new state-of-the-art model for generative
video modeling with camera control.

1. Introduction

22875

Foundational video diffusion models (VDMs) trained on
internet-scale data, acquire abundant knowledge about the
physical world [10]. They not only learn appearance and

