This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Which Viewpoint Shows it Best? Language for Weakly Supervising
View Selection in Multi-view Instructional Videos
Sagnik Majumder1,2

Tushar Nagarajan2 Ziad Al-Halah3 Reina Pradhan1
1
UT Austin 2 FAIR, Meta 3 University of Utah

Kristen Grauman1,2

Task: select the view that best shows the activity

Abstract
Given a multi-view video, which viewpoint is most informative for a human observer? Existing methods rely on heuristics or expensive “best-view" supervision to answer this
question, limiting their applicability. We propose a weakly
supervised approach that leverages language accompanying
an instructional multi-view video as a means to recover its
most informative viewpoint(s). Our key hypothesis is that
the more accurately an individual view can predict a viewagnostic text summary, the more informative it is. To put this
into action, we propose L ANG V IEW, a framework that uses
the relative accuracy of view-dependent caption predictions
as a proxy for best view pseudo-labels. Then, those pseudolabels are used to train a view selector, together with an auxiliary camera pose predictor that enhances view-sensitivity.
During inference, our model takes as input only a multi-view
video—no language or camera poses—and returns the best
viewpoint to watch at each timestep. On two challenging
datasets comprised of diverse multi-camera setups and howto activities, our model consistently outperforms state-ofthe-art baselines, both with quantitative metrics and human
evaluation. Project: https://vision.cs.utexas.
edu/projects/which-view-shows-it-best.

1. Introduction
Videos are an essential vehicle for communicating how to
perform a new skill, as evidenced by the millions of “howto" videos online, for everything from frosting a cake to
perfecting a basketball layup. The more intricate the task,
however, the more important the viewpoint used to film the
instructional video. For example, a close-up view of the
hands is desirable when a knitter shows how to add stitches
of yarn to a needle, or when a rock-climber demonstrates a
particular hold—whereas a view from afar may be preferable
when the knitter shows the knitted sweater being worn, or the
climber shows their selected path up the wall. In general, the
information available in any given viewpoint of an activity
varies. Not all views are created equal.
Shooting a video with multiple cameras offers a holistic

View i

View 1

View N
View 1

View-agnostic
ground-truth
narration
[unseen in
inference]:
The person
inspects the rear
wheel with both
hands.
Best view
pseudo-label

…

View i

…

View N

View-dependent captioning
The person holds
the rear wheel
with both hands
to inspect it

The person
puts his hand
on the wheel.

The person
holds the rear
wheel with his
right hand.

Compare

Compare

Compare

0.9

0.3

0.6

Idea: Learn this view selection without best-view labels

Figure 1. L ANG V IEW idea: given multi-view instructional videos,
we aim to learn a view selection model that can identify the best
view for seeing how to perform the activity shown in the videos, in
the absence of best view labels. To achieve this, we compare each
estimated view-dependent caption to the view-agnostic groundtruth video narration of the human activity, and use their respective
accuracies as a proxy for view quality. These quality scores then
serve as pseudo-labels for learning to select the most informative
view. In this example, the 1st view most clearly shows all entities
involved in the activity—the wheel and the person’s hands, and how
they interact—and hence, produces a caption that best matches the
ground-truth, making it a positive pseudo-label for view selection.

view of the activity taking place in a scene, by capturing it
from different locations and angles, and multi-view video is
developing as a new frontier in computer vision research [33,
44, 66, 86, 92], especially in instructional settings [33, 44].
However, multi-view videos are generally not suitable for
direct human consumption; digesting multiple views at once
imposes a high cognitive burden [21]. Thus, in practice, the

29016

