This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lift3D Policy: Lifting 2D Foundation Models for Robust
3D Robotic Manipulation
∗

∗,†

∗

Yueru Jia1,2 , Jiaming Liu1 , Sixiang Chen1 , Chenyang Gu1 , Zhilve Wang1 , Longzan Luo1 ,
†
Xiaoqi Li1 , Pengwei Wang2 , Zhongyuan Wang2 , Renrui Zhang3 , Shanghang Zhang1,2
1

Attention

Place bottle at rack

Pour water

Unplug charge

MetaWorld (MuJoCo, Gripper)

Stack blocks

Pick and place

Slide block

Adroit (MuJoCo, Dexterous hands)

Water plants

Wipe table

Open drawer…

RLBench (CoppelaSim, Gripper)

b) Explicit 3D robotic representation
2D Position Embedding
Policy Head

2D Foundation
Model

Robot State

Reconstructing Depth

Guide

MAE Decoder

Point Cloud

a) Implicit 3D robotic representation
2D Foundation
Model

Image

State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science,
Peking University; 2 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI); 3 CUHK
Project web page: lift3d-web.github.io

Execution

Left part: Overview of our proposed Lift3D

Right part: Extensive evaluation on simulation and real-world tasks.

Figure 1. Lift3D empowers 2D foundation models with 3D manipulation capabilities by refining implicit 3D robotic representations through
task-related affordance masking and depth reconstruction, while enhancing explicit 3D robotic representations by leveraging the pretrained 2D
positional embeddings to encode point cloud. Lift3D achieves robustness and surprising effectiveness in diverse simulation and real-world tasks.

Abstract
3D geometric information is essential for manipulation
tasks, as robots need to perceive the 3D environment, reason about spatial relationships, and interact with intricate
spatial configurations. Recent research has increasingly focused on the explicit extraction of 3D features, while still
facing challenges such as the lack of large-scale robotic 3D
data and the potential loss of spatial geometry. To address
these limitations, we propose the Lift3D framework, which
progressively enhances 2D foundation models with implicit
and explicit 3D robotic representations to construct a robust 3D manipulation policy. Specifically, we first design
a task-aware masked autoencoder that masks task-relevant
∗ : Equal contribution, † : Project lead,

affordance patches and reconstructs depth information, enhancing the 2D foundation model’s implicit 3D robotic representation. After self-supervised fine-tuning, we introduce a
2D model-lifting strategy that establishes a positional mapping between the input 3D points and the positional embeddings of the 2D model. Based on the mapping, Lift3D utilizes
the 2D foundation model to directly encode point cloud data,
leveraging large-scale pretrained knowledge to construct
explicit 3D robotic representations while minimizing spatial
information loss. In experiments, Lift3D consistently outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods across several
simulation benchmarks and real-world scenarios.

: Corresponding author.

17347

