This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling up Image Segmentation across Data and Tasks
Pei Wang1 , Zhaowei Cai1 , Hao Yang1 , Ashwin Swaminathan1 , R. Manmatha2 , Stefano Soatto2
1
2
Amazon AGI
AWS AI Labs
{pwwng,zhaoweic,haoyng,swashwin,manmatha,soattos}@amazon.com

datasets can be integrated. This integration is essential for
improving performance on complex, real-world problems,
particularly when larger and more diverse datasets are available. We say that a segmentation model is scalable if it
can effectively improve with the increase in both dataset
size and task diversity. A scalable model can continuously
evolve by leveraging existing and future datasets, without
requiring frequent redesign or retraining, making development more efficient. In this way, simply gathering more
diverse data can naturally enhance the model’s capabilities.
Despite these benefits, numerous prior works were explored on specific tasks or datasets in isolation [4–6, 17,
39, 50, 60]. While these models have achieved significant
success in their respective areas, they often struggle to generalize to real-world scenarios, where versatility and adaptability are critical. The limitations of task-specific models
raise a key question: Can we design a model that scales
effectively across both tasks and datasets while improving
generalization in diverse, real-world applications?
Several recent efforts have aimed to scale up segmentation training tasks and datasets by exploring unified frameworks, seeking to address the joint training of multiple tasks
and datasets, summarized in Table 1. However, these existing works possess certain inherent limitations, far from
achieving true scalability across both tasks and datasets.
Some of these works have made progress in dataset scalability but remain restricted to a single task [21, 26].
Others [18, 70] have demonstrated limited task scalability—addressing only specific tasks such as semantic, instance, or panoptic segmentation—but cannot generalize
across datasets with different class structures. There is few
attempt for both datasets and tasks scalability [15, 31, 75].
X-Decoder [75] offers a promising solution with its learnable queries for jointly training on tasks and datasets. Nevertheless, its subpar performance in instance-level segmentation reveals shortcomings in its architecture, indicating
that its task scalability is still constrained.
In this work, we conduct an in-depth analysis and
identify a key limitation preventing effective scalability:
the design of object queries, a fundamental component
in transformer-based segmentation models. The learnable

Abstract
Traditional segmentation models, while effective in isolated
tasks, often fail to generalize to more complex and openended segmentation problems, such as free-form, openvocabulary, and in-the-wild scenarios. To bridge this gap,
we propose to scale up image segmentation across diverse
datasets and tasks such that the knowledge across different tasks and datasets can be integrated while improving the generalization ability. Mixed-Query Transformer
(MQ-Former), a novel segmentation framework, is introduced and designed to scale seamlessly across both data
size and task diversity. It is built upon a dynamic object
query mechanism called mixed query, which fuses different types of queries using cross-attention. This hybrid approach enables the model to balance between instance- and
stuff-level segmentation, providing enhanced scalability for
handling diverse object types. We further enhance scalability by leveraging synthetic data-generating segmentation
masks and captions for pixel-level and open-vocabulary
tasks-drastically reducing the need for costly human annotations. By training on multiple datasets and tasks at scale,
MQ-Former continuously improves performance as the volume and diversity of data and tasks increase. It exhibits
strong generalization capabilities, boosting performance in
open-set segmentation tasks SeginW by 7 points. These
advancements mark a key step toward universal, scalable
segmentation models capable of addressing the demands of
real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation aims to partition an image into discrete
pixel groups and includes tasks like semantic, instance,
panoptic, foreground/background, and referring segmentation, etc. A universal segmentation model should generalize robustly across diverse applications, including openvocabulary, free-form, and in-the-wild segmentation [35,
62, 75]. To achieve that, such a model is expected to be
trainable jointly across any segmentation datasets and tasks
at scale such that the knowledge across different tasks and

4573

