This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reproducible Vision-Language Models Meet Concepts Out of Pre-Training
Ziliang Chen1† , Xin Huang2,3† , Xiaoxuan Fan4 , Keze Wang2,1 , Yuyu Zhou4 , Quanlong Guan4 , Liang Lin1,2 *
1

Research Institute of Multiple Agents and Embodied Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory,

2

Sun Yat-sen University,

3

EPFL,

4

Jinan University

c.ziliang@yahoo.com, huangx353@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, kezewang@gmail.com, {zyy,Gql}@jnu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) models
as a milestone of modern multimodal intelligence, its generalization mechanism grasped massive research interests in
the community. While existing studies limited in the scope
of pre-training knowledge, hardly underpinned its generalization to countless open-world concepts absent from the
pre-training regime. This paper dives into such Out-of-Pretraining (OOP) generalization problem from a holistic perspective. We propose LAION-Beyond benchmark to isolate
the evaluation of OOP concepts from pre-training knowledge, with regards to OpenCLIP and its reproducible variants derived from LAION datasets. Empirical analysis evidences that despite image features of OOP concepts born
with significant category margins, their zero-shot transfer
significantly fails due to the poor image-text alignment. To
this, we elaborate the “name-tuning” methodology with its
theoretical merits in terms of OOP generalization, then propose few-shot name learning (FSNL) and zero-shot name
learning (ZSNL) algorithms to achieve OOP generalization in a data-efficient manner. LAION-Beyond dataset and
codes: http://m-huangx.github.io/laion beyond/.

Figure 1. Comparison between IP and OOP generalization. The
former evaluate OpenCLIP’s generalization with visual concepts
seen in pre-training phases, whereas the latter justifies its generalization through the concepts absent during pre-training.

1. Introduction

learning on behave of its out-of-distribution (OOD) generalizability [10, 11, 41] .
Leading studies investigated the CLIP family from diverse aspects of OOD generalization, while visual concepts
employed in their evaluations were almost expected to have
been encountered during pre-training (Fig.1.a). In contrast
of these In-Pre-training (IP) concepts, Out-of-Pre-training
(OOP) concepts never shown previously yet might predominant in the majority of open-world cases, remain questionable (Fig.1.b). This limitation stems from the scarcity of
available evaluation data: existing benchmarks mainly consist of visual concepts well-represented in large-scale pretraining datasets such as LAION [26]. This category overlap between evaluation and pre-training distributions potentially masks the CLIP’s true OOD generalization evaluation
beyond commonly encountered concepts.
To demystify the underlying capability of CLIP in OOP
concepts, we propose LAION-Beyond benchmark with the
counterpart classes absent in LAION datasets used to build
OpenCLIP, the reproducible variants of CLIP. It derives
LAION-Beyond’s construction with 324 IP and 674 OOP
classes under the rubric of 9 domains, which are tractably
crawled from web to prevent the category-set contamination from the vocabulary of LAION. Combining LAION
series and their OpenCLIP-derived models helps rigorously
identify whether a concept joined contrastive pre-training.

In recent years, pre-training vision models with language
supervision by contrastive learning schemes becomes a focal point of interest [12, 23, 25]. The so-called CLIPs and
its variants, forging a synergy between images and natural language, are pre-trained by aligning visual and textual
information with a vast trove of image-text pairs using coupled encoders. The success of image-text matching is quantified by classifying images into the classes with their names
in a vocabulary, which are fed into the text encoder with its
prompt template (e.g., “a photo of a {class}”) to generate
their classification weights. Constructing Softmax classifier by the cosine similarity between normalized image features and weights, CLIP exhibits stellar few-shot / zero-shot
* indicate corresponding author; † indicates the equal contribution.

14701

