This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Foundations of the Theory of Performance-Based Ranking
Sébastien Piérard, Anaïs Halin, Anthony Cioppa, Adrien Deliège, and Marc Van Droogenbroeck
Montefiore Institute, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium
{S.Pierard,Anais.Halin,Anthony.Cioppa,Adrien.Deliege,M.VanDroogenbroeck}@uliege.be

Abstract

Ranking Scores
Theorem 3

Sec. 4.3
Sec. 4.2

Preorder

Satisfaction

Evaluation
Combinations

Scores

Importance

Axiom 3

Performances

Ranking entities such as algorithms, devices, methods,
or models based on their performances, while accounting
for application-specific preferences, is a challenge. To address this challenge, we establish the foundations of a universal theory for performance-based ranking. First, we
introduce a rigorous framework built on top of both the
probability and order theories. Our new framework encompasses the elements necessary to (1) manipulate performances as mathematical objects, (2) express which performances are worse than or equivalent to others, (3) model
tasks through a variable called satisfaction, (4) consider
properties of the evaluation, (5) define scores, and (6)
specify application-specific preferences through a variable
called importance. On top of this framework, we propose
the first axiomatic definition of performance orderings and
performance-based rankings. Then, we introduce a universal parametric family of scores, called ranking scores, that
can be used to establish rankings satisfying our axioms,
while considering application-specific preferences. Finally,
we show, in the case of two-class classification, that the
family of ranking scores encompasses well-known performance scores, including the accuracy, the true positive rate
(recall, sensitivity), the true negative rate (specificity), the
positive predictive value (precision), and F1 . However, we
also show that some other scores commonly used to compare classifiers are unsuitable to derive performance orderings satisfying the axioms.

Sufficient
Conditions Theorem 1 Theorem 2
Axioms
Axiom 1
Axiom 2
Sec 4.1

Sec. 3.1

Sec. 3.2

Sec. 3.3

Sec. 3.4

Sec. 3.5

Sec. 3.6

Foundations of the Theory of Performance-Based Ranking

Figure 1. This work establishes the foundations of the theory of
performance-based ranking. We do this in two steps. First, we
introduce a new mathematical framework with 6 main elements,
as depicted here by the pillars. Second, we build on top of it:
(1) a set of three axioms for the ordering of performances and for
the performance-based ranking of entities, (2) sufficient conditions
for them when the performance ordering is induced by a score,
and (3) a family of scores, named ranking scores that consider the
application-specific preferences. This theory is universal in the
sense that it is applicable to any task.

1. Introduction

termine (i.e., assume, calculate, estimate, predict, etc.) a
performance, encompassing the necessary uncertainty, for
each of these entities; (2) choose a way of comparing these
performances with each other; and (3) assume that an entity is preferable to others if it has the best performance. A
more general problem is to establish an order of preference
between the entities: this is the performance-based ranking.
The approach of performance-based ranking is common
in many fields and has proved its usefulness, especially
in scientific communities that organize themselves around
competitions [3, 10, 16, 17] for the development of algorithms for specific tasks. Nevertheless, several studies
[18, 19] have alerted the scientific community about the
ranking methodology used in these competitions.
A critical analysis [18] of common practices for 150
biomedical image analysis challenges reveals that the scores
used are justified in only 23% of the cases, and that the rank
computation method is reported in only 36% of the cases.
Moreover, there are at least 10 different methods for deter-

Every day, millions of people are faced with choices to
make. Often, these choices are between entities (e.g., algorithms, devices, methods, models, options, procedures,
solutions, strategies, etc.) considered to be interchangeable, although not necessarily equivalent in terms of performance. One of the main difficulties arises from the uncertainty that people have regarding the use that will be made
of the entity to choose. A widespread approach to objectifying these choices is to (1) perform an evaluation to de-

14293

