This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decompositional Neural Scene Reconstruction with Generative Diffusion Prior
Junfeng Ni1,2 Yu Liu1,2 Ruijie Lu2,3 Zirui Zhou1
Song-Chun Zhu1,2,3 Yixin Chen2† Siyuan Huang2†
†
Corresponding author 1 Tsinghua University
2
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI 3 Peking University

Number of Views

ObjectSDF++ with 10 views

Reconstructed mesh in Blender

ObjectSDF++ with 100 views

Ours with 10 views

“A round table”

“Chinese style”

“Pokemon style”

“Freeze it!”

Object geometry editing

Object appearance editing

Scene stylization

VFX editing

Figure 1. We propose DP-R ECON, which capitalizes on pre-trained diffusion models for complete and decompositional neural scene
reconstruction. This approach significantly improves reconstruction quality in less captured regions, where previous methods often struggle.
Additionally, our method enables flexible text-based editing of geometry and appearance, as well as photorealistic VFX editing.

Abstract

ther introduce a visibility-guided approach to dynamically
adjust the per-pixel SDS loss weights. Together these components enhance both geometry and appearance recovery
while remaining faithful to input images. Extensive experiments across Replica and ScanNet++ demonstrate that our
method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods.
Notably, it achieves better object reconstruction under 10
views than the baselines under 100 views. Our method enables seamless text-based editing for geometry and appearance through SDS optimization and produces decomposed
object meshes with detailed UV maps that support photorealistic Visual effects (VFX) editing. The project page is
available at https://dp-recon.github.io/.

Decompositional reconstruction of 3D scenes, with complete shapes and detailed texture of all objects within, is
intriguing for downstream applications but remains challenging, particularly with sparse views as input. Recent approaches incorporate semantic or geometric regularization
to address this issue, but they suffer significant degradation
in underconstrained areas and fail to recover occluded regions. We argue that the key to solving this problem lies
in supplementing missing information for these areas. To
this end, we propose DP-R ECON, which employs diffusion
priors in the form of Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) to
optimize the neural representation of each individual object under novel views. This provides additional information for the underconstrained areas, but directly incorporating diffusion prior raises potential conflicts between the
reconstruction and generative guidance. Therefore, we fur-

1. Introduction
3D scene reconstruction from multi-view images is a longstanding topic in computer vision. Recent advances in neu-

6022

