This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Hard Example Augmentation for
Semantic Point Cloud Segmentation
Qi Zhang, Jibin Peng, Zhao Huang, Wei Feng*, Di Lin*
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
{qizhang118, 2023244054, 2023244157, wfeng, di.lin}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
The recent progress in semantic point cloud segmentation is
attributed to deep networks, which require a large amount
of point cloud data for training. However, how to collect
substantial point-wise annotations of the point clouds at affordable cost for the end-to-end network training still needs
to be solved. In this paper, we propose Generative Hard
Example Augmentation (GHEA) to achieve novel examples
of point clouds, which enrich the data for training the segmentation network. Firstly, GHEA employs the generative
network to embed the discrepancy between the point clouds
into the latent space. From the latent space, we sample
multiple discrepancies for reshaping a point cloud to various examples, contributing to the richness of the training
data. Secondly, GHEA mixes the reshaped point clouds by
respecting their segmentation errors. This mixup allows the
reshaped point clouds, which are difficult to segment, to join
as the challenging example for network training. We evaluate the effectiveness of GHEA, which helps the popular
segmentation networks to improve the performances.

vidual points (e.g., create, remove, and shift). But they produce less challenging examples, where some point-wise category labels could be problematic after manipulation. Another family of methods [15–21] use the generative network
to produce novel point clouds with diverse shapes, allowing
challenging examples to emerge. Unlike the deformation
of semantic point clouds, the newly generated point clouds
have unavailable point-wise labels to align. They are inapplicable to the end-to-end training of segmentation network.
In this paper, we propose the Generative Hard Example Augmentation (GHEA) to augment the semantic point
cloud data for training the general segmentation networks.
We illustrate the training of the segmentation network with
GHEA in Figure 1, where the whole pipeline consists of
the Generative Point Cloud Reshape, Generative Example
Mixup, and Network Update.
In the Generative Point Cloud Reshape (see Figure 1(a)),
we employ the generative network to reshape the semantic point cloud as new training examples. Given a pair of
semantic point clouds, the generative network learns their
discrepancy in terms of the spatial distribution of points in
different categories. It embeds this discrepancy into a latent space. The generative network regards a semantic point
cloud as a source example to sample multiple discrepancy
representations from the latent space. Each representation
reconfigures each point of the source example to a new location. It also renews the reconfigured point’s category label,
yielding a more reasonable label than the trivial manipulation of available points. We reshape each source example,
generating novel examples with point-wise category labels.
In the Generative Example Mixup (see Figure 1(b)), we
pass the generated examples of point cloud into the segmentation network, which predicts the segmentation scores
for points. Each point of the generated examples has a renewed label compared to the predicted score for measuring
the segmentation error. We respect the segmentation errors
for mixing up multiple generated examples. This is done
by using the segmentation errors to weigh the discrepancy
representations, which correspond to the generated examples individually. We regard the weighted representations

1. Introduction
Semantic point cloud segmentation requires understanding
the surrounding contexts of the 3D points to be segmented.
These point-based contexts capture the points’ spatial configuration and their categories’ co-existence. Because the
point cloud is a flexible structure, it leads to a high degree
of freedom to determine the neighbors of each point, thus
yielding diverse point-based contexts.
Deep networks [1–8] have been widely used to learn
point-based contexts. They learn from sufficient, challenging data to adapt to diverse contexts. Point clouds are usually collected at an expensive cost, limiting the amount of
training data. To augment training data, some methods [9–
14] rely on the pre-scribed manipulation of the entire semantic point cloud (e.g., rotate, crop, and scale) or the indi* Co-corresponding authors.

22205

