This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real-time High-fidelity Gaussian Human Avatars with
Position-based Interpolation of Spatially Distributed MLPs

1

Youyi Zhan1 Tianjia Shao1 * Yin Yang2
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Kun Zhou1
University of Utah

2

10 FPS

(a) Novel view

(b) Novel pose

166 FPS

AnimatableGaussians

Ours

Figure 1. Our method can model high-fidelity human avatars that can be animated under novel poses and rendered in real-time. Compared to
the state-of-the-art method AnimatableGaussians [28], our approach can recover finer details while achieving significantly faster rendering
speed (166 fps) under novel views and novel poses.

Abstract
Many works have succeeded in reconstructing Gaussian human avatars from multi-view videos. However, they either
struggle to capture pose-dependent appearance details with
a single MLP, or rely on a computationally intensive neural network to reconstruct high-fidelity appearance but with
rendering performance degraded to non-real-time. We propose a novel Gaussian human avatar representation that
can reconstruct high-fidelity pose-dependence appearance
with details and meanwhile can be rendered in real time.
Our Gaussian avatar is empowered by spatially distributed
MLPs which are explicitly located on different positions
on human body. The parameters stored in each Gaussian
are obtained by interpolating from the outputs of its nearby
MLPs based on their distances. To avoid undesired smooth
Gaussian property changing during interpolation, for each
Gaussian we define a set of Gaussian offset basis, and a linear combination of basis represents the Gaussian property
offsets relative to the neutral properties. Then we propose
to let the MLPs output a set of coefficients corresponding to
the basis. In this way, although Gaussian coefficients are
derived from interpolation and change smoothly, the Gaussian offset basis is learned freely without constraints. The
smoothly varying coefficients combined with freely learned

basis can still produce distinctly different Gaussian property offsets, allowing the ability to learn high-frequency
spatial signals. We further use control points to constrain
the Gaussians distributed on a surface layer rather than allowing them to be irregularly distributed inside the body, to
help the human avatar generalize better when animated under novel poses. Compared to the state-of-the-art method,
our method achieves better appearance quality with finer
details while the rendering speed is significantly faster under novel views and novel poses.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author (tjshao@zju.edu.cn)

Digital human avatars have widespread applications in the
fields like virtual reality and visual content creation. The
reconstruction of human avatars from multi-view videos has
been extensively studied, and remarkable progress is being
made with the radiance field representation (i.e., NeRF [33]
and 3D Gaussians [20]). Specially, with the fast training
and rendering speed, many works have succeeded in using
3D Gaussians to reconstruct digital human avatars with high
quality pose-dependent appearances.
Among those works, a common way is to use a single
multilayer perceptron (MLP) network [35, 42, 54] , which
takes human pose along with Gaussian position or learnable
code as input and outputs Gaussian property offsets for each
Gaussian. Though these methods can achieve real-time ren-

26297

