This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DroneSplat: 3D Gaussian Splatting for Robust 3D Reconstruction from
In-the-Wild Drone Imagery
Jiadong Tang1 Yu Gao1 Dianyi Yang1
1
Beijing Institute of Technology

2

Liqi Yan2 Yufeng Yue1 Yi Yang1, *
Hangzhou Dianzi University

Figure 1. Given a set of drone imagery, our method effectively eliminates the impact of dynamic distractors on the static scenes (e.g.,
vehicles driving on the road). The right side of the figure shows the rendering results of our method compared to 3DGS under input view
and novel view. Our method eliminates distractors while 3DGS generates artifacts in the corresponding regions. Moreover, our method
reconstructs scenes with accurate geometry under limited viewpoints, demonstrating robustness to significant view variation (novel view).

Abstract

comprehensive evaluation, we provide a drone-captured
3D reconstruction dataset encompassing both dynamic and
static scenes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
DroneSplat outperforms both 3DGS and NeRF baselines
in handling in-the-wild drone imagery. Project page:
https://bityia.github.io/DroneSplat/.

Drones have become essential tools for reconstructing wild scenes due to their outstanding maneuverability. Recent advances in radiance field methods have
achieved remarkable rendering quality, providing a new
avenue for 3D reconstruction from drone imagery. However, dynamic distractors in wild environments challenge
the static scene assumption in radiance fields, while limited view constraints hinder the accurate capture of underlying scene geometry. To address these challenges,
we introduce DroneSplat, a novel framework designed for
robust 3D reconstruction from in-the-wild drone imagery.
Our method adaptively adjusts masking thresholds by integrating local-global segmentation heuristics with statistical approaches, enabling precise identification and elimination of dynamic distractors in static scenes. We enhance 3D Gaussian Splatting with multi-view stereo predictions and a voxel-guided optimization strategy, supporting
high-quality rendering under limited view constraints. For

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction is pivotal in fields such as cultural heritage preservation [6], geological investigation [8] and urban surveying [19, 33]. In this context, drones have become
valuable for these tasks due to their outstanding maneuverability. Capable of traversing obstacles like water and difficult terrain, drones enable extensive data acquisition from
varied altitudes and angles.
Recently, radiance field methods, such as NeRF [23] and
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [11], have shown remarkable potential in 3D representation and novel view synthesis. Compared to traditional drone-based 3D reconstruction
methods like oblique photogrammetry, NeRF and 3DGS
can capture more realistic surface while reducing the train-

* Corresponding author: Yi Yang (yang yi@bit.edu.cn).

833

