This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Compatible Multi-Prize Subnetworks for Asymmetric Retrieval
Yushuai Sun1* , Zikun Zhou2*† , Dongmei Jiang2 , Yaowei Wang2 ,
Jun Yu1 , Guangming Lu1 , and Wenjie Pei1,2†
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Pengcheng Laboratory

Abstract
Asymmetric retrieval is a typical scenario in real-world
retrieval systems, where compatible models of varying
capacities are deployed on platforms with different resource configurations. Existing methods generally train
pre-defined networks or subnetworks with capacities specifically designed for pre-determined platforms, using compatible learning. Nevertheless, these methods suffer from
limited flexibility for multi-platform deployment. For example, when introducing a new platform into the retrieval systems, developers have to train an additional model at an
appropriate capacity that is compatible with existing models via backward-compatible learning. In this paper, we
propose a Prunable Network with self-compatibility, which
allows developers to generate compatible subnetworks at
any desired capacity through post-training pruning. Thus
it allows the creation of a sparse subnetwork matching the
resources of the new platform without additional training.
Specifically, we optimize both the architecture and weight of
subnetworks at different capacities within a dense network
in compatible learning. We also design a conflict-aware
gradient integration scheme to handle the gradient conflicts
between the dense network and subnetworks during compatible learning. Extensive experiments on diverse benchmarks and visual backbones demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method. The code will be made publicly available.

N pre-determined platforms

New platform

N pre-defined (sub)networks

New network

2

1

N pre-defined (sub)networks (1 ,

 N +1

N

N )

A new
network  N +1
Compatible Learning
BCL
(a) Learning pre-defined (sub)networks with compatibility
N pre-determined platforms

New platform

N+1 multi-prize subnetworks

1

2

N

 N +1

Prune

Prune

Prune

Prune

Capacity c1

Capacity c2

A prunable network

New
capacity
Training free

Capacity cN

Compatible Learning
(b) Learning a prunable network with compatible multi-prize subnetworks

Figure 1. Two pipelines for learning compatible models with
different capacities for multi-platform deployment. (a) Existing
methods tailor N pre-defined (sub)networks for pre-determined
platforms through compatible learning and train additional models for new platforms by Backward-Compatible Learning (BCL).
(b) Our method constructs a prunable network that can generate
compatible subnetworks at any specified capacity via pruning.

1. Introduction
limit the performance and waste the resources of the other
devices. To address the issue, many studies [37, 41, 43, 44]
explore asymmetric retrieval, training multiple retrieval
models with different capacities and deploying them on different devices. Typically, the large-capacity model is deployed on a cloud server to index gallery images, while the
small-capacity one is deployed on a resource-constrained
device to process query images. They are referred to as the
gallery and query models, respectively.
Asymmetric retrieval requires compatibility between the
gallery and query models, meaning that similar images

Image retrieval [7, 32, 33] has been extensively studied for
many years. Traditional retrieval systems use the same
model to process both query and gallery images, known
as symmetric retrieval. Nevertheless, symmetric retrieval
is not always optimal for real-world applications involving devices with diverse computation and storage resources,
such as cloud servers and mobiles. Deploying a lightweight
model tailored for the device with minimal resources would
*These authors contribute equally.
†Zikun Zhou and Wenjie Pei are corresponding authors (zhouzikunhit@gmail.com, wenjiecoder@outlook.com).

15255

