This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

KAC: Kolmogorov-Arnold Classifier for Continual Learning
Yusong Hu1 , Zichen Liang1 , Fei Yang1,2 , Qibin Hou1,2 , Xialei Liu1,2 ,* Ming-Ming Cheng1,2
1
2
VCIP, CS, Nankai University
NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
{ethanhu, liangzc}@mail.nankai.edu.cn
{feiyang, houqb, xialei, cmm}@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract

task T

task 1

Continual learning requires models to train continuously
across consecutive tasks without forgetting. Most existing
methods utilize linear classifiers, which struggle to maintain a stable classification space while learning new tasks.
Inspired by the success of Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks
(KAN) in preserving learning stability during simple continual regression tasks, we set out to explore their potential
in more complex continual learning scenarios. In this paper, we introduce the Kolmogorov-Arnold Classifier (KAC),
a novel classifier developed for continual learning based on
the KAN structure. We delve into the impact of KAN’s spline
functions and introduce Radial Basis Functions (RBF) for
improved compatibility with continual learning. We replace
linear classifiers with KAC in several recent approaches
and conduct experiments across various continual learning benchmarks, all of which demonstrate performance improvements, highlighting the effectiveness and robustness
of KAC in continual learning. The code is available at
https://github.com/Ethanhuhuhu/KAC.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models are typically trained on a fixed dataset
in a single session, achieving impressive performance on
various static tasks. In contrast, real-world scenarios continuously evolve, necessitating models that can learn incrementally from a data stream. However, in such scenarios, these models often encounter a significant challenge,
known as catastrophic forgetting [12]. Continual learning [2, 8, 18, 47] investigates how to effectively train models
in such dynamic environments with sequential data exposure, aiming to adapt and avoid forgetting over time.
Class incremental learning (CIL) [50], as a key challenge
in continual learning, has garnered extensive research interest. It involves the continuous introduction of new classes
with ongoing tasks, requiring the model to conduct classifi-

…

…

classification head
…
…

learnable activations

feature embedding
(a) Linear Classifier

task 1

…

task T

…

…

…

…

…
feature embedding
(b) Kolmogorov-Arnold Classifier

Figure 1. Brief comparison between conventional linear classifier and our Kolmogorov-Arnold classifier. The solid lines represent activated weights, while the dashed ones represent suppressed weights. (a) Conventional linear classifiers activate each
weight equally across all tasks, resulting in irrelevant weights being equally updated in the new task.. (b) our Kolmogorov-Arnold
Classifier learns class-specific learnable activations for each channel across all categories, minimizing forgetting caused by irrelevant weight changes.

cation on all encountered classes after training on new tasks.
Most CIL methods retain exemplars and employ techniques,
such as knowledge distillation [9, 50, 59] or dynamic architectures [6, 10, 31, 60], to mitigate forgetting. With the development of pre-trained models, numerous studies [44, 63]
have attempted to explore the applications of pre-trained
models in CIL, achieving impressive results. Among these,
prompt-based approaches [16, 52, 57, 58] have attracted
considerable attention.
For existing methods, some [19, 44, 62] focus on fea-

* Corresponding author.

15297

