This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structure-Aware Correspondence Learning for Relative Pose Estimation
Yihan Chen1

Wenfei Yang1 Huan Ren1 Shifeng Zhang3 Tianzhu Zhang1,2 * Feng Wu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
National Key Laboratory of Deep Space Exploration, Deep Space Exploration Laboratory
3
Sangfor Technologies
{yihanchen, rh hr 666}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhangshifeng@sangfor.com.cn
{yangwf, tzzhang, fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn

𝐹𝑞3𝐷

Abstract

𝐹𝑞
3D lifting

* Corresponding author.

3D Matching

Object pose estimation aims to estimate the 3D translation
and 3D rotation of an object from a single image. It plays
a crucial role in many real-world applications such as augmented reality (AR) [2, 26], robotic manipulation [27, 44,
45] and autonomous driving [4, 9], drawing increasing attention in recent years. Early works [12, 13, 41, 46] mainly
focus on instance-level pose estimation, where the model
is trained to estimate the pose for a specific object. However, these methods cannot generalize to other objects. Consequently, the category-level pose estimation [42] is intro-

𝐹𝑟3𝐷
𝐹𝑟
3D lifting

2D Matching

(b): 2D Correspondence-Based Methods (c): 3D Correspondence-Based Methods

Δ𝑅

Reference Image

(a): Relative Pose Estimation

Structure-Aware
Correspondence
Estimation

1. Introduction

Query Image

Structure
Representation

Relative pose estimation provides a promising way for
achieving object-agnostic pose estimation. Despite the success of existing 3D correspondence-based methods, the reliance on explicit feature matching suffers from small overlaps in visible regions and unreliable feature estimation
for invisible regions. Inspired by humans’ ability to assemble two object parts that have small or no overlapping regions by considering object structure, we propose
a novel Structure-Aware Correspondence Learning method
for Relative Pose Estimation, which consists of two key
modules. First, a structure-aware keypoint extraction module is designed to locate a set of kepoints that can represent
the structure of objects with different shapes and appearance, under the guidance of a keypoint based image reconstruction loss. Second, a structure-aware correspondence
estimation module is designed to model the intra-image
and inter-image relationships between keypoints to extract
structure-aware features for correspondence estimation. By
jointly leveraging these two modules, the proposed method
can naturally estimate 3D-3D correspondences for unseen
objects without explicit feature matching for precise relative
pose estimation. Experimental results on the CO3D, Objaverse and LineMOD datasets demonstrate that the proposed
method significantly outperforms prior methods, i.e., with
5.7◦ reduction in mean angular error on the CO3D dataset.

Δ𝑅

𝐼

(d): Our Method

Figure 1. a) Task depiction. Predict the relative pose ∆R between the query and reference images. b) 2D correspondencebased methods extract keypoints to conduct 2D-2D matching for
pose estimation. c) 3D correspondence-based methods lift 2D
features into 3D voxel features and conduct 3D-3D matching for
pose estimation. d) Our method bypasses the feature matching
and directly regresses 3D correspondences for pose estimation.

duced, where the model is trained to estimate the pose for
different instances within the same category. Nevertheless,
they can hardly generalize to unseen objects of other categories, limiting their application potentials.
To further improve the generalization ability, recent
works [19, 48, 49] have shifted towards relative pose estimation for unseen objects. It requires only a single reference image of a novel object to estimate the poses of new
images, as shown in Figure 1 (a), providing a promising
way to achieve object-agnostic pose estimation. Existing
relative pose estimation methods can be broadly categorized
into three types, 2D correspondence-based methods [33,
36], hypothesis-and-verification-based methods [19, 48, 49]
and 3D correspondence-based methods [49, 50]. 2D
correspondence-based methods [33, 36] extract keypoints
directly from two images and compute the relative pose
based on keypoint matching. However, as shown in Figure
1 (b), these methods suffer from small overlapping regions
caused by large pose variations, making it difficult to establish reliable correspondence. Hypothesis-and-verificationbased methods [19, 48, 49] sample a large number of pose

11611

