This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Synchronized Video-to-Audio Generation via
Mel Quantization-Continuum Decomposition
Juncheng Wang12 * Chao Xu2∗ Cheng Yu2∗ Lei Shang2 †
Shujun Wang1 ‡ Liefeng Bo2‡

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group
https://wjc2830.github.io/MelQCD/

Abstract

Silent Video
...................

Video-to-audio generation is essential for synthesizing realistic audio tracks that synchronize effectively with silent
videos. Following the perspective of extracting essential signals from videos that can precisely control the
mature text-to-audio generative diffusion models, this paper presents how to balance the representation of melspectrograms in terms of completeness and complexity through a new approach called Mel QuantizationContinuum Decomposition (Mel-QCD). We decompose the
mel-spectrogram into three distinct types of signals, employing quantization or continuity to them, we can effectively predict them from video by a devised video-to-all
(V2X) predictor. Then, the predicted signals are recomposed and fed into a ControlNet, along with a textual inversion design, to control the audio generation process. Our
proposed Mel-QCD method demonstrates state-of-the-art
performance across eight metrics, evaluating dimensions
such as quality, synchronization, and semantic consistency.

...................

Video
Product

Synchronized Audio

(a) Our Objective Task
or

Signals

Visual
Encoder

t

or

Audio Generator

Components

(b)Common Framework
V2X
Predictor

(c)Our Solution

Easy to
Predict

Continual

Continual
Discrete

Control

1

Zhe Hu1

Energy

t

Std

t

SVQ

Trade-off?

Recompose

Precise to
Control
Control

…

Mel-QCD

Figure 1. Task formulation of this paper (a). Previous mainstream
approaches focus on extracting control signals from videos to govern audio generation (b). However, they struggle to balance between ease of prediction and precision of control. In response, our
proposed Mel-QCD achieves a more effective trade-off (c).

tasks by fine-tuning approaches from mature text-to-audio
(T2A) [17, 18, 26, 27, 46] generation, particularly diffusion
models. While these methods are driven by various motivations, they can generally be viewed as extracting signals
from videos to control the synthesis of audio represented in
mel-spectrogram format, as illustrated in Figure 1. For example, FoleyCrafter [50] extracts sound event onset signals
from video, which are then used to control the temporal distribution within a text-to-audio generative diffusion model.

1. Introduction
The relevance of multimedia content has positioned videoto-audio (V2A) [19, 21, 43, 45, 50] generation as a critical area of research, focusing on synthesizing realistic audio tracks synchronized with silent video footage. This
task is vital for enhancing user experiences in applications
such as video editing [4, 28], post-production [25, 33], and
content creation [16, 38]. Moreover, as AI increasingly
influences video production—often resulting in silent outputs [3, 30, 32]—the development of effective V2A solutions has become essential. High-quality audio generation for AI-generated videos enhances storytelling and emotional impact, bridging the gap between visual and auditory
information in various multimedia contexts.
Recent studies have shown promising results in V2A

From this perspective, we hypothesize the primary challenge that the community faces is how to better represent an audio signal that can be easily predicted from
video while also enabling precise control over audio generation? Intuitively, an easily predictable signal promises
effective generalization across different videos. However,
to ensure that the generated audio is highly aligned with
the conditioned video in both semantic and temporal representations, the signal must encompass adequate information. However, existing methods that fine-tune T2A diffu-

* Equal contribution. † Project lead. ‡ Correspondence.

3111

