This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

POPEN: Preference-Based Optimization and Ensemble for
LVLM-Based Reasoning Segmentation
Lanyun Zhu1 Tianrun Chen3 Qianxiong Xu4 Xuanyi Liu5
Deyi Ji2 Haiyang Wu2 De Wen Soh1 Jun Liu6
1

Singapore University of Technology and Design 2 Tencent 3 Zhejiang University
Nanyang Technological University 5 Peking University 6 Lancaster University

4

Abstract

USER: I lack vitamins recently, what
should I eat from this table?

Existing LVLM-based reasoning segmentation methods often suffer from imprecise segmentation results and hallucinations in their text responses. This paper introduces
POPEN, a novel framework designed to address these
issues and achieve improved results. POPEN includes
a preference-based optimization method to finetune the
LVLM, aligning it more closely with human preferences
and thereby generating better text responses and segmentation results. Additionally, POPEN introduces a preferencebased ensemble method for inference, which integrates multiple outputs from the LVLM using a preference-score-based
attention mechanism for refinement. To better adapt to the
segmentation task, we incorporate several task-specific designs in our POPEN framework, including a new approach
for collecting segmentation preference data with a curriculum learning mechanism, and a novel preference optimization loss to refine the segmentation capability of the LVLM.
Experiments demonstrate that our method achieves state-ofthe-art performance in reasoning segmentation, exhibiting
minimal hallucination in text responses and the highest segmentation accuracy compared to previous advanced methods like LISA and PixelLM. Project page is here.

Image

ASSISTANT: To replenish your vitamins,
you should consider eating the
oranges <seg> on the table. There are
several oranges scattered across the
table, which are rich in vitamin C.
Additionally, there are apples <seg>
and grapes <seg> available, which also
provide essential vitamins and
nutrients. You can choose any of these
fruits to enjoy a healthy snack and
improve your overall well being.

Segmentation Result

Figure 1. An example of hallucination in text responses and
inaccurate segmentation results in existing LVLM-based reasoning segmentation methods. In this example, the LVLM generates the non-existent apple in the text response. The segmentation results show rough edges (grapes) or incorrect localization
(misidentifying part of the area belonging to the cup as an orange).

1. Introduction

While these methods have achieved some success, as
shown in Figure 1, their performance is still constrained by
two severe issues. Firstly, the LVLM frequently generates
text responses unrelated to the image content, a problem
known as hallucination. This issue can lead to the incorrect
generation and segmentation of non-existent objects within
the image, such as the “apple” in Figure 1. Secondly, the
segmentation accuracy is often suboptimal, with coarse results at object boundaries and even incorrect localization
of the target objects. One possible reason for this issue is
that the SFT-trained LVLM has not yet developed sufficient
capability to generate highly refined segmentation features.
These two challenges reveal the lack of robustness and effectiveness in current LVLM-based reasoning segmentation
models, underscoring the need for a more effective training paradigm to further enhance the LVLM’s segmentation
capabilities and mitigate the issue of hallucinations.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework named
POPEN, which effectively addresses the aforementioned issues and achieves significantly improved performance. Our

Image segmentation is an important and fundamental task in
computer vision that aims to classify each pixel in an image.
Traditional methods in this field are typically constrained to
segmenting only clearly indicated objects or categories. To
overcome this limitation, recent studies, such as LISA [12]
and PixelLM [22], have leveraged large vision-language
models (LVLMs) to enhance the language comprehension
capabilities of segmentation algorithms, enabling segmentation to be performed based on more complex human instructions. For example, given the instruction “I lack vitamins recently, what should I eat from this table?”, the model
can generate a text response and segment the vegetables and
fruits in the image, as shown in Figure 1.

30231

