This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Convex Splatting: Radiance Field Rendering with 3D Smooth Convexes
Jan Held∗ 1,2 Renaud Vandeghen∗ 1 Abdullah Hamdi∗ 3 Adrien Deliege 1 Anthony Cioppa 1
Silvio Giancola 2 Andrea Vedaldi 3 Bernard Ghanem 2 Marc Van Droogenbroeck 1
1

University of Liège

2

KAUST

3

University of Oxford

∗ Equal contribution

Abstract
Recent advances in radiance field reconstruction, such
as 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), have achieved highquality novel view synthesis and fast rendering by representing scenes with compositions of Gaussian primitives.
However, 3D Gaussians present several limitations for
scene reconstruction. Accurately capturing hard edges is
challenging without significantly increasing the number of
Gaussians, creating a large memory footprint. Moreover,
they struggle to represent flat surfaces, as they are diffused
in space. Without hand-crafted regularizers, they tend to
disperse irregularly around the actual surface. To circumvent these issues, we introduce a novel method, named 3D
Convex Splatting (3DCS), which leverages 3D smooth convexes as primitives for modeling geometrically-meaningful
radiance fields from multi-view images. Smooth convex
shapes offer greater flexibility than Gaussians, allowing
for a better representation of 3D scenes with hard edges
and dense volumes using fewer primitives. Powered by
our efficient CUDA-based rasterizer, 3DCS achieves superior performance over 3DGS on benchmarks such as MipNeRF360, Tanks and Temples, and Deep Blending. Specifically, our method attains an improvement of up to 0.81 in
PSNR and 0.026 in LPIPS compared to 3DGS while maintaining high rendering speeds and reducing the number of
required primitives. Our results highlight the potential of
3D Convex Splatting to become the new standard for highquality scene reconstruction and novel view synthesis. The
project page is https://convexsplatting.github.io

1. Introduction
Reconstructing complex scenes and synthesizing novel
views have been fundamental challenges in computer vision
and graphics for decades [1, 12], with applications ranging
from virtual reality to autonomous navigation [17, 36, 40].
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [38] revolutionized this
area by representing scenes as continuous volumetric radi-

Figure 1. 3D Convex Splatting for Novel View Synthesis. We
introduce a novel primitive-based pipeline for novel view synthesis with 3D smooth convexes. Our 3D smooth convexes share the
rendering speed of 3D Gaussians [26] and the flexible representation of smooth convexes [9]. As a result, 3D Convex Splatting
better reconstructs scenes with fewer primitives.

ance fields, which are optimized to render novel views at
high-quality. However, NeRF suffered from slow training
and rendering times, limiting its practicality. To address
these issues, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [26] emerged
as an efficient alternative, by representing scenes with millions of 3D Gaussian primitives. 3DGS significantly accelerated training and enabled real-time rendering while main-

21360

