This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Autonomous Micromobility through
Scalable Urban Simulation
Wayne Wu1∗ Honglin He1∗ Chaoyuan Zhang2 Jack He1
Seth Z. Zhao1 Ran Gong1 Quanyi Li1 Bolei Zhou1
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 University of Washington

Figure 1. Autonomous micromobility. In public urban spaces, various mobile machines shown in the circle images are essential for
short-distance travel. However, urban environments are complex and contain varied terrain and challenging situations (rectangle images).
To bridge this gap, we present a scalable urban simulation solution to advance autonomous micromobility.

Abstract
Micromobility, which utilizes lightweight mobile machines moving in urban public spaces - such as delivery
robots and electric wheelchairs - emerges as a promising
alternative to vehicular mobility. Current micromobility depends mostly on human manual operation (in-person or remote control), which raises safety and efficiency concerns
when navigating busy urban environments full of unpredictable obstacles and pedestrians. Assisting humans with
AI agents in maneuvering micromobility devices presents
a viable solution for enhancing safety and efficiency. In
this work, we present a scalable urban simulation solution to advance autonomous micromobility. First, we build
URBAN-SIM – a high-performance robot learning platform for large-scale training of embodied agents in interactive urban scenes. URBAN-SIM contains three critical

modules: Hierarchical Urban Generation pipeline, Interactive Dynamics Generation strategy, and Asynchronous
Scene Sampling scheme, to improve the diversity, realism,
and efficiency of robot learning in simulation. Then, we
propose URBAN-BENCH – a suite of essential tasks and
benchmarks to gauge various capabilities of the AI agents
in achieving autonomous micromobility. URBAN-BENCH
includes eight tasks based on three core skills of the agents:
Urban Locomotion, Urban Navigation, and Urban Traverse. We evaluate four robots with heterogeneous embodiments, such as the wheeled and legged robots, across
these tasks. Experiments on diverse terrains and urban
structures reveal each robot’s strengths and limitations.
Project page: https://metadriverse.github.
io/urban-sim/.

* Co-first authors.

27553

