This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FFaceNeRF: Few-shot Face Editing in Neural Radiance Fields
Kwan Yun1 Chaelin Kim1 Hangyeul Shin2 Junyong Noh1
1
KAIST, Visual Media Lab 2 Handong Global University

Figure 1. Results of FFaceNeRF. With few-shot training, our method can edit 3D-aware images from desired layouts.

Abstract
Recent 3D face editing methods using masks have produced
high-quality edited images by leveraging Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF). Despite their impressive performance, existing methods often provide limited user control due to the use
of pre-trained segmentation masks. To utilize masks with
a desired layout, an extensive training dataset is required,
which is challenging to gather. We present FFaceNeRF, a
NeRF-based face editing technique that can overcome the
challenge of limited user control due to the use of fixed
mask layouts. Our method employs a geometry adapter
with feature injection, allowing for effective manipulation
of geometry attributes. Additionally, we adopt latent mixing for tri-plane augmentation, which enables training with
a few samples. This facilitates rapid model adaptation to
desired mask layouts, crucial for applications in fields like
personalized medical imaging or creative face editing. Our
comparative evaluations demonstrate that FFaceNeRF surpasses existing mask based face editing methods in terms of
flexibility, control, and generated image quality, paving the
way for future advancements in customized and high-fidelity
3D face editing. The code is available on the project-page.

pecially for applications in VR/AR, personalized avatar creation, and medical purposes. To deliver high-fidelity facial
images and support their extensive customization, precise
manipulation of facial attributes and intrinsic features is essential. To achieve this, image-based editing methods have
been proposed [2, 6, 39, 46]. Although these methods successfully achieve high performance in generating edited images by controlled features, they suffer from inconsistency
when the camera view is changed.

1. Introduction

Recent advancements in 3D face editing, driven by generative Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [4, 34], have significantly improved the resolution and quality of the edited
images. These methods enable 3D-aware face generation
and editing using segmentation masks. Early studies [5, 43]
required large training datasets to build 3D segmentation
fields, while recent studies [18, 42] have reduced the burden
of data collection by utilizing pre-trained segmentation networks. Unfortunately, the use of a pretrained segmentation
network necessitates a mask with a fixed layout, making it
impossible to edit the regions that are not included in the
segment labels of the layout. The purposes of editing may
differ from session to session, requiring a different mask
layout each time. For example, a makeup artist would need
eyelid control for visualizing makeup effects, while a plastic surgeon would need detailed nasal ala editing for the previsualization of a surgery. Achieving this with the previous
methods either requires an extensive dataset segmented with
various layouts or, by chance, finding a pretrained segmen-

In the growing field of digital image synthesis, the ability to
create realistic and controllable facial images is crucial, es-

10825

