This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

T-CIL: Temperature Scaling using Adversarial Perturbation for Calibration in
Class-Incremental Learning
Seong-Hyeon Hwang

Minsu Kim
KAIST

Steven Euijong Whang*

{sh.hwang, ms716, swhang}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We study model confidence calibration in class-incremental
learning, where models learn from sequential tasks with
different class sets. While existing works primarily focus
on accuracy, maintaining calibrated confidence has been
largely overlooked. Unfortunately, most post-hoc calibration techniques are not designed to work with the limited memories of old-task data typical in class-incremental
learning, as retaining a sufficient validation set would be
impractical. Thus, we propose T-CIL, a novel temperature
scaling approach for class-incremental learning without a
validation set for old tasks, that leverages adversarially perturbed exemplars from memory. Directly using exemplars
is inadequate for temperature optimization, since they are
already used for training. The key idea of T-CIL is to perturb exemplars more strongly for old tasks than for the new
task by adjusting the perturbation direction based on feature distance, with the single magnitude determined using
the new-task validation set. This strategy makes the perturbation magnitude computed from the new task also applicable to old tasks, leveraging the tendency that the accuracy of old tasks is lower than that of the new task. We
empirically show that T-CIL significantly outperforms various baselines in terms of calibration on real datasets and
can be integrated with existing class-incremental learning
techniques with minimal impact on accuracy.

predictions unreliable to use for decision making. The discrepancy also results in severe failures in real-world safetycritical applications that require reliable models such as autonomous driving [12] and medical diagnostics [15].
With the growing need for reliable models, confidence
calibration [13], which adjusts confidence levels of the
model to match their actual accuracies, has gained increasing attention. To enhance the calibration of deep neural networks, both post-hoc and training-time methods have been
introduced. Post-hoc methods adjust the confidence levels
of a model after training by applying a calibration function to the predictions made on a hold-out validation set,
such as temperature scaling [13] or histogram binning [41].
Training-time methods refine model calibration during the
training phase by altering the loss function [27], implementing label smoothing [36], or using Mixup [43] training on
interpolated data samples.
However, conventional post-hoc calibration approaches
struggle in class-incremental learning scenarios, where
models must continuously adapt to new classes with sufficient data while retaining performance on previously
learned classes. Existing works for class-incremental learning [3, 25, 34, 38, 39, 46] focus on preventing catastrophic
forgetting [26], losing knowledge of old tasks as they learn
new ones. They often assume a limited memory size for
old classes, as storing all data may be impractical due to
memory constraints and privacy concerns. For post-hoc approaches, the primary challenge stems from this memory
limitation. This limitation restricts the retention of a sufficient validation set from old tasks. If a portion of the
stored data is reserved solely for validation and excluded
from training, model accuracy on old tasks will likely decline due to the reduced amount of training data.
To effectively calibrate models in class-incremental
learning, we propose T-CIL, a novel temperature scaling approach that operates without validation data from old tasks
(see Figure 1). While exemplars from memory are the only
available source of information for old tasks, directly using them for temperature optimization yields abnormally
small values due to their use in training. Thus, we optimize

1. Introduction
Nowadays it is essential for deep neural networks to deliver not only precise predictions, but also trustworthy confidence levels indicating the likelihood that predictions are
correct. However, with the enhancement of the model’s capabilities, there is a tendency for the model to exhibit excessive confidence in its predictions compared to the actual
accuracy [13]. This discrepancy between the confidence
levels of the model and the actual accuracy makes model
* Corresponding Author

15339

