This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Motion-Grounded Video Reasoning:
Understanding and Perceiving Motion at Pixel Level
Andong Deng1 , Tongjia Chen2 , Shoubin Yu3 , Taojiannan Yang4 , Lincoln Spencer1 ,
Yapeng Tian5 , Ajmal Saeed Mian2 , Mohit Bansal3 , Chen Chen1
1

CRCV, University of Central Florida, 2 University of Western Australia,
3
UNC, Chapel Hill, 4 Amazon Web Services, 5 The University of Texas at Dallas

Abstract

ing [15, 49, 55, 61, 65], autonomous driving [8, 22, 35, 59],
and human-computer interaction [2, 56, 69]. Existing motion understanding tasks (e.g., action recognition [7, 60],
temporal action localization [6, 27], spatiotemporal action/object detection [16, 19, 28, 39, 66], video object segmentation [10, 13, 30, 57, 75]) are designed to comprehend
spatial interactions or detect motions in temporal span.

We introduce Motion-Grounded Video Reasoning, a
new motion understanding task that requires generating visual answers (video segmentation masks) according to the
input question, and hence needs implicit spatiotemporal
reasoning and grounding. It extends existing spatiotemporal grounding work focusing on explicit action/motion
grounding, to a more general format by enabling implicit
reasoning via questions. To facilitate the development of the
new task, we collect a large-scale dataset called G ROUND M O R E, which comprises 1,715 video clips, 249K object
masks that are deliberately designed with 4 question types
for benchmarking deep and comprehensive motion reasoning abilities. G ROUND M O R E uniquely requires models to
generate visual answers, providing a more concrete and visually interpretable response than plain texts. It evaluates
models on both spatiotemporal grounding and reasoning,
fostering to address complex challenges in motion-related
video reasoning, temporal perception, and pixel-level understanding. Furthermore, we introduce a novel baseline
model named M O RA, which achieves respectable performance on G ROUND M O R E outperforming the best existing
visual grounding baseline model by an average of 21.5%
relatively. We hope this novel and challenging task will
pave the way for future advancements in robust and general motion understanding via video reasoning segmentation. Project available at: https://groundmore.github.io/

However, motion is a complex spatiotemporal concept
involving interactions between visual entities over time.
Understanding motion-related attributes abstracted from
dynamic scenes is crucial for comprehensive motion understanding. Table 1 highlights that existing tasks only address this challenge from specific aspects. As shown in Figure 1(a), action recognition focuses on identifying actions
within a curated video clip, primarily using spatial features.
The models are not required to distinguish fine-grained motion patterns over time but to recognize ”the motion” mostly
based on spatial features in a temporal-agnostic [23] manner
due to potential single-frame bias [34]. It leads to overlook
fine-grained temporal motion patterns. Conversely, temporal action localization in Figure 1(b) emphasizes the temporal dimension but lacks detailed spatial analysis at the object
level, relying on snippet-level features. Spatiotemporal action detection aims to localize actions in both dimensions
but typically focuses only on humans in predefined actions
(e.g., AVA [19], MultiSports [39]), neglecting other interacting objects. It impairs the integrity of the spatial perception of motion understanding. Previous compositional action recognition investigates subject-object interaction and
examines whether the model could distinguish pretended
actions, but the benchmark [18] only contains short clips,
making the task fall short in analyzing the temporal context
of motions. Thus, a crucial question arises: What will be
a more comprehensive task for motion understanding? Inspired by the recent reasoning segmentation task in image
domain [33], and considering the spatiotemporal nature of

1. Introduction
Understanding motions [1, 11, 64, 88] in dynamic video
scenes has long been an important topic in the computer
vision community. It plays a crucial role in many vital
real-world applications, such as scene/video understand-

8625

