This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Simple yet Effective Layout Token in Large Language Models for Document
Understanding
Zhaoqing Zhu1∗ , Chuwei Luo1∗† , Zirui Shao2∗ , Feiyu Gao1† , Hangdi Xing2 , Qi Zheng1
Ji Zhang1
1
Alibaba Group, 2 Zhejiang University
{zzhaoqing.z,luochuwei,zhengqisjtu}@gmail.com
{shaozirui,xinghd}@zju.edu.cn, {feiyu.gfy,zj122146}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

N Text Tokens 𝑡!
M Layout Tokens 𝑏!

Recent methods that integrate spatial layouts with text
for document understanding in large language models
(LLMs) have shown promising results. A commonly used
method is to represent layout information as text tokens and
interleave them with text content as inputs to the LLMs.
However, such a method still demonstrates limitations, as
it requires additional position IDs for tokens that are used
to represent layout information. Due to the constraint on
max position IDs, assigning them to layout information reduces those available for text content, reducing the capacity for the model to learn from the text during training,
while also introducing a large number of potentially untrained position IDs during long-context inference, which
can hinder performance on document understanding tasks.
To address these issues, we propose LayTokenLLM, a simple yet effective method for document understanding. LayTokenLLM represents layout information as a single token
per text segment and uses a specialized positional encoding
scheme. It shares position IDs between text and layout tokens, eliminating the need for additional position IDs. This
design maintains the model’s capacity to learn from text
while mitigating long-context issues during inference. Furthermore, a novel pre-training objective called Next Interleaved Text and Layout Token Prediction (NTLP) is devised
to enhance cross-modality learning between text and layout
tokens. Extensive experiments show that LayTokenLLM outperforms existing layout-integrated LLMs and MLLMs of
similar scales on multi-page document understanding tasks,
as well as most single-page tasks.

1. Introduction
Document understanding [9] is currently an important area
in both industry and academic research, driven by the criti* Equal contribution.† Corresponding author.

Position IDs Allocation

Other Layout-as-Token Methods
m’ Text Tokens
Cannot Be Learned

Max Position ID N
0

1

2

……

𝑡&

𝑡'

𝑏&

… … 𝑡!"#$

𝑏#$

N-1

N

𝑡!"#$%&

~ 𝑡!

LayTokenLLM (Ours)

𝑡&

𝑡'

𝑏&

……

𝑡!

𝑏(

0

1

0

……

N

N

All N Text Tokens
Can Be Learned

Max Position ID N

Figure 1. Comparison with other Layout-as-Token methods. Previous Layout-as-Token methods require additional position IDs for
layout information which squeeze the learning space for text content, while LayTokenLLM eliminates the need for additional position IDs of layout information by sharing the first position ID of
corresponding text content.

cal need to efficiently process and understand complex documents. In recent years, large language models (LLMs) and
multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have made remarkable progress in this field. Especially in tasks involving
rich textual content, such as the document-oriented Visual
Question Answering (DocVQA) [32] task and the visuallyrich document information extraction (VIE) [19, 33, 48]
task. Some works [20, 28, 44] suggest that the most valuable information for document understanding can be derived from both the text and its layout, treating spatial layouts as a form of lightweight visual information. Building on this idea, these approaches [20, 28, 44] that integrate such spatial layouts as visual information with text for
LLMs have shown promising results, and sometimes superior performance compared to MLLMs.
The integration of layout information can be broadly cat-

14472

