This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Simpler Diffusion: 1.5 FID on ImageNet512 with pixel-space diffusion
Emiel Hoogeboom
Google Deepmind
emielh@google.com

Thomas Mensink
Google Deepmind
mensink@google.com

Kay Lamerigts
Google Research
kaylamerigts@google.com

Ruiqi Gao
Google Deepmind
ruiqig@google.com

Abstract

FID

Latent diffusion models have become the popular choice for
scaling up diffusion models for high resolution image synthesis. Compared to pixel-space models that are trained endto-end, latent models are perceived to be more efficient and
to produce higher image quality at high resolution. Here we
challenge these notions, and show that pixel-space models
can be very competitive to latent models both in quality and
efficiency, achieving 1.5 FID on ImageNet512 and new SOTA
results on ImageNet128, ImageNet256 and Kinetics600.
We present a simple recipe for scaling end-to-end pixelspace diffusion models to high resolutions. 1: Use the
sigmoid loss-weighting [25] with our prescribed hyperparameters. 2: Use our simplified memory-efficient architecture with fewer skip-connections. 3: Scale the model to
favor processing the image at a high resolution with fewer
parameters, rather than using more parameters at a lower
resolution. Combining these with guidance intervals, we
obtain a family of pixel-space diffusion models we call
Simpler Diffusion (SiD2).

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have been tremendously successful in domains such as image, video and audio generation. For high
resolution data, latent diffusion models [32] have been particularly successful: Through encoding the data in a lower
dimensional space, these models sidestep the difficulties
faced by more traditional pixel-space diffusion models in
scaling up to high resolution. This makes latent diffusion
models also scale better in training compute than other approaches, as shown by [20].
However, latent models have their own challenges: It can
be difficult to train the autoencoders that produce the latents,

Jonathan Heek
Google Deepmind
jheek@google.com
Tim Salimans
Google Deepmind
salimans@google.com

ADM

5

RIN

3
2
1
2021

SD, U-ViT L
VDM++
SiD2 (ours)

2022

2023

2024

Figure 1. End-to-end pixel diffusion performance on ImageNet512.

which in practice requires careful tuning of regularization
hyperparameters [32]. Even when trained well, the decoder
of a latent diffusion model can produce artifacts or otherwise
imperfect reconstructions, especially when it is applied to
latents that are out of distribution compared to the training
set. A single-stage pixel-space diffusion model does not have
these issues, and so we ask the question: Can pixel-space
diffusion models scale as well as latent models with the right
architecture and hyperparameters?
Over the years, end-to-end pixel-space diffusion has improved considerably (Figure 1). The main problem was that
the standard schedule and loss-weighting [11] work well for
small resolution images, like 322 or 642 , but not at higher
resolution [3, 14]. It was further shown [25] that it can be
helpful to disentangle loss weighting and time sampling for
improved control over both, leading to better performance at
higher resolution. However, in previous works pixels-space
models still did not match the best latent models on standard
benchmarks like ImageNet512.
The main contribution of this paper is to improve pixelspace diffusion on high resolution images while keeping
as close to the original formulation of diffusion models as
possible. Specifically, we analyze and tune the sigmoid loss
weighting from [25], and show why it should be preferred
over their favored EDM monotonic. We further propose
architectural improvements that lead to even better perfor-

18062

