This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PO3AD: Predicting Point Offsets toward Better 3D Point Cloud Anomaly
Detection

1

Jianan Ye1,2∗ , Weiguang Zhao1,2 *, Xi Yang1 , Guangliang Cheng2 , Kaizhu Huang3†
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, 2 University of Liverpool, 3 Duke Kunshan University
{Jianan.Ye20, Weiguang.Zhao20}@student.xjtlu.edu.cn, Xi.Yang01@xjtlu.edu.cn,
Guangliang.Cheng@liverpool.ac.uk, kaizhu.huang@dukekunshan.edu.cn

Abstract
Point cloud anomaly detection under the anomaly-free setting poses significant challenges as it requires accurately
capturing the features of 3D normal data to identify deviations indicative of anomalies. Current efforts focus on devising reconstruction tasks, such as acquiring normal data
representations by restoring normal samples from altered,
pseudo-anomalous counterparts. Our findings reveal that
distributing attention equally across normal and pseudoanomalous data tends to dilute the model’s focus on anomalous deviations. The challenge is further compounded by
the inherently disordered and sparse nature of 3D point
cloud data. In response to those predicaments, we introduce
an innovative approach that emphasizes learning point offsets, targeting more informative pseudo-abnormal points,
thus fostering more effective distillation of normal data representations. We also have crafted an augmentation technique that is steered by normal vectors, facilitating the creation of credible pseudo anomalies that enhance the efficiency of the training process. Our comprehensive experimental evaluation on the Anomaly-ShapeNet and Real3DAD datasets evidences that our proposed method outperforms existing state-of-the-art approaches, achieving an average enhancement of 9.0% and 1.4% in the AUC-ROC
detection metric across these datasets, respectively. Code
is available at https://github.com/yjnanan/
PO3AD.

Reconstruction-based Ours

Reconstruction-based Ours

(a) Performance comparison
Highest
Model attention

1.0 normal weight

0.5 normal weight

Reconstruction-based

No weight tuning
Ours

Lowest

(b) Model attention comparison

Figure 1. Comparison of reconstruction-based method and our
method in terms of performance, and model attention. (a) Detection and localization performance of the reconstruction-based
method on the ashtray0 category with various normal point loss
weights; pseudo-abnormal points consistently weighted at 1.0 (implemented with our network due to the absence of official code).
(b)By reducing normal weight in the reconstruction-based method,
the model pays more attention to pseudo-abnormal points (marked
with blue circles). Our method successfully focuses on pseudoabnormal points. The model attention map is obtained by calculating the gradient of each point during backward propagation.

1. Introduction
Point cloud anomaly detection aims to identify defective
samples and locate abnormal regions that deviate from expected data patterns [21, 22, 28, 44]. Owing to the high
cost of collecting and labeling anomaly samples, this task is
usually implemented in an anomaly-free setting, i.e., only

normal samples are available during training. The critical
challenge within this framework is to effectively capture
the distinctive features that are characteristic of 3D normal data, enabling the system to recognize and classify instances that deviate from these normal patterns as anomalies. Moreover, the inherently disordered and sparse nature

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

1353

