This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAP: Unleashing Hybrid Mamba-Transformer Vision Backbone’s Potential with
Masked Autoregressive Pretraining
Yunze Liu1,3
Li Yi1,2,3
1
IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

Abstract
Hybrid Mamba-Transformer networks have recently garnered broad attention. These networks can leverage the
scalability of Transformers while capitalizing on Mamba’s
strengths in long-context modeling and computational efficiency. However, the challenge of effectively pretraining such
hybrid networks remains an open question. Existing methods, such as Masked Autoencoders (MAE) or autoregressive
(AR) pretraining, primarily focus on single-type network
architectures. In contrast, pretraining strategies for hybrid
architectures must be effective for both Mamba and Transformer components. Based on this, we propose Masked Autoregressive Pretraining (MAP) to pretrain a hybrid MambaTransformer vision backbone network. This strategy combines the strengths of both MAE and Autoregressive pretraining, improving the performance of Mamba and Transformer modules within a unified paradigm. Experimental results show that the hybrid Mamba-Transformer vision backbone network pretrained with MAP significantly outperforms
other pretraining strategies, achieving state-of-the-art performance. We validate the method’s effectiveness on both 2D
and 3D datasets and provide detailed ablation studies to support the design choices for each component. Code and checkpoints are available at https://github.com/yunzeliu/MAP.

Figure 1. We propose Masked Autoregressive Pretraining to pretrain the hybrid Mamba-Transformer backbone. It demonstrates
significant performance improvements on both 2D and 3D tasks.

ditionally, the hybrid structure requires a pretraining strategy
compatible with both computation blocks. This is particularly challenging because the State Space Model captures
visual features very differently from Transformers.
To address these challenges, we conducted pilot studies
and identified three key observations. Firstly, existing popular pretraining strategies for Transformers, such as MAE[18]
and Contrastive Learning[17], do not yield satisfactory results for Mambas. Secondly, Autoregressive Pretraining[37]
can be effective for Mamba-based vision backbones with
an appropriate scanning pattern and token masking ratio.
Thirdly, pretraining strategies suitable for either Mamba or
Transformers do not effectively benefit the other.
Based on the above observations, we develop a novel
pretraining strategy suitable for the Mamba-Transformer vision backbone named Masked Autoregressive pretraining, or
MAP for short. The key is a hierarchical pretraining objective where local MAE is leveraged to learn good local attention for the Transformer blocks while global autoregressive
pretraining enables the Mamba blocks to learn meaningful

1. Introduction
The Mamba-Transformer backbone[4, 15, 22, 42] has recently attracted widespread attention. It leverages the scalability advantages of Transformers and utilizes Mamba’s[10,
51] strong capabilities in long-context language modeling.
However, to scale up Mamba-Transformer vision backbones,
an effective pretraining strategy is essential for maximizing
the combined capabilities of Mamba and Transformer. Our
work aims to take the first step in this direction.
Developing an effective pretraining strategy for MambaTransformer vision backbones is challenging. Although the
capability of MAE in pretraining Transformers has been
well validated, pretraining methods for Mamba are still underexplored, and the optimal approach remains unclear. Ad-

9676

