This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dora: Sampling and Benchmarking for 3D Shape Variational Auto-Encoders
Rui Chen1,2 Jianfeng Zhang2† Yixun Liang1,3 Guan Luo2,4 Weiyu Li1,3
Jiarui Liu1,3 Xiu Li2 Xiaoxiao Long1,3 Jiashi Feng2 Ping Tan1,3†
†

1

Corresponding authors

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 ByteDance Seed
3
LightIllusions 4 Tsinghua University
https://aruichen.github.io/Dora

Abstract
Recent 3D content generation pipelines commonly employ Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) to encode shapes
into compact latent representations for diffusion-based generation. However, the widely adopted uniform point sampling strategy in Shape VAE training often leads to a significant loss of geometric details, limiting the quality of
shape reconstruction and downstream generation tasks. We
present Dora-VAE, a novel approach that enhances VAE
reconstruction through our proposed sharp edge sampling
strategy and a dual cross-attention mechanism. By identifying and prioritizing regions with high geometric complexity during training, our method significantly improves
the preservation of fine-grained shape features. Such sampling strategy and the dual attention mechanism enable the
VAE to focus on crucial geometric details that are typically missed by uniform sampling approaches. To systematically evaluate VAE reconstruction quality, we additionally propose Dora-bench, a benchmark that quantifies
shape complexity through the density of sharp edges, introducing a new metric focused on reconstruction accuracy
at these salient geometric features. Extensive experiments
on the Dora-bench demonstrate that Dora-VAE achieves
comparable reconstruction quality to the state-of-the-art
dense XCube-VAE while requiring a latent space at least
8× smaller (1,280 vs. > 10,000 codes). Project page:
https://aruichen.github.io/Dora.

tent generation methods [2, 3, 7, 9, 17, 21, 25, 28, 30, 42,
44, 57] have transformed the field, making it more accessible to many more users.
Following the success of text-to-image generation models [4, 5, 15, 37, 55], recent 3D content creation approaches [36, 49, 56] adopt a two-stage pipeline: encoding 3D shapes into a latent space using variational autoencoders (VAEs), followed by training a latent diffusion
model. The performance of such a generative pipeline heavily relies on the VAE’s capability to faithfully encode and
reconstruct 3D shapes.
Existing 3D VAEs operate by sampling points on mesh
surfaces for shape encoding and then reconstructing the
original 3D meshes by its decoder. This process faces
unique challenges compared to 2D image VAEs where the
input image is fully observable. In comparison, the sampled
point cloud often cannot capture all the necessary shape information, which could harm the performance of 3D VAEs.
Volume-based method [36] leverages sparse convolution [47] to process millions of voxelized points for highfidelity reconstruction. Its dense sampling captures precise
shape information. However, this method produces large
latent codes (commonly > 10,000 tokens), which significantly complicate the training of diffusion models. On the
other hand, vector-set (Vecset) methods [24, 54, 56, 58]
use transformers to achieve compact latent representations
(hundreds to thousands of tokens), enabling efficient diffusion [24, 56]. However, due to the quadratic complexity of
transformer networks, it often only samples a few thousand
points to represent a 3D shape, which leads to information
loss and performance degradation. Therefore, we seek to
improve the reconstruction quality of Vecset-based VAEs
and maintain their compact representation.
We begin by analyzing the shape reconstruction capability of Vecset-based VAEs. Through careful analysis,
we find these methods have limited reconstruction performance, which stems from their commonly used uniform
sampling. When computational constraints limit the total

1. Introduction
3D content creation is vital to delivering realistic and immersive experiences in various industries, including games,
movies, and AR/VR. However, traditional 3D modeling
typically demands significant expertise and manual effort,
making it time-consuming and challenging, especially for
non-expert users. Recent advances in AI-powered 3D con-

16251

