This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-Mem: 3D Scene Memory for Embodied Exploration and Reasoning
Yuncong Yang1 ,* Han Yang2 ,* Jiachen Zhou3 , Peihao Chen1 ,
Hongxin Zhang1 , Yilun Du4 , Chuang Gan1,5
1
UMass Amherst, 2 CUHK, 3 Columbia University
4
MIT, 5 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
yuncongyang@umass.edu
https://umass-embodied-agi.github.io/3D-Mem/

Figure 1. With 3D-Mem, explored regions are represented by a set of Memory Snapshots capturing clusters of co-visible objects, i.e., the
objects observable in a single image observation, along with their spatial relationships and background context, as shown in the bottom-left
example. Unexplored regions are represented by navigable frontiers along with image observations, referred to as Frontier Snapshots.

Abstract
Constructing compact and informative 3D scene representations is essential for effective embodied exploration and
reasoning, especially in complex environments over extended periods. Existing representations, such as objectcentric 3D scene graphs, oversimplify spatial relationships
by modeling scenes as isolated objects with restrictive textual relationships, making it difﬁcult to address queries requiring nuanced spatial understanding. Moreover, these
representations lack natural mechanisms for active explo* Equal Contribution

17294

ration and memory management, hindering their application to lifelong autonomy. In this work, we propose 3DMem, a novel 3D scene memory framework for embodied
agents. 3D-Mem employs informative multi-view images,
termed Memory Snapshots, to capture rich visual information of explored regions. It further integrates frontier-based
exploration by introducing Frontier Snapshots—glimpses of
unexplored areas—enabling agents to make decisions by
considering both known and potential new information. To
support lifelong memory in active exploration settings, we
present an incremental construction pipeline for 3D-Mem,
as well as a memory retrieval technique for memory man-

