This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

U NI A LIGN: Scaling Multimodal Alignment within One Unified Model
Bo Zhou1 *, Liulei Li2 ,* Yujia Wang3 , Huafeng Liu1 , Yazhou Yao1†, Wenguan Wang2
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, 2 Zhejiang University, 3 Zhejiang Sci-Tech University
https://github.com/NUST-Machine-Intelligence-Laboratory/UNIALIGN

Abstract
Frozen

We present U NI A LIGN, a unified model to align an arbitrary number of modalities (e.g., image, text, audio, 3D
point cloud, etc.) through one encoder and a single training
phase. Existing solutions typically employ distinct encoders
for each modality, resulting in increased parameters as the
number of modalities grows. In contrast, U NI A LIGN proposes a modality-aware adaptation of the powerful mixtureof-experts (MoE) schema and further integrates it with LowRank Adaptation (LoRA), efficiently scaling the encoder to
accommodate inputs in diverse modalities while maintaining a fixed computational overhead. Moreover, prior work
often requires separate training for each extended modality. This leads to task-specific models and further hinders
the communication between modalities. To address this,
we propose a soft modality binding strategy that aligns all
modalities using unpaired data samples across datasets.
Two additional training objectives are introduced to distill
knowledge from well-aligned anchor modalities and prior
multimodal models, elevating U NI A LIGN into a high performance multimodal foundation model. Experiments on
11 benchmarks across 6 different modalities demonstrate
that U NI A LIGN could achieve comparable performance to
SOTA approaches, while using merely 7.8M trainable parameters and maintaining an identical model with the same
weight across all tasks.

1. Introduction
Humans accomplish tasks by processing and combining
signals from different modalities [37, 53]. This gives rise
to multimodal learning, which aims to build AI models
that can extract and relate information across multimodal
inputs [97]. Recent efforts have been made to learn a unified representation space via the alignment between modalities[18, 22, 39]. Though enabling extension to novel modalities, existing solutions typically rely on a one-versus-one
paradigm where merely one extended modality (e.g., point
* The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding author: Yazhou Yao.

Trainable

Text

Image

Modality
Alignment

Depth

Point Cloud

Audio

Video

Modality
Alignment

Knowledge
Distillation

Foundation
Model

Modality
Model

Unified
Model

Modality
Model

Modal
Tokenizer

Modal
Tokenizer

Modal
Tokenizer

Modal
Tokenizer

Anchor Modality

Extended Modality

Anchor Modality

Extended Modality

(a)
(b)
Figure 1. Comparison of architectures between standard multimodal alignment methods [18, 39, 109] and U NI A LIGN: (a) Existing work adopts specialized encoders tailored to each modality;
(b) U NI A LIGN unifies the alignment across multiple modalities in
a single model, with one training phase across all datasets.

cloud, audio) could be aligned with the anchor modalities
(e.g., text, image) at each time (Fig. 1(a)). This presents
several drawbacks: i) one dedicated encoder is required for
each modality, leading to exponential increases in training
cost and parameter count as the number of aligned modalities
grows, severely limiting scalability; ii) task-specific training for each dataset, results in multiple independent models
for different tasks; and iii) the separate alignment of each
extended modality hinders the model to leverage the full
breadth of data across all datasets to shape the shared embedding space from a global view. This further impedes
cross-modal knowledge transfer where insights gained from
one modality could benefit understanding in others.
These observations prompt us to rethink: Is this oneversus-one alignment paradigm essential? and Can we
achieve joint alignment of all modalities within one single model? In response, we propose U NI A LIGN (Fig. 1(b)),
which embraces a all-in-one design to realize multimodal
alignment by constructing a foundation model that includes:
❶ one base encoder to U NIfy the encoding of all anchor and

29644

