This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

M-LLM Based Video Frame Selection for Efficient Video Understanding
Kai Hu1, * Feng Gao3 Xiaohan Nie3 Peng Zhou3 Son Tran3 Tal Neiman3
Lingyun Wang3 Mubarak Shah2,3 Raffay Hamid3 Bing Yin3 Trishul Chilimbi3
Carnegie Mellon University 1
University of Central Florida 2
Amazon 3
kaihu@cs.cmu.edu1,→ shah@crcv.ucf.edu2
fenggo,nxiaohan,zhoupz,sontran,taneiman,lingyunw,raffay,alexbyin,trishulc}@amazon.com3

Abstract

Uniform sampling (8 frames)

Recent advances in Multi-Modal Large Language Models
(M-LLMs) show promising results in video reasoning. Popular Multi-Modal Large Language Model (M-LLM) frameworks usually apply naive uniform sampling to reduce the
number of video frames that are fed into an M-LLM, particularly for long context videos. However, it could lose
crucial context in certain periods of a video, so that the
downstream M-LLM may not have sufficient visual information to answer a question. To attack this pain point,
we propose a light-weight M-LLM-based frame selection
method that adaptively select frames that are more relevant to users’ queries. In order to train the proposed frame
selector, we introduce two supervision signals (i) Spatial
signal, where single frame importance score by prompting
an M-LLM; (ii) Temporal signal, in which multiple frames
selection by prompting Large Language Model (LLM) using
the captions of all frame candidates. The selected frames
are then digested by a frozen downstream video M-LLM for
visual reasoning and question answering. Empirical results
show that the proposed M-LLM video frame selector improves the performances various downstream video Large
Language Model (video-LLM) across medium (ActivityNet,
NExT-QA) and long (EgoSchema, LongVideoBench) context
video question answering benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Large Language Model (LLM) has revolutionized numerous
domains in Artificial Intelligence (AI) [3, 34, 41, 44]. In the
past year, Multi-Modal Large Language Model (M-LLM)
has significantly improved the performances of VisionLanguage Models (VLM) to an unprecedented level in tasks
such as image captioning and Visual Question Answering (VQA) [2, 4, 16, 46]. To extend VQA to the temporal
domain, video QA task requires a model to understand consecutive images along the time to answer a question, raising
* This work is done during this author’s internship at Amazon.

Price Tag
Price Tag

Our frame selector (8 frames)
Price Tag
Price Tag
Price Tag

Price Tag

Question : What is the thing attached to the boy’s cap? Answer : Price Tag

Figure 1. An example of our video frame selection for video QA.
Compared to uniform sampling, ours has higher hit rate.

new challenges to the current M-LLM. One of the most
critical challenges is the length of the video context, where a
model needs to comprehend all frames in a video.
To balance the trade-off between the capability of understanding all video frames and the available context length in
a specific M-LLM, conventional practices [55, 61] rely on
uniform sampling of frames. Frames are extracted at predefined intervals regardless of their relevance to the specific
questions. Although such methods maximize the coverage
of a video in time-axis, it introduces insufficient visual information. The uniformly sampled frames may be irrelevant or
redundant, meanwhile some important frames are ignored.
This fact prevents the model from focusing on key events in
the video and sometimes increases the computational costs.
Generally in video QA [26, 59], some specific frames are
more likely to contain information relevant to the question.
The conventional one-size-fits-all approach limits both the
performance and practicality of M-LLMs, especially when

13702

