This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TIDE: Training Locally Interpretable Domain Generalization Models
Enables Test-time Correction
Aishwarya Agarwal1,2 * Srikrishna Karanam2† Vineet Gandhi1‡
1

CVIT, Kohli Centre for Intelligent Systems, IIIT Hyderabad, India
2

Adobe Research, Bengaluru, India

Abstract
We consider the problem of single-source domain generalization. Existing methods typically rely on extensive augmentations to synthetically cover diverse domains during
training. However, they struggle with semantic shifts (e.g.,
background and viewpoint changes), as they often learn
global features instead of local concepts that tend to be domain invariant. To address this gap, we propose an approach that compels models to leverage such local concepts
during prediction. Given no suitable dataset with per-class
concepts and localization maps exists, we first develop a
novel pipeline to generate annotations by exploiting the rich
features of diffusion and large-language models. Our next
innovation is TIDE, a novel training scheme with a concept saliency alignment loss that ensures model focus on the
right per-concept regions and a local concept contrastive
loss that promotes learning domain-invariant concept representations. This not only gives a robust model but also can
be visually interpreted using the predicted concept saliency
maps. Given these maps at test time, our final contribution
is a new correction algorithm that uses the corresponding
local concept representations to iteratively refine the prediction until it aligns with prototypical concept representations that we store at the end of model training. We evaluate
our approach extensively on four standard DG benchmark
datasets and substantially outperform the current state-ofthe-art (12% improvement on average) while also demonstrating that our predictions can be visually interpreted.

bird

person

ABA

Training Domain
(Caltech101)

lips

feathers

eyes

beak

TIDE

Test Domain
(VOC2007)

Training Domain
(Photo)

Test Domain
(Sketch)

Figure 1. Samples from VLCS (left) and PACS dataset (right)
across domain shifts, corresponding to bird and person class. First
row displays GradCAM maps [43] for ABA’s class predictions.
We observe that model attention of ABA [5] falters across domain
shifts. Second and third row display the concept specific GradCAM maps from TIDE. We posit that accurate concept learning
and localization facilitates DG.

1. Introduction

tion [31]. The challenges compound when obtaining labeled samples from the target domain is expensive or unfeasible, hindering application of semi-supervised learning
or domain adaptation [25, 32, 49]. The problem of Domain Generalization (DG) [30, 44, 54, 61, 63] represents
a promising avenue for developing techniques that capture
domain-invariant patterns and improve performance on outof-distribution samples. In this paper, we focus on Single
Source Domain Generalization (SSDG), where a model is
trained on data from a single domain and aims to generalize
well to unseen domains [40, 51]. It represents the most strict
form of DG, as the model must extract domain-invariant
features from a single, often limited perspective, without
exposure to the variation present across multiple domains.
Most previous work on SSDG [5, 7, 8, 19, 20, 22, 59, 63]
relies extensively on data augmentations to support the
learning of domain-generalized features. The premise is
that constructing an extensive repertoire of augmentations
synthesizes instances encompassing a wide spectrum of

Enhancing deep neural networks to generalize to out-ofdistribution samples remains a core challenge in machine
learning and computer vision research, as real-world test
data often diverges significantly from the training distribu* aishwarya.agarwal@research.iiit.ac.in, aishagar@adobe.com
† skaranam@adobe.com
‡ vgandhi@iiit.ac.in

30210

