This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniScene: Uniﬁed Occupancy-centric Driving Scene Generation
Bohan Li1,2 ,* Jiazhe Guo3∗ , Hongsi Liu2∗ , Yingshuang Zou3∗ , Yikang Ding4∗ , Xiwu Chen5 , Hu Zhu2 , Feiyang Tan5 , Chi Zhang5 ,
Tiancai Wang4 , Shuchang Zhou4 , Li Zhang6 , Xiaojuan Qi7 , Hao Zhao3 , Mu Yang4 , Wenjun Zeng2 , Xin Jin2†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, China
3

Tsinghua University, 4 MEGVII Technology, 5 Mach Drive, 6 Fudan University, 7 University of Hong Kong

Figure 1. (a) Overview of UniScene. Given BEV layouts, UniScene facilitates versatile data generation, including semantic occupancy,
multi-view video, and LiDAR point clouds, through an occupancy-centric hierarchical modeling approach. (b) Performance comparison on
different generation tasks. UniScene delivers substantial improvements over SOTA methods in video, LiDAR, and occupancy generation.

at https://arlo0o.github.io/uniscene/.

Abstract
Generating high-ﬁdelity, controllable, and annotated training data is critical for autonomous driving. Existing methods typically generate a single data form directly from a
coarse scene layout, which not only fails to output rich
data forms required for diverse downstream tasks but also
struggles to model the direct layout-to-data distribution. In
this paper, we introduce UniScene, the ﬁrst uniﬁed framework for generating three key data forms — semantic occupancy, video, and LiDAR — in driving scenes. UniScene
employs a progressive generation process that decomposes
the complex task of scene generation into two hierarchical
steps: (a) ﬁrst generating semantic occupancy from a customized scene layout as a meta scene representation rich
in both semantic and geometric information, and then (b)
conditioned on occupancy, generating video and LiDAR
data, respectively, with two novel transfer strategies of
Gaussian-based Joint Rendering and Prior-guided Sparse
Modeling. This occupancy-centric approach reduces the
generation burden, especially for intricate scenes, while
providing detailed intermediate representations for the subsequent generation stages. Extensive experiments demonstrate that UniScene outperforms previous SOTAs in the
occupancy, video, and LiDAR generation, which also indeed
beneﬁts downstream driving tasks. The Project is available
* Share contribution
† Corresponding author

1. Introduction
The generation of high-quality driving scenes is a promising
approach for autonomous driving (AD), as it helps mitigate the high resource demands associated with real-world
data collection and annotation [19, 25, 34, 41]. Recent advancements in generative models, particularly diffusion models [19, 25, 34, 41], have made it possible to generate realistic
synthetic data [43, 51, 65], facilitating the training of downstream tasks. Existing methods [13, 51, 54, 57, 75] typically
use layout conditions derived from coarse geometric labels
(e.g., BEV maps and 3D bounding boxes) as input to guide
scene generation. The resulting synthetic data are then leveraged to improve downstream tasks such as BEV segmentation [27, 29, 60] and 3D object detection [6, 10, 16, 37, 53].
Nevertheless, as depicted in Tab. 1, existing driving scene
generation models predominantly focus on generating data
in a single format (e.g., RGB video) [13, 51, 54, 58, 69],
without fully exploring the potential of generating data
across multiple formats. This limits their applicability for a
wide range of downstream tasks that require diverse sensor
data (i.e., RGB video, LiDAR) to ensure sufﬁcient training
for real-world scenarios [1, 3, 28, 30, 50]. Furthermore,
previous methods attempt to capture the real-world distribution with a single-step layout-to-data modeling process
given only coarse input conditions (e.g., BEV layouts or 3D
boxes) [13, 54, 58]. This direct learning strategy hinders the
model’s ability to capture the complex distributions inherent

11971

