This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HiMoR: Monocular Deformable Gaussian Reconstruction with
Hierarchical Motion Representation

1

Yiming Liang1 * Tianhan Xu2 Yuta Kikuchi2
2
Waseda University
Preferred Networks, Inc.

yiming liang@toki.waseda.jp, {xutianhan, kikuchi}@preferred.jp

Abstract

Gaussians and their deformations [28, 50]. However, reconstruction from a monocular video remains particularly
challenging due to the limited available information, especially the lack of a multi-view consistency constraint.
Recent works focus on designing deformation models for
Gaussians that can better integrate temporal information
across frames, overcoming the limited available information in monocular videos. For instance, Shape of Motion
(SoM) [47] introduces a set of global motion bases, assigning each Gaussian coefficients that determine its motion,
based on the insight that motion is generally smooth and
simple, or in other words, low-rank. As the entire scene
shares a limited number of global motion bases, capturing
fine motion details becomes difficult. Another representative work MoSca [15] models motion using hundreds of
3D nodes, with each Gaussian interpolating its deformation
from surrounding nodes. Such a large number of motion
nodes brings a high degree of freedom, making optimization prone to overfit to the training view. Similar challenges
are faced by other works [25, 43, 48, 54], where methods
either struggle to capture fine details or suffer from overfitting, hindering high-quality reconstruction with smooth
motion in both spatial and temporal dimensions.
To tackle the aforementioned issue, we propose a novel
hierarchical motion representation that captures motion at
both coarse and fine levels. This approach enables highquality monocular reconstruction of dynamic 3D scenes,
maintaining both spatio-temporal consistency and fine details. Specifically, our hierarchical motion representation
is implemented through a tree structure, where each node
represents relative motion w.r.t. its parent node. The global
motion w.r.t. the world coordinate can be iteratively derived
from the hierarchy of the tree structure, assuming the root
node is stationary at the origin of the world coordinate. This
design allows nodes at different levels (i.e., tree depth) to
express motions at different levels of detail, enabling the
decomposition of coarse and fine motion.
The insight behind our approach is that, in everyday life
scenarios, finer motions tend to be associated with coarser
motions. For instance, the movement of fingers can be bro-

We present Hierarchical Motion Representation (HiMoR),
a novel deformation representation for 3D Gaussian primitives capable of achieving high-quality monocular dynamic
3D reconstruction. The insight behind HiMoR is that motions in everyday scenes can be decomposed into coarser
motions that serve as the foundation for finer details. Using a tree structure, HiMoR’s nodes represent different levels of motion detail, with shallower nodes modeling coarse
motion for temporal smoothness and deeper nodes capturing finer motion. Additionally, our model uses a few shared
motion bases to represent motions of different sets of nodes,
aligning with the assumption that motion tends to be smooth
and simple. This motion representation design provides
Gaussians with a more structured deformation, maximizing the use of temporal relationships to tackle the challenging task of monocular dynamic 3D reconstruction. We also
propose using a more reliable perceptual metric as an alternative, given that pixel-level metrics for evaluating monocular dynamic 3D reconstruction can sometimes fail to accurately reflect the true quality of reconstruction. Extensive
experiments demonstrate our method’s efficacy in achieving
superior novel view synthesis from challenging monocular
videos with complex motions.

1. Introduction
Dynamic 3D scene reconstruction aims to recover the geometry, appearance, and motion of dynamic scenes from
video data. The reconstructed dynamic 3D model allows
free-viewpoint rendering at any timestep, enabling practical
applications in virtual reality, video production, and even
provides an innovative way for individuals to capture and
relive their memorable moments.
With the recent rise of research on 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [17], some methods attempt to reconstruct dynamic 3D scenes from multi-view videos by jointly learning
* Work was done during an internship at Preferred Networks, Inc..

886

