This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Symmetry Strikes Back: From Single-Image Symmetry Detection
to 3D Generation
Xiang Li1
1

Zixuan Huang1
Anh Thai2
James M. Rehg1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Georgia Institute of Technology

https://ryanxli.github.io/reflect3d

Figure 1. We propose Reflect3D, a zero-shot 3D reflection symmetry detector capable of accurately detecting 3D symmetry from a single
RGB image of an arbitrary object. Conditioned on the detected symmetry, we improve single-image 3D generation in both geometry and
texture quality.

Abstract

demonstrate that Reflect3D establishes a new state-of-theart in single-image symmetry detection. Furthermore, we
show the practical benefit of incorporating detected symmetry into single-image 3D generation pipelines through
a symmetry-aware optimization process. The integration
of symmetry significantly enhances the structural accuracy,
cohesiveness, and visual fidelity of the reconstructed 3D geometry and textures, advancing the capabilities of 3D content creation.

Symmetry is a ubiquitous and fundamental property in
the visual world, serving as a critical cue for perception
and structure interpretation. This paper investigates the detection of 3D reflection symmetry from a single RGB image, and reveals its significant benefit on single-image 3D
generation. We introduce Reflect3D, a scalable, zero-shot
symmetry detector capable of robust generalization to diverse and real-world scenarios. Inspired by the success
of foundation models, our method scales up symmetry detection with a transformer-based architecture. We also
leverage generative priors from multi-view diffusion models
to address the inherent ambiguity in single-view symmetry
detection. Extensive evaluations on various data sources

1. Introduction
”Symmetry is what we see at a glance.” — Blaise Pascal.
Symmetry is ubiquitous in both natural and artificial

743

