This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViCaS: A Dataset for Combining Holistic and Pixel-level Video Understanding
using Captions with Grounded Segmentation
Ali Athar

Xueqing Deng

Liang-Chieh Chen

ByteDance Inc.
https://ali2500.github.io/vicas-project/
{ali.athar}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Recent advances in multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) have expanded research in video understanding,
primarily focusing on high-level tasks such as video captioning and question-answering. Meanwhile, a smaller
body of work addresses dense, pixel-precise segmentation
tasks, which typically involve category-guided or referralbased object segmentation. Although both directions are essential for developing models with human-level video comprehension, they have largely evolved separately, with distinct benchmarks and architectures. This paper aims to
unify these efforts by introducing ViCaS, a new dataset
containing thousands of challenging videos, each annotated with detailed, human-written captions and temporally consistent, pixel-accurate masks for multiple objects
with phrase grounding. Our benchmark evaluates models on both holistic/high-level understanding and languageguided, pixel-precise segmentation. We also present carefully validated evaluation measures and propose an effective model architecture that can tackle our benchmark.

Figure 1. ViCaS Dataset/Benchmark. Our dataset contains detailed video captions with phrase-level grounding for accurate object segmentation masks. The benchmark comprises two tasks to
evaluate holistic and pixel-level video understanding, respectively.

1. Introduction
The emergence of open-source large lauguage models
(LLMs) [9, 32, 96], coupled with progress in aligning vision
and language feature spaces [55, 58, 83], has enabled significant research into vision-language models that can jointly
reason over visual and language inputs. Earlier advances in
image-language models [8, 56, 66] have spurred development of multimodal LLMs capable of reasoning over other
modalities such as videos [63] and 3D point-clouds [128].
In the field of video-language models, research has
mainly focused on holistic video understanding tasks such
as video captioning and question-answering [63, 67, 72, 73,
113, 127], with a particular emphasis on generating temporally dense text output for long video sequences [18,

62, 92, 118, 132]. By contrast, comparatively less attention has been given to predicting spatially dense outputs
— such as bounding boxes or segmentation masks — that
can localize key objects and actors in videos based on text
prompts, even though this has important practical applications, e.g., autonomous robots and video editing. Although
recent language-driven benchmarks [29, 47, 89, 117] in the
video segmentation community have made progress in this
area, these datasets are largely object-centric and lack evaluation of high-level, holistic video understanding.
In this paper, we seek to bridge the gap between benchmarks that evaluate holistic video understanding and those

19023

