This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ETAP: Event-based Tracking of Any Point
Friedhelm Hamann1,4,6 , Daniel Gehrig2 , Filbert Febryanto1,4,6 ,
Kostas Daniilidis2,5 , and Guillermo Gallego1,3,4,6 .
1
Technische Universität Berlin, 2 University of Pennsylvania, 3 Einstein Center for Digital Future,
4
Robotics Institute Germany, 5 Archimedes, Athena RC, 6 Science of Intelligence Excellence Cluster.
Events

Abstract

Point tracks

𝑥

Tracking any point (TAP) recently shifted the motion estimation paradigm from focusing on individual salient points
with local templates to tracking arbitrary points with global
image contexts. However, while research has mostly focused on driving the accuracy of models in nominal settings, addressing scenarios with difficult lighting conditions
and high-speed motions remains out of reach due to the
limitations of the sensor. This work addresses this challenge with the first event camera-based TAP method. It
leverages the high temporal resolution and high dynamic
range of event cameras for robust high-speed tracking, and
the global contexts in TAP methods to handle asynchronous
and sparse event measurements. We further extend the TAP
framework to handle event feature variations induced by
motion — thereby addressing an open challenge in purely
event-based tracking — with a novel feature alignment-loss
which ensures the learning of motion-robust features. Our
method is trained with data from a new data generation
pipeline and systematically ablated across all design decisions. Our method shows strong cross-dataset generalization and performs 136% better on the average Jaccard metric than the baselines. Moreover, on an established feature
tracking benchmark, it achieves a 20% improvement over
the previous best event-only method and even surpasses the
previous best events-and-frames method by 4.1%. Our code
is available at https:// github.com/ tub-rip/ ETAP.

𝑥

𝑦

𝑦

Ψ

𝑡

𝑡

Figure 1. Event-only Tracking of Any Point. Our method uses only
events to track semi-dense long-range point trajectories, working
in conditions where frame-based methods fail.

1. Introduction

(HDR), and low power consumption, characteristics that
make them valuable stand-alone sensors for various robotic
perception tasks. These innovative sensors address several
limitations of conventional cameras, particularly handling
motion blur and high-speed movements. To fully leverage these advantages we focus on developing an eventonly method for tracking arbitrary 2D points within the data
stream without additional sensor input.
Estimating point trajectories for arbitrary scene motion presents significant challenges, with recent solutions
emerging primarily through deep neural networks trained
on synthetic data. Progress in dense optical flow [15, 58]
and subsequently point tracking have been driven by supervised learning on rendered datasets, which provide ground
truth (GT) scene motion. Event simulators have enabled a
conceptually similar workflow for event-based vision algorithms. Using the event generation model, events - representing pixel-wise intensity changes - can be synthesized
from high-frame-rate videos. The input video can either
be real (temporally upsampled through video interpolation)
or synthetic. For motion estimation tasks, this approach
has been applied to dense optical flow estimation [22]
and sparse feature tracking [44]. However, the synthetic
datasets used for training are simplistic warps of 2D objects
lacking realism and limiting performance.
The feasibility of training motion-estimation networks

Understanding scene motion from a video remains a fundamental challenge in computer vision, with renewed interest
through its formulation as tracking any point (TAP) [13, 25,
54]. A new class of powerful methods has been quickly
adopted for downstream tasks, e.g., in robotics [7, 59].
However, existing methods focus on tracking in nominal
settings due to the fundamental limitations of the sensor.
Event cameras represent a novel class of visual sensors offering high temporal resolution, high dynamic range

27186

