This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Plug-and-Play Versatile Compressed Video Enhancement
Huimin Zeng
Jiacheng Li
Zhiwei Xiong*
University of Science and Technology of China
{zenghuimin, jclee}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn

010010010101

Bitstream 011101010011

As a widely adopted technique in data transmission, video
compression effectively reduces the size of files, making
it possible for real-time cloud computing. However, it
comes at the cost of visual quality, posing challenges
to the robustness of downstream vision models. In this
work, we present a versatile codec-aware enhancement
framework that reuses codec information to adaptively enhance videos under different compression settings, assisting various downstream vision tasks without introducing
computation bottleneck. Specifically, the proposed codecaware framework consists of a compression-aware adaptation (CAA) network that employs a hierarchical adaptation
mechanism to estimate parameters of the frame-wise enhancement network, namely the bitstream-aware enhancement (BAE) network. The BAE network further leverages
temporal and spatial priors embedded in the bitstream to
effectively improve the quality of compressed input frames.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superior
quality enhancement performance of our framework over
existing enhancement methods, as well as its versatility in
assisting multiple downstream tasks on compressed videos
as a plug-and-play module. Code and models are available at https://huimin-zeng.github.io/PnPVCVE/.

CRF15
CRF25
CRF35
Motion Vector

Compressed Videos

Partition Map

Codec-Aware Enhancement
Framework

Enhanced Videos

Downstream Tasks
Optical Flow Estimation

…

Object Segmentation

…

Super-resolution

…

Figure 1. The proposed codec-aware enhancement framework
reuses codec information to adaptively enhance videos across different compression settings, while assisting in various downstream
tasks in a plug-and-play manner.

1. Introduction

aries in Fig. 1). Given the crucial role of videos in data
transmission, there is a critical need for a versatile solution
to enhance videos of diverse compression levels and effectively support various downstream tasks.
Existing video enhancement methods are hard to respond to these demands. Specifically, to effectively enhance videos of different compression levels, previous
methods [11, 12, 16, 22, 32, 55] employ separate enhancement models for each compression level, which is
inflexible occurring unseen compression levels. Recent
approaches [8, 18, 47] consider this issue as the generalization ability across diverse compression levels, therefore randomly selecting inputs of different compression
levels during training. However, such a training strategy
is compression-agnostic and offers limited improvement.
Most importantly, the aforementioned methods focus primarily on improving perceptual quality, neglecting the need
to assist in downstream tasks in real-world scenarios.
Based on the mismatch between the versatility demand
and existing solutions, here we summarize the following criteria of a favorable solution: 1) adaptively enhance
videos of varying compression levels with a single model;
2) effectively assist various downstream tasks on compressed videos in a plug-and-play manner; and 3) given the

With the flower booming of short video platforms, video
has become one of the most popular multimedia formats.
In addition to distributing visual content, in practical scenarios (e.g., autonomous driving [43, 48]), it is common to
upload the captured videos to the cloud end for further visual analysis and downstream applications (e.g., object detection [5, 51] and segmentation [20, 44]). However, due to
the bandwidth constraint during transmission, these videos
are typically compressed with varying levels, resulting in
poor visual quality and suboptimal performance in downstream tasks [22, 59] (e.g., inaccurate segmentation bound* Corresponding author.

17767

