This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Explicit Geometry-Reflectance Collaboration for Generalized
LiDAR Segmentation in Adverse Weather
Longyu Yang1 , Ping Hu1 *, Shangbo Yuan1 , Lu Zhang2 , Jun Liu3 , Hengtao Shen1,4 , Xiaofeng Zhu1
1
UESTC 2 DLUT 3 Lancaster University 4 Tongji University
104

Number of Points

Existing LiDAR semantic segmentation models often suffer
from decreased accuracy when exposed to adverse weather
conditions. Recent methods addressing this issue focus on
enhancing training data through weather simulation or universal augmentation techniques. However, few works have
studied the negative impacts caused by the heterogeneous
domain shifts in the geometric structure and reflectance intensity of point clouds. In this paper, we delve into this
challenge and address it with a novel Geometry-Reflectance
Collaboration (GRC) framework that explicitly separates
feature extraction for geometry and reflectance. Specifically, GRC employs a dual-branch architecture designed to
independently process geometric and reflectance features
initially, thereby capitalizing on their distinct characteristic. Then, GRC adopts a robust multi-level feature collaboration module to suppress redundant and unreliable information from both branches. Consequently, without complex
simulation or augmentation, our method effectively extracts
intrinsic information about the scene while suppressing interference, thus achieving better robustness and generalization in adverse weather conditions. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of GRC through comprehensive experiments
on challenging benchmarks, showing that our method outperforms previous approaches and establishes new state-ofthe-art results.

104

SemanticKITTI

SemanticKITTI

SemanticSTF

SemanticSTF

103

Number of Points

Abstract

102

101

100

0

50

100

103

102

101
0.0

0.5

1.0

(a) Distance
(b) Reflectance
Figure 1. Histogram of distance and reflectance intensity for
the averaged point cloud in SemanticKITTI [5] and SemanticSTF [53]. Reflectance intensity exhibits a much more pronounced
domain shift compared to the geometric layout.

idealized conditions, utilizing standard datasets for training and testing that often exclude various interference factors encountered in real-world applications, such as adverse
weather conditions like fog, rain, snow, etc [6, 13, 14, 53].
Consequently, although current methods perform well in
standard environments, they tend to experience significant
performance degradation when exposed to more challenging scenarios [20, 56]. This highlights a critical challenge
in the task: the lack of robustness and adaptability of LiDAR semantic segmentation models across different scenarios, especially under adverse weather.
In addressing the challenge, recent efforts focus on employing weather-simulators [13, 14, 57, 61] and universal
augmentation techniques [17, 18, 20, 24, 30, 53]. Although
previous approaches have shown promising results, several
limitations may still exist. On the one hand, weather simulation methods synthesize intrinsic characteristics of specific
weather conditions but struggle to capture the full spectrum
of weather types and severities, leading to limited adaptability when models encounter real-world conditions [61]. On
the other hand, universal augmentation aims to learn general representations with reduced overfitting to the training
data but often produces redundant and futile information,
resulting in increased complexity and difficulty in model
training [44, 63]. Unlike previous approaches that focus
on enhancing the diversity of training data, we present a
perspective to achieve robust LiDAR segmentation under

1. Introduction
LiDAR semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in 3D
scene understanding and plays a crucial role in applications
like robotics and autonomous driving [12, 54]. It works by
predicting a semantic label for each point in a LiDAR scan,
thus enabling the recognition of objects and environmental
features essential for downstream tasks. With the rapid advancement of deep learning techniques, significant progress
has been made in this area [7, 19, 33, 48, 49, 58, 62]. However, most traditional research is conducted under relatively
* Corresponding author

139

