This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Autoregressive Visual Generation with
Cluster-Oriented Token Prediction
Teng Hu1∗ , Jiangning Zhang2,3 *, Ran Yi1†, Jieyu Weng1 , Yabiao Wang3,2 ,
Xianfang Zeng3 , Zhucun Xue3 , Lizhuang Ma1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent, 3 Zhejiang University
{hu-teng, ranyi, w.jerry, lzma}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{186368, yabiaowang, zzlongjuanfeng, 12432038}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

AR

Employing LLMs for visual generation has recently become a research focus. However, the existing methods primarily transfer the LLM architecture to visual generation
but rarely investigate the fundamental differences between
language and vision. This oversight may lead to suboptimal utilization of visual generation capabilities within the
LLM framework. In this paper, we explore the characteristics of visual embedding space under the LLM framework and discover that the correlation between visual embeddings can help achieve more stable and robust generation results. We present IAR, an Improved AutoRegressive
Visual Generation Method that enhances the training efficiency and generation quality of LLM-based visual generation models. Firstly, we propose a Codebook Rearrangement strategy that uses balanced k-means clustering algorithm to rearrange the visual codebook into clusters, ensuring high similarity among visual features within each
cluster. Leveraging the rearranged codebook, we propose a
Cluster-oriented Cross-entropy Loss that guides the model
to correctly predict the cluster where the target token is located. This approach ensures that even if the model predicts
the wrong token index, there is a high probability the predicted token is located in the correct cluster, which significantly enhances the generation quality and robustness. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our IAR consistently
enhances the model training efficiency and performance
from 100M to 1.4B, reducing the training time by half while
achieving the same FID. Additionally, IAR can be applied to
various LLM-based visual generation models and adheres
to the scaling law, providing a promising direction for future research in LLM-based visual generation. The code is
available at: https://github.com/sjtuplayer/IAR.

Wrongly
Predicted

Output

Generating
Artifacts

Irrelevant
Ground
Truth
Similar

IAR
Predict
Cluster

Wrongly
Predicted

Similar
Codes

Ground Truth
Output

Sharing
Similarity
Compare with
Ground Truth

Figure 1. When an autoregressive model predicts a wrong token,
the previous methods [36, 38] may predict an irrelevant token that
causes artifacts. Our IAR alleviates this issue by ensuring a high
probability of the predicted token located in the correct cluster.

1. Introduction
With the development of generative models [15, 19, 33],
a large number of outstanding visual generation methods
have emerged, achieving considerable success in image and
video generation [3, 16, 33]. Recently, researchers have begun exploring the integration of images and text to achieve
a unified multi-modal model for image and text generation
and understanding [37, 44]. Consequently, aligning image
generation models with large language models (LLMs) [32]
has become a key research focus. Recent studies have made
progress by quantizing images and employing autoregressive or mask-prediction methods to predict discrete image
tokens [2, 6, 36, 38], laying the research foundation for a
unified world model in the future.
Unlike diffusion [19] or GAN [15] models that model
image distribution in continuous space, autoregressive or
masked image modeling (MIM) methods [2, 6, 36, 38] first
convert images into discrete-valued tokens by image tokenizers, and then predict image tokens by autoregressive or

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

9351

