This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Activating Sparse Part Concepts for 3D Class Incremental Learning
Zhenya Tian, Jun Xiao∗ , Lupeng Liu, Haiyong Jiang*
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
tianzhenya20@mails.ucas.ac.cn, xiaojun@ucas.ac.cn
liulupeng@ucas.ac.cn, haiyong.jiang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
This work tackles the challenge of 3D Class-Incremental
Learning (CIL), where a model must learn to classify new
3D objects while retaining knowledge of previously learned
classes. Existing methods often struggle with catastrophic
forgetting, misclassifying old objects due to overreliance on
shortcut local features. Our approach addresses this issue
by learning a set of part concepts for part-aware features.
Particularly, we only activate a small subset of part concepts for the feature representation of each part-aware feature. This facilitates better generalization across categories
and mitigates catastrophic forgetting. We further improve
the task-wise classification through a part relation-aware
Transformer design. At last, we devise learnable affinities
to fuse task-wise classification heads and avoid confusion
among different tasks. We evaluate our method on three 3D
CIL benchmarks, achieving state-of-the-art performance.
Code is available at https://github.com/zhenyatian/ILPC.

categorized into two schemes: replay-based methods [3,
8, 20, 34, 40, 61] and dynamic network expanding-based
methods [4, 32, 39, 47, 59, 60]. These methods can achieve
wonderful performance in 2D tasks and are a good start for
3D CIL. Existing 3D CIL methods [10, 12, 21, 33, 49, 54]
mainly extend 2D CIL methods based on 3D geometric
structures, e.g., neighborhood-based feature aggregations.
However, these methods still suffer from catastrophic forgetting. We owe partial reasons for catastrophic forgetting
in 3D CIL to shortcut features [14, 16]. Particularly, 3D
classifiers prioritize shortcut features for recognition, neglecting the importance of other shape parts and their overall composition. This can lead to misclassification of past
tasks if new tasks share similar local features with old tasks.
For instance, a 3D classifier that classifies a table in the old
task perfectly may fail in classifying chairs in the new task
when the classifier has learned a shortcut strategy relying
on the legs.

1. Introduction

This work tackles the limitations of 3D CIL with two
key designs. First, we leverage sparsely activated part concepts for local part feature representation. This is because
common part concepts are usually shared among different classes, ensuring good generalization across different
tasks. For example, legs, planes, and bases learned in an old
task already provide discriminative enough information and
make the adaption in novel tasks easier, e.g., chair recognition (see Fig. 1). Analysis of the generalization of part concepts is demonstrated in Fig. 3. Second, the catastrophic
forgetting of a model is mainly caused by confusion among
different task heads. Therefore, learning a dynamic mixture
of task-wise classification heads can relieve catastrophic
forgetting.

A key aspect of human intelligence is the ability to continuously learn and adapt to new semantic concepts. This ability
is crucial for 3D recognition in robotics and autonomous
driving and mirrors Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) in
machine learning [35, 36]. This work focuses on CIL in
3D recognition that trains the network one task by one task
with each task containing 3D objects from different semantic categories. 3D CIL shares the same challenge of catastrophic forgetting in old class recognition as 2D CIL when
adapting to a new task [3, 4, 8, 11, 39, 40, 47, 59–61]. Moreover, 3D CILs are still confronted with texture-less shapes
and unstructured points in inputs, resulting in shortcut features [44] to mislead the shape classification. This problem further amplifies the catastrophic forgetting of 3D deep
learning methods, e.g., [25, 26, 53].
2D CIL has been extensively studied and can be broadly
* Joint Corresponding Authors. Haiyong is the Project Lead.

To fulfill the above-mentioned observations, we address
3D Incremental Learning with Part Concepts Awareness,
called ILPC. The overview is shown in Fig. 2. First, ILPC
learns a set of shared part concepts as representative local geometric features among different classes. Then, we
selectively activate related part concepts according to the
similarity between a part concept and a geometric feature.
Activated part concepts span the feature space of an input

30343

