This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CryptoFace: End-to-End Encrypted Face Recognition
Wei Ao Vishnu Naresh Boddeti
Michigan State University
{aowei, vishnu}@msu.edu

Abstract

Client

Server
Encrypt

Face recognition is central to many authentication, security,
and personalized applications. Yet, it suffers from significant privacy risks, particularly arising from unauthorized
access to sensitive biometric data. This paper introduces
CryptoFace, the first end-to-end encrypted face recognition
system with fully homomorphic encryption (FHE). It enables secure processing of facial data across all stages of
a face-recognition process—feature extraction, storage, and
matching—without exposing raw images or features. We introduce a mixture of shallow patch convolutional networks
to support higher-dimensional tensors via patch-based processing while reducing the multiplicative depth and thus
inference latency. Parallel FHE evaluation of these networks ensures near-resolution-independent latency. On
standard face recognition benchmarks, CryptoFace significantly accelerates inference and increases verification accuracy compared to the state-of-the-art FHE neural networks adapted for face recognition. CryptoFace will facilitate secure face recognition systems requiring robust
and provable security. The code is available at https:
//github.com/human-analysis/CryptoFace.

probe face

feature

encrypted feature

score

claimed ID

Client

Server
Encrypt

probe face

encrypted face

score

claimed ID

Figure 1. Secure FR systems. (1) Top: existing secure FR system
which encrypts only the features, rather than raw face images, limits practical utility and security; (2) bottom: proposed end-to-end
encrypted face recognition system which ensures stronger protection of the user’s face image and feature while safeguarding the
server’s reference database.

1. Introduction

The feature extractor processes a face image to generate its
corresponding compact feature representation.
Secure FR Systems. FR systems meet increasing security
challenges. An adversarial client could attempt to infer biometric data from the server’s reference database or leverage the feature extractor to generate adversarial probes to
deceive the system. Similarly, an adversarial server might
exploit client-provided data to extract biometric information or infer sensitive attributes such as gender, age, or race.
Existing secure FR systems apply homomorphic encryption (HE) in a client-server two-party scenario [3, 15] to
ensure security of face features. HE allows computation
over encrypted data and provides provable post-quantum
security [7, 9, 16, 17, 32]. As shown in Figure 1 (top),
the client’s probe feature and the reference database at a
server are encrypted. The client performs feature extraction
locally and cannot delegate this task to the server. Verification is performed by the server directly within the encrypted
domain. Limiting security measures to feature protection
only reduces the practical utility of such systems. Moreover,
such a secure FR system is vulnerable to a template recovery attack [2] where an adversarial client could attempt to
infer features in the server’s reference database. Unlike HE,

Face Recognition (FR) [13, 26, 44] has become integral to identity management in many practical applications, from unlocking personal devices to facilitating law
enforcement and accessing financial services. These systems process sensitive biometric data that, if compromised,
can lead to privacy invasions, identity theft, and unauthorized surveillance. Unlike passwords, biometric data is immutable—once compromised, it cannot be changed, which
elevates the need for robust security mechanisms to protect
it. Such protections are also mandated by legal regulations
on the acquisition, storage, and usage of biometric data [34],
e.g. the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [43]. FR systems in the wild consist of three
entities: a probe face image, a feature extractor (i.e. a FR
neural network), and a reference database of face features.

19197

