This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LaVin-DiT: Large Vision Diffusion Transformer
Zhaoqing Wang1,4 Xiaobo Xia2 Runnan Chen1 Dongdong Yu4
Changhu Wang4 * Mingming Gong3 * Tongliang Liu1 *
1

The University of Sydney

2

National University of Singapore

3

The University of Melbourne

4

AIsphere

wangchanghu@aishi.ai, mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au, tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

(a) Autoregressive Modeling

This paper presents the Large Vision Diffusion Transformer (LaVin-DiT), a scalable and unified foundation
model designed to tackle over 20 computer vision tasks in a
generative framework. Unlike existing large vision models
directly adapted from natural language processing architectures, which rely on less efficient autoregressive techniques
and disrupt spatial relationships essential for vision data,
LaVin-DiT introduces key innovations to optimize generative performance for vision tasks. First, to address the high
dimensionality of visual data, we incorporate a spatialtemporal variational autoencoder that encodes data into
a continuous latent space. Second, for generative modeling, we develop a joint diffusion transformer that progressively produces vision outputs. Third, for unified multitask training, in-context learning is implemented. Inputtarget pairs serve as task context, which guides the diffusion transformer to align outputs with specific tasks within
the latent space. During inference, a task-specific context
set and test data as queries allow LaVin-DiT to generalize across tasks without fine-tuning. Trained on extensive
vision datasets, the model is scaled from 0.1B to 3.4B parameters, demonstrating substantial scalability and stateof-the-art performance across diverse vision tasks. This
work introduces a novel pathway for large vision foundation models, underscoring the promising potential of diffusion transformers. The code and models are available at
https://derrickwang005.github.io/LaVin-DiT/.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) like GPT [9] and
LLaMA [60] have rapidly gained widespread attention and
transformed the field, demonstrating the strong capability
to handle a wide range of language tasks within a unified
framework [1]. This breakthrough of integrating diverse
language tasks into a single large model has sparked momentum to develop similar large models for computer vision. The potential to create large vision models (LVMs)
* Corresponding author.

(b) Diffusion Modeling

𝑁 timesteps

Figure 1. Comparison of autoregressive and diffusion modeling. (a) In autoregressive modeling, visual data is divided into
a sequence of patches and transformed into a one-dimensional sequence. The model then predicts each token sequentially from left
to right and top to bottom, which is computationally intensive for
high-dimensional visual data. Besides, tokens marked in red and
blue illustrate disrupted spatial dependencies, highlighting the limitations of preserving spatial coherence. (b) In contrast, diffusion
modeling denoises all tokens in parallel across N timesteps, significantly improving computational efficiency and preserving essential spatial structures crucial for high-performance vision tasks.

capable of generalizing across multiple vision tasks represents a promising step toward a more versatile, scalable, and
efficient approach to vision-based AI [4, 7, 41–43, 54, 65].
However, constructing LVMs presents greater complexity than LLMs due to the inherently diverse and highdimensional nature of vision data, as well as the need to
handle variations in scale, perspective, and lighting across
tasks [31, 50, 53, 66, 68]. To handle the problem, recent work [4] has developed a sequential modeling method

20060

