This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gaussian Eigen Models for Human Heads
Wojciech Zielonka1, 2
1

Timo Bolkart3

Thabo Beeler3

Justus Thies1, 2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
Technical University of Darmstadt 3 Google
https://zielon.github.io/gem/

Figure 1. We propose a method that represents 3D Gaussian head avatars in a network-free form as ensembles of eigenbases (GEM). Only a
linear combination of these bases is needed to generate new primitives, which can be splatted using 3D Gaussian Splatting. We demonstrate
that the necessary coefficients for a specific expression can be regressed from single images, enabling real-time facial animation and crossreenactment. The simplicity of GEM results in highly efficient storage and rendering times.

Abstract
Current personalized neural head avatars face a trade-off:
lightweight models lack detail and realism, while highquality, animatable avatars require significant computational resources, making them unsuitable for commodity devices. To address this gap, we introduce Gaussian Eigen
Models (GEM), which provide high-quality, lightweight,
and easily controllable head avatars. GEM utilizes 3D
Gaussian primitives for representing the appearance combined with Gaussian splatting for rendering. Building
on the success of mesh-based 3D morphable face models
(3DMM), we define GEM as an ensemble of linear eigenbases for representing the head appearance of a specific
subject. In particular, we construct linear bases to represent the position, scale, rotation, and opacity of the 3D
Gaussians. This allows us to efficiently generate Gaussian
primitives of a specific head shape by a linear combination of the basis vectors, only requiring a low-dimensional
parameter vector that contains the respective coefficients.
We propose to construct these linear bases (GEM) by distilling high-quality compute-intense CNN-based Gaussian
avatar models that can generate expression-dependent appearance changes like wrinkles. These high-quality models
are trained on multi-view videos of a subject and are dis-

tilled using a series of principle component analyses.
Once we have obtained the bases that represent the animatable appearance space of a specific human, we learn
a regressor that takes a single RGB image as input and
predicts the low-dimensional parameter vector that corresponds to the shown facial expression. We demonstrate that
this regressor can be trained such that it effectively supports self- and cross-person reenactment from monocular
videos without requiring prior mesh-based tracking. In a
series of experiments, we compare GEM’s self-reenactment
and cross-person reenactment results to state-of-the-art 3D
avatar methods, demonstrating GEM’s higher visual quality and better generalization to new expressions. As our
distilled linear model is highly efficient in generating novel
animation states, we also show a real-time demo of GEMs
driven by monocular webcam videos. The code and model
will be released for research purposes.

1. Introduction

15930

Half a century ago, Frederick Parke described a representation and animation technique to generate ,,animated sequences of a human face changing expressions” [40]. Using polygonal meshes, single facial expression states were
described that could be combined with linear interpolation

