This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Stereotype Theory Induced Micro-expression Recognition
with Oriented Deformation
Bohao Zhang1,2

Xuejiao Wang2

Changbo Wang1,3 *

Gaoqi He1,2,4 *

1

Lab of Artificial Intelligence for Education, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
School of Data Science and Engineering, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
4
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Mental Health and Psychological Crisis Intervention, School of Psychology
and Cognitive Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2

{52215901021,52275901001}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {cbwang, gqhe}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Micro-expression recognition (MER) aims to uncover genuine emotions and underlying psychological states. However, existing MER methods struggle with three main challenges. 1) Scarcity of micro-expression samples. 2)
Difficulty in modeling nearly imperceptible facial movements. 3) Reliance on apex frame annotations. To address these issues, we propose a Self-supervised Oriented
Deformation model for Apex-free Micro-expression Recognition (SODA4MER). Our approach enhances local deformation perception using muscle-group priors and amplifies
subtle features through Dynamic Stereotype Theory (DST)
based enhancement, while contrastive learning eliminates
the need for manual apex annotations. Specifically, the
Oriented deformation estimator of SODA4MER is first pretrained in a self-supervised manner. Secondly, a Gated
Temporal Variance Gaussian model (GTVG) is introduced
to adaptively integrate facial muscle-group priors, enhancing local deformation perception and mitigating noise from
head movements. Then, contrastive learning is employed
to achieve apex detection by identifying the frame with the
most significant local deformation. Finally, guided by DST,
we introduced a feature enhancement strategy that models
the temporal dynamics of local deformation in the activation and decay phases, leading to richer deformation features. Our rigorous experiments confirm the competitive
performance and practical applicability of SODA4MER.

genuine emotional states [1, 11, 33]. Specifically, it focuses on analyzing subtle, involuntary facial movements
to capture fleeting emotional cues that typically go unnoticed. Consequently, MER is vital for tasks such as security surveillance, criminal investigation, and mental health
assessment [17], and has thus attracted significant research
interest in recent years [16, 23, 27].
Compared to typical facial expressions, microexpressions (MEs) have significantly shorter duration
and involve extremely subtle movements, making MER a
highly challenging task [19, 43]. Existing MER methods
primarily tackle the aforementioned challenges through two
strategies to improve the performance. 1) Discrepancybased strategies estimate inter-frame variations [25, 45]
and employ self-attention mechanism [13] to capture
the subtle movements of MEs. They estimate the visual
discrepancy (e.g., the widely adopted optical flow) between
frames as motion features and utilize self-attention to
model the visual contextual information across different
facial regions. 2) Prior knowledge based strategies divide
the face into predefined blocks [16] or extract features from
specific spatial location [3, 14], with the aim of modeling
localized features that are specifically tailored for MER.

1. Introduction

Despite notable advancements achieved by the aforementioned strategies, existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) MER
methods still encounter three obstacles that limit their practical applicability. 1) Most discrepancy-based methods focus on the spatial discrepancy between onset and apex
frames, resulting in a strong dependency on apex annotations and degradation of discriminative temporal pattern
representations [17, 45]. Moreover, spatial discrepancy estimation lacks robustness to head movements and other noise,
introducing irrelevant artifacts and often failing on extreme
micro-expression samples, as shown in Fig. 2c. 2) Extracting ME-specific local features from predefined regions

Micro-expression recognition (MER) is a meaningful yet
challenging task in high-risk scenarios, aiming to uncover
* Changbo Wang and Gaoqi He are the corresponding authors.

10701

