This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ODE: Open-Set Evaluation of Hallucinations in Multimodal Large Language
Models
Yahan Tu Rui Hu Jitao Sang
Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing, China
{yahan.tu, rui.hu, jtsang}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
in MLLMs’ Hallucination Evaluation

Hallucination poses a persistent challenge for multimodal
large language models (MLLMs). However, existing benchmarks for evaluating hallucinations are generally static,
which may overlook the potential risk of data contamination. To address this issue, we propose ODE, an openset, dynamic protocol designed to evaluate object hallucinations in MLLMs at both the existence and attribute levels. ODE employs a graph-based structure to represent
real-world object concepts, their attributes, and the distributional associations between them. This structure facilitates the extraction of concept combinations based on diverse distributional criteria, generating varied samples for
structured queries that evaluate hallucinations in both generative and discriminative tasks. Through the generation
of new samples, dynamic concept combinations, and varied distribution frequencies, ODE mitigates the risk of data
contamination and broadens the scope of evaluation. This
protocol is applicable to both general and specialized scenarios, including those with limited data. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our protocol, revealing that MLLMs exhibit higher hallucination rates when
evaluated with ODE-generated samples, which indicates
potential data contamination. Furthermore, these generated samples aid in analyzing hallucination patterns and
fine-tuning models, offering an effective approach to mitigating hallucinations in MLLMs. Our code are available at
https://github.com/Iridescent-y/ODE.

Higher scores

Lower scores

Uncertain high
performance

More reliable
performance

Previous Test Set
Statistic: F1-Score Variation
66.6

CoCo

Our Test Set

Conversation 1: Previous test sample from coco2014
Is there a dog in the picture?

70.3

59.8

Online

56.4

51.6

ODE

51

InstructBLIP

MiniGPT-4

Yes.
Conversation 2: New test sample from our method
Is there a dog in the picture?
No.

Figure 1. Comparison of closed-set and open-set evaluations for
MLLMs, showing that open-set testing reduces data contamination
and provides a more reliable assessment of hallucination rates.
Coco

1. Introduction

sponses appear plausible but lack fidelity to the actual image content. This issue can lead to harmful consequences,
limiting the utility of MLLMs.
Therefore, the evaluation of hallucinations in MLLMs is
crucial to improve model reliability and practical application. Prior studies have proposed various benchmarks to
evaluate hallucinations in MLLMs, focusing on different
types (e.g., existence hallucinations[14, 26] and relational
hallucinations [34]) or levels of difficulty [6, 31, 32]. However, these benchmarks are predominantly static, using fixed
test data with limited distributions, which increases the risk
of data contamination. Contamination occurs when test data
overlaps with training data, leading to inflated performance
metrics. For example, we find that, under the same semantic distribution, models perform better on the COCO2014
image subset than on the latest Internet images (as shown

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [1, 3, 16,
30, 33, 36] have rapidly advanced in recent times, enabling
detailed image descriptions (i.e., image captioning) and responses to image-related queries (i.e., visual question answering). However, these models face the persistent challenge of “hallucination” [8, 15, 27], where generated re-

19836

