This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DynScene: Scalable Generation of
Dynamic Robotic Manipulation Scenes for Embodied AI
Sangmin Lee* , Sungyong Park* , Heewon Kim
Soongsil University
{sm32289, ejqdl010}@gmail.com, hwkim@ssu.ac.kr

6WDWLF6FHQH*HQHUDWLRQ

$FWLRQ*HQHUDWLRQ

'\QDPLF6FHQH*HQHUDWLRQ

³7KHURRPKDVDVRIDWDEOHUHG
ERWWOHDQG)UDQNDURERW´

³3LFNXSWKHERWWOH´

³3LFNXSWKHERWWOHWHQFHQWLPHWHU´

1RRWKHUREMHFWV

1RRWKHUREMHFWV

,QDGHTXDWHREMHFWSRVLWLRQIRUWDVNH[HFXWLRQ

/LPLWHGGDWDGLYHUVLW\IRULQWHUDFWLRQ

6XFFHVVIXOLQWHUDFWLRQDQGGLYHUVHGDWD

Figure 1. Types of text-guided data generation for embodied AI. Static scene generation often prevents task completion due to object positioning, regardless
of the task requirements (left). Action generation is limited by a lack of interaction diversity, failing to account for the effects of surrounding environments
(middle). To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to propose a method for dynamic scene generation that enables more realistic and diverse task
interactions by the joint generation of static scenes and robotic actions (right).

Abstract
Robotic manipulation in embodied AI critically depends
on large-scale, high-quality datasets that reﬂect realistic
object interactions and physical dynamics. However, existing data collection pipelines are often slow, expensive, and
heavily reliant on manual efforts. We present DynScene, a
diffusion-based framework for generating dynamic robotic
manipulation scenes directly from textual instructions. Unlike prior methods that focus solely on static environments or
isolated robot actions, DynScene decomposes the generation
into two phases static scene synthesis and action trajectory
generation allowing ﬁne-grained control and diversity. Our
model enhances realism and physical feasibility through
scene reﬁnement (layout sampling, quaternion quantization)
and leverages residual action representation to enable action
augmentation, generating multiple diverse trajectories from

a single static conﬁguration. Experiments show DynScene
achieves 26.8× faster generation, 1.84× higher accuracy,
and 28% greater action diversity than human-crafted data.
Furthermore, agents trained with DynScene exhibit up to
19.4% higher success rates across complex manipulation
tasks. Our approach paves the way for scalable, automated
dataset generation in robot learning.

* These authors contributed equally.

12166

1. Introduction
Embodied AI aims to train agents that can perceive, reason, and act within physically grounded environments, ultimately enabling robots to perform complex tasks in the
real world. However, collecting real-world data for robotic
manipulation is notoriously costly, time-consuming, and
often unsafe for trial-and-error learning. To address this,
the ﬁeld has increasingly turned to simulation-based training [7, 10, 23, 30, 34, 39, 48], where agents can learn from
interactions within virtual environments at scale.

