This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalized Gaussian Entropy Model for Point Cloud Attribute Compression
with Dynamic Likelihood Intervals
Changhao Peng
Peking University
changhaopeng@foxmail.com

Abstract
Gaussian and Laplacian entropy models are proved effective in learned point cloud attribute compression, as they
assist in arithmetic coding of latents. However, we demonstrate through experiments that there is still unutilized information in entropy parameters estimated by neural networks in current methods, which can be used for more
accurate probability estimation. Thus we introduce generalized Gaussian entropy model, which controls the tail
shape through shape parameter to more accurately estimate the probability of latents. Meanwhile, to the best of
our knowledge, existing methods use fixed likelihood intervals for each integer during arithmetic coding, which limits
model performance. We propose Mean Error Discriminator (MED) to determine whether the entropy parameter estimation is accurate and then dynamically adjust likelihood
intervals. Experiments show that our method significantly
improves rate-distortion (RD) performance on three VAEbased models for point cloud attribute compression, and
our method can be applied to other compression tasks, such
as image and video compression.

Figure 1. Rate-speed comparison on 8iVFBv2 [1] and MVUB
[18]. Left-top is better.

Successful Prediction

Left-Shift Stretch Right-Shift

1. Introduction

Failed Prediction

Original Likelihood Interval

Right-Shift Squeeze Left-Shift

In recent years, point clouds have become an important type
of 3D visual data, with widespread applications in virtual
reality [29], autonomous driving [30], and various other
fields. With the massive generation of point cloud, there
is an urgent need for efficient compression methods. Point
clouds consist of two main aspects: geometry information
and attribute information. Geometry information refers to
the 3D coordinates of the points, while attribute information
includes various details such as color and reflectance. Current geometry compression methods, such as the traditional
coding algorithms used in G-PCC [14] and V-PCC [15],
as well as deep learning-based methods like SparsePCGC
[26], OctAttention [7] and EHEM [25], have achieved efficient compression of point cloud geometry. However,

Figure 2. Dynamic likelihood intervals. When the prediction of
mean is inaccurate, squeeze the likelihood interval of ⌊µ⌉ so that
the remaining integer likelihood intervals can shift towards the
center of the entropy model, thereby increasing the likelihood. On
the contrary, when the prediction is accurate, the likelihood interval of ⌊µ⌉ is stretched.

11779

for attribute compression, the achievable compression ratios with current methods are still far below those for geometry compression. Therefore, our focus is on point cloud
attribute compression based on lossless geometry.
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) [13] have played an
important role in deep learning-based compression frameworks. Based on VAE, Ballé et al. [2] propose using
hyperpriors to generate multivariate Gaussian distributions

