This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Omni-Scene: Omni-Gaussian Representation for
Ego-Centric Sparse-View Scene Reconstruction
Dongxu Wei1,3 , Zhiqi Li1,2 , and Peidong Liu1*
1

School of Engineering, Westlake University, Hangzhou, China
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Institute of Advanced Technology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, Hangzhou, China
{weidongxu, lizhiqi49, liupeidong}@westlake.edu.cn
2

Input Views (real or synthetic)

Omni-Gaussian

Novel Views

: Gaussians
: Voxels
: Rays
Inference

Rendering

Reconstructed Scenes

Figure 1. Provided with six surrounding images captured in real world or synthesized by 2D diffusion models, we can generate high-quality
3D Gaussians based on our Omni-Gaussian representation for ego-centric scene reconstruction and novel view synthesis.

Abstract
Prior works employing pixel-based Gaussian representation have demonstrated efficacy in feed-forward sparseview reconstruction. However, such representation necessitates cross-view overlap for accurate depth estimation, and
is challenged by object occlusions and frustum truncations.
As a result, these methods require scene-centric data acquisition to maintain cross-view overlap and complete scene
visibility to circumvent occlusions and truncations, which
limits their applicability to scene-centric reconstruction. In
contrast, in autonomous driving scenarios, a more practical
paradigm is ego-centric reconstruction, which is characterized by minimal cross-view overlap and frequent occlusions
and truncations. The limitations of pixel-based representation thus hinder the utility of prior works in this task.
In light of this, this paper conducts an in-depth analysis
of different representations, and introduces Omni-Gaussian
representation with tailored network design to complement
their strengths and mitigate their drawbacks. Experiments
show that our method significantly surpasses state-of-the-

art methods, pixelSplat and MVSplat, in ego-centric reconstruction, and achieves comparable performance to prior
works in scene-centric reconstruction. Our code is available at https://github.com/WU-CVGL/Omni-Scene.

1. Introduction

*Corresponding author

Reconstructing 3D scenes from sparse observations is a crucial task in computer vision and graphics. Recent efforts
[1–22] have integrated 3D structural priors as inductive biases into neural networks, enabling the prediction of implicit neural field [23], light field [10], or explicit 3D Gaussians [24] for scene reconstruction in a single forward pass.
Notably, due to the efficiency of rasterization-based rendering and the explicit nature of 3D Gaussians [24], Gaussianbased methods [13–22] have shown superiority in both inference speed and visual quality compared to those based
on neural field [1–9] or light field [10–12]. Typically, these
methods assume existence of large overlaps among the observed input views. Thus they can utilize techniques such as
multi-view cross attention [16, 18, 22], epipolar lines [13]
or cost volumes [14, 21] to learn pixel-level cross-view cor-

22317

