This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Wav2Sem: Plug-and-Play Audio Semantic Decoupling for 3D Speech-Driven
Facial Animation

1

Hao Li1,2 , Ju Dai2, *, Xin Zhao1,2 , Feng Zhou3 , Junjun Pan1,2,∗ , Lei Li4,5
Beihang University, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 North China University of Technology,
4
University of Washington, 5 University of Copenhagen

{lih09, daij, zhaox03}@pcl.ac.cn, zhoufeng@ncut.edu.cn, pan junjun@buaa.edu.cn, lilei@di.ku.dk

Abstract

Semantic Features
Wav2Sem
Pre-Trained
Audio Model

In 3D speech-driven facial animation generation, existing
methods commonly employ pre-trained self-supervised audio models as encoders. However, due to the prevalence
of phonetically similar syllables with distinct lip shapes in
language, these near-homophone syllables tend to exhibit
significant coupling in self-supervised audio feature spaces,
leading to the averaging effect in subsequent lip motion
generation. To address this issue, this paper proposes a
plug-and-play semantic decorrelation module—Wav2Sem.
This module extracts semantic features corresponding to
the entire audio sequence, leveraging the added semantic
information to decorrelate audio encodings within the feature space, thereby achieving more expressive audio features. Extensive experiments across multiple Speech-driven
models indicate that the Wav2Sem module effectively decouples audio features, significantly alleviating the averaging effect of phonetically similar syllables in lip shape
generation, thereby enhancing the precision and naturalness of facial animations. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/wslh852/Wav2Sem.git.

Pre-Trained
Audio Model

Phonemic Features

Audio

Phonemic Features

Feature Space

Feature Space

Audio

Coupling

Decoupling

w/o Wav2Sem

Wav2Sem

Figure 1. Our plug-and-play Wav2Sem module effectively alleviates the coupling of near-homophonic syllables in pre-trained selfsupervised models by extracting semantic features from audio.

tion abilities provided by self-supervised learning, which
significantly enhances model training efficiency. However,
due to the diversity of phoneme combinations in natural
language, a considerable number of near-homophonic syllables exist. These syllables are acoustically similar, but
their corresponding lip shapes during pronunciation exhibit
distinct differences. For example, When “sheep” produces
the long vowel sound /i:/, the mouth opens slightly with a
gentle lip parting; whereas with “ship” producing the short
vowel sound /I/, the lips remain neutral, and the mouth
opens slightly wider. In Figure 1, We observe that nearhomophonic syllables show significant coupling in the feature space of existing self-supervised models, which leads
to the averaging of near-homophonic syllables in the subsequent lip shape generation process, resulting in significant
lip-syncing error. Therefore, effectively preventing the coupling of near-homophonic syllables in the feature space becomes a significant challenge.
The prevailing self-supervised audio encoding models,
such as HuBERT [18] and Wav2Vec 2.0 [3], rely on largescale unlabeled audio data for training, which often restricts
feature modeling to the phoneme-level, lacking effective se-

1. Introduction
Speech drive 3D facial animation is widely used in virtual
reality, film production, and gaming and has been an active
research topic for decades [36, 38, 39]. The high correlation
between audio and lip shapes makes lip-syncing the most
critical metric for evaluating facial animation. Whether
utilizing phoneme-based [41] matching techniques or deep
learning methods [7, 30], the primary focus is on establishing mapping rules between audio signals and facial (particularly lip) movements to achieve accurate lip-syncing.
Existing work [1, 12, 27, 29, 30, 32, 35, 42] typically
employs pre-trained self-supervised models for audio encoding, benefiting from the exceptional feature generaliza* Corresponding authors

183

