This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FluidNexus: 3D Fluid Reconstruction and Prediction from a Single Video
Yue Gao∗1,2
1

Stanford University

Hong-Xing Yu∗1
2

Microsoft

3

Bo Zhu3

Jiajun Wu1

Georgia Institute of Technology

+ Wind

Input single video

Interaction: Wind (novel view)

+ Object

+ Time

Future prediction (novel view)

Reconstructed fluid

Interaction: Object (novel view)

Figure 1. From a single fluid video (top left), we reconstruct the 3D fluid (middle), predict future evolution (bottom left), and simulate
wind-fluid interaction (top right) / object-fluid interactions (bottom right).

1. Introduction

Abstract
We study reconstructing and predicting 3D fluid appearance and velocity from a single video. Current methods require multi-view videos for fluid reconstruction. We present
FluidNexus, a novel framework that bridges video generation
and physics simulation to tackle this task. Our key insight
is to synthesize multiple novel-view videos as references
for reconstruction. FluidNexus consists of two key components: (1) a novel-view video synthesizer that combines
frame-wise view synthesis with video diffusion refinement
for generating realistic videos, and (2) a physics-integrated
particle representation coupling differentiable simulation
and rendering to simultaneously facilitate 3D fluid reconstruction and prediction. To evaluate our approach, we
collect two new real-world fluid datasets featuring textured
backgrounds and object interactions. Our method enables
dynamic novel view synthesis, future prediction, and interaction simulation from a single fluid video. Project website:
https://yuegao.me/FluidNexus.
* Equal contribution.

Video-based fluid reconstruction and prediction presents
a promising direction for understanding fluid dynamics in
scenarios where complex measurement equipment and computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations are impractical.
This capability has broad applications in industrial monitoring [10], visual special effects [40], and scientific visualization [44]. Recent state-of-the-art approaches have explored
integrating neural rendering with physics priors for fluid reconstruction from videos [9, 56]. However, these methods
all require multi-view videos for reconstruction, which are
often difficult to obtain in real-world scenarios.
In this paper, we address a novel problem setup: singlevideo 3D fluid reconstruction and prediction. Specifically,
we aim to start with a single-view video and generate multiple synchronized novel-view videos to serve as references for
3D fluid reconstruction. At first glance, this problem appears
ill-posed, as a single video provides limited information
about the fluid’s intricate 3D structure and dynamics, while
infinitely many potential 3D fluid states could correspond
to the observed frames. We identify three key challenges in

26091

