This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Teller: Real-Time Streaming Audio-Driven Portrait Animation with
Autoregressive Motion Generation
Dingcheng Zhen Shunshun Yin Shiyang Qin Hou Yi
Ziwei Zhang Siyuan Liu Gan Qi Ming Tao
Shanghai Soulgate Techonolgy Co.tl.
{dingchengzhen, yinshunshun, qinshiyang, houyi,zhangziwei, siyuanliu, ganqi, ming}@soulapp.cn
Stage 1

Stage 2

Facial Motion Latent Generation

Sample 1

+

Efficient Temporal Module
Before Temporal Module

= Sample 2

6

After Temporal Module Move

Diverse

Real-Time Performance
200ms chunks

Audio Encode cost 7ms

Stage1 cost 106ms

Stage2 cost 71ms

🚀 For 200ms Audio Chunk Condition Total Inference Time < 200ms 🚀

Figure 1. Teller framework is the first autoregressive framework for real-time, audio-driven portrait animation, achieving up to 25 FPS
while preserving realistic body part and accessory movements. Demo can be found at https://teller-avatar.github.io/.

Abstract
In this work, we introduce the first autoregressive framework for real-time, audio-driven portrait animation, a.k.a,
talking head. Beyond the challenge of lengthy animation
times, a critical challenge in realistic talking head generation lies in preserving the natural movement of diverse
body parts. To this end, we propose Teller, the first streaming audio-driven protrait animation framework with autoregressive motion generation. Specifically, Teller first decomposes facial and body detail animation into two components: Facial Motion Latent Generation (FMLG) based
on an autoregressive transfromer, and movement authenticity refinement using a Efficient Temporal Module (ETM).
Concretely, FMLG employs a Residual VQ model to map
the facial motion latent from the implicit keypoint-based
model into discrete motion tokens, which are then temporally sliced with audio embeddings. This enables the AR
tranformer to learn real-time, stream-based mappings from
audio to motion. Furthermore, Teller incorporate ETM to
capture finer motion details. This module ensures the physi-

cal consistency of body parts and accessories, such as neck
muscles and earrings, improving the realism of these movements. Teller is designed to be efficient, surpassing the inference speed of diffusion-based models (Hallo 20.93s vs.
Teller 0.92s for one second video generation), and achieves
a real-time streaming performance of up to 25 FPS. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms recent audio-driven portrait animation models, especially in small movements, as validated by human evaluations with a significant margin in quality and realism.

1. Introduction
Realistic and expressive portrait animation from audio and
static images, commonly known as talking head animation [12, 16, 21, 35], has garnered significant interest across
applications such as virtual avatars, digital communication,
and entertainment. However, generating high-quality animations that are visually compelling and temporally consistent remains a major challenge. This complexity stems
from the need to intricately coordinate lip movements, fa-

21075

