This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SemiETS: Integrating Spatial and Content Consistencies for
Semi-Supervised End-to-end Text Spotting
Dongliang Luo∗

Hanshen Zhu∗ Ziyang Zhang Dingkang Liang
Yuliang Liu Xiang Bai†
Huazhong University of Science and Technology

Xudong Xie

{ldl, zhs china, zzyzz, dkliang, xdxie, ylliu, xbai}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
(x, y)

Net

Most previous scene text spotting methods rely on highquality manual annotations to achieve promising performance. To reduce their expensive costs, we study semisupervised text spotting (SSTS) to exploit useful information
from unlabeled images. However, directly applying existing semi-supervised methods of general scenes to SSTS will
face new challenges: 1) inconsistent pseudo labels between
detection and recognition tasks, and 2) sub-optimal supervisions caused by inconsistency between teacher/student.
Thus, we propose a new Semi-supervised framework for
End-to-end Text Spotting, namely SemiETS that leverages the complementarity of text detection and recognition. Specifically, it gradually generates reliable hierarchical pseudo labels for each task, thereby reducing noisy labels. Meanwhile, it extracts important information in locations and transcriptions from bidirectional flows to improve
consistency. Extensive experiments on three datasets under
various settings demonstrate the effectiveness of SemiETS
on arbitrary-shaped text. For example, it outperforms previous state-of-the-art SSL methods by a large margin on
end-to-end spotting (+8.7%, +5.6%, and +2.6% H-mean
under 0.5%, 1%, and 2% labeled data settings on TotalText, respectively). More importantly, it still improves upon
a strongly supervised text spotter trained with plenty of labeled data by 2.0%. Compelling domain adaptation ability
shows practical potential. Moreover, our method demonstrates consistent improvement on different text spotters.
Code will be available at https:// github.com/
DrLuo/SemiETS.

Unlabeled image

Pseudo coordinates

gate

Net
Unlabeled
cropped image

Pseudo
transcription

Detector

Recognizer

(a) Semi-supervised text detection

(b) Semi-supervised text recognition

petrosains

Transcription

Net
Coordinates
Unlabeled image

Text
Spotter

Pseudo labels
(c) Semi-supervised text spotting

Figure 1. Comparison of different semi-supervised tasks related
to text, including (a) semi-supervised text detection, (b) semisupervised text recognition, and (c) semi-supervised text spotting.
The red arrow indicates the supervision flow of pseudo labels.

tory performance. However, annotating such data is expensive and laborious due to its complex formats. To alleviate
the cost of labeling, exploring effective information from
unlabeled text images is a valuable research direction. To
achieve that, semi-supervised learning (SSL) is a natural
and effective approach.
Recently, SSL methods have made considerable progress
in general scenarios such as semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) [15, 29, 40, 45]. The common practice is
to use a teacher model to generate pseudo labels on unlabeled sets, which act as the ground truth (GT) for the
student model [31, 34]. Thus, migrating them to optical character recognition (OCR) is natural and straightforward. Although semi-supervised methods have been applied to OCR tasks, most focus on one single task of text
detection [16, 27, 35] or recognition [1, 12, 47]. The former is mostly the modification of SSOD frameworks to fit
the irregular shape of texts [27] or improve label selection [36, 50], while not involving the recognition part, as
in Fig. 1 (a). The latter, illustrated in Fig. 1 (b), usually performs pseudo-labeling [12, 24] or consistency-based regu-

1. Introduction
Text spotting aims at concurrently localizing and recognizing texts from images. Most previous works [6, 7, 18, 23,
44, 46] highly rely on high-quality annotations for satisfac* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

9329

