This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SVDC: Consistent Direct Time-of-Flight Video Depth Completion with
Frequency Selective Fusion
Xuan Zhu1 , Jijun Xiang1 , Xianqi Wang1 , Longliang Liu1 ,
Yu Wang2 , Hong Zhang2 , Fei Guo2 , Xin Yang1†
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology

2

Honor Device Co., Ltd

0.12

Lightweight direct Time-of-Flight (dToF) sensors are ideal
for 3D sensing on mobile devices. However, due to the manufacturing constraints of compact devices and the inherent
physical principles of imaging, dToF depth maps are sparse
and noisy. In this paper, we propose a novel video depth
completion method, called SVDC, by fusing the sparse dToF
data with the corresponding RGB guidance. Our method
employs a multi-frame fusion scheme to mitigate the spatial
ambiguity resulting from the sparse dToF imaging. Misalignment between consecutive frames during multi-frame
fusion could cause blending between object edges and the
background, which results in a loss of detail. To address
this, we introduce an adaptive frequency selective fusion
(AFSF) module, which automatically selects convolution
kernel sizes to fuse multi-frame features. Our AFSF utilizes
a channel-spatial enhancement attention (CSEA) module to
enhance features and generates an attention map as fusion
weights. The AFSF ensures edge detail recovery while suppressing high-frequency noise in smooth regions. To further
enhance temporal consistency, We propose a cross-window
consistency loss to ensure consistent predictions across different windows, effectively reducing flickering. Our proposed SVDC achieves optimal accuracy and consistency on
the TartanAir and Dynamic Replica datasets. Code is available at https://github.com/Lan1eve/SVDC.

0.11

BPNet
CFormer
DVDC(Ours)
SVDC(Ours)

0.10

0.6

Dynamic Replica OPW

Abstract

Dynamic Replica RMSE (m)

{xuanzhu, jijunx, xianqiw, longliangl, xinyang2014}@hust.edu.cn

0.5
0.4

BPNet
CFormer
DVDC(Ours)
SVDC(Ours)

0.3

0.09
0.2
0.3
Tartanair RMSE (m)
(a)

0.2

0.20
0.25
Tartanair OPW
(b)

Figure 1. Comparisons with state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods on
the TartanAir and Dynamic Replica datasets. Left: Accuracy metric RMSE↓. Right: Temporal consistency metric OPW↓[31]. Our
proposed approach achieves superior accuracy and consistency
compared to per-frame depth completion methods.

1. Introduction

for depth enhancement research. By emitting laser pulses
and measuring the reflection time, dToF sensors acquire
depth information and offer advantages such as compact
size, low cost, and energy efficiency. Consequently, they
have attracted considerable attention from both academia
and industry[16, 20].
DToF sensors, depending on their type, typically return
two forms of depth information: low-resolution depth maps
or sparse depth maps. The low-resolution depth map provides detailed and accurate depth information for patch regions within the image, such as the mean and variance of
depth values, and even histograms of the depth distribution.
Previous research has focused on depth super-resolution
tasks for dToF data[15, 27]. Deltar[15] proposed a twobranch model in which one branch encodes RGB information while the other encodes the dToF low-resolution depth
map. Features from these two branches are fused at various
levels within the decoder, using RGB information to guide
the recovery of the low-resolution depth map. DVSR[27]
introduced a video-based dToF depth super-resolution algorithm that leverages RGB information as guidance and
incorporates an optical flow-guided deformable convolution
module[3] to aggregate and propagate multi-frame features.

Obtaining consistent and accurate depth video on mobile
devices is essential for constructing precise 3D scene models and plays a significant role in applications such as 3D reconstruction and AR/VR[1, 4]. With the rapid advancement
of sensor technology, novel lightweight direct Time-ofFlight (dToF) sensors[25] have created new opportunities
† Corresponding author.

16619

