This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MOS: Modeling Object-Scene Associations in Generalized Category Discovery
Zhengyuan Peng1 , Jinpeng Ma3 , Zhimin Sun1 , Ran Yi1 , Haichuan Song2 , Xin Tan2 *†, Lizhuang Ma1,2 *
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 East China Normal University, 3 Chongqing University

Ambiguity 1

base class but novel scene

Ambiguity 2

base scene but novel class

unlabel set

label set

Figure 1. Illustration of the ambiguity challenge. The top row illustrates the potential for base objects in novel scenes to be perceived as
novel categories. The bottom row shows misclassification risks when novel objects are placed in base scenes. Ambiguity challenge is the
primary factor that leads to the misinterpretation of scene information.

Abstract
Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) is a classification
task that aims to classify both base and novel classes in unlabeled images, using knowledge from a labeled dataset.
In GCD, previous research overlooks scene information
or treats it as noise, reducing its impact during model
training. However, in this paper, we argue that scene
information should be viewed as a strong prior for inferring novel classes. We attribute the misinterpretation of scene information to a key factor: the Ambiguity Challenge inherent in GCD. Specifically, novel objects
in base scenes might be wrongly classified into base categories, while base objects in novel scenes might be mistakenly recognized as novel categories. Once the ambiguity challenge is addressed, scene information can reach
its full potential, significantly enhancing the performance
of GCD models. To more effectively leverage scene information, we propose the Modeling Object-Scene Associations (MOS) framework, which utilizes a simple MLPbased scene-awareness module to enhance GCD perfor* Corresponding author.
† Project Leader.

15118

mance. It achieves an exceptional average accuracy improvement of 4% on the challenging fine-grained datasets
compared to state-of-the-art methods, emphasizing its superior performance in fine-grained GCD. The code is publicly
available at https://github.com/JethroPeng/MOS.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models in image recognition often face challenges when novel classes are introduced, due to their reliance on large annotated datasets and closed-world assumption. This limitation sparks interest in Generalized
Category Discovery (GCD) [42], which aims to classify
novel categories from unlabeled data using knowledge from
labeled datasets. GCD enables models to generalize to
novel categories and adapt to diverse environments, overcoming the constraints of the closed-world assumption.
In GCD, existing approaches [3, 10, 12, 14, 16, 28, 30,
33, 42, 43, 45, 48, 52, 53, 55–58] often overlook scene
information (e.g., forest, ocean, sky) or treat it as noise
that interferes with the generalization of classification models, seeking to minimize its influence through various techniques. This viewpoint has long been widely accepted, sup-

