This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instant3dit: Multiview Inpainting for Fast Editing of 3D Objects
Amir Barda
Tel Aviv University, Israel

Matheus Gadelha
Adobe Research, USA

Vladimir G. Kim
Adobe Research, USA

amirbarda@mail.tau.ac.il

gadelha@adobe.com

vokim@adobe.com

Noam Aigerman
Université de Montréal, Canada

Amit H. Bermano
Tel Aviv University, Israel

Thibault Groueix
Adobe Research, USA

noam.aigerman@umontreal.ca

amberman@mail.tau.ac.il

groueix@adobe.com

Input
mesh + mask

Gaussian Splat

Mesh

Adaptive
Remeshing

Input
mesh + mask

NeRF

Mesh

Original
Mesh

“A bear holding a honey pot”

“Bear with
wings”

Adaptive
Remeshing

Original
Mesh

“Man wearing a medieval helmet”

“An elven
warrior”

25 sec.

25 sec.

Figure 1. Our method takes as input a 3D object along with a 3D mask (first column) and a text prompt, and uses our multiview inpainting
diffusion model to consistently paint the mask in four rendered views of the object. Off-the-shelf reconstructors can be used on the
multiview output to give an NeRF, a Gaussian Splat (second column), or a mesh (third column) that can be used along with adaptive
remeshing to ensure the unmasked region is exactly preserved e.g. topology, uvs, (fourth and fifth column). This feedforward approach is
orders of magnitude faster than previous works in generative 3D editing, taking just ≈ 3 seconds per multiview edit, then 0.7 seconds to
reconstruct a GS or a NeRF, 3 seconds for a mesh, and ≈ 20 seconds for optional mesh post-processing.

Abstract
We propose a generative technique to edit 3D shapes,
represented as meshes, NeRFs, or Gaussian Splats, in ≈ 3
seconds, without the need for running an SDS type of optimization. Our key insight is to cast 3D editing as a multiview image inpainting problem, as this representation is
generic and can be mapped back to any 3D representation
using the bank of available Large Reconstruction Models.
We explore different fine-tuning strategies to obtain both
multiview generation and inpainting capabilities within the
same diffusion model. In particular, the design of the inpainting mask is an important factor of training an inpainting model, and we propose several masking strategies to
mimic the types of edits a user would perform on a 3D
shape. Our approach takes 3D generative editing from
hours to seconds and produces higher-quality results compared to previous works.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen an explosion in AI-guided 3D generative techniques for creation and editing of 3D content, al-

lowing the user to control the generation process with often
as little as a single text prompt [4, 9, 10, 42, 50, 55]. While
text prompts provide an easy interface for novice users, they
lack fine control over the generation, such as generating
a specific object in a specific location over a pre-existing
3D model, e.g., make a bear hold a previously non-existent
honey pot (see Figure 1).
Thus, several recent works have focused on such localized generation of 3D objects, namely 3D inpainting [6, 42,
50], i.e., filling-in masked-out content in a 3D object, conditioned on a textual description of the desired fill-in, similarly to 2D inpainting [8, 50]. Figure 1 shows several examples of such inpaintings produced by our method, where the
mask (made up of coarse 3D primitives) is highlighted in
purple color, the text prompt describing the target inpainting is written below, and the resulting inpainted 3D reconstructions are shown next to it.
Current 3D inpainting methods cannot be integrated into
production pipelines, as they suffer from two fundamental
issues: 1) long runtimes, and 2) low quality. We observe
these two issues can be explained by previous works’ re-

16273

