This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Occupancy Prediction with Low-Resolution Queries via
Prototype-aware View Transformation
Gyeongrok Oh1,→ , Sungjune Kim1,→ , Heeju Ko1 , Hyung-gun Chi2 , Jinkyu Kim1 , Dongwook Lee3 ,
Daehyun Ji3 , Sungjoon Choi1 , Sujin Jang3,† , Sangpil Kim1,†
1

Korea University

2

Purdue University

3

AI Center, DS Division, Samsung Electronics

Abstract
The resolution of voxel queries significantly influences the
quality of view transformation in camera-based 3D occupancy prediction. However, computational constraints
and the practical necessity for real-time deployment require smaller query resolutions, which inevitably leads to
an information loss. Therefore, it is essential to encode
and preserve rich visual details within limited query sizes
while ensuring a comprehensive representation of 3D occupancy. To this end, we introduce ProtoOcc, a novel
occupancy network that leverages prototypes of clustered
image segments in view transformation to enhance lowresolution context. In particular, the mapping of 2D prototypes onto 3D voxel queries encodes high-level visual geometries and complements the loss of spatial information from
reduced query resolutions. Additionally, we design a multiperspective decoding strategy to efficiently disentangle the
densely compressed visual cues into a high-dimensional 3D
occupancy scene. Experimental results on both Occ3D and
SemanticKITTI benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method, showing clear improvements over
the baselines. More importantly, ProtoOcc achieves competitive performance against the baselines even with 75%
reduced voxel resolution. Project page: https://kuailab.github.io/cvpr2025protoocc.

1. Introduction
3D occupancy prediction (3DOP) is the task of determining
which parts of a 3D space are occupied by objects and identifying their class categories. In particular, view transformation from 2D to 3D space is an essential step for successful
camera-based occupancy prediction. Prior works employ
various 3D space representation strategies, such as bird’seye-view (BEV) plane, tri-perspective-view (TPV) planes,
and 3D voxel cube, which aim to map multi-view camera in* Equal contributions

† Corresponding author (s.steve.jang@samsung.com, spk7@korea.ac.kr)

Figure 1. (a) Our ProtoOcc can perform comparably to higherresolution counterparts while using 75% less memory. (b-c) Reducing query resolutions in standard view transformation (VT) is
required for faster inference, but brings geometrical ambiguity. (d)
Our prototype-aware VT can capture high-level geometric details
while preserving computational efficiency.

formation into corresponding grid cells in a unified 3D space.
Among these, 3D voxels are the most common representation strategy in the 3DOP task [11, 12, 40, 43, 48, 50, 53, 55],
as they naturally encode visual information into a structured
semantic 3D space. Therefore, the effectiveness of 3D voxelization (i.e., voxel queries) plays a crucial role in determining the prediction performance in camera-based 3DOP.
Trade-offs between computation and performance have
long been a challenge in various deep learning applications [6, 8, 17, 26]. Learning voxel queries also encounters this dilemma, especially in real-time and safety-critical
vision systems such as autonomous driving and robotics.
As illustrated in Figure 1, utilizing voxel queries with highresolution may produce reliable performances, but requires
intensive computation. Accelerating the inference inevitably
necessitates smaller query sizes. However, it results in performance degradation primarily due to its inability to capture precise high-level details within limited spatial storage,

17134

