This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Correspondence Regenerator for Robust 3D Registration
Guiyu Zhao1,2,4 ,* Sheng Ao1,2,3 ,* Ye Zhang3†, Kai Xu5 , Yulan Guo3
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China 3 Sun Yat-sen University
4
Beijing Institute of Technology 5 National University of Defense Technology

Abstract
Obtaining enough high-quality correspondences is crucial for robust registration. Existing correspondence refinement methods mostly follow the paradigm of outlier removal, which either fails to correctly identify the accurate
correspondences under extreme outlier ratios, or select too
few correct correspondences to support robust registration.
To address this challenge, we propose a novel approach
named Regor, which is a progressive correspondence regenerator that generates higher-quality matches whist sufficiently robust for numerous outliers. In each iteration,
we first apply prior-guided local grouping and generalized
mutual matching to generate the local region correspondences. A powerful center-aware three-point consistency is
then presented to achieve local correspondence correction,
instead of removal. Further, we employ global correspondence refinement to obtain accurate correspondences from
a global perspective. Through progressive iterations, this
process yields a large number of high-quality correspondences. Extensive experiments on both indoor and outdoor
datasets demonstrate that the proposed Regor significantly
outperforms existing outlier removal techniques. More critically, our approach obtain 10 times more correct correspondences than outlier removal methods. As a result, our
method is able to achieve robust registration even with weak
features. The code is available at [Regor].

Initial Correspondences

Initial Correspondences

Outlier Removal

Inlier Regeneration

Prune

Too few inliers
Fail

Regenerate

More inliers

√ Success

6DoF Pose

6DoF Pose

(a) Existing Methods

(b) Our Method

Figure 1. Difference between our method and existing outlier removal techniques. Outlier removal methods perform top-down
pruning, producing an optimized set of correspondences that is
a subset of the initial correspondences. When the initial inliers
are few, this approach can obtain only a limited number of inliers,
which is insufficient for robust pose estimation. In contrast, our
method takes a bottom-up approach, using a regeneration strategy
to generate more inliers, thereby effectively addressing this issue.

of feature metric learning, feature-based point cloud registration methods [1, 20, 30, 43] have garnered significant
attention and achieved promising results. However, in scenarios characterized by low overlap and high noise, direct
feature matching often leads to a large number of outliers,
which poses a great challenge for point cloud registration.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration [8, 21] is a fundamental and critical
task in 3D computer vision, with widespread applications
across various domains such as robotic localization [36, 42]
and remote sensing [21, 35]. Point cloud registration aims
to estimate a rigid transformation to align two point clouds
scanned from different perspectives. With the advancement

Currently, the mainstream approach to address the issue of numerous outliers in point cloud registration is to
filter wrong correspondences. Existing outlier removal
methods [3, 6, 22, 27, 47] can be categorized into two
types: geometry-based methods and learning-based methods. Geometry-based methods [6, 14, 28, 47] typically remove outliers according to whether point correspondences
satisfy geometric consistency. Learning-based methods [3,

* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding Author.

1210

