This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MUST: The First Dataset and Unified Framework for
Multispectral UAV Single Object Tracking
Haolin Qin, Tingfa Xu† , Tianhao Li, Zhenxiang Chen, Tao Feng, Jianan Li†
Beijing Institute of Technology
{3120225333,ciom xtf1,lijianan}@bit.edu.cn *

Abstract
UAV tracking faces significant challenges in real-world scenarios, such as small-size targets and occlusions, which
limit the performance of RGB-based trackers. Multispectral
images (MSI), which capture additional spectral information, offer a promising solution to these challenges. However, progress in this field has been hindered by the lack
of relevant datasets. To address this gap, we introduce the
first large-scale Multispectral UAV Single Object Tracking
dataset (MUST), which includes 250 video sequences spanning diverse environments and challenges, providing a comprehensive data foundation for multispectral UAV tracking.
We also propose a novel tracking framework, UNTrack,
which encodes unified spectral, spatial, and temporal features from spectrum prompts, initial templates, and sequential searches. UNTrack employs an asymmetric transformer
with a spectral background eliminate mechanism for optimal relationship modeling and an encoder that continuously updates the spectrum prompt to refine tracking, improving both accuracy and efficiency. Extensive experiments show that our proposed UNTrack outperforms stateof-the-art UAV trackers. We believe our dataset and framework will drive future research in this area. The dataset
is available on https://github.com/q2479036243/MUSTMultispectral-UAV-Single-Object-Tracking.

1. Introduction
UAV tracking is critical but often encounters complex challenges, which hinder the extraction of accurate spatial features, as shown in Fig. 1. These factors substantially degrade the performance of RGB-based trackers that rely primarily on visual cues [13, 14]. Furthermore, the target’s
appearance may change significantly during tracking, often deviating considerably from the initial template, thereby
making the tracker prone to drift.
Multispectral images provide additional spectral infor* † Correspondence to: Tingfa Xu and Jianan Li.

Figure 1. In challenging scenarios, the spatial features (e.g.,
color and texture) of the tracked target closely resemble those
of the background, making differentiation and localization difficult. However, the target’s spectral information differs significantly from the background and aligns with the template’s spectral
data, providing robust features for reliable tracking.

mation that characterizes the target’s intrinsic reflectance
properties [27], offering valuable insights in situations
where spatial features are limited by the aforementioned
challenges. For example, even with severe background
interference and color similarities, distinct spectral curves
allow for effective target differentiation and localization
(Fig. 1). Moreover, key spectral features tend to remain
stable during tracking, improving robustness. Thus, multispectral imaging is a promising solution for UAV tracking
in challenging scenarios. However, the lack of large-scale,
challenging datasets hampers progress in this area.
To address this gap, we present the first large-scale Multispectral UAV Single Object Tracking dataset (MUST).
The dataset comprises 250 video sequences, totaling 43,000
frames, each with 1200×900 pixels and 8 spectral bands
that encompass both visible-light and near-infrared bands.
Furthermore, the dataset incorporates 12 key challenge attributes, including small-size targets, background clutter,
and similar colors, making it highly representative of realworld challenges. By leveraging data diversity and including difficult scenarios, the MUST dataset provides crucial
support for the development and thorough evaluation of

16882

