This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EDM: Equirectangular Projection-Oriented Dense Kernelized Feature Matching
Dongki Jung 1,2 Jaehoon Choi 2 Yonghan Lee 2 Somi Jeong 1 Taejae Lee 1
Dinesh Manocha 2 Suyong Yeon 1
1
NAVER LABS 2 University of Maryland

Input

(a) Prev. SotA
Warp

(b) Prev. SotA with Cubemap Proj.
Warp
Multiple
Predictions

(c) EDM (ours)
Warp

Figure 1. (a) Previous state-of-the-art [15] struggles to achieve accurate dense matching in equirectangular projection (ERP) images due to
inherent distortions. (b) The ERP image can be transformed into a cubemap image, which consists of six perspective images. However, this
approach demands multiple independent iterations of inference for each pair of perspective images, increasing computational complexity
and losing the global information in the ERP image. (c) Our proposed method, EDM, leverages the spherical camera model, rendering it
robust against distortions. Warp refers to results obtained by multiplying the warped image with the predicted certainty map, demonstrating
that our method yields more accurate dense matches.

1. Introduction
Omnidirectional images, also known as 360° images, provide significant advantages owing to their expansive fields
of view, offering more contextual information and versatility [12, 21, 38, 63, 67]. These spherical images enable a
comprehensive representation of environments, facilitating
a deeper understanding of spatial information. Their utility
extends to aiding robot navigation [40, 61] and autonomous
vehicle driving [43] by minimizing blind spots. 360° images also can be utilized in a diverse range of applications,
from creating immersive AR/VR experiences to practical
uses in interior design [1], tourism [48], and real estate photography [5]. Integrating omnidirectional images into virtual house tours allows customers to experience an immersive view, enabling them to fully engage themselves in the
service. Moreover, the adoption of omnidirectional images
contributes to more efficient data collection. By replacing
the need for multiple perspective images, omnidirectional
images can reduce both the cost and time associated with
data scanning. The large field of view provided by 360° images has also demonstrated superiority over narrower views
in 3D motion estimation [18, 27, 42].
Feature matching plays a critical role in numerous 3D
computer vision tasks, including mapping and localization. Traditionally, Structure from Motion (SfM) [49]

Abstract
We introduce the first learning-based dense matching algorithm, termed Equirectangular Projection-Oriented Dense
Kernelized Feature Matching (EDM), specifically designed
for omnidirectional images. Equirectangular projection
(ERP) images, with their large fields of view, are particularly suited for dense matching techniques that aim to
establish comprehensive correspondences across images.
However, ERP images are subject to significant distortions,
which we address by leveraging the spherical camera model
and geodesic flow refinement in the dense matching method.
To further mitigate these distortions, we propose spherical
positional embeddings based on 3D Cartesian coordinates
of the feature grid. Additionally, our method incorporates
bidirectional transformations between spherical and Cartesian coordinate systems during refinement, utilizing a unit
sphere to improve matching performance. We demonstrate
that our proposed method achieves notable performance enhancements, with improvements of +26.72 and +42.62 in
AUC@5° on the Matterport3D and Stanford2D3D datasets.
Project Page: https://jdk9405.github.io/EDM

6337

