This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RLAIF-V: Open-Source AI Feedback Leads to Super GPT-4V Trustworthiness
Tianyu Yu 1 Haoye Zhang 1 Qiming Li 3 Qixin Xu 1 Yuan Yao 2 *
Da Chen 1 Xiaoman Lu 1 Ganqu Cui 1 Yunkai Dang 1 Taiwen He 1
Xiaocheng Feng 3,5 Jun Song 4 Bo Zheng 4 Zhiyuan Liu 1∗ Tat-Seng Chua 2 Maosong Sun 1
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
NExT++ Lab, School of Computing, National University of Singapore
3
Harbin Institute of Technology 4 Taobao & Tmall Group of Alibaba 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
yiranytianyu@gmail.com
yaoyuanthu@gmail.com
RLAIF-V Code

RLAIF-V Dataset

Abstract

RLAIF-V Models

Traditional feedback learning for hallucination reduction
relies on labor-intensive manual labeling or expensive proprietary models. This leaves the community without foundational knowledge about how to build high-quality feedback with open-source MLLMs. In this work, we introduce RLAIF-V, a novel framework that aligns MLLMs in a
fully open-source paradigm. RLAIF-V maximally explores
open-source MLLMs from two perspectives, including highquality feedback data generation for preference learning
and self-feedback guidance for inference-time scaling. Extensive experiments on six benchmarks in both automatic
and human evaluation show that RLAIF-V substantially enhances the trustworthiness of models at both preference
learning and inference time. RLAIF-V 7B reduces object hallucination by 80.7% and overall hallucination by
33.7%. Remarkably, RLAIF-V 12B further reveals the
self-alignment potential of open-source MLLMs, where the
model can learn from feedback of itself to achieve super
GPT-4V trustworthiness.

preferences, reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) has been widely used and demonstrates substantial results [51, 61]. However, RLHF depends heavily on
labor-intensive human annotations and is consequently hard
to cover the widespread misalignment between model and
human preferences. Recently, reinforcement learning from
AI feedback (RLAIF), which uses the preference collected
from labeler models as a proxy of human preference, has
shown promising potential as an alternative to RLHF [22].

1. Introduction

However, current approaches face two challenges: (1)
Infeasible labeler requirement. Existing RLAIF methods,
demonstrated at the left top of Figure 1, rely on costly
proprietary models to distill feedback from [26, 69, 72].
More critically, this paradigm essentially distills the capability of proprietary models to provide a temporary solution
for bridging the performance gap. The community consequently lacks knowledge about how to build high-quality
feedback using open-source MLLM labelers of comparable capability, as demonstrated at the left bottom of Figure 1. Simply changing the labeler model from a proprietary model to a weaker open-source model leads to unsatisfactory feedback quality due to their limited capacity [5]. (2) Limited inference-time scaling. Inference-time
scaling has drawn great attention from the LLM community and shows promising results [41, 50]. Nevertheless,
recent works in MLLMs mainly focus on the preference
learning stage to utilize high-quality feedback [61, 67, 70]
while omitting the importance of feedback in the inference
stage. Besides, aimlessly scaling inference computation
budget can hardly contribute to the performance, since accurate feedback guidance plays an important role for effective inference-time scaling.

Recent advances in multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) mark a significant milestone in AI research [3, 9,
30–32, 60]. These models are trained on large-scale multimodal corpora and possess profound world knowledge,
showing remarkable capabilities in tackling diverse multimodal tasks [25, 36, 39]. However, it has been commonly noticed that MLLMs are prone to confidently generating incorrect content that deviates from human preferences [19, 51, 61, 71]. In order to align MLLMs with human

RLAIF-V addresses these challenges through two key
innovations: (1) For high-quality feedback generation, we

* Corresponding authors

19985

