This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

L-SWAG: Layer-Sample Wise Activation with Gradients information for
Zero-Shot NAS on Vision Transformers
Sofia Casarin1 , Sergio Escalera2,3 , Oswald Lanz1
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy
2
Computer Vision Center, Barcelona, Spain
3
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain

1

scasarin@unibz.it, sergio@maia.ub.es, lanz@inf.unibz.it

Abstract

learning world with high accuracy, NAS is not seen anymore as a naı̈ve tool for boosting performance. It finds important applicability in real-world scenarios with hardwareaware models requiring pruning, different resource constraints, and memory footprint optimization [27].
Despite its advantages, the major drawback of NAS usually resides in the computationally demanding search process. The first proposed multi-shot NAS methods involved
training multiple candidate networks, requiring up to 28
days on 800 GPUs [56]. Subsequent one-shot approaches
accelerated NAS by sharing candidate operations through
a super-network ([4, 5, 8, 12, 50, 52]). Weight-sharing
([6, 11, 17, 40]) further advanced by sharing also the parameters across different operations, improving memory efficiency. Although the differentiable process reduced optimization time to a few GPU hours for tasks like Cifar-10,
full training of the super-network is still required. Predictorbased methods remove the training of neural networks,
avoiding the main drawbacks of heavy time and GPU resource consumption. They achieve highly accurate performance estimation ([29, 32]), but still require training the
predictor [15, 44] over a NAS benchmark obtained through
a costly data collection step constituted of thousands of networks trained until convergence.
Zero-shot NAS methods therefore emerged with the
promise of fully removing the data collection step by characterizing Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) through proxy
metrics, an estimate of the performance of DNNs based
on heuristic and theoretical results. This paper focuses
on zero-shot NAS, which as pointed out in [27], brings
two major advantages: (i) time efficiency, as model training is eliminated, and (ii) interpretability, as the design
of a proxy metric is usually inspired by some theoretical
analysis of DNNs which helps in understanding the reason for their success. Since the first proposed metric [2],
many proxies have been introduced in the literature. They
usually characterize neural networks under three principles:

Training-free Neural Architecture Search (NAS) efficiently identifies high-performing neural networks using
zero-cost (ZC) proxies. Unlike multi-shot and one-shot NAS
approaches, ZC-NAS is both (i) time-efficient, eliminating
the need for model training, and (ii) interpretable, with
proxy designs often theoretically grounded. Despite rapid
developments in the field, current SOTA ZC proxies are typically constrained to well-established convolutional search
spaces. With the rise of Large Language Models shaping
the future of deep learning, this work extends ZC proxy applicability to Vision Transformers (ViTs). We present a new
benchmark using the Autoformer search space evaluated on
6 distinct tasks and propose Layer-Sample Wise Activation
with Gradients information (L-SWAG), a novel, generalizable metric that characterizes both convolutional and transformer architectures across 14 tasks. Additionally, previous
works highlighted how different proxies contain complementary information, motivating the need for a ML model to
identify useful combinations. To further enhance ZC-NAS,
we therefore introduce LIBRA-NAS (Low Information gain
and Bias Re-Alignment), a method that strategically combines proxies to best represent a specific benchmark. Integrated into the NAS search, LIBRA-NAS outperforms evolution and gradient-based NAS techniques by identifying an
architecture with a 17.0% test error on ImageNet1k in just
0.1 GPU days.

1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) optimizes neural networks for a given task and constraint replacing the costly
trial and error design process [56]. Over the course of the
years, it has gained attention for its ability to discover better
performing and more efficient neural networks compared
to hand-crafted ones [16, 29, 30, 37, 39, 45, 48]. With the
advent of Large Language Models (LLM)s ruling the deep

4441

