This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Saliuitl: Ensemble Salience Guided Recovery
of Adversarial Patches against CNNs
Mauricio Byrd Victorica, György Dán, Henrik Sandberg
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
{mbv, gyuri, hsan}@kth.se

Abstract
Adversarial patches are capable of misleading computer vision systems based on convolutional neural networks. Existing recovery methods suffer of at least one of three fundamental shortcomings: no information about the presence of patches in the scene, inability to efficiently handle noncontiguous patch attacks, and a strong reliance on
fixed saliency thresholds. We propose Saliuitl, a recovery
method independent of the number of patches and their
shape, which unlike prior works, explicitly detects patch
attacks before attempting recovery. In our approach, detection is based on the attributes of a binarized feature
map ensemble, which is generated by using an ensemble
of saliency thresholds. If an attack is detected, Saliuitl recovers clean predictions locating patches guided by an ensemble of binarized feature maps and inpainting them. We
evaluate Saliuitl on widely used object detection and image classification benchmarks from the adversarial patch
literature, and our results show that compared to recent
state-of-the-art defenses, Saliuitl achieves a recovery rate
up to 97.81 and 42.63 percentage points higher at the same
rate of lost predictions for image classification and object
detection, respectively. By design, Saliuitl has low computational complexity and is robust to adaptive white-box
attacks. Our code is available at https://github.com/
Saliuitl/Saliuitl/tree/main.

(a) Undefended

(b) PAD

(c) Obj. Seeker

(d) Saliuitl

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Undefended and recovered object detection outputs. Existing empirical (b) and certifiable (c) defenses struggle to balance
performance on attacked (top) and clean (bottom) images, unlike
Saliuitl (d).

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are arguably the
most widely used deep neural networks for computer vision tasks such as object detection and image classification [27]. Despite their remarkable performance, they are
vulnerable to various adversarial attacks [16]. Physically
realizable attacks are especially alarming, since they can be
added to a physical scene rather than digitally and directly
to a model’s input, and have been remarkably effective in
misleading CNN models [1, 2, 11, 14, 24, 36].

20360

Adversarial patches, commonly used to deceive computer vision models, stand out among physically realizable
attacks due to their effectiveness and ease of implementation. As a consequence, various methods have been proposed in recent years to defend CNN models against patch
attacks, aiming either at detecting the presence of an adversarial patch in the model’s input [3, 7, 17, 28, 32, 38, 39],
at recovering from the attack by removing (and potentially replacing) input regions deemed to contain an adversarial patch to suppress their effect on the model’s output [18, 22, 25, 26, 33, 35, 40–42], or at modifying the
model itself or its training process to improve robustness
to adversarial attacks [4, 5, 43, 44].
Among these three approaches, recovery methods have
the greatest promise, as they could enable the design of robust autonomous systems based on visual perception [15,
34]. Existing approaches suffer, however, from three major shortcomings. First, empirical defenses rely on fixed
saliency thresholds to either detect or localize adversarial
regions [18, 22, 25, 26, 33, 35, 42]. By determining an
adequate threshold on a certain input characteristic (e.g.,
entropy [35], semantic consistency [22, 42], hidden layer
activations [18]), these methods detect or localize adversarial regions as those that are above the threshold, referred
to as salient. The only methods that do not rely on fixed

