This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

h-Edit: Effective and Flexible Diffusion-Based Editing via Doob’s h-Transform
Toan Nguyen∗

Kien Do∗

Duc Kieu

Thin Nguyen

{k.nguyen, k.do, v.kieu, thin.nguyen}@deakin.edu.au
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2I2), Deakin University, Australia
∗
Equal contribution

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison between h-Edit and other training-free editing baselines. Our method achieves more accurate and faithful
edits than the baselines. Additional visualizations are provided in the Appendix.

Abstract
We introduce a theoretical framework for diffusionbased image editing by formulating it as a reverse-time
bridge modeling problem. This approach modifies the backward process of a pretrained diffusion model to construct a
bridge that converges to an implicit distribution associated
with the editing target at time 0. Building on this framework, we propose h-Edit, a novel editing method that utilizes Doob’s h-transform and Langevin Monte Carlo to decompose the update of an intermediate edited sample into
two components: a “reconstruction” term and an “editing”
term. This decomposition provides flexibility, allowing the
reconstruction term to be computed via existing inversion
techniques and enabling the combination of multiple editing terms to handle complex editing tasks. To our knowledge, h-Edit is the first training-free method capable of performing simultaneous text-guided and reward-model-based
editing. Extensive experiments, both quantitative and qualitative, show that h-Edit outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in terms of editing effectiveness and faithfulness.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [22, 62, 65] have established themselves
as a powerful class of generative models, achieving stateof-the-art performance in image generation [64]. When
combined with classifier-based [12] or classifier-free guidance [21], these models offer enhanced control, enabling
a wide range of applications including conditional generation [79, 80], image-to-image translation [8, 56], and image editing [19, 23, 44]. A prominent example is largescale text-guided diffusion models [47, 57] like Stable Diffusion (SD) [55], which have gained widespread popularity
for their ability to produce diverse high-quality images that
closely align with specified natural language descriptions.
However, leveraging pretrained text-guided diffusion
models for image editing presents significant challenges,
particularly in balancing effective editing with faithful
preservation of the unrelated content in the original image.
Moreover, combining text-guided editing with other forms
of editing to handle more complex requirements remains a
difficult task. Although recent advances in training-free image editing have been proposed [7, 19, 24, 27, 46, 70], most

28490

