This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Associative Transformer
*

*

Yuwei Sun1,2 , Hideya Ochiai3 , Zhirong Wu4 , Stephen Lin4 , Ryota Kanai1
1
Araya Research, 2 RIKEN AIP, 3 The University of Tokyo, 4 Microsoft Research

Abstract

neck. The bottleneck facilitates the processing of contentaddressable information using attention guided by contents
in the shared workspace [9, 10].
A bottleneck guides models to generalize in a manner
consistent with the underlying data distribution through inductive biases of sparsity [11, 12], resulting in superior performance. In this regard, the Coordination method [13] is
an initial attempt to assess the effectiveness of such a bottleneck in Transformers. Unfortunately, its design is parameter inefficient and often fails in more complex relational
reasoning tasks [14–20]. In this work, we aim to enhance
sparse attention capability of Transformers by leveraging
low-rank explicit memory to learn a diverse set of priors to
guide the attention. Furthermore, drawing inspiration from
associative memory based on Hebbian learning, we utilize
continuous Hopfield networks [21, 22] to reconstruct input
tokens from the explicit memory. The associative memory
enhances the effective association of sparsely attended historical inputs.
To this end, we propose Associative Transformer (AiT),
a sparse representation learner. AiT learns explicit memory for each attention layer to facilitate the extraction of localized features at different abstraction levels. The explicit
memory evolves into specialized priors through the bottleneck attention, with each focusing on a specific spatial relation of input tokens. We further propose a bottleneck attention balance loss to encourage diversity among the learned
priors. Furthermore, the acquired priors function as distinct
attractors within the associative memory of Hopfield networks, facilitating token reconstruction from memory. Extensive empirical results demonstrate that the emerging specialization of priors and the reconstruction within associative memory in AiT could significantly enhance parameter
efficiency and model performance across a broad spectrum
of tasks.
Overall, our main contributions are three-fold:
1) We propose the Associative Transformer (AiT) to
tackle inefficient sparse attention mechanisms in conventional Transformers, leveraging emerging specialized priors for guided bottleneck attention and token reconstruction
within associative memory (Section 3.3).
2) The learned priors function as attractors of Hopfield

Emerging from the pairwise attention in conventional
Transformers, there is a growing interest in sparse attention
mechanisms that align more closely with localized, contextual learning in the biological brain. Existing studies such
as the Coordination method employ iterative cross-attention
mechanisms with a bottleneck to enable the sparse association of inputs. However, these methods are parameter inefficient and fail in more complex relational reasoning tasks.
To this end, we propose Associative Transformer (AiT) to
enhance the association among sparsely attended input tokens, improving parameter efficiency and performance in
various vision tasks such as classification and relational
reasoning. AiT leverages a learnable explicit memory comprising specialized priors that guide bottleneck attentions to
facilitate the extraction of diverse localized tokens. Moreover, AiT employs an associative memory-based token reconstruction using a Hopfield energy function. The extensive empirical experiments demonstrate that AiT requires
significantly fewer parameters and attention layers outperforming a broad range of sparse Transformer models. Additionally, AiT outperforms the SOTA sparse Transformer
models including the Coordination method on the Sort-ofCLEVR dataset.

1. Introduction
Transformer models use pairwise attention to establish correlations among disparate segments of input information
[1, 2]. Emerging from the pair-wise attention, there is a
growing interest in leveraging sparse interactions for localized, contextual learning. This sparsity attribute has demonstrated advantages in enhancing learning performance and
efficiency [3, 4]. Sparse knowledge association can find
resonance with the neuroscientific grounding of the Global
Workspace Theory (GWT) [5–8]. GWT explains a fundamental cognitive architecture for working memory where
diverse specialized modules compete to write information
into a shared workspace through a communication bottle* Both authors contributed equally to the supervision of this work.
Corresponding author: Yuwei Sun (yuwei sun@araya.org).

4518

