This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Distractor-Aware Memory for Visual Object Tracking with SAM2
Jovana Videnovic∗ , Alan Lukezic∗ , Matej Kristan
Faculty of Computer and Information Science, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia
jovanavidenovic10@gmail.com, {alan.lukezic, matej.kristan}@fri.uni-lj.si

VOT2022: EAO

SAM2 output introspec on

Abstract
Memory-based trackers are video object segmentation
methods that form the target model by concatenating recently tracked frames into a memory buffer and localize
the target by attending the current image to the buffered
frames. While already achieving top performance on many
benchmarks, it was the recent release of SAM2 that placed
memory-based trackers into focus of the visual object tracking community. Nevertheless, modern trackers still struggle in the presence of distractors. We argue that a more
sophisticated memory model is required, and propose a
new distractor-aware memory model for SAM2 and an
introspection-based update strategy that jointly addresses
the segmentation accuracy as well as tracking robustness.
The resulting tracker is denoted as DAM4SAM. We also
propose a new distractor-distilled DiDi dataset to study the
distractor problem better. DAM4SAM outperforms SAM2.1
and related SAM memory extensions on seven benchmarks
and sets a solid new state-of-the-art on six of them. The
code and the new dataset are available on https://
github.com/jovanavidenovic/DAM4SAM .

Distractor detected!

0.753

0.692
+12%

0.673

+9%
VOT2022
winner

Predicted mask

Alterna ve mask

MS_AOT

+3%
SAM2.1

DAM4SAM

t
Target

Target

SAM2.1

t+T

and DAM4SAM

: Performance in presence of distractors

1. Introduction

Figure 1. DAM4SAM distractor-aware memory (DAM) update
is triggered by the divergence between the predicted and the alternative masks (top left). This resolves the visual ambiguity and
increases tracking robustness (bottom). DAM leads to a significant performance boost, setting a new state-of-the-art result on
VOT2022 (top-right).

General visual object tracking is a classical computer vision
problem that considers the localization of an arbitrary target
in the video, given a single supervised training example in
the first frame. The major source of tracking failures are socalled distractors, i.e., image regions that are difficult to distinguish from the tracked object, given the available target
model (see Figure 1). These can be nearby objects similar
to the tracked target (external distractors) or similar regions
on the object when tracking only a part of the object (internal distractors). When the target leaves and re-enters the
field of view, the external distractors become particularly
challenging.
Various approaches have been proposed to reduce the vi-

sual ambiguity caused by distractors. These include learning discriminative features [2, 5, 6, 10, 43] or explicitly
modeling the foreground-background by dedicated modules [9, 28, 29, 50]. An emerging paradigm, already positioned at the top of the major benchmarks [23–25], are
memory-based frameworks, which localize the target by
pixel association with the past tracked frames [8, 47, 51].
The memory-based methods construct the target model
by concatenating sequences of entire images with the segmented target, thus implicitly encoding the present distractors. Zhou et. al [51] argue that the visual redundancy in
the large memory leads to reduced localization capability
due to the nature of cross-attention. They show that limiting the memory to the most recent frames and temporally time-stamping them in fact improves tracking. This
paradigm was further verified by the recent tracking foun-

∗ The authors contributed equally.

24255

