This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Large Self-Supervised Models Bridge the Gap in Domain Adaptive
Object Detection
Marc-Antoine Lavoie
Anas Mahmoud
Steven L. Waslander
University of Toronto Robotics Institute
{marc-antoine.lavoie, anas.mahmoud, steven.waslander}@robotics.utias.utoronto.ca

Abstract
The current state-of-the-art methods in domain adaptive
object detection (DAOD) use Mean Teacher self-labelling,
where a teacher model, directly derived as an exponential
moving average of the student model, is used to generate
labels on the target domain which are then used to improve both models in a positive loop. This couples learning and generating labels on the target domain, and other
recent works also leverage the generated labels to add additional domain alignment losses. We believe this coupling
is brittle and excessively constrained: there is no guarantee that a student trained only on source data can generate accurate target domain labels and initiate the positive
feedback loop, and much better target domain labels can
likely be generated by using a large pretrained network that
has been exposed to much more data. Vision foundational
models are exactly such models, and they have shown impressive task generalization capabilities even when frozen.
We want to leverage these models for DAOD and introduce
DINO Teacher, which consists of two components. First,
we train a new labeller on source data only using a large
frozen DINOv2 backbone and show it generates more accurate labels than Mean Teacher. Next, we align the student’s
source and target image patch features with those from a
DINO encoder, driving source and target representations
closer to the generalizable DINO representation. We obtain
state-of-the-art performance on multiple DAOD datasets.
Code available at https://github.com/TRAILab/
DINO_Teacher.

Figure 1. Cosine similarity of patch feature from Cityscapes to
BDD100k.. We evaluate the similarity between the yellow star region in the Cityscapes image and all other regions in both images.
Compared to the EMA Teacher, DINOv2 generates semantically
stable features across domains, justifying the choice to use it for
feature alignment and as a frozen backbone for our labeller.

sue by transferring the performance of a network trained on
a labelled source dataset to an unlabelled target dataset [17].
In this work, we specifically consider the domain adaptive
object detection (DAOD) task.
Two common techniques for achieving domain adaptation are domain invariance and self-labelling. Domain invariance attempts to minimize the difference between features from the source and target domains, either by using an adversarial strategy with a domain discriminator
[6, 17, 22, 47, 54, 56] or by minimizing some distance
metric between domains [8, 26, 36]. Self-labelling methods instead attempt to generate their own pseudo-labels on
the target dataset. The most common framework for this
is Mean Teacher [10, 41, 53], where the labeller is directly

1. Introduction
Modern deep learning methods can achieve strong performance on a wide range of benchmark datasets for many
computer vision tasks, including classification, object detection, and segmentation. However, this performance often degrades significantly when tested on data outside the
training distribution. Domain adaptation addresses this is-

4692

