This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Kiss3DGen: Repurposing Image Diffusion Models for 3D Asset Generation
Jiantao Lin1∗ Xin Yang1,2∗ Meixi Chen1∗ Yingjie Xu1 Dongyu Yan1
Leyi Wu1 Xinli Xu1 Lie Xu3 Shunsi Zhang3 Ying-Cong Chen1,2†
1
HKUST(GZ) 2 HKUST 3 Guangzhou Quwan Network Technology
Hi, Ron! I’m practicing my new spell

“Kiss3DGen!”

🪄

Wow! They really
can‘t see me under
my invisible cloak

Morning Hermione!
What are you doing?

🪄

🪄“A Potter

Shiba dog!”
Woofwoof!

🪄“A red sofa” and “An owl”

🪄“A magic-ball!” and “A candle”

🪄“A magic book!”

Figure 1. A 3D Harry Potter scene built with Kiss3DGen. Our proposed framework, KISS3DGen, is a unified 3D generation
framework that facilitates various 3D generation tasks, including text-to-3D, image-to-3D, 3D enhancement, editing and more.
Specifically, most of the assets in the figure is generated from text (captioned with abbreviated text prompts) or image (marked by
dash lines) conditions, while the main characters (Hermoine, Ron and Potter) are created using a hybrid pipeline that combines
image-to-3D and text-guided mesh editing. Please zoom in for details and refer to our main paper for a more introduction.

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved great success in generating 2D images. However, the quality and generalizability of 3D content generation remain limited. Stateof-the-art methods often require large-scale 3D assets
for training, which are challenging to collect. In this
work, we introduce Kiss3DGen (Keep It Simple and
Straightforward in 3D Generation), an efficient framework for generating, editing, and enhancing 3D objects
by repurposing a well-trained 2D image diffusion model
for 3D generation. Specifically, we fine-tune a diffusion
model to generate ”3D Bundle Image”, a tiled representation composed of multi-view images and their corresponding normal maps. The normal maps are then
used to reconstruct a 3D mesh, and the multi-view images provide texture mapping, resulting in a complete
3D model. This simple method effectively transforms the
3D generation problem into a 2D image generation task,
maximizing the utilization of knowledge in pretrained

diffusion models. Furthermore, we demonstrate that our
Kiss3DGen model is compatible with various diffusion
model techniques, enabling advanced features such as
3D editing, mesh and texture enhancement, etc. Through
extensive experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach, showcasing its ability to produce highquality 3D models efficiently. Project page: https://ltto.github.io/Kiss3dgen.github.io.

1. Introduction
In recent years, generative models have significantly
advanced the field of 3D object generation, transforming computer vision and graphics. The rapid progress
of diffusion models led to remarkable improvements in
synthesizing highly realistic 2D images. These developments have opened new possibilities for creating complex 3D objects, essential for applications such as vir0

5870

This project is supported by Quwan Technology.

