This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SymDPO: Boosting In-Context Learning of Large Multimodal Models with
Symbol Demonstration Direct Preference Optimization
Hongrui Jia1,† Chaoya Jiang1,† Haiyang Xu2,∗ Wei Ye1,∗ Mengfan Dong1
Ming Yan2 Ji Zhang2 Fei Huang2 Shikun Zhang1
1
National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University
2
Alibaba Group
{jiahongrui, jiangchaoya, wye, zhangsk}@pku.edu.cn,
{shuofeng.xhy, fei.huang}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

Demostration

Question:
Who is on the right
in the picture?
Answer:
It’s Jerry.

As language models continue to scale, Large Language
Models (LLMs) have exhibited emerging capabilities in InContext Learning (ICL), enabling them to solve language
tasks by prefixing a few in-context demonstrations (ICDs)
as context. Inspired by these advancements, researchers
have extended these techniques to develop Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) with ICL capabilities. However, existing LMMs face a critical issue: they often fail to effectively leverage the visual context in multimodal demonstrations and instead simply follow textual patterns. This indicates that LMMs do not achieve effective alignment between
multimodal demonstrations and model outputs. To address
this problem, we propose Symbol Demonstration Direct
Preference Optimization (SymDPO). Specifically, SymDPO
aims to break the traditional paradigm of constructing multimodal demonstrations by using random symbols to replace text answers within instances. This forces the model
to carefully understand the demonstration images and establish a relationship between the images and the symbols
to answer questions correctly. We validate the effectiveness of this method on multiple benchmarks, demonstrating that with SymDPO, LMMs can more effectively understand the multimodal context within examples and utilize
this knowledge to answer questions better. Code is available at https://github.com/APiaoG/SymDPO.

Question:
Who is on the right
in the picture?
Answer:
It’s Tom.
Question

Question:
Who is on the right
in the picture?
Answer:

It’s Tom.

User

OpenFlamingo

It’s Jerry.
OpenFlamingo w/
SymDPO

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. In subfigure (a), an example of visual context overlook
is illustrated using OpenFlamingo as a case study. Here, OpenFlamingo [6] erroneously generates a response by solely following the textual cues in the demonstration, leading to an inaccurate
answer. After applying SymDPO to enhance alignment, OpenFlamingo with SymDPO successfully corrects its response, accurately addressing the question. Subfigure (b) further demonstrates
that for OpenFlamingo (OF), replacing images in the demonstration with blank placeholders (OF w/ blank) or omitting images
altogether (OF w/o image) surprisingly yields even better performance than the original setup. This result suggests a substantial
model dependency on textual context over visual information.

emplars provided as context, these models achieve impressive performance on various language tasks. This breakthrough in Natural Language Processing (NLP) has catalyzed research efforts to extend similar contextual learning capabilities to Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) [1,
4, 22, 23, 26, 29, 32, 33, 54–56]. The ultimate goal is
to enable LMMs to effectively learn from a limited number of image-text pairs for specific tasks without parameter
updates, thereby achieving few-shot learning in the multimodal domain.
To enhance the ICL capabilities of LMMs, prior works

1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs)
[3, 7, 10, 41, 47] has brought remarkable improvements in
their In-Context Learning (ICL) capabilities [15]. By leveraging In-Context Demonstrations (ICDs), a small set of ex† Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.

9361

