This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adapting Text-to-Image Generation with Feature Difference Instruction
for Generic Image Restoration
Chao Wang1,2∗ , Hehe Fan4 , Huichen Yang2 , Sarvnaz Karimi2 , Lina Yao2,3 , Yi Yang4†
1
ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
2
Data61, CSIRO
3
University of New South Wales
4
CCAI, Zhejiang University

Deraining

Dehazing

Desnowing Low-light Enhancement

Denoising

Motion Deblurring

Mixed Degradations

Figure 1. Our image restoration results. The proposed DiffRes introduces cross-modal understanding by leveraging multimodal visionlanguage models through an efficient adapter, without modifying the pre-trained diffusion model. This enables DiffRes to effectively
produce clean and sharp results over 10 image restoration tasks. For simplicity, we only show several representative tasks here.

Abstract
Diffusion-based Text-to-Image (T2I) models have demonstrated significant potential in image restoration. However,
existing models continue to grapple with challenges such
as complex training and prompt design. We introduce a
new perspective for improving image restoration by injecting knowledge from pretrained vision-language models into
current T2I models. We empirically show that the degradation and content representations in BLIP-2 can be linearly separated, providing promising degradation guidance
for image restoration. Specifically, the Feature Difference
Instruction (FDI) is first extracted by Q-Formers through
a simple subtraction operation based on reference image
pairs. Then, we propose a multi-scale FDI adapter to decouple the degradation style and corrupted artifacts, and
inject the styleflow exclusively into specific blocks through
adapter-tuning, thereby preventing noise interference and
eschewing the need for cumbersome weight retraining. In
this way, we can train various task-specific adapters according to different degradations, achieving rich detail enhancement in the restoration results. Furthermore, the proposed FDI adapters have attractive properties of practical value, such as composability and generalization abil-

ity for all-in-one and mixed-degradation restoration. Extensive experiments under various settings demonstrate that
our method has promising repairing quality over 10 image
restoration tasks and a wide range of other applications.

1. Introduction

23539

As a classical yet challenging Computer Vision (CV) task
for many real-world applications, image restoration aims
to recover high-quality images from degraded inputs by removing rain [19, 27, 63], haze [22, 64, 84], snow [10, 11,
42], low-light [36, 70, 90], etc. These traditional methods
typically concentrate on specific, pre-defined weather conditions. To improve model scalability, researchers have proposed all-in-one networks [12, 31, 38, 45, 77] capable of
handling different types of degradations through combined
model ensembles. However, such approaches often necessitate separate training for each distinct condition or struggle
with multiple degradations within a single image. Aiming at
this problem, several works [21, 79, 80] have been proposed
to restore images with mixed corruptions in a blind setting,
i.e., both the mixing degradation types as well as the mixing
mechanism are unknown. Nevertheless, these methods still

