This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BrepGiff: Lightweight Generation of Complex B-rep with 3D GAT Diffusion
Hao Guo1*

Xiaoshui Huang2*

Hao jiacheng3*

guoh0215@mail.nwpu.edu.cn

huangxiaoshui@sjtu.edu.cn

haojiacheng@email.ncu.edu.cn

Yunpeng Bai4

Hongping Gan1

Yilei Shi1 †

bai yunpeng99@u.nus.edu

ganhongping@nwpu.edu.cn

yilei shi@nwpu.edu.cn

1

Northwest Polytechnical University
3
Nanchang University

2

4

Shanghai Jiaotong University
National University of Singapore

Abstract
Despite advancements in Computer-Aided-Design (CAD)
generation, direct generation of complex Boundary Representation (B-rep) CAD models remains challenging. The
difficulty arises from the parametric nature of B-rep data,
complicating the encoding and generation of its geometric and topological information. In this paper, we introduce BrepGiff, a lightweight generation approach for highquality and complex B-rep based on 3D Graph Diffusion.
First, we transfer B-rep models into 3D graphs representation. Specifically, BrepGiff extracts and integrates topological and geometric features to construct a 3D graph where
nodes correspond to face centroids in 3D space, preserving
adjacency and degree information. Geometric features are
derived by sampling points in the UV domain and extracting face and edge features. BrepGiff then applies Graph
Attention Network (GAT) to enforce topological constraints
from local to global during the degree-guided diffusion process. With the 3D graph representation and diffusion process, BrepGiff significantly reduces the computational cost
and improves the quality, thus achieving lightweight generation of complex models. Experiments show that BrepGiff
can generate complex B-rep models (>100 faces) using only
2 RTX4090 GPUs, achieving state-of-the-art performance
in B-rep generation.

Figure 1. BrepGiff enables lightweight generation of complex Brep models by embedding B-rep models into 3D graphs and designing the diffusion process using Graph Attention Network.

1. Introduction

process. Existing methods often rely on sequences of commands [19, 28, 29] or Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG)
representations [27, 30, 42]. However, these formats have
limitations in fully capturing the detailed geometric and
topological information required for complex designs.
Boundary Representation (B-rep) emerges as a superior
format because it describes 3D models using parameterized
faces, edges, and vertices, encompassing both geometric
and topological information crucial for understanding the
model [31]. Despite its advantages, generating B-rep data
directly poses significant challenges due to the difficulties
in extracting and integrating topological and geometric features properly, as well as encoding parameterized models
into a learnable format. Some researchers explored stepby-step approaches that segment point clouds or distance
fields to generate B-rep models [11, 22, 23]. As the first
direct generation method, BrepGen [39] creates the entire
B-rep model in a single process, maintaining model details
with higher flexibility and efficiency. However, while it enhanced the quality of B-rep data generation, this method
used 2D tree to embed B-rep data, and primarily focused on

Computer-Aided Design (CAD) models are indispensable
for creating nearly all tangible industrial products, but designing CAD is labor-intensive and time-consuming, resulting extensive research into automating the CAD generation
* Equal contribution
†Corresponding author

26587

