This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffPortrait360: Consistent Portrait Diffusion for 360 View Synthesis
Yuming Gu1,2 , Phong Tran2 , Yujian Zheng2 , Hongyi Xu3 , Heyuan Li4 , Adilbek Karmanov2 , Hao Li2,5
1
University of Southern California, 2 MBZUAI, 3 ByteDance Inc.
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, 5 Pinscreen Inc.
https://freedomgu.github.io/DiffPortrait360
yuminggu@usc.edu, {the.tran, yujian.zheng, adilbek.karmanov}@mbzuai.ac.ae
heyuanli@link.cuhk.edu.cn, hao@hao-li.com

Reference

Generated Views

Reference

Generated Views

Figure 1. Our DiffPortrait360 enables 360◦ view-consistent full-head image synthesis. It is universally effective across a diverse range of
facial portraits, allowing for the creation of 3D-aware head portraits from single-view images.

Abstract
Generating high-quality 360-degree views of human heads
from single-view images is essential for enabling accessible immersive telepresence applications and scalable personalized content creation. While cutting-edge methods for
full head generation are limited to modeling realistic human heads, the latest diffusion-based approaches for styleomniscient head synthesis can produce only frontal views
and struggle with view consistency, preventing their conversion into true 3D models for rendering from arbitrary
angles. We introduce a novel approach that generates fully
consistent 360-degree head views, accommodating human,
stylized, and anthropomorphic forms, including accessories
like glasses and hats. Our method builds on the DiffPortrait3D framework, incorporating a custom ControlNet for
back-of-head detail generation and a dual appearance module to ensure global front-back consistency. By training on

continuous view sequences and integrating a back reference
image, our approach achieves robust, locally continuous
view synthesis. Our model can be used to produce highquality neural radiance fields (NeRFs) for real-time, freeviewpoint rendering, outperforming state-of-the-art methods in object synthesis and 360-degree head generation for
very challenging input portraits.

1. Introduction

26263

In game, film, and animation production, CG characters are
central to the content creation pipeline, meticulously designed with the right balance of realism and stylization to
align with the narrative. Multi-view stereo systems and 3D
scanners are commonly used to streamline the tedious manual process of creating realistic human characters. However, stylized characters are still often 3D modeled from
scratch. Alongside the growing demand for efficient and

