This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PosterMaker: Towards High-Quality Product Poster Generation
with Accurate Text Rendering
Yifan Gao1,2∗† , Zihang Lin2∗ , Chuanbin Liu1‡ , Min Zhou2
Tiezheng Ge2 , Bo Zheng2 , Hongtao Xie1
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Taobao & Tmall Group of Alibaba
eafn@mail.ustc.edu.cn

{liucb92, htxie}@ustc.edu.cn

{linzihang.lzh, yunqi.zm, tiezheng.gtz, bozheng}@alibaba-inc.com
Project page: https://poster-maker.github.io
Previous：two stage
Text
Poster
Subject

Prompt

abc深海⻥油

!"#$%&'

The box of fish oil supplements
is placed on a wooden table,
with a background of a serene
ocean and clear sky, symbolizing
purity and the natural source of
the product

!"#$
迷你颗粒

abc deep-sea fish oil
Support the heart
Mini particles

User Input

Sence Generation

Text Rendering

Ours: end to end

护肤美颜贵妇乳

The subject rests on a smooth,
dark wooden table, surrounded
by a few scattered leaves and
delicate flowers, with a serene
garden scene complete with
blooming flowers and lush
greenery in the background.

%&'(

⽀持⼼脏

99.9%纯度玻⾊因

PosterMaker

(a)

User Input

Skincare and Beauty Lady's Milk
99.9% purity Bose Einstein

(b)

End2End Generation

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Definition of the advertising product poster generation task. The input includes the prompt, subject image, and the texts to
be rendered with their layouts. The output is the poster image. (b) The comparison of our method with the previous method. PosterMaker
generates posters end-to-end, while previous methods first generate poster backgrounds and then render texts. (c) Visualization results
demonstrate that PosterMaker can generate harmonious and aesthetically pleasing posters with accurate texts and maintain subject fidelity.

Abstract

ating such posters using modern image generation methods is valuable, while the main challenge lies in accurately
rendering text, especially for complex writing systems like
Chinese, which contains over 10,000 individual characters.
In this work, we identify the key to precise text rendering

Product posters, which integrate subject, scene, and text,
are crucial promotional tools for attracting customers. Cre∗ Equal contribution. ‡ Corresponding author.

† Work done during the internship at Alibaba Group.

8083

