This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Once-Tuning-Multiple-Variants:
Tuning Once and Expanded as Multiple Vision-Language Model Variants
Chong Yu1
Tao Chen2,*
Zhongxue Gan1, *
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
2
School for Information Science and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
1

21110860050@m.fudan.edu.cn; {eetchen, ganzhongxue}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Vision-language model (VLM) is one of the most important
models for multi-modal tasks. Real industrial applications
often meet the challenge of adapting VLMs to different scenarios, such as varying hardware platforms or performance
requirements. Traditional methods involve training or finetuning to adapt multiple unique VLMs or using model compression techniques to create multiple compact models.
These approaches are complex and resource-intensive. This
paper introduces a novel paradigm called Once-TuningMultiple-Variants (OTMV). OTMV requires only a single
tuning process to inject dynamic weight expansion capacity
into the original VLM structure. This tuned VLM can then
be expanded into multiple variants tailored for different scenarios in inference. The tuning mechanism of OTMV is inspired by the mathematical series expansion theorem, which
helps to reduce the parameter size and memory requirements while maintaining accuracy for VLM. Experiment results show that OTMV-tuned models achieve comparable
accuracy to baseline VLMs across various visual-language
tasks. The experiments also demonstrate the dynamic expansion capability of OTMV-tuned VLMs, outperforming
traditional model compression and adaptation techniques
in terms of accuracy and efficiency.

Figure 1. Comparison: Once-Tuning-Multiple-Variants (OTMV)
(Left) only produces a single instance, while the typical manners
(Right) all produce multiple different instances to meet the requirements of different scenarios.

1. Introduction

critical modalities, vision and language, achieves considerable progress. These vision-language models [3, 4, 30, 53]
jointly process information from these two modalities and
uniformly utilize them to fulfill the complex tasks [13]. For
instance, visual question answering [1] provides an image
and the corresponding question as models’ input and requires the model to give the correct answer.
In real-world applications, we always need to adapt the
VLM model to different scenarios [30]. For example, we
want to deploy the VLM model to different hardware platforms with quite different hardware features or software
stacks. Another example is even deploying the VLM model
on the same specific platform; we still want to adjust the
VLM model itself to meet the different performance requirements in latency-sensitive or throughput-sensitive use
cases. The typical manner is using multiple different VLM
models to meet the requirements of different scenarios, respectively. Multiple different VLM models can be obtained
using two tuning paradigms. One tuning paradigm introduces the differences in the training process, either in the

Deep neural networks have been proven successful in many
mono-modal tasks, both in the vision domain (such as image classification [18, 33], object detection [42, 60], and
segmentation [27, 45]) and in the language domain (such
as summarization [17], machine translation [24], question
answering [34], information extraction and retrieval [32]).
Based on these foundational mono-modal capacities, prior
arts started to explore the potential of deep neural models on multi-modal tasks [20]. The combination of two
* Tao Chen and Zhongxue Gan are corresponding authors.

14712

