This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mitigating Object Hallucinations in Large Vision-Language Models with
Assembly of Global and Local Attention
Wenbin An1,2 Feng Tian1,2 * Sicong Leng3 Jiahao Nie3 Haonan Lin1,2
Qianying Wang4 * Ping Chen5 Xiaoqin Zhang6 Shijian Lu3 *
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Analytics
3
Nanyang Technological University 4 Lenovo Research
5
University of Massachusetts Boston 6 Zhejiang University of Technology
{wenbinan,linhaonan}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, fengtian@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, wangqya@lenovo.com
{jiahao007,sicong001}@e.ntu.edu.sg, Ping.Chen@umb.edu, shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg
90

LLaVA

88

LLaVA+AGLA

Despite great success across various multimodal tasks,
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) often encounter
object hallucinations with generated textual responses being inconsistent with the actual objects in images. We examine different LVLMs and pinpoint that one root cause
of object hallucinations lies with deficient attention on discriminative image features. Specifically, LVLMs often predominantly attend to prompt-irrelevant global features instead of prompt-relevant local features, undermining their
visual grounding capacity and leading to object hallucinations. We propose Assembly of Global and Local Attention (AGLA), a training-free and plug-and-play approach
that mitigates hallucinations by assembling global features for response generation and local features for visual
discrimination simultaneously. Specifically, we introduce
an image-prompt matching scheme that captures promptrelevant local features from images, leading to an augmented view of the input image where prompt-relevant content is highlighted while irrelevant distractions are suppressed. Hallucinations can thus be mitigated with a calibrated logit distribution that is from generative global features of the original image and discriminative local features of the augmented image. Extensive experiments show
the superiority of AGLA in LVLM hallucination mitigation, demonstrating its wide applicability across both discriminative and generative tasks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Lackel/AGLA.

86

InstructBLIP

84

InstructBLIP+AGLA

1. Introduction
By extending Large Language Models [6, 9, 12, 60, 63]
into the visual domain, Large Vision-Language Models
(LVLMs) [7, 15, 21, 34, 45, 72, 80] have demonstrated
impressive performance across various tasks such as image captioning [36, 67] and visual question answering [5,
* Corresponding author

F1 Score

Abstract

82
80
78
76
74
72
70
Random

Popular

Adversarial

Figure 1. Efficacy of AGLA under different settings of the POPE
dataset [40]. A lower F1 score means a higher hallucination rate.

30, 64]. Despite their remarkable success, LVLMs are
still facing several challenges that limit their reliability and
applicability in various vision-language tasks. In particular, one prominent challenge lies with object hallucinations [16, 33, 44, 46, 47, 81] where the LVLM generated
textual responses are inconsistent with the actual objects in
the input images [23, 40].
Several studies have explored the underlying cause of
object hallucinations in LVLMs, leading to different findings such as statistical pre-training bias [2, 3, 22], overreliance on parametric knowledge [24, 31, 33, 69, 77], biased feature learning [26, 74, 81], etc. Despite these efforts, we conjecture that object hallucinations stem from
certain attention deficiency toward images, where LVLMs
predominantly attend to global image features while failing to capture prompt-relevant local features. To verify this
hypothesis, we examine the weights of LVLM self-attention
toward image features while LVLMs respond to text queries
about different objects. As the first row of Fig. 2 shows, the
weights of LVLM self-attention are dominated by certain
global features and present similar patterns regardless of the
queried objects being present or absent in the image. This
study demonstrates how the attention deficiency in LVLMs
causes the ignorance of prompt-relevant object features in
images [29] and how it impairs LVLMs’ visual grounding

29915

