This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AFL: A Single-Round Analytic Approach for Federated Learning with
Pre-trained Models
Run He1 , Kai Tong1 , Di Fang1 , Han Sun2,3 , Ziqian Zeng1 , Haoran Li4 ,
Tianyi Chen5 , Huiping Zhuang1∗
1
South China University of Technology 2 Tsinghua University
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 5 Microsoft
∗

corresponding: hpzhuang@scut.edu.cn

Abstract

among clients over multiple rounds of training. The objective
is to achieve convergence and approximate its joint-training
counterpart, where all clients’ data are accessible in a single
location. To accomplish this, many contributions have been
made. One widely recognized method is FedAvg [24]. Relying on a large number of aggregation rounds, the FedAvg
employs a simple yet effective weight averaging technique
across local clients. Building upon this, various methods
have been proposed (e.g., the FedProx [17] and the FedNova
[35]), each with its own speciﬁc focus within the ﬁeld of FL.

In this paper, we introduce analytic federated learning (AFL),
a new training paradigm that brings analytical (i.e., closedform) solutions to the federated learning (FL) with pretrained models. Our AFL draws inspiration from analytic
learning—a gradient-free technique that trains neural networks with analytical solutions in one epoch. In the local
client training stage, the AFL facilitates a one-epoch training, eliminating the necessity for multi-epoch updates. In
the aggregation stage, we derive an absolute aggregation
(AA) law. This AA law allows a single-round aggregation,
reducing heavy communication overhead and achieving fast
convergence by removing the need for multiple aggregation
rounds. More importantly, the AFL exhibits a property that
invariance to data partitioning, meaning that regardless of
how the full dataset is distributed among clients, the aggregated result remains identical. This could spawn various
potentials, such as data heterogeneity invariance and clientnumber invariance. We conduct experiments across various
FL settings including extremely non-IID ones, and scenarios
with a large number of clients (e.g., ≥ 1000). In all these
settings, our AFL constantly performs competitively while existing FL techniques encounter various obstacles. Our codes
are available at https://github.com/ZHUANGHP/
Analytic-federated-learning.

However, training a model from scratch via FL can be
computationally intensive and demanding in terms of communication bandwidth, especially with large models and
numerous participating clients. Several efforts have explored
utilizing pre-trained models to mitigate these challenges
[23, 45]. Typically, this involves freezing the backbone and
only updating and sharing lightweight parameters, such as
prototypes [29, 30] or prompts [7, 40], to reduce the substantial training costs.
Although leveraging pre-trained models can circumvent
the high costs associated with training backbones from
scratch, existing FL techniques with pre-trained models are
primarily based on a gradient-based iterative approach, necessitating iterative optimization on each client and multi-round
aggregation across clients. The gradient-based optimization
used in the existing FL faces various challenges and imposes
several constraints. The faced challenges include, but are not
limited to: 1) Data heterogeneity, where the data distribution in each client is not independently identical (non-IID),
even with mutually exclusive data categories across different
clients (i.e., pathological distribution), 2) Large client number, where the aggregation involving a signiﬁcant number
of clients (i.e., ≥ 1000) can lead to substantial performance
degradation in FL systems as the client count increases [16],
3) Slow convergence: where FL methods may struggle to
converge within limited communication rounds, especially

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [24] aims to collectively train a machine learning model over data silos by aggregating their individual trained weights, while preserving the privacy of their
source data. This training paradigm has received high popularity, particularly in sensitive domains where data privacy is
crucial, such as in banks [27, 41] and hospitals [11, 13].
Conventional FL techniques rely on weight aggregation

4988

