This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SketchAgent: Language-Driven Sequential Sketch Generation
Yael Vinker1 Tamar Rott Shaham1 Kristine Zheng2 Alex Zhao1 Judith E Fan2 Antonio Torralba1
1

2

MIT

{yaelvink,tamarott,alexzhao,torralba}@mit.edu

Stanford University

{jefan,kxzheng}@stanford.edu

https://sketch-agent.csail.mit.edu/

   
  

“Butteﬂy”

“Taj Mahal”


  












 


“Circuit Diagram”

“Neural Network”

Figure 1. SketchAgent leverages an off-the-shelf multimodal LLM to facilitate language-driven, sequential sketch generation through an
intuitive sketching language. It can sketch diverse concepts, engage in interactive sketching with humans, and edit content via chat.

Abstract
Sketching serves as a versatile tool for externalizing
ideas, enabling rapid exploration and visual communication that spans various disciplines. While artificial systems
have driven substantial advances in content creation and
human-computer interaction, capturing the dynamic and
abstract nature of human sketching remains challenging. In
this work, we introduce SketchAgent, a language-driven, sequential sketch generation method that enables users to create, modify, and refine sketches through dynamic, conversational interactions. Our approach requires no training or
fine-tuning. Instead, we leverage the sequential nature and
rich prior knowledge of off-the-shelf multimodal large language models (LLMs). We present an intuitive sketching
language, introduced to the model through in-context examples, enabling it to “draw” using string-based actions.
These are processed into vector graphics and then rendered
to create a sketch on a pixel canvas, which can be accessed
again for further tasks. By drawing stroke by stroke, our
agent captures the evolving, dynamic qualities intrinsic to
sketching. We demonstrate that SketchAgent can generate
sketches from diverse prompts, engage in dialogue-driven
drawing, and collaborate meaningfully with human users.

1. Introduction
Sketching is a powerful tool for distilling ideas into their
simplest form. Its fluid and spontaneous nature makes
sketching a uniquely versatile tool for visualization, rapid
ideation, and communication across cultures, generations,
and disciplines [26, 102]. For example, designers use
sketches to explore new ideas [39, 103], scientists employ
them to formulate problems [48, 72], and children engage
in sketching to learn and express themselves [27, 28] (see
Fig. 2). Artificial systems, in principle, have the potential
to support and enhance human creativity, problem-solving,
and visual expression through sketching, adapting flexibly
to their exploratory nature [22, 98, 122].
Traditionally, sketch generation methods rely on humandrawn datasets to train generative models [5, 6, 16, 36, 42,
59]. However, fully capturing the diversity of sketches
within datasets remains challenging [26], limiting these
methods in both scale and diversity. Recent advancements in vision-language models, such as CLIP [78] and
text-to-image diffusion [82], have enabled sketch generation methods that reduce reliance on human-drawn datasets
[29, 46, 105]. These methods leverage pretrained model
guidance and differentiable rendering [58] to optimize parametric curves, creating sketches that go beyond predefined
styles and categories.

23355

