This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InsightEdit: Towards Better Instruction Following for Image Editing
Yingjing Xu1,2 *, Jie Kong1 *†, Jiazhi Wang1 , Xiao Pan2 , Bo Lin2‡, Qiang Liu1
1

01.AI, 2 Zhejiang University

{poppyxu, xiaopan, rainbowlin}@zju.edu.cn, {kongjie, wangjiazhi, liuqiang}@01.ai

Abstract

explore using MLLM to comprehend instructions, thereby
enhancing the ability to cope with complex editing
tasks. However, two challenges still remain: (i) Lack of
high-quality datasets. As illustrated in Table 1, current
datasets suffer from low resolution, poor visual quality and
background consistency, and overly simplistic, templatebased instructions. Specifically, most datasets rely on
Prompt2Prompt [10] method, which struggles to achieve
precise control over the generated images and fails to
maintain consistency in unedited regions. These limitations
hinder the image editing model’s capability in both complex instruction following and high-fidelity target image
generation. (ii) Lack of rich image condition. Current
methods primarily use the CLIP text encoder to provide
conditions, yet it often exhibits limited ability to understand
the instructions. Some approaches further leverage the
more advanced MLLM to better comprehend instructions.
However, they still mainly focus on understanding instructions at the textual level, while neglecting to capture
the rich visual semantics of the image, therefore showing
weak performance in complex instruction following and
maintaining background consistency.
To address the dataset issue, we propose an automated
data construction pipeline to generate editing pairs with
complex instructions and strong background consistency.
Leveraging the perceptive capabilities of MLLM, our approach extracts detailed object information from highresolution images and utilizes an advanced mask-based
editing model to produce realistic and controllable edits.
Using this method, we introduce AdvancedEdit Dataset, a
comprehensive collection comprising over 2,500,000 editing pairs with high visual quality, complex instructions, and
good background consistency.
To address the lack of rich image condition, we employ
a two-stream bridging mechanism to integrate both highlevel textual and rich visual information into the denoising
process of the diffusion model. This interaction effectively
extracts the conditional information, enabling precise and
controllable image editing.
Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on

In this paper, we focus on the task of instruction-based image editing. Previous works like InstructPix2Pix, InstructDiffusion, and SmartEdit have explored end-to-end editing. However, two limitations still remain: First, existing datasets suffer from low resolution, poor background
consistency, and overly simplistic instructions. Second,
current approaches mainly condition on the text while the
rich image information is underexplored, therefore inferior in complex instruction following and maintaining background consistency. Targeting these issues, we first curated
the AdvancedEdit dataset using a novel data construction
pipeline, formulating a large-scale dataset with high visual
quality, complex instructions, and good background consistency. Then, to further inject the rich image information, we introduce a two-stream bridging mechanism utilizing both the textual and visual features reasoned by the
powerful Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLM) to
guide the image editing process more precisely. Extensive results demonstrate that our approach, InsightEdit,
achieves state-of-the-art performance, excelling in complex
instruction following and maintaining high background
consistency with the original image. The project page is
https://poppyxu.github.io/InsightEdit web/.

1. Introduction
Image editing involves altering an image’s appearance,
structure, or content, encompassing a range of changes from
subtle adjustments to major transformations [13]. It has
witnessed significant advancements in image editing tasks
alongside the development of diffusion models [2, 4, 9, 16,
31], leading to impressive results.
Existing works like InstructPix2Pix [2], MagicBrush [39], and InstructDiffusion [9] have investigated
end-to-end image editing. Some recent efforts [8, 14]
* Equal Contribution
† Primary Corresponding author.
‡ Co-Corresponding author.

2694

