This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving the Training of Data-Efficient GANs via
Quality Aware Dynamic Discriminator Rejection Sampling
Zhaoyu Zhang1 , Yang Hua1 , Guanxiong Sun2 , Hui Wang1 , Seán McLoone1
1
2
Queen’s University Belfast
Huawei UKRD
{zzhang55,Y.Hua,gsun02,h.wang,s.mcloone}@qub.ac.uk

Abstract
Data-Efficient Generative Adversarial Nets (DE-GANs)
have become more and more popular in recent years. Existing methods apply data augmentation, noise injection and
pre-trained models to maximumly increase the number of
training samples thus improving the training of DE-GANs.
However, none of these methods considers the sample quality during training, which can also significantly influence
the training of DE-GANs. Focusing on sample quality during training, in this paper, we are the first to incorporate discriminator rejection sampling (DRS) into the training process and introduce a novel method, called quality aware dynamic discriminator rejection sampling (QADDRS). Specifically, QADDRS consists of two steps: (1) the sample quality aware step, which aims to obtain the sorted critic scores,
i.e., the ordered discriminator outputs, on real/fake samples in the current training stage; (2) the dynamic rejection step that obtains dynamic rejection number N , where
N is controlled by the overfitting degree of discriminator
(D) during training. When updating the parameters of D,
the N high critic score real samples and the N low critic
score fake samples in the minibatch are rejected dynamically based on the overfitting degree of D. As a result, QADDRS can avoid D becoming overly confident in distinguishing both real and fake samples, thereby alleviating the overfitting of D issue during training. Extensive experiments
on several datasets demonstrate that integrating QADDRS
into different DE-GANs can achieve better performance
and deliver state-of-the-art results. Codes are available at
https://github.com/zzhang05/QADDRS.

Figure 1. Comparison of discriminator outputs on both real and
fake samples with StyleGAN2 and StyleGAN2 + QADDRS using
the 100-shot Obama dataset. Applying QADDRS to StyleGAN2
can effectively prevent D from being overly confident in distinguishing both real and fake samples, thereby alleviating the overfitting of D issue.

1. Introduction

to collect and clean in certain domains. As a result, dataefficient GANs (DE-GANs) [28, 38, 39] have garnered significant attention.
Recent studies have applied techniques such as data augmentation [8, 9, 19, 22, 66], noise injection [55, 63] and
pre-trained models [25, 44] to improve the DE-GANs training. All of these methods aim to maximumly increase the
number of training samples under data-efficient scenarios.
However, none of these methods considers the sample quality during training, which can also significantly influence
the DE-GANs training. For instance, as pointed out in several existing approaches [22, 55, 64], the highly undesirable
quality samples produced by data augmentation or noise injection can be detrimental to DE-GANs training.
Focusing on sample quality during training, in this paper, we are the first to introduce discriminator rejection
sampling (DRS) [5] into the training process and propose
a novel method, termed quality aware dynamic discrimina-

Over the past decade, Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs)
[12] have demonstrated impressive performance in synthesizing images and videos [20, 21, 23, 59, 65]. However, this
success heavily depends on access to large-scale datasets,
which can be costly, time-consuming, and even impractical

30682

