This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SuperLightNet: Lightweight Parameter Aggregation Network for Multimodal
Brain Tumor Segmentation

1

Feng Yu1,2,3 Jiacheng Cao1 Li Liu1 Minghua Jiang1,3,†
Wuhan Textile University, China 2 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Engineering Research Center of Hubei Province for Clothing Information, China

Abstract

both time-consuming and labor-intensive. It is also prone to
subjective factors, leading to inconsistent segmentation results. Therefore, automated MRI brain tumor segmentation
methods have garnered widespread attention.

Multimodal 3D segmentation involves a significant number
of 3D convolution operations, which requires substantial
computational resources and high-performance computing
devices in MRI multimodal brain tumor segmentation. The
key challenge in multimodal 3D segmentation is how to minimize network computational load while maintaining high
accuracy. To address the issue, a novel lightweight parameter aggregation network (SuperLightNet) is proposed to realize the efficient encoder and decoder for the high accurate
and low computation. A random multiview drop encoder
is designed to learn the spatial structure of multimodal
images through a random multi-view approach for solving the high computational time complexity that has arisen
in recent years with methods relying on transformers and
Mamba. A learnable residual skip decoder is designed to
incorporate learnable residual and group skip weights for
addressing the reduced computational efficiency caused by
the use of overly heavy convolution and deconvolution decoders. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
method achieves a leading reduction in parameter count
by 95.59%, the 96.78% improvement in computational efficiency, the 96.86% enhancement in memory access performance, and the average performance gain of 0.21%
on the BraTS2019 and BraTS2021 datasets in comparison with the state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/WTU-MIS-Laboratory/SuperLightNet.

Figure 1. (a) and (b) illustrate the statistical results of lightweight
and segmentation performance for BraTS2019 and BraTS2021,
respectively. The X-axis represents the number of parameters
(smaller is better), and the Y-axis represents the DSC (higher is
better). The color depth gradient from light to dark indicates the
TFlops(lighter is better).

Deep learning methods have achieved significant success
in the field of brain tumor segmentation. The Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) are widely used in medical image
segmentation, such as UNet [23], UNet++ [33], V-Net [21],
DeepMedic [15], HighRes3DNet [16], and nnUnet [14].
These networks are capable of efficiently extracting and
processing complex features from medical images. Researchers have progressed from using 2D convolutions to
3D convolutions and from shallow to deep multimodal fusion methods, and there is increasing focus on network architectures that emphasize automated processing and adaptive fusion.
To enhance UNet’s ability to grasp global information,
researches have explored incorporating Transformer [27]
architectures, utilizing self-attention mechanisms to capture global context by treating images as sequences of adjacent patches. While this approach has proven effective,
Transformer-based methods introduce quadratic complexity

1. Introduction
Brain tumors are a serious type of neurological disease that
can lead to severe neurological dysfunction and even be lifethreatening. The choice of treatment varies depending on
the type, size, and location of the tumor. Accurate diagnosis and segmentation are crucial for developing an effective
treatment plan. Traditional brain tumor segmentation typically relies on manual annotation by radiologists, which is
† Corresponding author

5197

