This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VoteFlow: Enforcing Local Rigidity in Self-Supervised Scene Flow
Yancong Lin∗,1,2 , Shiming Wang∗,1 , Liangliang Nan1 , Julian Kooij1 and Holger Caesar1
1 TU Delft
2 ETH Zurich

Abstract

Motion Votes
x1
x1

1. Introduction
Motion perception is essential for autonomous vehicles operating in dynamic environments. A crucial task in this domain, known as scene flow estimation, involves detecting
per-point motion across consecutive LiDAR scans collected
within short temporal intervals, e.g., 0.1 seconds given a
10Hz LiDAR scanner [3, 7, 29, 40]. Scene flow estimation has been the cornerstone in self-supervised scene understanding, which offers a way to interpret dynamic scenes
without relying on extensively labeled data [11, 22, 34, 45,
49]. For example, [22] uses scene flow to associate moving

x6
x2
x1
x1
x0

...

Scene flow estimation aims to recover per-point motion from
two adjacent LiDAR scans. However, in real-world applications such as autonomous driving, points rarely move independently of others, especially for nearby points belonging
to the same object, which often share the same motion. Incorporating this locally rigid motion constraint has been
a key challenge in self-supervised scene flow estimation,
which is often addressed by post-processing or appending
extra regularization. While these approaches are able to improve the rigidity of predicted flows, they lack an architectural inductive bias for local rigidity within the model structure, leading to suboptimal learning efficiency and inferior
performance. In contrast, we enforce local rigidity with a
lightweight add-on module in neural network design, enabling end-to-end learning. We design a discretized voting
space that accommodates all possible translations and then
identify the one shared by nearby points by differentiable
voting. Additionally, to ensure computational efficiency, we
operate on pillars rather than points and learn representative features for voting per pillar. We plug the Voting
Module into popular model designs and evaluate its benefit
on Argoverse 2 and Waymo datasets. We outperform baseline works with only marginal compute overhead. Code is
available at https://github.com/tudelft-iv/
VoteFlow.

(a) Translation calculation

(b) Voting

(c) Scene ﬂow

Figure 1. Voting for identifying shared motion. We take inspiration from motion rigidity and identify a motion shared by the
majority via voting. We design a discrete voting space that encapsulates all possible translations that might occur within time
∆t. For a given star ☀ at time t, we calculate the displacements
between itself and its neighbors at time t + ∆t and cast votes,
defined by the cosine feature similarity between ☀ and , to corresponding bins in the voting space. We accumulate votes from
multiple spatially nearby points ☀ at time t. The voting result
indicates the likelihood of a motion shared by nearby points. Our
differentiable voting is a light-weight add-on module compatible
with popular model designs in scene flow estimation. In practice,
voting takes pillars as input rather than individual points, thus reducing the computation substantially.

●

●

objects over time and calculate object bounding boxes without any annotation cost. The generated object proposals
provide valuable pseudo labels for subsequent model training. This strategy, also used in [6, 34, 45], leverages the
low-cost nature of data collection to scale efficiently and
thus generates large quantities of pseudo labels. Therefore,
there is a perceivable demand for a robust scene flow estimator in autonomous driving.
Scene flow methods typically assume motion rigidity,
i.e. nearby points on rigid objects share the same motion.
State-of-the-art methods exploit this assumption for selfsupervised training through extra loss functions or regularizers [43, 51], or hard-coded post-processing [5]. However,
these models lack the ability to encode motion rigidity by
design. ICP-Flow* [25] enforces motion rigidity by using
Iterative Closest Point (ICP) to align pre-clustered points.
However, this can produce substantial errors if the given
* Winner of the Argoverse Scene Flow Challenge (unsupervised track)
at CVPR 2024.

* Equal contribution. Author ordering determined by coin flip.

17155

