This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Do ImageNet-trained models learn shortcuts?
The impact of frequency shortcuts on generalization
Shunxin Wang

Raymond Veldhuis Nicola Strisciuglio
University of Twente

{s.wang-2, r.n.j.veldhuis, n.strisciuglio}@utwente.nl

Table 1. Our method needs less computation times compared
to [39] (using ResNet18 on an NVIDIA A40 GPU). Computational
time of [39] on ImageNet-1k is estimated from their ImageNet10 experiments, considering that it increases proportionally to the
number of classes.

Abstract
Frequency shortcuts refer to specific frequency patterns that
models heavily rely on for correct classification. Previous studies have shown that models trained on small image datasets often exploit such shortcuts, potentially impairing their generalization performance. However, existing methods for identifying frequency shortcuts require expensive computations and become impractical for analyzing models trained on large datasets. In this work, we
propose the first approach to more efficiently analyze frequency shortcuts at a large scale. We show that both CNN
and transformer models learn frequency shortcuts on ImageNet. We also expose that frequency shortcut solutions
can yield good performance on out-of-distribution (OOD)
test sets which largely retain texture information. However, these shortcuts, mostly aligned with texture patterns,
hinder model generalization on rendition-based OOD test
sets. These observations suggest that current OOD evaluations often overlook the impact of frequency shortcuts
on model generalization. Future benchmarks could thus
benefit from explicitly assessing and accounting for these
shortcuts to build models that generalize across a broader
range of OOD scenarios. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/nis-research/hfss.

Dataset

Time (h) [39]

Time (h) (Ours)

CIFAR-10
ImageNet-1k

7.5
8500 (354 days)

0.5
220 (9.2 days)

1. Introduction

and ground truth.
However, there exist shortcuts in the Fourier domain,
which are implicitly embedded in image data characteristics and not easily detectable by visual inspection [37, 39].
Such shortcut solutions consist of small frequency subsets
that are easy-to-learn and sufficient for models to achieve
high classification rate. Typically, they correspond to simple features like textures, shapes or colors in the spatial domain. Wang, et al. [39] identified frequency shortcuts by
retaining relevant frequencies to classification of a certain
class. The relevance of an individual frequency was measured by the loss value of the model tested on images of the
class with that frequency removed. Thus, their approach requires computational time increasing proportionally to the
number of classes in a dataset and the image resolution. Yet,
frequency shortcuts usually consist of multiple frequencies.
The method in [39] might overlook some shortcuts as individual frequency relevance to classification neglects joint
contribution of frequencies. Furthermore, the computational burden limits its applicability for analyzing shortcut
learning behavior of models trained on large datasets (e.g.
ImageNet) with hundreds or thousands of classes. Several
studies have shown that ImageNet-trained models are biased towards textures [7, 8]. However, there is no concrete
evidence of what causes this phenomenon, although [39]
largely attributes it to frequency shortcut learning.
In this work, we propose the first method that enables
the uncovering of frequency shortcuts learned by models
trained on large-scale datasets (e.g. ImageNet-1k), for
analyzing learning behavior and explaining model generalization performance in different OOD scenarios. Our

Superficial correlations between data and ground truth [5, 9]
can be learned by models to minimize training objectives
with the least effort [34]. This learning behavior is called
shortcut learning, which either harms the generalization
performance of models or gives an illusion of good generalization abilities when learned shortcuts are present in OOD
test sets [39]. Artifacts and visual cues that cause shortcut learning are recognizable by visual inspection of images, and their impact on the training of models can be mitigated through data selection or augmentation [5, 19, 27],
i.e. counteracting the spurious correlations between data

25198

