This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling Inference Time Compute for Diffusion Models
Nanye Ma1,3, * Shangyuan Tong2,3,⇤ Haolin Jia3 Hexiang Hu3 Yu-Chuan Su3
Mingda Zhang3 Xuan Yang3 Yandong Li3 Tommi Jaakkola2 Xuhui Jia3 Saining Xie1,3
1
New York University 2 MIT 3 Google
Abstract
Generative models have made significant impacts across
various domains, largely due to their ability to scale during training by increasing data, computational resources,
and model size, a phenomenon characterized by the scaling laws. Recent research has begun to explore inferencetime scaling behavior in Large Language Models (LLMs),
revealing how performance can further improve with additional computation during inference. Unlike LLMs, diffusion models inherently possess the flexibility to adjust
inference-time computation via the number of denoising
steps, although the performance gains typically flatten after a few dozen. In this work, we explore the inferencetime scaling behavior of diffusion models beyond increasing denoising steps and investigate how the generation performance can further improve with increased computation.
Specifically, we consider a search problem aimed at identifying better noises for the diffusion sampling process. We
structure the design space along two axes: the verifiers used
to provide feedback, and the algorithms used to find better
noise candidates. Through extensive experiments on classconditioned and text-conditioned image generation benchmarks, our findings reveal that increasing inference-time
compute leads to substantial improvements in the quality of
samples generated by diffusion models, and with the complicated nature of images, combinations of the components
in the framework can be specifically chosen to conform with
different application scenario.

Figure 1. Inference scaling beyond increasing denoising steps.
We demonstrate the performance with respect to FID #, IS " on
ImageNet, and CLIPScore ", Aesthetic Score " on DrawBench.
Our search framework exhibits substantial improvements in all settings over purely scaling NFEs with increasing denoising steps.

development of increasingly capable generative models.
Recently, in Large Language Models (LLMs), the study
on scaling has expanded to inference-time [7, 65, 83]. By
allocating more compute during inference, often through
sophisticated search processes, these works show that
LLMs can produce higher-quality and more contextually
appropriate responses [19, 70, 80, 82, 88]. This opens new
avenues for improving model performance when additional
resources become available after training.
Diffusion models [24, 66, 68], trained to remove noises
from data, are a class of generative models that dominates the continuous data domains such as images [14], audio [63], and videos [52]. To generate a single sample, their
generation process usually starts from pure noise and requires multiple forward passes of trained models to denoise
and obtain clean data. These forward passes are thus dubbed
denoising steps. Since the number of denoising steps can be
adjusted to trade sample quality for computational cost, the
generation process of diffusion models naturally provides
flexibility in allocating inference-time computation budget.

1. Introduction
Generative models have transformed various fields, including language [1, 73, 75], vision [56, 57], and biology [81],
by learning to sample from the underlying data distributions. A key factor in their success is their ability to scale up
during training by increasing data volumes, computational
resources, and model sizes. This training-time scaling behavior, often described as Scaling Laws [25, 28], predicts
how performance improves as the models grow larger, consume more data, and are trained for longer time, guiding the
* Equal contribution; work done during an internship at Google.

2523

