This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TexGarment: Consistent Garment UV Texture Generation via
Efficient 3D Structure-Guided Diffusion Transformer
Jialun Liu1 , Jinbo Wu1 *, Xiaobo Gao1 , Jiakui Hu2 , Bojun Xiong2 , Xing Liu1 ,
Chen Zhao1 , Hongbin Pei3 , Haocheng Feng1 , Yingying Li1 , Errui Ding1 , Jingdong Wang1
1
Department of Computer Vision Technology(VIS), Baidu Inc.
2
Peking University 3 Xi’an Jiaotong University
liujialun@baidu.com

Figure 1. A gallery showcasing generated garment textures by TexGarment. Our method achieves globally consistent, high-quality, and
high-fidelity textures across a wide range of garment styles. The average time to generate each texture map is under 4 seconds.

Abstract
This paper introduces TexGarment, an efficient method for
synthesizing high-quality, 3D-consistent garment textures
in UV space. Traditional approaches based on 2D-to-3D
mapping often suffer from 3D inconsistency, while methods
learning from limited 3D data lack sufficient texture diversity. These limitations are particularly problematic in garment texture generation, where high demands exist for both
detail and variety. To address these challenges, TexGarment leverages a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion Transformer model with robust generalization capabilities, introducing structural information to guide the model in generating 3D-consistent garment textures in a single inference
step. Specifically, We utilize the 2D UV position map to

guide the layout during the UV texture generation process,
ensuring a coherent texture arrangement and enhancing it
by integrating global 3D structural information from the
mesh surface point cloud. This combined guidance effectively aligns 3D structural integrity with 2D layout. Our
method efficiently generates high-quality, diverse UV textures in a single inference step while maintaining 3D consistency. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of
TexGarment, achieving state-of-the-art performance in 3D
garment texture generation.

1. Introduction

* Project lead and corresponding author.

The demand for 3D garment visualization is growing across
virtual try-ons for e-commerce, video games, 3D films, and
AR/VR environments. These industries need large volumes

26566

