This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OccMamba: Semantic Occupancy Prediction with State Space Models
Heng Li1 , Yuenan Hou2 *, Xiaohan Xing3 , Yuexin Ma4 , Xiao Sun2 , Yanyong Zhang1 5 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 Stanford University 4 ShanghaiTech University
5
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
li heng@mail.ustc.edu.cn, houyuenan@pjlab.org.cn, xhxing@stanford.edu
mayuexin@shanghaitech.edu.cn, sunxiao@pjlab.org.cn, yanyongz@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction

Training deep learning models for semantic occupancy
prediction is challenging due to factors such as a large
number of occupancy cells, severe occlusion, limited visual cues, complicated driving scenarios, etc. Recent methods often adopt transformer-based architectures given their
strong capability in learning input-conditioned weights and
long-range relationships. However, transformer-based networks are notorious for their quadratic computation complexity, seriously undermining their efﬁcacy and deployment in semantic occupancy prediction. Inspired by the
global modeling and linear computation complexity of the
Mamba architecture, we present the ﬁrst Mamba-based
network for semantic occupancy prediction, termed OccMamba. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst design the hierarchical
Mamba module and local context processor to better aggregate global and local contextual information, respectively. Besides, to relieve the inherent domain gap between
the linguistic and 3D domains, we present a simple yet effective 3D-to-1D reordering scheme, i.e., height-prioritized
2D Hilbert expansion. It can maximally retain the spatial
structure of 3D voxels as well as facilitate the processing
of Mamba blocks. Endowed with the aforementioned designs, our OccMamba is capable of directly and efﬁciently
processing large volumes of dense scene grids, achieving
state-of-the-art performance across three prevalent occupancy prediction benchmarks, including OpenOccupancy,
SemanticKITTI, and SemanticPOSS. Notably, on OpenOccupancy, our OccMamba outperforms the previous stateof-the-art Co-Occ by 5.1% IoU and 4.3% mIoU, respectively. Our implementation is open-sourced and available
at: https://github.com/USTCLH/OccMamba.

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62332016) and the Key Research Program of Frontier
Sciences, CAS (No. ZDBS-LY-JSC001).
* The corresponding authors.

Semantic occupancy prediction is becoming an indispensable component in autonomous driving, augmented reality,
robotics, etc., which estimates the occupancy and categorical labels of the surrounding environment [36]. It faces
many challenges, such as the enormous number of occupancy grids, severe occlusion, limited visual clues as well
as complex driving scenarios [53].
Recent attempts, such as MonoScene [4] and JS3CNet [49], have made progress in addressing these challenges, but limitations remain due to their reliance on
uni-modal inputs. Multi-modal approaches, such as FusionOcc [51] and M-CONet [45], offer improvements, yet
they struggle to capture global information due to the inherent deﬁciency of CNN architectures. Despite the success
of transformer-based models [20, 40, 52], they suffer from
high computational complexity, particularly when processing a large number of voxel grids.
Mamba [9], which is an important variant of state space
models, emerges as a promising next-generation structure
for replacing the transformer architecture. In semantic
occupancy prediction, we anticipate leveraging its global
modeling capabilities to better handle the complex scenarios and overcome limited visual cues, while its linear computation complexity helps manage the enormous number of
occupancy grids efﬁciently. However, it is primarily designed for language modeling, with 1D input data, whereas
the input data for semantic occupancy prediction is 3D voxels. The use of dense voxels in large scenes makes the deployment of Mamba even more challenging. When converting 3D data into a 1D format, the inherent spatial relationships between adjacent voxels in the 3D space are missing, causing neighboring voxels to become far apart in the
1D sequence. This spatial separation undermines Mamba’s
ability to effectively understand local and global scene contexts, hampering the prediction performance. To address
this issue, developing an effective reordering strategy is cru-

11949

