This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Eval3D: Interpretable and Fine-grained Evaluation for 3D Generation
Shivam Duggal*1 Yushi Hu*2 Oscar Michel3 Aniruddha Kembhavi4 William T. Freeman1
Noah A. Smith2,5 Ranjay Krishna2,5 Antonio Torralba1 Ali Farhadi2,5 Wei-Chiu Ma6
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 University of Washington 3 New York University
4
Wayve 5 Allen Institute for AI 6 Cornell University
front

A corgi wearing a hat
side
back

A plate of fried chicken and
waffles with maple syrup
front

side

Structural inconsistency / Text-3D misalignment / Semantic inconsistency / Geometric inconsistency
Figure 1. Challenges of 3D generation: (1) Structural inconsistency: lack of globally-coherent 3D shape; (2) Text-3D misalignment: failure
to meet the requirements of the input text-prompt; (3) Semantic inconsistency: content change and incoherent semantics; (4) Geometric
inconsistency: misaligned geometry and texture.

Abstract

of current models. Project page: http://eval3d.github.io.

Despite the unprecedented progress in the field of 3D generation, current systems still often fail to produce high-quality
3D assets that are visually appealing and geometrically and
semantically consistent across multiple viewpoints. To effectively assess the quality of the generated 3D data, there
is a need for a reliable 3D evaluation tool. Unfortunately,
existing 3D evaluation metrics often overlook the geometric
quality of generated assets or merely rely on black-box multimodal large language models for coarse assessment. In this
paper, we introduce Eval3D, a fine-grained, interpretable
evaluation tool that can faithfully evaluate the quality of
generated 3D assets based on various distinct yet complementary criteria. Our key observation is that many desired
properties of 3D generation, such as semantic and geometric
consistency, can be effectively captured by measuring the
consistency among various foundation models and tools. We
thus leverage a diverse set of models and tools as probes
to evaluate the inconsistency of generated 3D assets across
different aspects. Compared to prior work, Eval3D provides
pixel-wise measurement, enables accurate 3D spatial feedback, and aligns more closely with human judgments. We
comprehensively evaluate existing 3D generation models
using Eval3D and highlight the limitations and challenges

1. Introduction
High-quality 3D assets play a pivotal role across various
domains including gaming, film, augmented/virtual reality,
and robotics [24, 54, 65]. They empower content creation
applications to deliver visually compelling and immersive
experiences and enable simulators to realistically reproduce
the real world. Unfortunately, 3D asset creation is complex
and tedious, requiring a lot of careful manual effort. Automatic (text/image-to-)3D generation, despite fast progress
over the last few years, still falls short in key aspects including geometry, semantic consistency, etc.

13326

What makes a good (text/image-to-)3D generation? 3D
assets are not created to merely be rendered onto a 2D image; rather, they are meant to live within a rich 3D world –
the assets may be viewed from various distinct viewpoints,
and their 3D geometry will affect how they interact with the
surroundings (e.g., collision, reflection, etc). Therefore, a
high-quality 3D asset should not only be visually appealing
and faithful to its text/image input across multiple individual
viewpoints, but its geometry and appearance should also be
coherent and plausible when observed as a whole. In the
absence of these characteristics, the utility of the generated

