This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoE: Chain-of-Explanation via Automatic Visual Concept Circuit Description
and Polysemanticity Quantification
Wenlong Yu Qilong Wang* Chuang Liu Dong Li Qinghua Hu
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{ywl 95, qlwang, liuc 09, li dong, huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

Local Explanation:
Concept Circuit

Explainability is a critical factor influencing the wide deployment of deep vision models (DVMs). Concept-based
post-hoc explanation methods can provide both global and
local insights into model decisions. However, current methods in this field face challenges in that they are inflexible to automatically construct accurate and sufficient linguistic explanations for global concepts and local circuits.
Particularly, the intrinsic polysemanticity in semantic Visual Concepts (VCs) impedes the interpretability of concepts and DVMs, which is underestimated severely. In this
paper, we propose a Chain-of-Explanation (CoE) approach
to address these issues. Specifically, CoE automates the decoding and description of VCs to construct global concept
explanation datasets. Further, to alleviate the effect of polysemanticity on model explainability, we design a concept
polysemanticity disentanglement and filtering mechanism to
distinguish the most contextually relevant concept atoms.
Besides, a Concept Polysemanticity Entropy (CPE), as a
measure of model interpretability, is formulated to quantify the degree of concept uncertainty. The modeling of deterministic concepts is upgraded to uncertain concept atom
distributions. Finally, CoE automatically enables linguistic
local explanations of the decision-making process of DVMs
by tracing the concept circuit. GPT-4o and human-based
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of CPE and the
superiority of CoE, achieving an average absolute improvement of 36% in terms of explainability scores.

C1: How to automatically describe
this concept circuit
and the global concepts?
C2: Each has so many
meanings …
Which meaning is
the Mr. Right ?
DVM …

Global Concept Explanation
[pizza,
iron,
[pizza,
iron,boat,
boat,circle,
circle,water,
water,
[pizza,
[pizza,iron,
iron,boat,
boat,circle,
circle,water,
water,
topping,
blue,
topping,
blue,cheese,…]
cheese,…]
topping,
cheese,…]
topping,blue,
blue, cheese,
yellow…]
Describing

Visual Concept (VC)
…

…
…

Figure 1. Illustration of the integrated process of concept-based
post-hoc XAI methods [36], along with two challenges they face.

aware of the reasons behind the model’s conclusions. This
lack of explainability significantly hinders the wide application of deep vision models (DVMs) in critical fields such
as autonomous driving and medical diagnosis [7, 28].
Post-hoc eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) can
enhance the transparency of DVMs without causing degradations in performance [34, 43]. Research in this field
can roughly be divided into local and global XAI methods
[6]. The former explains either specific stages or the entire
decision path with respect to a specific sample, identifying key activated regions or significant semantic concepts
[3, 45, 46]. The latter deciphers the overall behavior of
the DVM in a dataset by concept discovery or visualization
techniques [22, 27, 52]. Among them, concept-based methods can explain DVMs from both global and local (glocal)
perspectives [2, 4], assuming that each channel or neuron
in a certain layer is responsible for recognizing essential semantic concepts. As shown in Fig. 1, they primarily perform one or two of the three operations: decoding Visual
Concepts (VCs) of DVMs, manually constructing global
concept explanation datasets, and providing local concept
circuit explanations for individual samples [14, 16, 26].
Despite the significant progress made in concept-based
explanation research, certain challenges remain, as illustrated in Fig. 1. First, the VCs are decoded by manually

1. Introduction
Deep learning-based vision models have demonstrated outstanding performance in various visual tasks, owing to the
powerful learning and representation capabilities of deep
neural networks (DNNs) [29, 50]. However, the extreme
complexity of DNNs, while enhancing their performance,
also limits their explainability [41]. Humans are often un* Corresponding author.

4364

