This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-Fidelity Relightable Monocular Portrait Animation with
Lighting-Controllable Video Diffusion Model
Mingtao Guo1
Guanyu Xing2
Yanli Liu1,3†
National Key Laboratory of Fundamental Science on Synthetic Vision,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
2
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
3
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
1

mingtaoguo@stu.scu.edu.cn,{xingguanyu, yanliliu}@scu.edu.cn
Target Lighting

Driving
Frames

Shading
Hints

Animated and Relighted Results

Reference

Shading

Shading

Shading

Shading

Figure 1. Qualitative results of our method. Given a reference portrait, a target lighting and a driving video, for each frame we first render
a guidance image referred to as a shading hint with the 3D mesh of the reference portrait, the target lighting, and the pose of the driving
frame. Then, with the shading hint, our relightable portrait animation framework relights the reference portrait during animation. The
results within the solid boxes exhibit the lighting consistency with the target lighting and pose consistency with the driving frames.

Abstract

and extrinsic (pose and lighting) features. In this paper,
we present a Lighting Controllable Video Diffusion model
(LCVD) for high-fidelity, relightable portrait animation. We
address this limitation by distinguishing these feature types
through dedicated subspaces within the feature space of a
pre-trained image-to-video diffusion model. Specifically,
for each frame, we use the 3D mesh of the reference portrait, the pose of the driving frame as well as the specified lighting to render an image called shading hint. While

Relightable portrait animation aims to animate a static reference portrait to match the head movements of a driving
video while adapting to user-specified or reference lighting conditions. Existing portrait animation methods fail
to achieve relightable portraits because they do not separate and manipulate intrinsic (identity and appearance)
† Corresponding author: Yanli Liu.

228

