This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HiRes-LLaVA: Restoring Fragmentation Input
in High-Resolution Large Vision-Language Models
Runhui Huang1 * Xinpeng Ding3∗ Chunwei Wang2 Jianhua Han2
Yulong Liu3 Hengshuang Zhao4 Hang Xu2 Lu Hou2 Wei Zhang2 Xiaodan Liang1†
1
Shenzhen campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 4 The University of Hong Kong
Fragment

Abstract

13.0

High-resolution image inputs allow Large Vision-Language
Models (LVLMs) to capture finer visual details, improving
comprehension. However, the increased training and computational costs associated with such inputs pose significant
challenges. A common approach to mitigate these costs
involves slicing the input into uniform patches using sliding windows, each aligned with the vision encoder’s input
size. While efficient, this method fragments the input, disrupting the continuity of context, which negatively impacts
cross-patch perception tasks. To address these limitations,
we propose HiRes-LLaVA, a novel framework designed to
efficiently process high-resolution inputs of any size without
altering the original contextual and geometric information.
HiRes-LLaVA introduces two key components: (i) a SliceRestore Adapter (SRA) that reconstructs sliced patches into
their original form, enabling efficient extraction of both
global and local features through down-up-sampling and
convolutional layers, and (ii) a Self-Mining Sampler (SMS)
that compresses visual tokens based on internal relationships,
preserving original context and positional information while
reducing training overhead. To assess the ability of handling context fragmentation, we construct a new benchmark,
EntityGrid-QA, consisting of edge-related tasks. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the superiority of HiRes-LLaVA on
both existing public benchmarks and EntityGrid-QA. For
example, with SRA, our method achieves a performance improvement of ∼ 12% over state-of-the-art LVLMs in addressing fragmentation issues. Additionally, our SMS outperforms
other visual token downsamplers, while offering high data
efficiency.

Tomato

Non-Fragment
4.1

7.9

70

Object at non-fragment position
60

Like
Watermelon
Object at fragment position
(a) Slicing Input

3.0

50

LLaVA-1.5 IXC-4KHD LLaVA-Next Ours

Non-Slicing

Slicing

(b) Results on our EntityGrid-QA

Figure 1. Illustration of the fragmentation issue. (a) Slicing
input: Slicing-based LVLMs, such as LLaVA-Next [31], can fragment objects located at the edges of slices, leading to errors in
model understanding. (b) Performance comparison: On our
EntityGrid-QA benchmark, slicing-based methods show a significant performance gap between fragment and non-fragment inputs.
Our method effectively handles both cases, achieving a smaller
performance gap similar to non-slicing approaches.

1. Introduction

hanced capabilities in vision-language tasks, fostering improved understanding, reasoning, and interaction. Early
LVLMs [21, 29, 53] processed images at low resolutions,
typically 224 × 224, which hindering their ability to capture
detailed visual information. This limitation often results in
inaccurate recognition of objects and their contextual relationships within images [9, 27].
Enhancing the high-resolution capabilities of LVLMs
presents substantial challenges, i.e., training visual encoders
to handle high-resolution inputs requires significant computational resources as well as struggling with handling
arbitrary image sizes [2, 5]. Recent advances have introduced resource-efficient methods to improve the input resolution of LVLMs. One effective strategy involves using
a sliding window technique [14, 27, 33] to segment highresolution images into smaller patches. These patches are
then processed by a visual encoder that has been trained
on fixed-size lower-resolution inputs, maintaining computational efficiency while enhancing detail capture.

Recent progress in Large Vision-Language Models
(LVLMs) [1, 21, 23, 24, 30, 53] has significantly en* Equal contribution

29814

