This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hyperbolic Safety-Aware Vision-Language Models
Tobia Poppi∗1,2 Tejaswi Kasarla∗3 Pascal Mettes3 Lorenzo Baraldi1 Rita Cucchiara1,4
1
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy 2 University of Pisa, Italy
3
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands 4 IIT-CNR, Italy
1

{name.surname}@unimore.it

2

{name.surname}@phd.unipi.it

Abstract

3

{initial.surname}@uva.nl

74]. Popular VLMs like CLIP [58] and ALIGN [34] leverage vast amounts of web-scraped image-text data to learn
rich multimodal representations by aligning visual and textual modalities. However, most large-scale datasets sourced
from the web contain unsafe or inappropriate content, such
as violence, nudity, or hate speech [5, 6]. The presence of
such content not only raises ethical concerns but also introduces risks for real-world applications [7, 30, 75], where
exposure to or misuse of this material can lead to legal
and societal repercussions. Birhane et al. [7] also show
that the increasing dataset scale can exacerbate hateful and
unsafe content, as identified in the now removed LAION5B [66, 69]. Addressing the issue of unsafe content in
VLMs is therefore of utmost importance to ensure responsible AI practices.
Recent efforts to mitigate unsafe content in visionlanguage models have led to the development of methods
specifically designed for NSFW (Not Safe For Work) content removal. Most of these works [23, 55] have focused on
unlearning (i.e., removing) the knowledge of unsafe content from the models. As a recent example, Poppi et al. [55]
develop a fine-tuned version of CLIP which unlearns toxic
concepts by redirecting their embeddings towards safe regions, so that retrieval always produces safe content even
when the model is prompted with unsafe inputs.
In contrast, we propose an approach for managing unsafe content in VLMs: emphasizing awareness over unlearning. Rather than hiding the flaws of VLMs by ignoring
NSFW content, we aim to equip the VLMs with the ability
to distinguish between safe and unsafe content. This in turn
helps users of the model to expose or redirect NSFW content when necessary, a crucial step toward improving user
agency, understanding, and interpretability [19].
Inspired by recent hyperbolic vision-language models [17, 52], we introduce a hyperbolic framework that
leverages the geometric properties of hyperbolic space to
separate safe and unsafe content effectively. Using a paired
dataset of safe and unsafe image-text inputs [55], we adjust
the embeddings to create an entailment-based [24] structure. In this setup, safe concepts are positioned closer to the

Addressing the retrieval of unsafe content from visionlanguage models such as CLIP is an important step towards
real-world integration. Current efforts have relied on unlearning techniques that try to erase the model’s knowledge
of unsafe concepts. While effective in reducing unwanted
outputs, unlearning limits the model’s capacity to discern
between safe and unsafe content. In this work, we introduce
a novel approach that shifts from unlearning to an awareness paradigm by leveraging the inherent hierarchical properties of the hyperbolic space. We propose to encode safe
and unsafe content as an entailment hierarchy, where both
are placed in different regions of hyperbolic space. Our
HySAC, Hyperbolic Safety-Aware CLIP, employs entailment
loss functions to model the hierarchical and asymmetrical
relations between safe and unsafe image-text pairs. This
modelling – ineffective in standard vision-language models
due to their reliance on Euclidean embeddings – endows
the model with awareness of unsafe content, enabling it to
serve as both a multimodal unsafe classifier and a flexible
content retriever, with the option to dynamically redirect unsafe queries toward safer alternatives or retain the original
output. Extensive experiments show that our approach not
only enhances safety recognition but also establishes a more
adaptable and interpretable framework for content moderation in vision-language models. Our source code is available at: https://github.com/aimagelab/HySAC
Warning: This paper features explicit sexual content and
other material that some readers may find disturbing, distressing, or offensive.

1. Introduction
Large-scale vision-language models (VLMs) have achieved
remarkable successes in various applications, including
cross-model retrieval [58], text-to-image and image-to-text
generation [40, 60] and various downstream tasks [45, 67,
* Equal contribution

4222

