This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Plug-and-Play Interpretable Responsible Text-to-Image Generation
via Dual-Space Multi-facet Concept Control
Basim Azam Naveed Akhtar
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia
{basim.azam, naveed.akhtar1}@unimelb.edu.au

Figure 1. Our unique plug-and-play interpretable approach simultaneously controls a range of concepts for responsible and fair image
generation with text-to-image pipelines. Our method enables control over both text embedding space and latent diffusion space. Shown
examples compare unfair and unsafe generation for the given prompts by the Stable Diffusion (top), along with their responsible counterparts resulting from our approach influencing the text encoder (middle) and the diffusion model (bottom). We control individual concepts
for diverse/safe generation in these examples while modeling them in continuous composite responsible semantic spaces.

Abstract
Ethical issues around text-to-image (T2I) models demand a comprehensive control over the generative content.
Existing techniques addressing these issues for responsible
T2I models aim for the generated content to be fair and
safe (non-violent/explicit). However, these methods remain
bounded to handling the facets of responsibility concepts individually, while also lacking in interpretability. Moreover,
they often require alteration to the original model, which
compromises the model performance. In this work, we propose a unique technique to enable responsible T2I generation by simultaneously accounting for an extensive range of
concepts for fair and safe content generation in a scalable
manner. The key idea is to distill the target T2I pipeline with
an external plug-and-play mechanism that learns an inter-

pretable composite responsible space for the desired concepts, conditioned on the target T2I pipeline. We use knowledge distillation and concept whitening to enable this. At
inference, the learned space is utilized to modulate the generative content. A typical T2I pipeline presents two plug-in
points for our approach, namely; the text embedding space
and the diffusion model latent space. We develop modules
for both points and show the effectiveness of our approach
with a range of strong results. Our code can be accessed at
https://basim-azam.github.io/responsiblediffusion/

1. Introduction
Rapid advances in text-to-image (T2I) generative pipeline
are revolutionizing numerous vision applications, offering
unprecedented convenience for synthesizing high quality

2976

