This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffCAM: Data-Driven Saliency Maps by Capturing Feature Differences
Xingjian Li, Qiming Zhao, Neelesh Bisht, Mostofa Rafid Uddin, Jin Yu Kim, Bryan Zhang, Min Xu*
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue Pittsburgh, PA 15213, United States

Abstract

map is a visualization that highlights the critical parts of an
image that significantly influence a model’s prediction.

In recent years, the interpretability of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) has garnered significant attention, particularly due to their widespread deployment in critical domains like healthcare, finance, and autonomous systems.
To address the challenge of understanding how DNNs make
decisions, Explainable AI (XAI) methods, such as saliency
maps, have been developed to provide insights into the inner workings of these models. This paper introduces DiffCAM, a novel XAI method designed to overcome limitations
in existing Class Activation Map (CAM)-based techniques,
which often rely on decision boundary gradients to estimate
feature importance. DiffCAM differentiates itself by considering the actual data distribution of the reference class,
identifying feature importance based on how a target example differs from reference examples. This approach captures
the most discriminative features without relying on decision
boundaries or prediction results, making DiffCAM applicable to a broader range of models, including foundation
models. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate
the superior performance and flexibility of DiffCAM in providing meaningful explanations across diverse datasets and
scenarios.

In deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), the activation map of each convolutional channel in deep layers naturally provides such information of spatial attention.
This nature motivates popular solutions, such as Class Activation Map (CAM) [60], GradCAM [41] and ScoreCAM
[55], which calculate a saliency map by a weighted aggregation of those feature channels. To estimate the feature
importance, GradCAM calculates the gradient of the prediction (typically the probability of a target class) with respect
to the input features. This gradient essentially measures the
sensitivity of the prediction to variances in the input image or deep features, revealing the fastest direction in the
feature space to change the model’s decision. CAM and
ScoreCAM adopt the similar idea to estimate the feature
importance while avoiding gradient calculation.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) [20, 43, 52] are often referred to as black-box models due to the difficulty in understanding how they extract features and make decisions.
This lack of interpretability raises significant concerns in
critical areas such as healthcare, finance, and autonomous
systems. To address this challenge, Explainable AI (XAI)
methods are designed to make the decision-making processes of AI systems more transparent and understandable
to humans [2, 27]. It allows users and stakeholders to gain
insight into how AI models arrive at specific outcomes [48].
Among the XAI approaches, saliency map is a common
technique used to explain deep vision models. A saliency

Despite the widely application of those CAM-based approaches, there still exists an essential limitation of them in
estimating the feature importance. Here we illustrate our
core idea by a simplified binary classification model predicting their language test result (Pass or Fail) according to
their historical reading and writing scores. Intuitively, writing is learned as a more dominant feature for the prediction
as it is usually harder than reading. This results in a decision
boundary which lean to separate low and high write scores.
When explaining a specific prediction, existing CAM-based
approaches consider the direction orthogonal to the decision
boundary as the feature importance vector, i.e., indicating
the writing score is a more important feature for the prediction. However, this is counter-intuitive in case that the
explained data point is not a representative one among its
class. For example, when explaining why the student xt is
predicted as Fail, CAM-based approaches assign a higher
importance on writing to which the final prediction is more
sensitive. However, the writing score of xt is as high as the
average of the Pass group and higher than most of the Fail
students. Therefore, reading is a better feature to explain
the failure of xt , i.e., if xt ’s reading is as good as the Pass
group, xt will be predicted as Pass.
Another relevant technique, counterfactual explanation

* Corresponding Author

10327

