This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BIGS: Bimanual Category-agnostic Interaction Reconstruction
from Monocular Videos via 3D Gaussian Splatting
Jeongwan On Kyeonghwan Gwak Gunyoung Kang
Junuk Cha Soohyun Hwang Hyein Hwang Seungryul Baek
UNIST, South Korea

Animatable hands and objects

Reconstructed
hand-object interaction

Novel
hand / object / camera
pose

Input video

time

Output

Novel view video (e.g., egocentric view)

Figure 1. Our approach reconstructs 3D Gaussians of bimanual category-agnostic interactions from a monocular video, where the two hands interact
with an unknown object. Even with limited observations, our method reliably builds the 3D Gaussians in this scenario and once 3D Gaussians
are built, our method can be used to render new videos with novel poses of hand, object and camera (i.e., view).

Abstract
Reconstructing 3Ds of hand-object interaction (HOI) is
a fundamental problem that can find numerous applications.
Despite recent advances, there is no comprehensive pipeline
yet for bimanual class-agnostic interaction reconstruction
from a monocular RGB video, where two hands and an
unknown object are interacting with each other. Previous works
tackled the limited hand-object interaction case, where object
templates are pre-known or only one hand is involved in the
interaction. The bimanual interaction reconstruction exhibits
severe occlusions introduced by complex interactions between
two hands and an object. To solve this, we first introduce BIGS
(Bimanual Interaction 3D Gaussian Splatting), a method that
reconstructs 3D Gaussians of hands and an unknown object
from a monocular video. To robustly obtain object Gaussians
avoiding severe occlusions, we leverage prior knowledge of
pre-trained diffusion model with score distillation sampling
(SDS) loss, to reconstruct unseen object parts. For hand
Gaussians, we exploit the 3D priors of hand model (i.e., MANO)
and share a single Gaussian for two hands to effectively

accumulate hand 3D information, given limited views. To
further consider the 3D alignment between hands and objects,
we include the interacting-subjects optimization step during
Gaussian optimization. Our method achieves the state-of-the-art
accuracy on two challenging datasets, in terms of 3D hand pose
estimation (MPJPE), 3D object reconstruction (CDh, CDo,
F10), and rendering quality (PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS), respectively.

1. Introduction
In our daily life, we constantly interact with objects using
our hands. Accurately modeling hand-object interaction
is essential for numerous applications such as virtual reality (VR), augmented reality (AR), remote robot control,
and enabling more natural and intuitive human-computer
interaction (HCI). Consequently, there have been many
works that deal with the hand-object interaction (HOI)
reconstruction problem [2, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 15–17, 19–
22, 24, 26–28, 33, 49, 52, 64, 76–78]. However, each
method exhibits its own limitations: many existing HOI
reconstruction methods rely on pre-scanned templates for

17437

