This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BizGen: Advancing Article-level Visual Text Rendering for
Infographics Generation
Yuyang Peng Shishi Xiao Keming Wu Qisheng Liao Bohan Chen Kevin Lin Danqing Huang Ji Li Yuhui Yuan
Tsinghua University, Brown University, University of Liverpool, Microsoft Research Asia, Microsoft
https://bizgen-msra.github.io

(a) 386 characters / OCR: 93%

(b) 426 characters / OCR: 96%

(c) 545 characters / OCR: 99%

(d) 594 characters / OCR: 99%

(e) 737 characters / OCR: 97%

Figure 1. Accurate article-level visual text rendering results in infographics generated with BizGen, ranging from 386 to 737 characters.

Abstract
Recently, state-of-the-art text-to-image generation models,
such as FLUX and Ideogram 2.0, have made significant
progress in sentence-level visual text rendering. In this paper, we focus on the more challenging scenarios of articlelevel visual text rendering and address a novel task of generating high-quality business content, including infographics
and slides, based on user provided article-level descriptive
prompts and ultra-dense layouts. The fundamental challenges are twofold: significantly longer context lengths and
the scarcity of high-quality business content data.
In contrast to most previous works that focus on a limited number of sub-regions and sentence-level prompts, ensuring precise adherence to ultra-dense layouts with tens
or even hundreds of sub-regions in business content is far
more challenging. We make two key technical contributions:
(i) the construction of scalable, high-quality business content dataset, i.e., Infographics-650K, equipped with ultra-

dense layouts and prompts by implementing a layer-wise
retrieval-augmented infographic generation scheme; and (ii)
a layout-guided cross attention scheme, which injects tens of
region-wise prompts into a set of cropped region latent space
according to the ultra-dense layouts, and refine each subregions flexibly during inference using a layout conditional
CFG. We demonstrate the strong results of our system compared to previous SOTA systems such as FLUX and SD3 on
our BizEval prompt set. Additionally, we conduct thorough
ablation experiments to verify the effectiveness of each component. We hope our constructed Infographics-650K and
BizEval can encourage the broader community to advance
the progress of business content generation.

1. Introduction
Recently, graphic design generation [2, 3, 6, 9–12, 19, 25,
36, 39, 43] has attracted increasing interest, as modern textto-image generation models like SD3, DALL·E3, FLUX,

23615

