This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Multimodal Driving Scenes via Next-Scene Prediction
Yanhao Wu1,2 * Haoyang Zhang2 Tianwei Lin2 Lichao Huang2 Shujie Luo2
Rui Wu2 Congpei Qiu1 Wei Ke1† Tong Zhang3,4
1
School of Software Engineering, XJTU 2 Horizon Robotics
3
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Figure 1. An overview of our proposed driving scene generation paradigm − UMGen. Starting from a random initialization (a) UMGen generates ego-centric, multimodal scenes frame-by-frame. Each scene encompasses four modalities: ego-vehicle action, map, traffic
agent, and image; (b) UMGen offers multiple functions. It can autonomously generate multimodal scene sequences based solely on its
own historical context, but also predict other modalities based on input ego-vehicle actions provided by users. Furthermore, UMGen can
incorporate user-specified agent actions to create customized scene sequences. In three scene sequences, arranged from top to bottom, we
demonstrate the ego vehicle autonomously driving straight through an intersection, executing a user-defined right turn, and encountering
scenes where a user-specified white car cuts in front of it. For better visualization, a portion of the map in the last row is zoomed in.

Abstract

troduce a multimodal generation framework that incorporates four major data modalities, including a novel addition of the map modality. With tokenized modalities, our
scene sequence generation framework autoregressively predicts each scene while managing computational demands
through a two-stage approach. The Temporal AutoRegressive (TAR) component captures inter-frame dynamics for

Generative models in Autonomous Driving (AD) enable diverse scenario creation, yet existing methods fall short by
only capturing a limited range of modalities, restricting
the capability of generating controllable scenes for comprehensive evaluation of AD systems. In this paper, we in-

6844

