This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mamba-Reg: Vision Mamba Also Needs Registers
Feng Wang1 Jiahao Wang1 Sucheng Ren1 Guoyizhe Wei1 Jieru Mei1
Wei Shao2 Yuyin Zhou3 Alan Yuille1 Cihang Xie3
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 University of Florida 3 UC Santa Cruz

Abstract
Similar to Vision Transformers, this paper identifies artifacts also present within the feature maps of Vision Mamba.
These artifacts, corresponding to high-norm tokens emerging in low-information background areas of images, appear much more severe in Vision Mamba—they exist prevalently even with the tiny-sized model and activate extensively across background regions. To mitigate this issue,
we follow the prior solution of introducing register tokens
into Vision Mamba. To better cope with Mamba blocks’
uni-directional inference paradigm, two key modifications
are introduced: 1) evenly inserting registers throughout the
input token sequence, and 2) recycling registers for final decision predictions. We term this new architecture Mamba® .
Qualitative observations suggest, compared to vanilla Vision Mamba, Mamba® ’s feature maps appear cleaner and
more focused on semantically meaningful regions. Quantitatively, Mamba® attains stronger performance and scales
better. For example, on the ImageNet benchmark, our
Mamba® -B attains 83.0% accuracy, significantly outperforming Vim-B’s 81.8%; furthermore, we provide the first
successful scaling to the large model size with 341M parameters, attaining competitive accuracies of 83.6% and 84.5%
for 224×224 and 384×384 inputs, respectively. Additional
validation on the downstream semantic segmentation task
also supports Mamba® ’s efficacy. Code is available at
https://github.com/wangf3014/Mamba-Reg.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in State Space Models (SSMs) have showcased their considerable potential in sequence modeling
tasks. In contrast to Transformers’ quadratic computational
complexity with respect to sequence lengths, SSMs operate
with linear computational complexity, offering significant
efficiency advantages in managing extended sequences.
One exemplary instantiation of SSMs is the Mamba architecture [9], which employs selective scan techniques alongside a suite of hardware-optimized designs. This innovation

14944

facilitates the efficient training and inference of recurrent
models with linear computational complexity and memory
overhead. Furthermore, a comprehensive body of recent research [2, 9, 24] substantiates that the Mamba architecture
is able to achieve competitive performance levels, on par
with Transformers, particularly in processing natural language and audio.
Furthermore, the Mamba architecture has also been successfully extended to a variety of visual tasks [16, 23, 26,
45]. The motivation for this expansion mainly arises from
the computational challenges presented by processing highresolution images and videos. These data types often lead
to long input sequences that conventional models struggle to
handle effectively or efficiently—e.g., for long-length input,
traditional models such as Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) suffer from relatively small receptive fields, and Vision Transformers (ViTs) contend with high computational
and memory costs. Yet, Vision Mamba (Vim) architectures
have shown the potential to mitigate these limitations—
recent works demonstrate that they not only manage computational and memory demands more efficiently but also
deliver strong performance across a variety of generic visual tasks, including classification, segmentation, and image generation [16, 25, 45].
Despite the competitive benchmark performance, our
observations reveal that Mamba’s internal modeling exhibits significant issues when processing visual inputs. This
issue is similar to the prior observation of ViTs [6], where
some outlier tokens located in the less semantic background
unexpectedly contain rich global information (showing as
high attention scores in the feature map). These unusual
feature activations are typically termed artifacts in the existing studies [6]. In this work, we reveal that this artifact
issue not only exists but actually is considerably more severe in Vision Mamba. For example, the artifacts are clearly
visible in the feature maps of Vim [45], as illustrated in
the 2nd and 4th columns of Figure 1, where activations encompass not just semantically significant content, but also
extend to expansive yet minimally informative background
regions. Furthermore, as quantitatively confirmed in Section 3.2, these artifact tokens are widely present in differ-

