This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pseudo Visible Feature Fine-Grained Fusion for Thermal Object Detection
Ting Li1 , Mao Ye1 *, Tianwen Wu1 , Nianxin Li1 , Shuaifeng Li1 , Song Tang2 , and Luping Ji1
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology
lting1103@gmail.com, cvlab.uestc@gmail.com

(a) Previous approach

Abstract
Thermal object detection is a critical task in various fields,
such as surveillance and autonomous driving. Current
state-of-the-art (SOTA) models always leverage a prior
Thermal-To-Visible (T2V) translation model to obtain visible spectrum information, followed by a cross-modality
aggregation module to fuse information from both modalities. However, this fusion approach does not fully exploit
the complementary visible spectrum information beneficial
for thermal detection. To address this issue, we propose
a novel cross-modal fusion method called Pseudo Visible
Feature Fine-Grained Fusion (PFGF). Specifically, a graph
is constructed with nodes generated from multi-level thermal features and pseudo-visual latent features produced
by the T2V model. Each level of features corresponds to
a subgraph. An Inter-Mamba block is proposed to perform cross-modality fusion between nodes at the lowest
level; while a Cascade Knowledge Integration (CKI) strategy is used to fuse low-level fused information to highlevel subgraphs in a cascade manner. After several iterations of graph node updating, each subgraph outputs an
aggregated feature to the detection head respectively. Unlike previous cross-modal fusion methods, our approach
explicitly models high-level relationships between crossmodal data, effectively fusing different granularity information. Experimental results demonstrate that our method
achieves SOTA detection performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/liting1018/PFGF.

T2V
Thermal

z

Channel
Attention

Spatial Attention

Results

Attention-based Module

Pseudo-Visible

(b) Ours
f 31
T2V

z1
z2

3

n

f 51

zn
f 52
Pseudo-Visible

...f
...

z

f 32

...

Thermal

...f

Results
5

n

Graph-Mamba Module

Figure 1. Comparison between previous attention-based method
and our method. (a) An attention-based module combines channel
and spatial attention to augment the modality-translation awareness of detection. (b) Our method employs a Graph-Mamba Fusion module to integrate cross-modality knowledge in a cascade
manner with different granularity.

only and thermal-only approaches face limitations by solely
relying on one spectrum, and lacking complementary data.
As a result, multi-spectral (visible and thermal) object detection [8, 25, 52] have gained popularity. However, these
approaches require paired visible and thermal images for
both training and inference, increasing hardware costs and
complexity. Furthermore, the need for precise alignment
between modalities further limits practical deployment [5].
Consequently, there is growing interest in visible knowledge assistance methods that utilize paired visible-thermal
images for training and solely thermal images for testing.

1. Introduction
Object detection is critical in computer vision, with applications in autonomous driving and video surveillance [27].
While most methods rely on visible spectrum images, they
often struggle in adverse conditions like nighttime, fog, or
snow. In contrast, thermal spectrum images offer robustness in challenging environments [13], but they may falter
in the daytime due to limited texture detail. Both visible-

Visible knowledge-assisted thermal pedestrian detection
methods can be categorized into two routes: data enhancement and cross-modal transfer. The route of data enhancement [2] employs generative models to adapt visible images
to the thermal domain like domain adaptation [26, 29], us-

* The corresponding author.

6710

