This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AKiRa: Augmentation Kit on Rays for optical video generation
Xi Wang1 , Robin Courant1 , Marc Christie2 , Vicky Kalogeiton1
1
LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris 2 Univ Rennes, IRISA, Inria, CNRS

Figure 1. While current state-of-the-art video generation approaches offer limited control to users on camera motion, we propose a
dedicated data augmentation framework —AKiRa — to train an optical video generation model that provides users with a panel of controls
on camera motions (top row), camera focal length (second row), lens distortion (third row), or bokeh (camera aperture and focus in bottom
row). See more on our project page: https://www.lix.polytechnique.fr/vista/projects/2024_akira_wang.

Abstract

It enables fine-tuned control over camera motion as well
as complex optical parameters (focal length, distortion,
aperture) to achieve cinematic effects such as zoom, fisheye effect, and bokeh. Extensive experiments demonstrate
AKiRa’s effectiveness in combining and composing camera optics while outperforming all state-of-the-art methods.
This work sets a new landmark in controlled and optically
enhanced video generation, paving the way for future optical video generation methods.

Recent advances in text-conditioned video diffusion have
greatly improved video quality. However, these methods
offer limited or sometimes no control to users on camera
aspects, including dynamic camera motion, zoom, distorted
lens and focus shifts. These motion and optical aspects are
crucial for adding controllability and cinematic elements to
generation frameworks, ultimately resulting in visual content that draws focus, enhances mood, and guides emotions
according to filmmakers’ controls. In this paper, we aim
to close the gap between controllable video generation and
camera optics. To achieve this, we propose AKiRa (Augmentation Kit on Rays), a novel augmentation framework
that builds and trains a camera adapter with a complex
camera model over an existing video generation backbone.

1. Introduction
Creating high-quality video sequences has always been a
complex interplay between the content itself and the means,
the camera, by which it is portrayed. A powerful narrative or stunning visual concept can only reach its full po-

2609

