This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Universal Soccer Video Understanding
Jiayuan Rao1,2∗ , Haoning Wu1,2∗ , Hao Jiang3 , Ya Zhang1 , Yanfeng Wang1† , Weidi Xie1†
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China 3 Alibaba Group, China
https://jyrao.github.io/UniSoccer/

Videos in SoccerReplay-1988

Abstract
As a globally celebrated sport, soccer has attracted
widespread interest from fans all over the world. This paper aims to develop a comprehensive multi-modal framework for soccer video understanding. Specifically, we make
the following contributions in this paper: (i) we introduce SoccerReplay-1988, the largest multi-modal soccer
dataset to date, featuring videos and detailed annotations
from 1,988 complete matches, with an automated annotation pipeline; (ii) we present an advanced soccer-specific
visual encoder, MatchVision, which leverages spatiotemporal information across soccer videos and excels in various
downstream tasks; (iii) we conduct extensive experiments
and ablation studies on event classification, commentary
generation, and multi-view foul recognition. MatchVision
demonstrates state-of-the-art performance on all of them,
substantially outperforming existing models, which highlights the superiority of our proposed data and model. We
believe that this work will offer a standard paradigm for
sports understanding research.

Classification
“Shot Saved”

Commentary
MatchVision

“[PLAYER] ([TEAM]) shakes off the attention
of a defender and from mid-range lets fly
towards the middle of the goal, but [PLAYER]
is well positioned to make a comfortable save.”

Figure 1. Overview. We present SoccerReplay-1988, the largest
soccer dataset to date, and a powerful soccer-specific visual encoder, MatchVision, capable of excelling in various tasks such as
event classification and commentary generation.

fan engagement through interactive and personalized content [34, 36, 40]. These capabilities promote a deeper understanding of soccer, simplify content creation, and foster
a more engaging experience for fans and professionals.
Existing research in soccer video analysis primarily revolves around the SoccerNet series datasets [7, 10, 15],
which comprise 500 full-match videos for benchmarking
various tasks, such as action spotting [10, 15] and commentary generation [34, 36, 40]. Despite this extensive
coverage, the focus has predominantly been on designing
specialized models for task-specific applications, leading to
fragmented and incompatible solutions. Such fragmentation underscores the need for a unified framework capable
of integrating diverse demands, enabling more holistic and
scalable advancements in soccer video understanding.
In this paper, we introduce SoccerReplay-1988, the
largest and most comprehensive multi-modal soccer video
dataset to date, featuring 1,988 complete match videos with

“Football is one of the world’s best means of communication. It is impartial, apolitical, and universal.”
—— Franz Beckenbauer (1945 - 2024)

1. Introduction
Soccer, celebrated worldwide for its significant commercial
value, has recently seen great research interest in integrating
artificial intelligence (AI) for soccer video understanding.
This is primarily motivated by the sport’s complexity and
the growing demand for enhanced analytics and improved
viewing experiences. AI systems facilitate tactical analysis [49], allowing coaches to devise better strategies by uncovering patterns not apparent to the naked eye. In addition,
it also supports automated content generation and enriches
*: These authors contribute equally to this work.
†: Corresponding author.

8384

