This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NVComposer: Boosting Generative Novel View Synthesis with
Multiple Sparse and Unposed Images
Lingen Li1 * Zhaoyang Zhang2†‡ Yaowei Li3 Jiale Xu2 Wenbo Hu2 Xiaoyu Li2
Weihao Cheng2 Jinwei Gu1 Tianfan Xue1‡ Ying Shan2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG 3 Peking University
Input Views
#1

ViewCrafter

Ours

1-View

Legend
DUSt3R

PSNR

23

DISTS

0.28

(Higher is Better)

21

0.24

19

0.2

17

0.16

(Lower is Better)

ViewCrafter

#2

2-View

NVComposer
(Ours)

Real Reference
#3

15

3-View

0.12

Num. of Input View(s)

13
1

2

3

4

Num. of Input View(s)

0.08
1

2

3

4

Figure 1. As the number of unposed input views increases, NVComposer (blue circle) effectively uses the extra information to improve
NVS quality. In contrast, ViewCrafter [49] (green triangle), which relies on external multi-view alignment (via pre-reconstruction from
DUSt3R [38]), suffers performance degradation as the number of views grows due to instability of the external alignment. This result
contradicts the common expectation that “more views lead to better performance.” Please refer to Sec. 4.2 for full results.

Abstract

1. Introduction
With recent advances in generative models, generative
novel view synthesis (NVS) methods have drawn considerable attention [8, 23, 24, 30, 43, 49] due to its ability to synthesize novel views with only one or a few images. Unlike reconstruction-based NVS methods, where
dense-view images with full coverage of the scene are required [17, 19, 25, 38], generative NVS methods could take
only one or a few views as inputs, completing unseen parts
of a scene with plausible content [28, 48]. This capability
is particularly useful in applications where capturing extensive views is impractical, offering greater flexibility and efficiency for virtual scene exploration and content creation.
In addition to generating novel views from a single input
image, generative NVS methods [8, 22, 49] have demonstrated more flexible utility by reducing ambiguity through
giving additional input images [45]. To leverage multiview images in the generative NVS tasks, existing methods [8, 43, 49] all rely on external multi-view alignment
processes before generation. For example, assuming accurate poses of condition images are given (through explicit pose estimation) [8] or generate novel views conditioned on results extracted from reconstructive NVS methods (through pre-reconstruction) [22, 43, 49]. However, in
the case of the overlap region being small and hard to do
stereo matching, external multi-view alignment processes

Recent advancements in generative models have significantly improved novel view synthesis (NVS) from multi-view
data. However, existing methods depend on external multiview alignment processes, such as explicit pose estimation
or pre-reconstruction, which limits their flexibility and accessibility, especially when alignment is unstable due to insufficient overlap or occlusions between views. In this paper, we propose NVComposer, a novel approach that eliminates the need for explicit external alignment. NVComposer
enables the generative model to implicitly infer spatial and
geometric relationships between multiple conditional views
by introducing two key components: 1) an image-pose dualstream diffusion model that simultaneously generates target
novel views and condition camera poses, and 2) a geometryaware feature alignment module that distills geometric priors from dense stereo models during training. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that NVComposer achieves stateof-the-art performance in generative multi-view NVS tasks,
removing the reliance on external alignment and thus improving model accessibility. Our approach shows substantial improvements in synthesis quality as the number of unposed input views increases, highlighting its potential for
more flexible and accessible generative NVS systems.
* Work

done during the internship at ARC Lab.
‡ Corresponding authors.

Project Page.

† Project lead.

777

