This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AT A: Adaptive Transformation Agent for Text-Guided
Subject-Position Variable Background Inpainting
Yizhe Tang1 * Zhimin Sun1,2 * Yuzhen Du1,2 Ran Yi1† Guangben Lu2
Teng Hu1 Luying Li2 Lizhuang Ma1 Fangyuan Zou2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Tencent
A car is parked on the road, with a waterfall cascading in
the distance, surrounded by lush vegetation.

Abstract
Image inpainting aims to fill the missing region of an image.
Recently, there has been a surge of interest in foregroundconditioned background inpainting, a sub-task that fills the
background of an image while the foreground subject and
associated text prompt are provided. Existing background
inpainting methods typically strictly preserve the subject’s
original position from the source image, resulting in inconsistencies between the subject and the generated background. To address this challenge, we propose a new task,
the “Text-Guided Subject-Position Variable Background Inpainting”, which aims to dynamically adjust the subject position to achieve a harmonious relationship between the
subject and the inpainted background, and propose the
Adaptive Transformation Agent (AT A) for this task. Firstly,
we design a PosAgent Block that adaptively predicts an appropriate displacement based on given features to achieve
variable subject-position. Secondly, we design the Reverse
Displacement Transform (RDT) module, which arranges
multiple PosAgent blocks in a reverse structure, to transform hierarchical feature maps from deep to shallow based
on semantic information. Thirdly, we equip AT A with a Position Switch Embedding to control whether the subject’s
position in the generated image is adaptively predicted or
fixed. Extensive comparative experiments validate the effectiveness of our AT A approach, which not only demonstrates
superior inpainting capabilities in subject-position variable
inpainting, but also ensures good performance on subjectposition fixed inpainting.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting [37] aims to fill the missing region in an
image, which is an important research topic in computer
vision. With the development of text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models [18, 25, 27], text-guided inpainting meth* Equal contribution.
{tangyizhe, zhimin.sun}@sjtu.edu.cn
† Corresponding author.
ranyi@sjtu.edu.cn

(a) BrushNet-SD1.5

(b) Ours

Figure 1. For foreground-conditioned background inpainting, (a)
fixing the object position specified by the input image (left-top)
may contradict the generated background; (b) while our model
achieves subject-position variable background inpainting, adaptively determines a suitable location for the subject, and generates
an image with a harmonious subject-background relationship.

ods [1, 2, 10, 11, 40, 50] have achieved promising progress,
which fill a user-specified region under the inputs of an image, a masked region, and a text prompt, and achieve inpainting results consistent with the text prompt. In most
inpainting scenarios, the inpainted regions are foreground
regions, and some parts of the foreground human or objects are restored or edited according to the text guidance [1, 11, 27, 40, 47, 50]. However, in this paper, we
focus on the inpainting scenarios where the foreground region is given and the whole background region is to be inpainted [23, 41, 46], and aim to fill the background region
according to the text prompt, which has wide applications
in advertisement design, product promotional design, etc.
When filling the specified masked regions, existing inpainting methods [11, 40, 50] emphasize the preservation
of the unmasked (given) region as much as possible, requiring pixel-level strong consistency for the unmasked region. However, in the case of foreground-conditioned background inpainting [23, 41, 46], where the foreground is
given and the background is to be inpainted, this unmasked
region preservation constraint can sometimes be overpowering and result in problems. Given a subject image, a back-

18335

