This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Lexicon: Rich Image Features in Language Space
XuDong Wang1,2∗

Xingyi Zhou1 Alireza Fathi1 Trevor Darrell2
1
2
Google DeepMind
UC Berkeley

Cordelia Schmid1

Figure 1. Given the cute corgi painting in the top left corner, how can we extract a visual representation that captures semantic-level
information – such as object categories and layouts – while preserving rich visual details like image styles, textures and colors? We
introduce ViLex model that generates image representations in the text vocabulary space, acting as a new visual “language”, while
retaining intricate visual details that are difﬁcult, if not impossible, to convey in natural language. The set of images (generated under
different diffusion noises) in the 2×2 grid, which are highly semantically and visually similar to each other, is created by using ViLex as
“text” prompts for text-to-image diffusion models.

Abstract
We present Visual Lexicon, a novel visual language that
encodes rich image information into the text space of vocabulary tokens while retaining intricate visual details that are
often challenging to convey in natural language. Unlike traditional methods that prioritize either high-level semantics
(e.g., CLIP) or pixel-level reconstruction (e.g., VAE), ViLex
simultaneously captures rich semantic content and ﬁne visual details, enabling high-quality image generation and
comprehensive visual scene understanding. Through a selfsupervised learning pipeline, ViLex generates tokens optimized for reconstructing input images using a frozen textto-image (T2I) diffusion model, preserving the detailed information necessary for high-ﬁdelity semantic-level reconstruction. As an image embedding in the language space,
ViLex tokens leverage the compositionality of natural languages, allowing them to be used independently as “text tokens” or combined with natural language tokens to prompt
pretrained T2I models with both visual and textual inputs, mirroring how we interact with vision-language mod*Work done in a GDM internship.

: {xudongwang, zhouxy}@google.com

els (VLMs). Experiments demonstrate that ViLex achieves
higher ﬁdelity in image reconstruction compared to text embeddings—even with a single ViLex token. Moreover, ViLex
successfully performs various DreamBooth tasks in a zeroshot, unsupervised manner without ﬁne-tuning T2I models.
Additionally, ViLex serves as a powerful vision encoder,
consistently improving vision-language model performance
across 15 benchmarks relative to a strong SigLIP baseline.

1. Introduction
How should we represent an image? This is a fundamental question in computer vision. Over decades of progress,
there have been two primary approaches: representations
optimized for understanding high-level semantics [14, 50,
53], or for high-ﬁdelity image reconstruction [23, 34, 86],
often used in image generation [55, 60]. Understandingfocused models like CLIP [53] and DINO [8] capture highlevel semantics but lose pixel-level details. Conversely,
reconstruction-focused models, such as VAEs [34], retain
ﬁne visual details but lack semantic richness, making them
less effective for tasks like vision-language modeling. In

19736

