This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoComp: Advancing Fine-Grained Compositional and Temporal Alignment
in Video-Text Models
Dahun Kim
Google DeepMind

AJ Piergiovanni
Google DeepMind

Ganesh Mallya
Google DeepMind

Anelia Angelova
Google DeepMind

Abstract
We introduce VideoComp, a benchmark and learning framework for advancing video-text compositionality understanding, aimed at improving vision-language models (VLMs) in
fine-grained temporal alignment. Unlike existing benchmarks focused on static image-text compositionality or isolated single-event videos, our benchmark targets alignment in continuous multi-event videos. Leveraging videotext datasets with temporally localized event captions (e.g.
ActivityNet-Captions, YouCook2), we construct two compositional benchmarks, ActivityNet-Comp and YouCook2Comp. We create challenging negative samples with subtle
temporal disruptions such as reordering, action word replacement, partial captioning, and combined disruptions.
These benchmarks comprehensively test models’ compositional sensitivity across extended, cohesive video-text sequences. To improve model performance, we propose a hierarchical pairwise preference loss that strengthens alignment with temporally accurate pairs and gradually penalizes increasingly disrupted ones, encouraging fine-grained
compositional learning. To mitigate the limited availability
of densely annotated video data, we introduce a pretraining
strategy that concatenates short video-caption pairs to simulate multi-event sequences. We evaluate video-text foundational models and large multimodal models (LMMs) on
our benchmark, identifying both strengths and areas for improvement in compositionality. Overall, our work provides
a comprehensive framework for evaluating and enhancing
model capabilities in achieving fine-grained, temporally coherent video-text alignment.

[Positive] A swimmer is standing on a diving board outside a pool.
Then, a guy at the edge of the diving board extends his hand and dives
into the water. As he completes his dive, the audience cheer and
celebrate. Finally, the diver receives hugs from others.
[Temp-Reorder] (2) At the edge of the diving board, a guy extends his
hand and dives into the water. (1) Nearby, a swimmer is standing on
the diving board outside the pool. (4) After the dive, the diver receives
hugs from others. (3) Then, the audience cheer and celebrate.

[Action-Replace] A swimmer is standing on a diving board outside a
pool. Then, a guy at the edge of the diving board waves to the crowd
and dives into the water. As he completes his dive, the audience cheer
and celebrate. Finally, the diver receives hugs from others.
[Seg-Mismatch] A swimmer is standing on a diving board outside a
pool. Then, a guy at the edge of the diving board extends his hand and
dives into the water.
[Seg-Mismatch] As a man completes his dive, the audience cheer and
celebrate. Afterward, the diver receives hugs from others.
[Multi-Disrupt] (2) At the edge of the diving board, a guy waves to
the crowd and dives into the water. (1) Nearby, a swimmer is standing
on the diving board outside the pool. (4) After the dive, the diver
receives hugs from others. (3) Then, the audience cheer and celebrate

Figure 1. Illustration of our video-text compositionality benchmark, introducing challenging disruptions for fine-grained alignment. Starting from a video and its positive text description (top
row), we apply subtle disruptions including temporal reordering
(purple), action word replacement (orange), and segment-level
mismatch (yellow text matched with blue video crop) for evaluation, along with combined disruptions used during training. These
perturbations test the model’s ability to distinguish coherent videotext pairs from disrupted ones.

ture both temporal and structural relationships within event
sequences. In video compositionality, models must align
temporally ordered and semantically rich video segments
with text, discerning evolving relationships among entities
within and across scenes. Although video-text understanding has gained attention, few benchmarks specifically address the dynamic, fine-grained temporal compositionality
needed to process multi-event coherence in video.

1. Introduction
Compositionality, the capacity to understand and integrate
attributes, relations, and entity states, is essential for visionlanguage models (VLMs) to achieve a comprehensive understanding of complex scenes. While traditional benchmarks largely focus on compositionality in static image-text
pairs, extending this to video data requires models to cap-

29060

