This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EgoLM: Multi-Modal Language Model of Egocentric Motions
Fangzhou Hong1,2† , Vladimir Guzov1,3,4† , Hyo Jin Kim1 , Yuting Ye1
Richard Newcombe1 , Ziwei Liu2 , Lingni Ma1
1

Meta Reality Labs Research, 2 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University,
3
Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen, 4 MPI for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
Input #1: Sparse
Motion Sensors

Input #2: Egocentric Videos

“The person is standing straight as she
puts the piece of clothing on the hanger.”

“The person turns around then
walks out of the bedroom.”

Figure 1. We propose EgoLM, a multi-modal language model that unifies egocentric motion tracking and understanding from wearable
sensor data, i.e., sparse motion sensors and egocentric videos.

through a variety of applications. Project page: https:
//hongfz16.github.io/projects/EgoLM .

Abstract
As wearable devices become more prevalent, understanding the user’s motion is crucial for improving contextual
AI systems. We introduce EgoLM, a versatile framework
designed for egocentric motion understanding using multimodal data. EgoLM integrates the rich contextual information from egocentric videos and motion sensors afforded by
wearable devices. It also combines dense supervision signals from motion and language, leveraging the vast knowledge encoded in pre-trained large language models (LLMs).
EgoLM models the joint distribution of egocentric motions
and natural language using LLMs, conditioned on observations from egocentric videos and motion sensors. It unifies a
range of motion understanding tasks, including motion narration from video or motion data, as well as motion generation from text or sparse sensor data. Unique to wearable
devices, it also enables a novel task to generate text descriptions from sparse sensors. Through extensive experiments,
we validate the effectiveness of EgoLM in addressing the
challenges of under-constrained egocentric motion learning, and demonstrate its capability as a generalist model

1. Introduction
Smart wearable devices, such as Ray-Ban Meta [33] and
Spectacles [48], offer new opportunities for developing personal AI assistants by capturing the world from the user’s
perspective. They provide real-time egocentric observations about the user’s environment and actions. On the
other hand, large language models (LLMs) [2, 53] encode
such context through text in their latent space, which can be
leveraged for common-sense reasoning and human understanding. The fusion of egocentric perception and commonsense reasoning presents a unique and exciting opportunity
for advancing contextual AI research, among which, egocentric motion understanding is an essential task [41].
However, a key challenge in utilizing egocentric perception is the lack of direct observations of the wearer.
Two types of observations are available from wearable devices, i.e., 1) egocentric videos and 2) sparse motion sensors. Egocentric videos, captured by cameras mounted on
smart glasses, provide rich contextual information of the
wearer’s environment and interactions. But the wearer’s
body is rarely visible in the video, due to constrained cam-

Corresponding author.
† Work done during internships at Meta Reality Labs Research.

5344

