This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mitigating Ambiguities in 3D Classiﬁcation with Gaussian Splatting*
Ruiqi Zhang1,† , Hao Zhu1,† , Jingyi Zhao2 , Qi Zhang3 , Xun Cao1,∗ , Zhan Ma1,∗
1
Nanjing University, 2 Imperial College London, 3 Vivo Company
† Equal contribution. * Corresponding author: {caoxun, mazhan}@nju.edu.cn
Bowl?

Abstract
3D classiﬁcation with point cloud input is a fundamental
problem in 3D vision. However, due to the discrete nature
and the insufﬁcient material description of point cloud representations, there are ambiguities in distinguishing wirelike and ﬂat surfaces, as well as transparent or reﬂective objects. To address these issues, we propose Gaussian Splatting (GS) point cloud-based 3D classiﬁcation. We ﬁnd that
the scale and rotation coefﬁcients in the GS point cloud
help characterize surface types. Speciﬁcally, wire-like surfaces consist of multiple slender Gaussian ellipsoids, while
ﬂat surfaces are composed of a few ﬂat Gaussian ellipsoids. Additionally, the opacity in the GS point cloud represents the transparency characteristics of objects. As a
result, ambiguities in point cloud-based 3D classiﬁcation
can be mitigated utilizing GS point cloud as input. To verify the effectiveness of GS point cloud input, we construct
the ﬁrst real-world GS point cloud dataset in the community, which includes 20 categories with 200 objects in each
category. Experiments not only validate the superiority of
GS point cloud input, especially in distinguishing ambiguous objects, but also demonstrate the generalization ability
across different classiﬁcation methods. Our project page:
https://ruiqi-nju.github.io/MACGS.

1. Introduction
“The performance of machine learning methods is heavily
dependent on the choice of data representation (or features)
on which they are applied.”
Bengio et al. [1]
3D classiﬁcation, which aims at identifying and categorizing objects with 3D point cloud input, is gaining increasing attention due to the convenience of 3D acquisition equipment and its better ability to characterize structure and handle occlusions compared to traditional 2D images. Different from the regular grids in 2D images, the
3D point cloud is organized in an irregular, unordered way,
* The work was supported in part by the National Key Research and
Development Project of China (2022YFF0902402) and NSFC (Grant
62473193).

Basket?
Reflective

Point Cloud

GS Point Cloud

Wire-like

Point Cloud

GS Point Cloud

Classifiers

Prob.

Basket
Bowl

Prob.

Bowl

Prob.

Basket

Bowl

Basket

Wrong

Prob.

Bowl
Basket

Correct

Wrong

Correct

Figure 1. Illustration of ambiguity mitigation in 3D classiﬁcation
using GS point cloud. Although the Bowl and the Basket have
different surface types (ﬂat vs wire-like, specular vs diffuse reﬂection), existing classiﬁers often confuse them due to similar shapes
when described as traditional point cloud, resulting in wrong probability predictions. These ambiguities can be mitigated by introducing GS point cloud.

leading to the development of various neural network architectures [7, 10, 11, 19–21, 27, 30] for extracting local
shapes.
However, due to the discrete nature and hard description
of existence in point cloud representation, there are two inherent ambiguities in characterizing local shapes and appearance in existing point cloud-based classiﬁcation methods. For the ﬁrst ambiguity, the sampling rate of existing 3D acquisitions is often insufﬁcient for characterizing
high-frequency structures, resulting in similar point cloud
representations for wire-like and ﬂat surfaces of objects
that belong to different categories. For the second ambiguity, existing point cloud representation assumes that the
components of a 3D object follow a hard existing (1) or

27275

