This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DyFo: A Training-Free Dynamic Focus Visual Search for Enhancing LMMs in
Fine-Grained Visual Understanding
Geng Li1 Jinglin Xu2 Yunzhen Zhao3 Yuxin Peng1 *
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology Beijing
3
Tencent Beijing Research, Beijing, 100193, China
1

ligeng@stu.pku.edu.cn, xujinglinlove@gmail.com, yunzhenzhao@tencent.com, pengyuxin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

to recognize the importance of selecting visual inputs based
on semantic relevance for efficient visual processing.

Humans can effortlessly locate desired objects in cluttered environments, relying on a cognitive mechanism
known as visual search to efficiently filter out irrelevant
information and focus on task-related regions. Inspired
by this process, we propose DyFo (Dynamic Focus), a
training-free dynamic focusing visual search method that
enhances fine-grained visual understanding in large multimodal models (LMMs). Unlike existing approaches which
require additional modules or data collection, DyFo leverages a bidirectional interaction between LMMs and visual
experts, using a Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithm to simulate human-like focus adjustments. This enables LMMs to focus on key visual regions while filtering out irrelevant content, without introducing additional
training caused by vocabulary expansion or the integration
of specialized localization modules. Experimental results
demonstrate that DyFo significantly improves fine-grained
visual understanding and reduces hallucination issues in
LMMs, achieving superior performance across both fixed
and dynamic resolution models.

As a promising paradigm for achieving general multimodal perception and reasoning capabilities, LMMs have
achieved notable performance improvements across a range
of multimodal tasks [1, 5, 19, 24, 64]. Some LMMs,
such as BLIP-2[19] and LLaVA[24], use fixed-resolution
encoders to process visual information. These encoders,
like ViT[7], operate at a specified input resolution (224
or 336), converting scaled images into a fixed number of
tokens. This approach often faces difficulties with highresolution image tasks because downsizing images and limiting the number of tokens cause the loss of important details, such as small objects, which can eventually lead to
hallucinations[9, 44]. To handle high-resolution images,
some works (e.g., Qwen2-VL [45] and LLaVA-Next [17])
divide images into smaller sections. Each section is processed separately to generate fixed number of tokens, which
are then combined. This approach supports dynamic resolutions and variable token counts, greatly enhancing LMMs’
ability to process high-resolution images. However, realworld visual inputs often consist of complex scenes with
many unrelated objects, such as busy streets crowded with
pedestrians and vehicles or supermarket shelves filled with
products. In fine-grained visual understanding tasks that
require focusing on specific visual subregions to answer
detailed questions, unrestrictedly increasing visual input
may introduce a large amount of irrelevant content, causing interference. Some studies [43, 58] have shown that
as irrelevant input increases, hallucinations in large multimodal models (LMMs) become more pronounced. Therefore, merely expanding resolution and input capacity may
further introduce hallucinations, ultimately limiting the performance of fine-grained visual understanding tasks.

1. Introduction
Humans can quickly locate desired objects in a cluttered environment or recognize familiar faces in a crowd. This efficient visual information retrieval ability is attributed to a visual processing mechanism known as visual search, which
has been extensively studied in cognitive and vision sciences [29, 42, 46, 48, 49]. In visual search, dynamic focusing adjustments are taken to efficiently filter out irrelevant
visual information and concentrate on task-related regions
[34, 36]. For example, when reading, people focus on semantically relevant text regions (fixations) and quickly scan
past irrelevant areas (saccades) [13, 31]. This inspires us

To enhance LMMs’ fine-grained visual understanding [11, 56, 61], some studies [3, 30, 57] use region bounding boxes or masks during training to enable local re-

* Corresponding author.

9098

