This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neuro-Symbolic Evaluation of Text-to-Video Models using Formal Verification
S P Sharan*
Minkyu Choi* †
Harsh Goel
Mohammad Omama

Sahil Shah
Sandeep Chinchali

The University of Texas at Austin, United States

Figure 1. Current generative video evaluation methods struggle with temporal fidelity. NeuS-Vconverts prompts into Temporal Logic
specifications and formally verifies them against a video automaton. The upper video aligns with the prompt’s temporal sequencing, while
the lower video, despite being visually appealing, fails to do so. Unlike VBench, NeuS-V effectively differentiates between them.

Abstract

introduce \textit {NeuS-V}, a novel synthetic video evaluation metric that rigorously assesses text-to-video alignment using
neuro-symbolic formal verification techniques. Our approach first converts the prompt into a formally defined
Temporal Logic (TL) specification and translates the generated video into an automaton representation. Then, it
evaluates the text-to-video alignment by formally checking
the video automaton against the TL specification. Furthermore, we present a dataset of temporally extended prompts
to evaluate state-of-the-art video generation models against
our benchmark. We find that \textit {NeuS-V} demonstrates a higher
correlation by over 5× with human evaluations when compared to existing metrics. Our evaluation further reveals
that current video generation models perform poorly on

Recent advancements in text-to-video models such as Sora,
Gen-3, MovieGen, and CogVideoX are pushing the boundaries of synthetic video generation, with adoption seen
in fields like robotics, autonomous driving, and entertainment. As these models become prevalent, various metrics and benchmarks have emerged to evaluate the quality of the generated videos. However, these metrics emphasize visual quality and smoothness, neglecting temporal fidelity and text-to-video alignment, which are crucial
for safety-critical applications. To address this gap, we
*Equal contribution (Order determined by coin toss).
†Corresponding author: minkyu.choi@utexas.edu

8395

