This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MMTL-UniAD: A Unified Framework for Multimodal and Multi-Task Learning
in Assistive Driving Perception
Wenzhuo Liu1
Wenshuo Wang*,1
2
Zilong Chen
Huiming Yang2
1

Yicheng Qiao2
Qiannan Guo2
Jiayin Zhu3
Pengfei Li2
4
5
2
Zhiwei Li
Lening Wang
Tiao Tan
Huaping Liu2

2
3
Beijing Institute of Technology, Zhuhai
Tsinghua University
HKUST(GZ)
4
5
Beijing University of Chemical Technology
Beihang University

Abstract
Advanced driver assistance systems require a comprehensive understanding of the driver’s mental/physical state and
traffic context but existing works often neglect the potential benefits of joint learning between these tasks. This paper proposes MMTL-UniAD, a unified multi-modal multitask learning framework that simultaneously recognizes
driver behavior (e.g., looking around, talking), driver emotion (e.g., anxiety, happiness), vehicle behavior (e.g., parking, turning), and traffic context (e.g., traffic jam, traffic
smooth). A key challenge is avoiding negative transfer between tasks, which can impair learning performance. To
address this, we introduce two key components into the
framework: one is the multi-axis region attention network
to extract global context-sensitive features, and the other
is the dual-branch multimodal embedding to learn multimodal embeddings from both task-shared and task-specific
features. The former uses a multi-attention mechanism to
extract task-relevant features, mitigating negative transfer
caused by task-unrelated features. The latter employs a
dual-branch structure to adaptively adjust task-shared and
task-specific parameters, enhancing cross-task knowledge
transfer while reducing task conflicts. We assess MMTLUniAD on the AIDE dataset, using a series of ablation studies, and show that it outperforms state-of-the-art methods
across all four tasks. The code is available on https:
//github.com/Wenzhuo-Liu/MMTL-UniAD.

Figure 1. Traffic context and driver states interaction diagram.
Tasks (a), (b), (c), and (d) represent traffic context recognition, vehicle behavior recognition, driver behavior recognition, and driver
emotion recognition, respectively. These tasks comprehensively
demonstrate the complex and closely interconnected relationships
between the driver and traffic.

66]. Despite these advancements, approximately 1.35 million fatalities occur annually in traffic accidents [42], with
human drivers’ abnormal mental or physical states contributing to over 65% of these incidents [50]. Consequently,
accurate identification of driver states is essential for ADAS
[28, 38] but remains a complex challenge due to the intricate
causal relationships between driver states and traffic context
[62] (see Fig. 1). For instance, traffic congestion can induce
driver anxiety, effecting driving behavior [62].
Most existing approaches to driver state and traffic context recognition focus on isolated tasks, such as driver behavior or emotion recognition [19, 29, 41, 45, 63, 64], traffic environment recognition [20, 39, 54, 67]. However, they
fail to exploit the interaction between these tasks, which can
limit the potential for cross-task learning [43]. In reality,
these tasks are not independent when driving in real-world
traffic [38, 62]. For example, lane-change behavior relies
on the interaction between the current traffic context (e.g.,
congestion) and the driver’s emotional state [20, 57].
Multi-task learning (MTL) offers an opportunity to en-

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) — such as automatic emergency braking, lane
keeping assist, and surround view monitoring — have significantly enhanced driving safety through the advances in
monitoring driver states and surrounding traffic [6, 31, 55,
* Corresponding author.

6864

