This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Extremely High Density Crowds as Active Matters
Feixiang He2 , Jiangbei Yue3 , Jialin Zhu2 , Armin Seyfried4 , Dan Casas5 ,* Julien Pettré6 , He Wang 1,2†
1
AI Centre, University College London, UK 2 University College London, UK
3
University of Leeds, UK 4 Forschungszentrum Jülich, Germany
5
Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, Spain 6 INRIA Rennes, France

Abstract

crushes [46], which is under-studied in computer vision.
Early research has primarily focused on relatively low
density, with empirical modeling [5, 21, 39, 51, 53] and
data-driven methods [3, 16, 31, 32, 37, 65]. While the former is explicit and explainable but inaccurate in prediction,
the latter is accurate in prediction but lacks explainability
[54, 63, 64]. A recent trend is hybrid models, combining black-box neural networks (NNs) with explicit models,
leveraging the advantages of both methodologies. These
methods combine NNs with differential equations [69], or
with physics conditioned on social interactions [9, 66], or
with physics and symbolic regression [38]. However, these
approaches are designed mainly for low-density crowds,
where the microscopic motion is simple and trajectory data
can be reliably obtained, which is unlikely in high-density
crowds from in-the-wild videos. Furthermore, merely focused on local interactions, they lack the ability to capture
large-scale/global flow patterns [55]. A very recent attempt
introduced a hydrodynamics-informed neural network to
simulate dense crowds [74] utilizing optical flows. However, it fails to account for the self-propelled characteristics
of crowds and is not suitable for agent-based simulation.

Video-based high-density crowd analysis and prediction has
been a long-standing topic in computer vision. It is notoriously difficult due to, but not limited to, the lack of highquality data and complex crowd dynamics. Consequently, it
has been relatively under-studied. In this paper, we propose
a new approach that aims to learn from in-the-wild videos,
often with low quality where it is difficult to track individuals or count heads. The key novelty is a new physics prior
to model crowd dynamics. We model high-density crowds
as active matter, a continuum with active particles subject
to stochastic forces, named ‘crowd material’. Our physics
model is combined with neural networks, resulting in a neural stochastic differential equation system that can mimic
complex crowd dynamics. Due to the lack of similar research, we adapt a range of existing methods which are
close to ours for comparison. Through exhaustive evaluations, we show our model outperforms existing methods in
analyzing and forecasting extremely high-density crowds.
Furthermore, since our model is a continuous-time physics
model, it can be used for simulation and analysis, providing strong interpretability. This is categorically different
from most deep learning methods, which are discrete-time
models and black-boxes.

Extremely high-density crowds present unique challenges for prediction and analysis. The foremost is the
scarcity of high-quality data. For high-density crowds,
often the only available data is Closed-Circuit Television
(CCTV) videos, because cameras are the only sensors allowed in many public spaces due to their non-invasiveness.
As a result, it is imperative to be able to work directly with
these videos. However, in public spaces, the cameras are
often far from the crowd and the data is noisy therefore unlikely to provide accurate individual motion, if at all, even
with crowd counting/localization methods [1, 33, 35, 36].
This makes agent-based analysis [18, 56–58, 69, 70],
which relies on trajectory estimation, impractical. Furthermore, complex dynamics arise when crowd density exceeds
5p/m2 . Vastly different from low-density crowds, highdensity crowds behave like an active matter [40], e.g. a continuum with particles moving non-deterministically caused
by autonomous behaviors and self-propulsion even when

1. Introduction
Video-based crowd forecasting/analysis has been a longstanding problem in computer vision [30], and is especially crucial in public safety and event organization [19].
In this area, one of the most difficult scenarios is extremely high-density crowds. We are particularly interested in crowds where the density is at least 5p/m2 (people
per square meter). At this density level, forecast/analysis
becomes notoriously challenging as the dynamics can become violently chaotic [14], resulting in life-threatening
* work done prior to joining Amazon
† Corresponding author, he wang@ucl.ac.uk

540

