This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HSI: A Holistic Style Injector for Arbitrary Style Transfer
Shuhao Zhang1,2 , Hui Kang1,3 , Yang Liu1 , Fang Mei1,3∗ , Hongjuan Li1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, 130012, China
2
Academic Affairs Office, Jilin University of Arts, Changchun, 130021, China
3
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education,
Jilin University, Changchun, 130012, China
shzhang22@mails.jlu.edu.cn, kanghui@jlu.edu.cn,
liuy24@mails.jlu.edu.cn, meifang@jlu.edu.cn, hongjuan23@mails.jlu.edu.cn

Content & Style

SANet

Ours

AdaAttN

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. The comparison between our method and some attention-based methods. (a) Image stylization results. Compared to SANet [23]
and AdaAttN [21], the generated image of our method is more consistent with original content and more harmonious in style patterns. (b)
GPU memory consumption in different resolutions. Compared to other methods, our method successfully renders images from 256 × 256
to 2048 × 2048 resolution on a 24GB GPU (4090Ti) without running out of memory.

Abstract
Attention-based arbitrary style transfer methods have
gained significant attention recently due to their impressive ability to synthesize style details. However, the pointwise matching within the attention mechanism may overly
focus on local patterns such that neglect the remarkable
global features of style images. Additionally, when processing large images, the quadratic complexity of the attention mechanism will bring high computational load. To
alleviate above problems, we propose Holistic Style Injector
(HSI), a novel attention-style transformation module to deliver artistic expression of target style. Specifically, HSI performs stylization only based on global style representation
that is more in line with the characteristics of style transfer,
to avoid generating local disharmonious patterns in stylized images. Moreover, we propose a dual relation learning
* Corresponding author

mechanism inside the HSI to dynamically render images by
leveraging semantic similarity in content and style, ensuring the stylized images preserve the original content and improve style fidelity. Note that the proposed HSI achieves linear computational complexity because it establishes feature
mapping through element-wise multiplication rather than
matrix multiplication. Qualitative and quantitative results
demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art
approaches in both effectiveness and efficiency.

1. Introduction
Arbitrary Style Transfer (AST) is an artwork creating
technique to transform a natural image (i.e., content image) with specific artistic semantic by learning the representative style elements of the artistic images (i.e., style image). Since Gates et al. [11] proposed the first neural style
transfer algorithm that integrates the Gram statistics of style

23433

