This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PanDA: Towards Panoramic Depth Anything with Unlabeled Panoramas and
Möbius Spatial Augmentation
Zidong Cao1

Jinjing Zhu1 Weiming Zhang1 Hao Ai2 Haotian Bai1
Hengshuang Zhao3 Lin Wang4†
1
AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ) 2 University of Birmingham 3 HKU 4 NTU

Zoom

0.8

1.6

Rotation

20°

10°

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Our PanDA exhibits impressive panoramic depth estimation results in open-world scenarios. The resolution of presented
panoramas is 1008×2016. (b) Top row: Spherical images with different zoom levels, and the corresponding depth predictions with perspective projection. Middle row: ERP image. Bottom row: Spherical images with different vertical rotation angles, and the corresponding
depth predictions with perspective projection. Our PanDA is robust to spherical transformations and predicts fine-grained depths.

Abstract

joint training on synthetic indoor and outdoor panoramic
datasets. Then, a student model is trained using largescale unlabeled data, leveraging pseudo-labels generated
by the teacher model. To enhance PanDA’s generalization
capability, Möbius transformation-based spatial augmentation (MTSA) is proposed to impose consistency regularization between the predicted depth maps from the original and spatially transformed ones. This subtly improves
the student model’s robustness to various spatial transformations, even under severe distortions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that PanDA exhibits remarkable zeroshot capability across diverse scenes, and outperforms the
data-specific panoramic depth estimation methods on two
popular real-world benchmarks. Project page: https:
//caozidong.github.io/PanDA_Depth/.

Recently, Depth Anything Models (DAMs) [47, 48] – a
type of depth foundation models – have demonstrated impressive zero-shot capabilities across diverse perspective
images. Despite its success, it remains an open question regarding DAMs’ performance on panorama images
that enjoy a large field-of-view (180◦ × 360◦ ) but suffer
from spherical distortions. To address this gap, we conduct an empirical analysis to evaluate the performance
of DAMs on panoramic images and identify their limitations. For this, we undertake comprehensive experiments
to assess the performance of DAMs from three key factors: panoramic representations, 360◦ camera positions for
capturing scenarios, and spherical spatial transformations.
This way, we reveal some key findings, e.g., DAMs are sensitive to spatial transformations. We then propose a semisupervised learning (SSL) framework to learn a panoramic
DAM, dubbed PanDA. Under the umbrella of SSL, PanDA
first learns a teacher model by fine-tuning DAM through

1. Introduction
360◦ cameras have gained significant interest for their ability to capture surrounding environments in a single shot [3].
Monocular panoramic depth estimation is a crucial task for
3D scene perception with various applications, such as vir-

† Corresponding author

982

