This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UVGS: Reimagining Unstructured 3D Gaussian Splatting using UV Mapping
Aashish Rai1,2

Dilin Wang2
Mihir Jain2
Srinath Sridhar1
1

Brown University

Nikolaos Sarafianos2
Aayush Prakash2
2

Kefan Chen1,2

Meta Reality Labs

https://aashishrai3799.github.io/uvgs

Figure 1. We propose UVGS - an structured image-like representation for 3DGS obtained by spherical mapping of its primitives. The
obtained UVGS maps can be further unified to a 3-channel Super UVGS image to bridging the gap between 3DGS and existing image
foundation models. We show Super UVGS can compress the 3DGS assets using pretrained image Autoencoders, and for direct unconditional and conditional 3DGS object generation using diffusion models. We also present one of the first experiments on 3DGS inpainting.

Abstract

to accommodate more Gaussians, making UVGS a scalable
solution compared to typical 3D backbones. This approach
immediately unlocks various novel generation applications
of 3DGS by inherently utilizing the already developed superior 2D generation capabilities. In our experiments, we
demonstrate various unconditional, conditional generation,
and inpainting applications of 3DGS based on diffusion
models, which were previously non-trivial.

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has demonstrated superior quality in modeling 3D objects and scenes. However,
generating 3DGS remains challenging due to their discrete,
unstructured, and permutation-invariant nature. In this
work, we present a simple yet effective method to overcome
these challenges. We utilize spherical mapping to transform
3DGS into a structured 2D representation, termed UVGS.
UVGS can be viewed as multi-channel images, with feature
dimensions as a concatenation of Gaussian attributes such
as position, scale, color, opacity, and rotation. We further
find that these heterogeneous features can be compressed
into a lower-dimensional (e.g., 3-channel) shared feature
space using a carefully designed multi-branch network. The
compressed UVGS can be treated as typical RGB images.
Remarkably, we discover that typical VAEs trained with
latent diffusion models can directly generalize to this new
representation without additional training. Our novel representation makes it effortless to leverage foundational 2D
models, such as diffusion models, to directly model 3DGS.
Additionally, one can simply increase the 2D UV resolution

1. Introduction
The creation of high-quality 3D content is essential in applications like virtual reality, game design, robotics, and movie
production, where realistic 3D representations play a critical role. Typical 3D representations like Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) [25] are promising but require substantial
computational resources, limiting their scalability for realtime applications. Moreover, NeRF is an implicit representation, which makes editing and manipulation challenging.
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [17] emerged as a
compelling alternative, enabling efficient and high-fidelity
3D rendering through a large set of Gaussian primitives that
model spatial and visual properties. As an explicit represen-

5927

