This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Contextual Attribute Density in Referring Expression Counting
Zhicheng Wang Zhiyu Pan* Zhan Peng Jian Cheng Liwen Xiao Wei Jiang
School of AIA, Huazhong University of Science and Technology

Zhiguo Cao

{zhicheng_wang, zhiyupan, zgcao}@hust.edu.cn

Referring Expression
person riding a motorcycle

GT: 1 Pred: 59

GT: 100 Pred: 81

GT: 1 Pred: 1

GT: 100 Pred: 96

Target
Prediction

CAD

Prediction

Ours

Target

Referring expression counting (REC) algorithms are for
more flexible and interactive counting ability across varied fine-grained text expressions. However, the requirement for fine-grained attribute understanding poses challenges for prior arts, as they struggle to accurately align
attribute information with correct visual patterns. Given
the proven importance of “visual density”, it is presumed
that the limitations of current REC approaches stem from an
under-exploration of “contextual attribute density” (CAD).
In the scope of REC, we define CAD as the measure of the
information intensity of one certain fine-grained attribute
in visual regions. To model the CAD, we propose a Ushape CAD estimator in which referring expression and
multi-scale visual features from GroundingDINO can interact with each other. With additional density supervision, we
can effectively encode CAD, which is subsequently decoded
via a novel attention procedure with CAD-refined queries.
Integrating all these contributions, our framework significantly outperforms state-of-the-art REC methods, achieves
30% error reduction in counting metrics and a 10% improvement in localization accuracy. The surprising results
shed light on the significance of contextual attribute density
for REC. Code will be at github.com/Xu3XiWang/CAD-GD.

Referring Expression
person walking

REC Baseline

Abstract

Figure 1. The efficacy of contextual attribute density (CAD).
According to the qualitative comparison above, the REC baseline [8] often over-counts when it focuses primarily on class information rather than fine-grained attributes, and it under-counts
in cases of occlusion or scale variations. By modeling CAD, our
method more accurately aligns fine-grained attributes with corresponding visual regions, effectively reducing counting errors.

1. Introduction
Object counting algorithms estimate the number of specific objects in query images. Early research has explored various forms of object descriptions, including classspecific [26, 37], class-agnostic [27, 29, 32, 33], exemplarguided [29], and text-guided [16, 36] approaches. However,
these methods lack the flexibility to distinguish between
fine-grained, open-world descriptions, e.g., differentiating
a walking person from a person riding motorcycle. To address this, recent work [8] proposes the referring expression
counting (REC) task which aims to count fine-grained and
contextually nuanced objects within the same class.
* Corresponding author.

GroundingREC [8] is firstly developed as the REC baseline with the power of the open-world detection model
GroundingDINO [22]. However, distinguishing between
objects of the same class based on nuanced attribute differences is challenging, which makes the REC baseline struggle to align attributes with corresponding visual regions. As
shown in Fig. 1, two primary types of failure cases can
be observed in the REC baseline: (1) Over-counting: the
baseline may place excessive emphasis on class information while neglecting fine-grained attributes, e.g., walking,
leading to the inclusion of objects with wrong attributes; (2)
Under-counting: the baseline might miss objects with the

19587

