This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Blurry-Edges: Photon-Limited Depth Estimation from Defocused Boundaries
Wei Xu, Charles James Wagner, Junjie Luo, and Qi Guo
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University

Focal Track

PhaseCam3D

DFV-DFF

RMSE (cm)
Ours

8.114
Ours-PP

10.556
Tang et al.

8.487
DefocusNet

8.150
DEReD

6.777

4.735

10.685

7.441

8.776

118 cm

Ours-W

Ground Truth

75 cm

Depth Boundary Color
map
map
map

Noisy
patch

{xu1639,wagne329,luo330,qiguo}@purdue.edu

Figure 1. Overview. (Left) Blurry-Edges representation parametrically models an image patch’s color, boundary positions, and boundary
smoothness. Object depths can be analytically calculated from the smoothness of corresponding boundaries in a pair of differently defocused images. (Right) Compared to a variety of state-of-the-art depth from defocus algorithms [8, 23, 32, 38, 44, 47], our method generates
sparse or dense depth maps with the lowest depth estimation errors from photon-limited, noisy images.

Abstract

18]. These advantages make DfD suitable for spatially constrained artificial platforms, such as AR/VR, smartphones
and watches, miniature robots, and drones.
However, DfD relies on accurately estimating spatial
derivatives in the captured images, a proxy of defocus level,
as the depth cue, which is highly susceptible to the image
noise [1, 2, 35]. To our knowledge, existing DfD solutions
typically avoid this issue by assuming low noise levels in the
input image (Tab. 1). Considering DfD’s potential applications, which inevitably include dark environments, there is a
pressing need for a DfD algorithm robust to photon-limited,
noisy images.
In light of this, we propose a method that robustly estimates object depth along the blurry boundaries from a
pair of differently defocused noisy images. It leverages a
novel patch structure representation named Blurry-Edges.
Blurry-Edges models an image patch as a stack of partially
occluded wedges. As shown in Fig. 2, each wedge is parameterized by its vertex, color, and boundary blurriness.
We develop a deep neural network to predict the optimal
Blurry-Edges parameters that describe each patch and are
consistent with neighboring patches’ representation regarding boundary location, smoothness, and color.
To perform depth estimation, our method utilizes a camera with a deformable lens to capture a pair of images of a
static scene with varied focal lengths. The images share the

Extracting depth information from photon-limited, defocused images is challenging because depth from defocus
(DfD) relies on accurate estimation of defocus blur, which is
fundamentally sensitive to image noise. We present a novel
approach to robustly measure object depths from photonlimited images along the defocused boundaries. It is based
on a new image patch representation, Blurry-Edges, that
explicitly stores and visualizes a rich set of low-level patch
information, including boundaries, color, and smoothness.
We develop a deep neural network architecture that predicts
the Blurry-Edges representation from a pair of differently
defocused images, from which depth can be calculated using a closed-form DfD relation we derive. The experimental results on synthetic and real data show that our method
achieves the highest depth estimation accuracy on photonlimited images compared to a broad range of state-of-theart DfD methods.

1. Introduction
Depth from defocus (DfD) generates physically accurate
depth maps without additional, active illumination like
time-of-flight or structured light [14–16, 26], and has a
monocular and compact form factor compared to stereo [13,

432

