This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attend to Not Attended:
Structure-then-Detail Token Merging for Post-training DiT Acceleration
Haipeng Fang1,2, Sheng Tang1,2, Juan Cao1,2, Enshuo Zhang1,2, Fan TangB,1,2, Tong-Yee Lee3
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
National Cheng-Kung University

Abstract
Diffusion transformers have shown exceptional performance in visual generation but incur high computational
costs. Token reduction techniques that compress models by
sharing the denoising process among similar tokens have
been introduced. However, existing approaches neglect the
denoising priors of the diffusion models, leading to suboptimal acceleration and diminished image quality. This
study proposes a novel concept: attend to prune feature
redundancies in areas not attended by the diffusion process. We analyze the location and degree of feature redundancies based on the structure-then-detail denoising priors.
Subsequently, we introduce SDTM, a structure-then-detail
token merging approach that dynamically compresses feature redundancies. Specifically, we design dynamic visual
token merging, compression ratio adjusting, and prompt
reweighting for different stages. Served in a post-training
way, the proposed method can be integrated seamlessly into
any DiT architecture. Extensive experiments across various
backbones, schedulers, and datasets showcase the superiority of our method, for example, it achieves 1.55× acceleration with negligible impact on image quality. Project page:
https://github.com/ICTMCG/SDTM .

(a) Denoising Process of DiT

(b) Denoising Process of DiT + SDTM

FID-29.02

MMDiT : Speed-10.67s

SDTM : FID-28.97
Speed-6.90s

(c) Comparison of Generated Images

－0.05
×1.55

Figure 1. Illustration. Upper: Our SDTM represents a dynamic
multi-resolution generation process by reducing feature redundancies in areas not unattended by the denoising process. Lower:
Compared to the baseline method, our approach achieves 1.55×
acceleration with negligible impact on generation quality.

1. Introduction

tural redundancy. Due to the inflexibility of these methods
for diverse data and evolving requirements, various studies
introduced token reduction [2, 22, 32, 37] to reduce feature
redundancy. For instance, ToMeSD [1] and AT-EDM [44]
compress similar or unimportant tokens, where DyDiT [50]
and TokenCache [26] train a dynamic module to prune or
cache unnecessary computation. However, these featurebased approaches often require additional fine-tuning or
overlook the denoising priors, resulting in suboptimal acceleration, diminished image quality, and limited applicability.
In this paper, we propose a novel view: attend to prune
feature redundancies in areas not attended by the diffusion
process. Initially, we observe the evolution of low and high
frequencies within DiT and confirm that diffusion transformers still adhere to the structure-then-detail denoising
priors: they allocate less attention to less-structure tokens in

Diffusion transformers (DiTs) [33] are flourishing in image [6, 9, 11] and video [18, 30, 51] generation, and have
been adopted as the fundamental model of Sora [3]. However, heavy computational redundancies slow down inference and drive the need for acceleration techniques.
Several sampler-based methods aim to optimize denoising steps through sampler optimization [27, 42] or distillation [31, 39], and model-based studies focus on pruning [4, 10], quantizing [12, 20], or caching [29, 45] architecB Corresponding author: Fan Tang.

18083

