This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stable Flow: Vital Layers for Training-Free Image Editing
Omri Avrahami1,2
Kfir Aberman1
1

Snap Research

2

Or Patashnik1,3 Ohad Fried4 Egor Nemchinov1
Dani Lischinski2
Daniel Cohen-Or1,3

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Non-rigid editing

“Jumping”

“Sitting”

“Sniffing the
road”

“An otter”

“A pig”

“A plastic
bag”

3

Tel Aviv University

4

Reichman University

Adding an object

Object replacement

Scene editing

“Wearing
green glasses”

“Wearing a
straw hat”

“Next to an
avocado”

“On a wet
road”

“During the
evening”

“Snowy day”

Figure 1. Stable Flow. Our training-free editing method is able to perform various types of image editing operations, including non-rigid
editing, object addition, object removal, and global scene editing. These different edits are done using the same mechanism.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Over the recent years, we have witnessed an unprecedented
explosion in creative applications of generative models, fueled by diffusion-based models [35, 75–77]. Recent models, such as FLUX [44] and SD3 [24], have replaced the
traditional UNet architecture [70] with the Diffusion Transformer (DiT) [61], and adopted flow matching [5, 47, 48] as
a superior alternative for training and sampling.
These flow-based models are based on optimal transport conditional probability paths, resulting in faster training and sampling, compared to diffusion models. This is
attributed [47] to the fact that they follow straight line trajectories, rather than curved paths. One of the known consequences of this difference, however, is that these models
exhibit lower diversity than previous diffusion models [25],
as shown in Figure 2(1-2). While reduced diversity is generally considered an undesirable characteristic, in this paper,
we suggest leveraging it for the task of training-free image
editing, as shown in Figure 2(3) and Figure 1.
Specifically, we explore image editing via parallel generation [4, 18, 85], where features from the generative trajectory of the source (reference) image are injected into the
trajectory of the edited image. Such an approach has been

Diffusion models have revolutionized the field of content
synthesis and editing. Recent models have replaced the traditional UNet architecture with the Diffusion Transformer
(DiT), and employed flow-matching for improved training
and sampling. However, they exhibit limited generation diversity. In this work, we leverage this limitation to perform consistent image edits via selective injection of attention features. The main challenge is that, unlike the UNetbased models, DiT lacks a coarse-to-fine synthesis structure, making it unclear in which layers to perform the injection. Therefore, we propose an automatic method to
identify “vital layers” within DiT, crucial for image formation, and demonstrate how these layers facilitate a range of
controlled stable edits, from non-rigid modifications to object addition, using the same mechanism. Next, to enable
real-image editing, we introduce an improved image inversion method for flow models. Finally, we evaluate our approach through qualitative and quantitative comparisons,
along with a user study, and demonstrate its effectiveness
across multiple applications.

Project page is available at: https://omriavrahami.com/stable-flow

This research was performed while Omri was at Snap.

7877

