This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoHandles: Editing 3D Object Compositions in Videos Using Video
Generative Priors
Juil Koo1∗

Paul Guerrero2
1

Context-Aware 3D Edits in Videos
Frame N

Frame 1

Frame N

Minhyuk Sung1

3D Edits in Real Videos

Frame 1

Frame N

Edited Video

Input Video

Frame 1

Chun-Hao P. Huang2
Duygu Ceylan2
2
KAIST
Adobe Research

Figure 1. VideoHandles edits 3D object composition in videos of static scenes. Solid axes represent the original 3D position and dotted
axes the user-provided target position. The edit plausibly updates effects like the reflection of the wine glass and handles disocclusions like
the lamp behind the book pile that is exposed by the edit. In addition to generated videos, we can also edit real (non-generated) videos by
inverting the video into its corresponding latent, as shown on the right.

Abstract
Generative methods for image and video editing leverage
generative models as priors to perform edits despite incomplete information, such as changing the composition
of 3D objects depicted in a single image. Recent methods have shown promising composition editing results for
images. However, in the video domain, editing methods
have focused on editing objects’ appearance and motion,
or camera motion. As a result, methods for editing object composition in videos remain largely unexplored. We
propose VideoHandles as a method for editing 3D object
compositions in videos of static scenes with camera motion.
Our approach enables the editing of an object’s 3D position across all frames of a video in a temporally consistent
manner. This is achieved by lifting intermediate features of
a generative model to a 3D reconstruction that is shared
between all frames, editing the reconstruction, and project-

ing the features on the edited reconstruction back to each
frame. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first generative approach to edit object compositions in videos. Our
approach is simple and training-free, while outperforming
state-of-the-art image editing baselines. Our project page
is https://videohandles.github.io.

1. Introduction

* Work done during an internship at Adobe Research.

Diffusion and flow-based models are currently the standard
for high-quality text-to-image generation. Text-to-video
diffusion/flow-based models lag behind in quality, but have
recently seen big improvements. The prevalent text-based
control is easy to use, but impractical for some types of
edits, such as edits of the object composition in a scene:
specifying the position of an object with text is inaccurate
and iterative editing workflows are not supported. Several
recent methods address this issue in the image domain by
proposing different types of iterative image editing methods. These either focus on editing the appearance of ob-

17692

