This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

M3GYM: A Large-Scale Multimodal Multi-view Multi-person Pose Dataset
for Fitness Activity Understanding in Real-world Settings

1

Qingzheng Xu1,3 , Ru Cao2 , Xin Shen1 , Heming Du1,3 , Sen Wang1 , Xin Yu1,3 *
The University of Queensland 2 City University of Macau 3 Follow Me AI Pty LTD
{qingzheng.xu, xin.yu}@uq.edu.au
View 1

View 2

…

View 8

View 1

View 2

…

View 8

More Samples with
Various Lighting Conditions
Sunlight

RGB Video

…

…

2D Keypoint

…

…

Well-Lit

Self & Mutual Occlusions

3D Keypoint

Mesh +
Action Label

6 Subjects
With
ID tracked

8 Subjects
With
ID tracked

Action Label:
Side-Lying
Leg Lifts

Action Label:
Warrior I
Variation
Sample 2 from Yoga Exercises

Sample 1 from Pilates Exercises

Labeled & Evaluated Actions

Figure 1. Illustration of M3GYM. For each sample, we provide multi-view videos with fine-grained annotations, including 2D keypoints,
3D keypoints, subject IDs, mesh, and action labels. M3GYM also includes expert assessments on action completeness for each subject,
covers diverse lighting conditions and features scenes with complex self & mutual occlusions.

Abstract
Human pose estimation is a critical task in computer vision
for applications in sports analysis, healthcare monitoring,
and human-computer interaction. However, existing human
pose datasets are collected either from custom-configured
laboratories with complex devices or they only include data
on single individuals, and both types typically capture daily
activities. In this paper, we introduce the M3GYM dataset, a
large-scale multimodal, multi-view, and multi-person pose
dataset collected from a real gym to address the limitations
of existing datasets. Specifically, we collect videos for 82
sessions from the gym, each session lasting between 40 to
60 minutes. These videos are gathered by 8 cameras, including over 50 subjects and 47 million frames. These sessions include 51 Normal fitness exercise sessions as well as
17 Pilates and 14 Yoga sessions. The exercises cover a wide
range of poses and typical fitness activities, particularly in

Yoga and Pilates, featuring poses with stretches, bends, and
twists, e.g., humble warrior, fire hydrants and knee hover
side twists. Each session involves multiple subjects, leading
to significant self-occlusion and mutual occlusion in single
views. Moreover, the gym has two symmetric floor mirrors,
a feature not seen in previous datasets, and seven lighting
conditions. We provide frame-level multimodal annotations,
including 2D&3D keypoints, subject IDs, and meshes. Additionally, M3GYM uniquely offers labels for over 500 actions along with corresponding assessments from sports experts. We benchmark a variety of state-of-the-art methods
for several tasks, i.e., 2D human pose estimation, singleview and multi-view 3D human pose estimation, and human
mesh recovery. To simulate real-world applications, we also
conduct cross-domain experiments across Normal, Yoga,
and Pilates sessions. The results show that M3GYM significantly improves model generalization in complex realworld settings. The project is available here.

* Corresponding author.

12289

