This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Calibrated Multi-Preference Optimization for Aligning Diffusion Models
Kyungmin Lee1,2,† Xiahong Li3 Qifei Wang1 Junfeng He4 Junjie Ke1
Ming-Hsuan Yang1 Irfan Essa1,5 Jinwoo Shin2 Feng Yang1,‡ Yinxiao Li1,‡
1

Google DeepMind

2

KAIST

3

Google

4

Google Research

Abstract
Aligning text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models with preference optimization is valuable for human-annotated datasets,
but the heavy cost of manual data collection limits scalability. Using reward models offers an alternative, however,
current preference optimization methods fall short in exploiting the rich information, as they only consider pairwise
preference distribution. Furthermore, they lack generalization to multi-preference scenarios and struggle to handle
inconsistencies between rewards. To address this, we present
Calibrated Preference Optimization (CaPO), a novel method
to align T2I diffusion models by incorporating the general
preference from multiple reward models without human annotated data. The core of our approach involves a reward
calibration method to approximate the general preference
by computing the expected win-rate against the samples
generated by the pretrained models. Additionally, we propose a frontier-based pair selection method that effectively
manages the multi-preference distribution by selecting pairs
from Pareto frontiers. Finally, we use regression loss to
fine-tune diffusion models to match the difference between
calibrated rewards of a selected pair. Experimental results
show that CaPO consistently outperforms prior methods,
such as Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), in both single and multi-reward settings validated by evaluation on T2I
benchmarks, including GenEval and T2I-Compbench.

1. Introduction
Recent text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models [4, 11, 43, 54,
55] generate high-quality images from text prompts. While
these models perform well, synthesizing images that closely
match subtle human preferences is a challenging task. Following the success of reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) in language models [44], training a reward model to mimic human preference [28, 31, 66–68, 71],
† Work done during an internship at Google DeepMind.
‡ Equal advising.

5

Georgia Institute of Technology

and fine-tuning diffusion models with RL algorithms shows
promise [5, 10, 12, 32]. However, the computational expense
of backpropagation through the diffusion trajectories limits
the scalability to large-scale diffusion models. To address
this problem, Diffusion-DPO [63] applies direct preference
optimization (DPO) [48] to diffusion models, with good
results for large-scale diffusion models [11]. Nonetheless,
since Diffusion-DPO entails an expensive paired human preference dataset, it remains unclear how to leverage multiple
reward models to align large-scale T2I diffusion models.
Building on this line of research, we explore an alternative approach to fine-tune large-scale T2I diffusion models
without relying on human preference datasets. Instead, we
generate training data using pretrained T2I diffusion models
and simulate human preferences through multiple reward
models. Unlike Diffusion-DPO [63], which relies on explicit
pairwise preference data, our method fully leverages the rich
knowledge embedded in reward signals. However, directly
optimizing rewards risks overfitting and reward hacking if
the reward values are not properly calibrated [15].
To address this issue, we propose Calibrated Preference
Optimization (CaPO) to enhance preference optimization of
T2I diffusion models by improving how reward signals are
used. Instead of directly optimizing reward values, we introduce the concept of general preference [3], defined as the
expected win-rate against a pretrained model. We approximate this by averaging pairwise win-rates among multiple
samples, providing a robust and calibrated signal. Our finetuning objective uses the regression loss to match the difference of calibrated rewards with the difference of implicit
reward from diffusion models, which is simple and effective
that enhances the performance. In addition, we introduce a
novel Frontier-based rejection sampling method to enhance
the multi-reward preference optimization. This approach
addresses the limitations of combining rewards with linear
weights [7, 10] by selecting training pairs from the upper
and lower Pareto frontiers using a non-dominated sorting
algorithm. Jointly optimizing diverse reward signals enables
the model to achieve balanced response to multiple rewards
and mitigate the over-optimization problem when using a

18465

