This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Volumetrically Consistent 3D Gaussian Rasterization
Chinmay Talegaonkar Yash Belhe Ravi Ramamoorthi
University of California San Diego

Nicholas Antipa

{ctalegaonkar, ybelhe, ravir, nantipa}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has enabled
photorealistic view synthesis at high inference speeds.
However, its splatting-based rendering model makes several approximations to the rendering equation, reducing
physical accuracy. We show that the core approximations
in splatting are unnecessary, even within a rasterizer; we
instead volumetrically integrate 3D Gaussians directly to
compute the transmittance across them analytically. We
use this analytic transmittance to derive more physicallyaccurate alpha values than 3DGS, which can directly be
used within their framework. The result is a method that
more closely follows the volume rendering equation (similar
to ray-tracing) while enjoying the speed benefits of rasterization. Our method represents opaque surfaces with higher
accuracy and fewer points than 3DGS. This enables it to
outperform 3DGS for view synthesis (measured in SSIM and
LPIPS). Being volumetrically consistent also enables our
method to work out of the box for tomography. We match
the state-of-the-art 3DGS-based tomography method with
fewer points. Our code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/chinmay0301ucsd/Vol3DGS

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been tremendous progress in view synthesis methods using differentiable volume rendering [5, 27,
37, 39, 51]. These techniques can be broadly categorized as
rasterization or ray-tracing methods. Both produce photorealistic results but with distinct trade-offs.
The speed of rasterization-based methods like 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [27] comes at the cost of reduced physical accuracy compared to their ray-tracingbased counterparts. Rasterization itself makes some unavoidable approximations for faster rendering, like per-tile
sorting and no overlap handling (though these can be mitigated at some computational expense [22, 35, 41], which
3DGS inherits. However, 3DGS makes further approximations due to its use of Ellipsoidal Weighted Averaging
(EWA) splatting [60]. These approximations do not merely

have a theoretical impact — they have important practical
consequences too. For example, as we show Fig. 3, they
make it harder for 3D Gaussians to represent opaque surfaces prevalent in 3D scenes.
Recent works have taken inspiration from raytracing-based methods to make 3DGS more physicallyaccurate [23, 25, 53]. However, these methods don’t
volumetrically integrate 3D Gaussians for color computation. Instead, like 3DGS, they rely on splatting, i.e.,
projecting 3D Gaussians to 2D Gaussians in screen space.
We identify that we do not need splatting, including all
its approximations, to have a fast rasterization-based technique. Instead of splatting, we analytically evaluate the volume rendering equation by integrating Gaussians directly in
3D space (assuming correct sorting and no overlap) — all
within a rasterizer. See Fig. 1 for a qualitative illustration.
We first show the volume rendering equation (without splatting approximations) can be expressed as an
alpha-blending operation over 3D Gaussians (Sec. 4.1).
Next, we derive the corresponding alpha values which are
more physically-accurate than 3DGS and use them within
3DGS’s rasterization framework (Sec. 4.2). We then show
that our alpha values enable representing opaque objects
better than 3DGS (Sec. 4.3).
In practice, our method consistently matches or exceeds
3DGS’s view synthesis quality (as measured by LPIPS and
SSIM) over a wide variety of scenes (Sec. 6.1). Our method
also works out-of-the-box for 3DGS-based tomographic reconstruction and is able to match a recent state-of-the-art
method’s quality with a lower memory footprint (Sec. 6.2).

2. Related Work
2.1. Volume rendering with ray marching
Image-based rendering (view synthesis) works have a long
history in computer graphics [10, 18, 32, 45]. Recently,
NeRF and its followups [3, 16, 37, 39, 51] pioneered using differentiable volume rendering [36] and have achieved
photorealistic reconstruction. These methods use neural
networks and grids to represent a scene’s volumetric density and color. Colors along rays are computed evaluating

10953

