This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TopoCellGen: Generating Histopathology Cell Topology with a Diffusion Model
Meilong Xu1

Saumya Gupta1 Xiaoling Hu2 Chen Li1 Shahira Abousamra3
Dimitris Samaras1 Prateek Prasanna1 Chao Chen1
1
Stony Brook University, NY, USA
2
Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, MA, USA
3
Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University, CA, USA
meixu@cs.stonybrook.edu, chao.chen.1@stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Accurately modeling multi-class cell topology is crucial in
digital pathology, as it provides critical insights into tissue structure and pathology. The synthetic generation of
cell topology enables realistic simulations of complex tissue environments, enhances downstream tasks by augmenting training data, aligns more closely with pathologists’ domain knowledge, and offers new opportunities for controlling and generalizing the tumor microenvironment. In this
paper, we propose a novel approach that integrates topological constraints into a diffusion model to improve the generation of realistic, contextually accurate cell topologies. Our
method refines the simulation of cell distributions and interactions, increasing the precision and interpretability of results in downstream tasks such as cell detection and classification. To assess the topological fidelity of generated layouts, we introduce a new metric, Topological Fréchet Distance (TopoFD), which overcomes the limitations of traditional metrics like FID in evaluating topological structure.
Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach in generating multi-class cell layouts that capture intricate topological relationships. Code is available
at https://github.com/Melon-Xu/TopoCellGen.

types display unique spatial patterns, requiring significant
domain expertise. Although annotated datasets for multiple cell types exist, they often lack the diversity needed for
generalization across various tissues and organs.
To alleviate the burden of manual annotation and enhance the efficiency of analysis, there has been growing
interest in utilizing generative models. Early works use
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [20] for automatic generation of pathology images [2, 10, 34]. In recent years, diffusion models [11, 31, 45, 50, 61, 69, 75, 76]
have emerged as much more reliable alternatives, generating accurate, high-resolution histopathology images [4, 23,
48, 51, 72]. However, all these diffusion models are only
trained to directly generate the histopathology images. Despite the impressive visual results, these powerful models
deliver limited insight into the underlying biology. It is
very hard to connect the learned distributions with human
knowledge about tumor microenvionment. This makes it
challenging to validate, generalize, or control these models.

1. Introduction

We argue that a key issue is the lack of explicit generation of cells and their spatial arrangement. The spatial
organization of cells and the interactions across different
cell types are critical for understanding tumor microenvironments, disease progression, and tissue regeneration [59].
The density and spatial distribution of various cell types
-such as lymphocytes, epithelial cells, and stromal cellsare essential for pathologists in making accurate diagnoses
and prognoses. For instance, the detection and quantification of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), which are
lymphocytes located within the boundaries of invasive tumors [56], have been strongly linked to improved clinical
outcomes [57, 63]. The presence of isolated or small clusters of tumor cells at the invasive front, known as tumor
budding, serves as a prognostic biomarker associated with
a higher risk of lymph node metastasis in colorectal carcinoma and other solid malignancies [47].

Deep-learning methods have made substantial advances in
foundational tasks for nuclei analysis, including instance
segmentation [21, 29, 32, 40, 73], classification, and detection [1, 52]. These tasks provide the basis for downstream
analyses, enabling detailed characterization of tissue architecture and cellular interactions, which are crucial for diagnostic and prognostic applications in pathology [12, 46].
However, accurately annotating multi-class cell arrangements in pathology images is challenging, as distinct cell

20979

