This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Focus-N-Fix: Region-Aware Fine-Tuning for Text-to-Image Generation
Xiaoying Xing* 1,2 , Avinab Saha* 1,3 , Junfeng He* †1 , Susan Hao†4 , Paul Vicol4 , Moonkyung Ryu1 , Gang
Li4 , Sahil Singla4 , Sarah Young5 , Yinxiao Li4 , Feng Yang4 , and Deepak Ramachandran†4
1

Google Research, 2 Northwestern University, 3 UT Austin, 4 Google DeepMind, 5 Google

Abstract

Fine-Tuning with Artifact Reward. Text Prompt: “A stop sign out in the
middle of nowhere.”

Text-to-image (T2I) generation has made significant advances in recent years, but challenges still remain in the
generation of perceptual artifacts, misalignment with complex prompts, and safety. The prevailing approach to address these issues involves collecting human feedback on
generated images, training reward models to estimate human feedback, and then fine-tuning T2I models based on the
reward models to align them with human preferences. However, while existing reward fine-tuning methods can produce
images with higher rewards, they may change model behavior in unexpected ways. For example, fine-tuning for one
quality aspect (e.g., safety) may degrade other aspects (e.g.,
prompt alignment), or may lead to reward hacking (e.g.,
finding a way to increase rewards without having the intended effect). In this paper, we propose Focus-N-Fix, the
first region-aware fine-tuning method that trains models to
correct only previously problematic image regions. The resulting fine-tuned model generates images with the same
high-level structure as the original model but shows significant improvements in regions where the original model was
deficient in safety (over-sexualization and violence), plausibility, or other criteria. Our experiments demonstrate that
Focus-N-Fix improves these localized quality aspects with
little or no degradation to others and typically imperceptible changes in the rest of the image. Disclaimer: This paper
contains images that may be overly sexual, violent, offensive
or harmful.

SD v1.4
Reward : 0.66

DRaFT [11]
Reward : 0.84

Ours
Reward : 0.92

Artifact Heatmap
from [32]

Fine-Tuning with Safety Reward. Text Prompt: “cyberpunk woman.”

SD v1.4
Reward : -0.92

DRaFT [11]
Reward : -0.01

Ours
Reward : -0.002

Over-Sexualization
Heatmap [19]

Figure 1. Focus-N-Fix applied to reducing artifacts (top) and
reducing over-sexualization (bottom). Each row shows: the
baseline from Stable Diffusion (SD) v1.4 [42], the image after
DRaFT fine-tuning, the one from our region-aware method, FocusN-Fix, and a heatmap of problematic regions. Unconstrained finetuning, as in DraFT, can yield entirely different images for the
same prompt as in the STOP sign example (top row) or introduce
artifacts (bottom row). Safety rewards are derived from a classifier [19] predicting explicit content (multiplied by -1), while artifact rewards are based on a plausibility score from human feedback [32]. Images are from the test set; heatmaps shown were
unseen during training and not used for inference in Focus-N-Fix.
Some images use a black box to cover sexually explicit regions.
More examples are in Supplementary Material for a better understanding of the results of the proposed method and the baselines.

to incorporate preference feedback from humans (RLHF) or
point-wise scores from reward models (RLAIF), including
algorithms like Proximal Policy Optimization [48], Direct
Preference Optimization [40, 50] or Direct Reward Finetuning [11]. These methods can fine-tune models to achieve
higher reward scores but may unexpectedly alter model behavior, potentially changing image composition and style.
This can lead to several problems:
• Fine-tuning to improve one quality aspect may degrade

1. Introduction
Significant progress has been made in fine-tuning Text-toImage (T2I) generative models by learning from human
feedback [11, 55]. Various paradigms have been proposed
* Co-first authors, equal technical contribution. The work is done when
Xiaoying Xing and Avinab Saha are interns at Google Research.
† Corresponding authors, leading contributors. Contact email: junfenghe@google.com

18486

