This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-modal Knowledge Distillation-based Human Trajectory Forecasting
Jaewoo Jeong1 , Seohee Lee1 , Daehee Park2† , Giwon Lee1 , and Kuk-Jin Yoon1
1
Visual Intelligence Lab., KAIST, Korea
2
Intelligent Systems and Learning Lab., DGIST, Korea

Abstract
Pedestrian trajectory forecasting is crucial in various
applications such as autonomous driving and mobile robot
navigation. In such applications, camera-based perception enables the extraction of additional modalities (human pose, text) to enhance prediction accuracy. Indeed,
we find that textual descriptions play a crucial role in integrating additional modalities into a unified understanding. However, online extraction of text requires the use of
VLM, which may not be feasible for resource-constrained
systems. To address this challenge, we propose a multimodal knowledge distillation framework: a student model
with limited modality is distilled from a teacher model
trained with full range of modalities. The comprehensive
knowledge of a teacher model trained with trajectory, human pose, and text is distilled into a student model using only trajectory or human pose as a sole supplement.
In doing so, we separately distill the core locomotion insights from intra-agent multi-modality and inter-agent interaction. Our generalizable framework is validated with
two state-of-the-art models across three datasets on both
ego-view (JRDB, SIT) and BEV-view (ETH/UCY) setups,
utilizing both annotated and VLM-generated text captions.
Distilled student models show consistent improvement in all
prediction metrics for both full and instantaneous observations, improving up to ∼13%. The code is available at
github.com/Jaewoo97/KDTF.

1. Introduction
Trajectory forecasting aims to predict the future 2D trajectory of an agent based on its historical trajectory [10, 14,
15, 33, 44, 51, 59, 60, 63, 64]. This predictive capability is widely applied in fields such as autonomous driving [9, 16, 17, 24, 35, 36, 43–45, 66, 70], mobile robot
navigation [4, 50, 52], and surveillance systems [1, 32, 46].
These applications depend on accurately forecasting the trajectories of human or vehicles to prevent collisions, enable
smooth navigation, and improve situational awareness.
† This work was completed as a Ph.D candidate at KAIST.

Figure 1. Multi-modal data such as human pose and text greatly
improve trajectory forecasting performance. However, expensive
modalities such as text are not readily available during application.
Thus, we transfer the extensive knowledge from full modalities to
a student model operating on a limited set of modalities.

The main challenge in trajectory forecasting lies in modeling the agent’s future intent in locomotion. A clear objective on the purpose of locomotion such as a short-term (1∼2
seconds) destination significantly improves the prediction
accuracy [20, 33]. In that sense, human agents naturally interact via visual signals to convey such intention to nearby
agents during their maneuvers. Vehicles blink signal lights,
bikers raise their arms, pedestrians rotate their torsos, all of
which indicate their intent in locomotion to avoid collision
with others. Diverse applications of trajectory forecasting
allow for an effortless acquisition of these visual cues. In
autonomous driving, vehicles employ various complementary sensors alongside RGB cameras as the primary tool for
perception [5, 53]. Mobile robots and surveillance systems
also rely on RGB cameras for perception and interaction
with its surrounding environment and agents [4, 39].
Recent works attempt to extract and utilize additional
modalities from these visual inputs. Extrinsics such as 2D,
3D human pose and bounding boxes have been examined to
complement understanding human motion dynamics [50].
For vehicle trajectory forecasting, vision language models

24222

