This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What’s in the Image? A Deep-Dive into the Vision of Vision Language Models
Omri Kaduri∗
Shai Bagon∗
Tali Dekel
Weizmann Institute of Science
*Indicates equal contribution.
Project webpage: vision-of-vlm.github.io

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have recently demonstrated remarkable capabilities in comprehending complex visual content. However, the mechanisms underlying
how VLMs process visual information remain largely unexplored. In this paper, we conduct a thorough empirical
analysis, focusing on the attention modules across layers,
by which we reveal several key insights about how these
models process visual data: (i) the internal representation
of the query tokens (e.g., representations of “describe the
image”), is utilized by the model to store global image information; we demonstrate that the model generates surprisingly descriptive responses solely from these tokens, without
direct access to image tokens. (ii) Cross-modal information flow is predominantly influenced by the middle layers
(approximately 25% of all layers), while early and late layers contribute only marginally. (iii) Fine-grained visual attributes and object details are directly extracted from image
tokens in a spatially localized manner, i.e., the generated
tokens associated with specific object or attribute attend
strongly to their corresponding regions in the image. We
propose novel quantitative evaluation to validate our observations, leveraging real-world complex visual scenes. Finally, we demonstrate the potential of our findings in facilitating efficient visual processing in state-of-the-art VLMs.

[18, 36], with limited understanding of their internal mechanisms for processing visual data. Uncovering these mechanisms is essential for enhancing model transparency, efficiency, and trustworthiness in high-stakes applications,
as well as for guiding future VLM design. In this work,
we take significant steps toward unraveling the “vision”
of prominent VLMs, offering new insights into how these
models interpret and process visual data.

1. Introduction

We examine the scenario in which the VLM receives an
input image along with the query “describe the image”. The
VLM generates its response autoregressively, where each
generated token gathers information from both the input image and text. In this work, we aim to understand the information flow between the visual and textual modalities. Our
analysis focuses on the attention modules across the VLM’s
layers through a set of experiments in which we restrict
in different ways the access to visual information across
layers. This allows us to uncover several critical insights:
(i) The models compresses high-level image information
into the query text tokens. We demonstrate this insight by
blocking the direct influence of image tokens on the generated tokens, allowing visual information to be accessible
only indirectly through the query text tokens. Remarkably,
the model generates descriptive responses, relying solely
on the visual information encoded in the query text tokens. (ii) Middle layers play a crucial role in the visionto-language knowledge transfer, while early and late layers
contribute only marginally; we show that accessing image
tokens only in mid-layers (∼ 25% of all layers) results in
minor degradation in the VLM’s performance. (iii) Finegrained object details and visual attributes are directly retrieved from image tokens in a spatially localized manner.

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have recently emerged as
a powerful extension of Large Language Models (LLMs).
As demonstrated by their unprecedented capabilities in generating highly detailed and accurate descriptions of complex visual scenes, these models are quickly narrowing the
gap between machine-generated and human interpretation
of the visual world [1, 8, 9, 27, 28]. As such, VLMs have
been rapidly adopted across diverse visual tasks, including robotics, medical imaging analysis, autonomous driving, and content generation [25, 29, 30, 37].
Despite their growing adoption, VLMs are often treated
as black-box tools or agents for solving specific tasks

14549

A key aspect in our study involves validating our observations by measuring the alignment between the VLM’s
original output and its modified output under each of our
experiments above. This evaluation requires comparing
two free-text paragraphs – a challenging task due to possible large variations in wording and writing style. Inspired
by [43], we propose a new LLM-based evaluation protocol which enables us to quantify the agreement between the

