This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Matrix3D: Large Photogrammetry Model All-in-One
Yuanxun Lu1 * † Jingyang Zhang2∗ Tian Fang2 Jean-Daniel Nahmias2
Long Quan3 Xun Cao1 Yao Yao1‡ Shiwei Li2
1

Yanghai Tsin2

Nanjing University

luyuanxun@smail.nju.edu.cn, {caoxun,yaoyao}@nju.edu.cn
2

Apple

{jingyang zhang,fangtian,jnahmias,ytsin,shiwei}@apple.com
3

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
quan@cse.ust.hk

RGB

…

Pose

…

Depth

…

Single/Few-shot Inputs

3DGS Optimization

Multi-view Multi-modal DiT

Rendered 3DGS

…
…

Matrix3D
…
Pose Estimation

Novel View Synthesis

Depth Estimation

Novel View Synthesis for More Views

Figure 1. Utilizing Matrix3D for single/few-shot reconstruction. Before 3DGS optimization, we complete the input set by pose estimation,
depth estimation and novel view synthesis, all of which are done by the same model.

Abstract
We present Matrix3D, a unified model that performs several
photogrammetry subtasks, including pose estimation, depth
prediction, and novel view synthesis using just the same
model. Matrix3D utilizes a multi-modal diffusion transformer (DiT) to integrate transformations across several
modalities, such as images, camera parameters, and depth
maps. The key to Matrix3D’s large-scale multi-modal train-

ing lies in the incorporation of a mask learning strategy.
This enables full-modality model training even with partially complete data, such as bi-modality data of image-pose
and image-depth pairs, thus significantly increases the pool
of available training data. Matrix3D demonstrates stateof-the-art performance in pose estimation and novel view
synthesis tasks. Additionally, it offers fine-grained control
through multi-round interactions, making it an innovative
tool for 3D content creation. Project page: https://nju3dv.github.io/projects/matrix3d.

* Equal contribution.
† This project was performed during Yuanxun Lu’s internship at Apple.
‡ Corresponding author.

11250

