This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Edge-SD-SR: Low Latency and Parameter Efficient On-device Super-Resolution
with Stable Diffusion via Bidirectional Conditioning
Isma Hadji1*
1

Mehdi Noroozi1* Victor Escorcia1 Anestis Zaganidis1
Brais Martinez1 Georgios Tzimiropoulos1,2
2

Samsung AI Center, Cambridge, UK
*

Queen Mary University of London, UK

Equal contribution

Abstract
There has been immense progress recently in the visual
quality of Stable Diffusion-based Super Resolution (SD-SR).
However, deploying large diffusion models on computationally restricted devices such as mobile phones remains impractical due to the large model size and high latency. This
is compounded for SR as it often operates at high res (e.g.
4K×3K). In this work, we introduce Edge-SD-SR, the first
parameter efficient and low latency diffusion model for image super-resolution. Edge-SD-SR consists of ∼ 169M parameters, including UNet, encoder and decoder, and has
a complexity of only ∼ 142 GFLOPs. To maintain a high
visual quality on such low compute budget, we introduce
a number of training strategies: (i) A novel conditioning
mechanism on the low-resolution input, coined bidirectional
conditioning, which tailors the SD model for the SR task. (ii)
Joint training of the UNet and encoder, while decoupling the
encodings of the HR and LR images and using a dedicated
schedule. (iii) Finetuning the decoder using the UNet’s output to directly tailor the decoder to the latents obtained at
inference time. Edge-SD-SR runs efficiently on device, e.g.
it can upscale a 128 × 128 patch to 512 × 512 in 38 msec
while running on a Samsung S24 DSP, and of a 512 × 512
to 2, 048 × 2, 048 (requiring 25 model evaluations) in just
∼ 1.1 sec. Furthermore, we show that Edge-SD-SR matches
or even outperforms state-of-the-art SR approaches on the
most established SR benchmarks.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Results of 4× upsampling with (a) interpolation, (b) our
architecture with the standard training approach (c) our architecture
with our training approach. Images are best seen in a display and
zoomed in. Samples taken from DIV2K-RealESRGAN dataset.

1. Introduction
We are interested in the application of Stable Diffusion [17,
33] to Super Resolution (i.e. SD-SR), as it has been shown
to produce steep improvements compared to previous SR
approaches [16, 25, 31]. Considering that SR is most widely
used on mobile phones, where the vast majority of photos
are taken nowadays, we focus on the very challenging task
of creating a SD-SR model that can run on Edge devices (i.e.

12789

Edge SD-SR). Deploying such models on computationally
limited devices, such as mobile phones, entails addressing
several practical challenges due to the large model size and
high latency. These issues are exacerbated for the SR task, as
it operates on high-resolution and typically requires multiple
model runs. For example, 4K×3K is a typical resolution on
modern phones, while SD-SR typically generates 512 × 512
patches per run, e.g. StableSR [25]. In this case, 88 model
runs are required for tile-based generation. Specifically, to
get a 4K × 3K image we split the corresponding 1000 × 750
LR image to 128 × 128 patches with 25% overlap between
patches. This yields 88 patches that the model has to process
sequentially. Such a model runs in ∼ 900 seconds on a highend GPU (A100), making on-device deployment unfeasible.

