This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Samba: A Unified Mamba-based Framework for General Salient Object Detection
Jiahao He1 Keren Fu1,3,∗ Xiaohong Liu2 Qijun Zhao1,3
1
College of CS, Sichuan University 2 John Hopcroft Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
National Key Lab of Fundamental Science on Synthetic Vision, Sichuan University

Abstract

(a)

Existing salient object detection (SOD) models primarily
resort to convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and Transformers. However, the limited receptive fields of CNNs and
quadratic computational complexity of transformers both
constrain the performance of current models on discovering attention-grabbing objects. The emerging state space
model, namely Mamba, has demonstrated its potential to
balance global receptive fields and computational complexity. Therefore, we propose a novel unified framework based
on the pure Mamba architecture, dubbed saliency Mamba
(Samba), to flexibly handle general SOD tasks, including
RGB/RGB-D/RGB-T SOD, video SOD (VSOD), and RGB-D
VSOD. Specifically, we rethink Mamba’s scanning strategy
from the perspective of SOD, and identify the importance of
maintaining spatial continuity of salient patches within scanning sequences. Based on this, we propose a saliency-guided
Mamba block (SGMB), incorporating a spatial neighboring
scanning (SNS) algorithm to preserve spatial continuity of
salient patches. Additionally, we propose a context-aware
upsampling (CAU) method to promote hierarchical feature
alignment and aggregations by modeling contextual dependencies. Experimental results show that our Samba outperforms existing methods across five SOD tasks on 21 datasets
with lower computational cost, confirming the superiority of
introducing Mamba to the SOD areas. Our code is available
at https://github.com/Jia-hao999/Samba.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) is an essential vision task that
aims to identify and segment the most visually prominent
objects within a scene. This technique plays a crucial role in
various applications such as object tracking [90], semantic
segmentation [14], image enhancement [51], autofocus [28]
and evaluation of large models [29].
Current state-of-the-art (SOTA) SOD methods are primarily dominated by convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
and transformers, addressing various SOD tasks, including
* Corresponding author: Keren Fu (fkrsuper@scu.edu.cn).

(b)
(c)
(d)
Guide

Continuous

Figure 1. Comparison between existing scanning strategies and
our scanning strategy. (a) Sequential scanning of patches in a
“Z” pattern [43]. (b) Sequential scanning of patches in diagonal
directions [60, 84]. (c) Sequential scanning of patches in an “S”
pattern [76]. (d) Compared to (a/b/c), our spatial neighboring
scanning (SNS) can preserve spatial continuity of salient patches.

RGB/RGB-D/RGB-T SOD [4, 23, 40, 62, 63, 72], video
SOD (VSOD) [21, 80, 85], and RGB-D VSOD [36, 39, 53].
While CNN-based backbones are known for their scalability
and linear computational complexity, they suffer from limited receptive fields, making it challenging to capture global
dependencies. In contrast, transformer-based backbones
offer superior visual modeling by leveraging global receptive fields. However, their self-attention mechanism incurs
quadratic complexity, raising efficiency concerns. Although
efficient transformer architectures, such as Swin transformer
[44] and MobileViT [50], have been proposed, they typically
sacrifice some global modeling capability for efficiency, failing to achieve an optimal balance between the two.
Recently, Mamba [16], a novel state space model (SSM),
has emerged as a highly promising backbone to balancing
global receptive fields and computational efficiency. Mamba
employs a selective scanning algorithm to model long-range
dependencies while preserving linear complexity. Besides,
with a specially designed hardware-aware algorithm, Mamba
achieves efficient training on GPUs. Building on this foundation, visual Mamba backbones [43, 92], with task-specific
models [6, 68, 78, 87, 91] based on them, have been rapidly
developed. Given Mamba’s success across various vision
tasks and its absence in SOD areas, we seek to explore its
potential for efficient global modeling in SOD tasks.
In this paper, we propose a novel unified model, saliency
Mamba (Samba), to flexibly handle general SOD tasks. Owing to the strong performance of visual Mamba backbones,
many task-specific models [49, 68, 78, 91] have leveraged

25314

