This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Volumetric Surfaces: Representing Fuzzy Geometries with Layered Meshes
Stefano Esposito1 Anpei Chen1
Katja Schwarz2 Christian Richardt2
1

Christian Reiser1 Samuel Rota Bulò2 Lorenzo Porzi2
Michael Zollhöfer2 Peter Kontschieder2 Andreas Geiger1
2

University of Tübingen

Meta Reality Labs

a) PermutoSDF

b) Ours (7-Mesh)

c) 3DGS

d) Ours (7-Mesh)

Figure 1. Our Volumetric Surfaces representation (b) consists of k lightweight, semi-transparent mesh shells that efficiently render fuzzy
geometries with a limited number of samples (3 ≤ k ≤ 9) via rasterization. Our image quality surpasses that of surface-based methods (a)
and approaches the quality of 3D Gaussian splatting (c). Unlike splatting methods, our sorting-free representation enables faster rendering,
particularly on low-power or mobile graphics hardware. Project page: https://autonomousvision.github.io/volsurfs.

Abstract
1. Introduction

High-quality view synthesis relies on volume rendering, splatting, or surface rendering. While surface rendering is typically the fastest, it struggles to accurately model fuzzy geometry like hair. In turn, alpha-blending techniques excel at representing fuzzy materials but require an unbounded number
of samples per ray (P1). Further overheads are induced by
empty space skipping in volume rendering (P2) and sorting
input primitives in splatting (P3). We present a novel representation for real-time view synthesis where the (P1) number
of sampling locations is small and bounded, (P2) sampling
locations are efficiently found via rasterization, and (P3)
rendering is sorting-free. We achieve this by representing
objects as semi-transparent multi-layer meshes rendered in
a fixed order. First, we model surface layers as signed distance function (SDF) shells with optimal spacing learned
during training. Then, we bake them as meshes and fit UV
textures. Unlike single-surface methods, our multi-layer representation effectively models fuzzy objects. In contrast to
volume and splatting-based methods, our approach enables
real-time rendering on low-power laptops and smartphones.

21370

Real-time rendering on mobile devices is challenging due to
limited processing power, memory, and thermal constraints.
Recent methods for real-time view synthesis can be categorized according to their rendering paradigm. On the one
hand, we have surface-based methods like BakedSDF [60]
or BOG [43], where rendering a pixel requires only reading appearance data from a single sampling location along
the ray. On the other hand, we have volume-based methods
like SMERF [10] or 3DGS [24], where rendering a pixel requires reading data from multiple sample locations along the
ray. As a result, surface-based methods are generally faster
than volume-based techniques, which struggle to achieve
interactive frame rates on mobile devices [43]. While recent surface-based methods are also capable of representing
thin structures like individual strands of grass [43, 64], they
still lag behind volume-based methods, especially when it
comes to reconstructing highly fuzzy geometry like hair or
plush. Even if possible from a reconstruction perspective, a
purely surface-based representation might be too memory-

