This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoDGP: Monocular 3D Object Detection with Decoupled-Query and
Geometry-Error Priors
Fanqi Pu1
Yifan Wang1
Jiru Deng1
Wenming Yang1 *
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
{pfq23, yf-wang23, djr23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yang.wenming@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Perspective projection has been extensively utilized in
monocular 3D object detection methods. It introduces geometric priors from 2D bounding boxes and 3D object dimensions to reduce the uncertainty of depth estimation.
However, due to errors originating from the object’s visual surface, the bounding box height often fails to represent the actual central height, which undermines the effectiveness of geometric depth. Direct prediction for the projected height unavoidably results in a loss of 2D priors,
while multi-depth prediction with complex branches does
not fully leverage geometric depth. This paper presents a
Transformer-based monocular 3D object detection method
called MonoDGP, which adopts perspective-invariant geometry errors to modify the projection formula. We also try
to systematically discuss and explain the mechanisms and
efficacy behind geometry errors, which serve as a simple but
effective alternative to multi-depth prediction. Additionally,
MonoDGP decouples the depth-guided decoder and constructs a 2D decoder only dependent on visual features, providing 2D priors and initializing object queries without the
disturbance of 3D detection. To further optimize and finetune input tokens of the transformer decoder, we also introduce a Region Segmentation Head (RSH) that generates
enhanced features and segment embeddings. Our monocular method demonstrates state-of-the-art performance on
the KITTI benchmark without extra data. Code is available
at https://github.com/PuFanqi23/MonoDGP.

Figure 1. Comparison with MonoDETR. MonoDGP employs
an RSH module for enhanced features and segment embeddings,
along with an independent visual decoder for 2D query initialization. We further propose a geometry error prior that converts uneven depth distribution into more concentrated error distribution.

ease of configuration [23, 35], monocular methods have remained a primary focus of research in recent years.
Without extra data, the direct prediction of 3D objects
from single 2D images is an extremely challenging problem. During the formation of 2D images, crucial depthrelated information is compressed, resulting in an inherently
ill-posed issue for direct depth estimation [23, 32, 36, 53,
56]. This limitation significantly undermines the accuracy
of 3D object detection. However, under certain conditions,
the uncertainty of depth estimation can be reduced with substantial prior knowledge. Particularly in the realm of autonomous driving, where the major objects of interest, such
as cars, are rigid entities with known geometric properties.
Previous methods like Deep3DBox [30] and Shift R-

1. Introduction
3D object detection has always been a critical research
topic in the fields of autonomous driving and robotic perception. Compared with LiDAR- [19, 39, 40, 50] or stereobased [9, 20, 21, 34, 42] methods, monocular 3D object
detection exhibits lower spatial positional accuracy without
depth information. Owing to their cost-effectiveness and
* Corresponding author.

6520

