This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PRaDA: Projective Radial Distortion Averaging
Daniil Sinitsyn1,2 , Linus Härenstam-Nielsen1,2 , Daniel Cremers1,2
1
Technical University of Munich, 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning
daniil.sinitsyn@tum.de, linus.nielsen@tum.de, cremers@tum.de

Abstract
We tackle the problem of automatic calibration of radially
distorted cameras in challenging conditions. Accurately determining distortion parameters typically requires either 1)
solving the full Structure from Motion (SfM) problem involving camera poses, 3D points, and the distortion parameters,
which is only possible if many images with sufficient overlap
are provided, or 2) relying heavily on learning-based methods that are comparatively less accurate. In this work, we
demonstrate that distortion calibration can be decoupled
from 3D reconstruction, maintaining the accuracy of SfMbased methods while avoiding many of the associated complexities. This is achieved by working in Projective space,
where the geometry is unique up to a homography, which
encapsulates all camera parameters except for distortion.
Our proposed method, Projective Radial Distortion Averaging, averages multiple distortion estimates in a fully projective framework without creating 3d points and full bundle
adjustment. By relying on pairwise projective relations, our
methods support any feature-matching approaches without
constructing point tracks across multiple images.

Figure 1. We average multiple imprecise and mutually inconsistent distortion model estimates into a single consistent model.

1. Introduction

Averaging (PRaDA), a simple yet effective approach for
calibrating radially distorted cameras from unordered image
collections. SfM methods typically operate in Euclidean
space, recovering 3D reconstructions and poses up to translation, rotation, and scaling. Projective framework extends
this to projective space, where reconstructions are defined
up to a homography that encapsulates all non-distortion parameters. This simplifies distortion optimization and enables image relationships to be expressed without 3D points
or poses at any stage of the entire algorithm. We observe
that standard image matching algorithms, which are typically designed for pinhole cameras, work well even for distorted images. For each image, we start off by computing
point correspondences with every other image using wellestablished methods. For each such pair, we then use a robust correspondence-based minimal solver to obtain an estimate of the radial distortion. These individual estimates are
then finally averaged to produce a single consistent model
per camera. Fig. 1 An overview of the approach can be
found in Fig. 3. Our contributions are summarized as follows:

Having access to an accurate camera model is foundational
to essentially all geometric computer vision algorithms, including Structure from Motion (SfM), Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM), and novel-view synthesis (NVS). However, in many cases, prior accurate intrinsics are not available. For instance, if images are sourced
from the internet or if camera parameters have drifted over
time due to wear and tear. In such cases, intrinsics must
instead be estimated using geometric principles or learned
from data. Despite active research, accurately determining intrinsics remains a challenging problem with no established go-to method. Methods based on full SfM and
bundle adjustment [48, 49] often fail to converge without a
good initialization, and learning-based methods [53] tend to
lack accuracy and robustness.
In this work, we introduce Projective Radial Distortion

21902

1. We introduce a fully projective method for radial distortion averaging. Our method does not require explicit 3D
point reconstruction or focal length estimation, significantly simplifying the auto-calibration process.
2. We propose a novel distortion averaging technique that
fuses inconsistent pairwise estimates into a single, consistent camera model.
3. We demonstrate significant improvements in accuracy
and robustness over commonly used methods and validate them on challenging datasets.

