This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Automatic Joint Structured Pruning and Quantization for Efficient Neural
Network Training and Compression
Xiaoyi Qu2 , David Aponte1 , Colby Banbury1 , Daniel P. Robinson2 , Tianyu Ding1 , Kazuhito Koishida1 , Ilya Zharkov1 , Tianyi Chen1 *
Microsoft1 , Lehigh University2
xiq322@lehigh.edu, Tianyi.Chen@microsoft.com

Abstract
Structured pruning and quantization are fundamental
techniques used to reduce the size of deep neural networks
(DNNs), and typically are applied independently. Applying
these techniques jointly via co-optimization has the potential to produce smaller, high-quality models. However, existing joint schemes are not widely used because of (1) engineering difficulties (complicated multi-stage processes), (2)
black-box optimization (extensive hyperparameter tuning to
control the overall compression), and (3) insufficient architecture generalization. To address these limitations, we
present the framework GETA, which automatically and efficiently performs joint structured pruning and quantizationaware training on any DNN. GETA introduces three key
innovations: (i) a quantization-aware dependency graph
(QADG) that constructs a pruning search space for generic
quantization-aware DNN, (ii) a partially projected stochastic gradient method that guarantees layerwise bit constraints are satisfied, and (iii) a new joint learning strategy
that incorporates interpretable relationships between pruning and quantization. We present numerical experiments
on both convolutional neural networks and transformer architectures that show that our approach achieves competitive (often superior) performance compared to existing joint
pruning and quantization methods. Source code is available
at https://github.com/microsoft/GETA.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely used
in various applications [26, 34, 36, 56]. However, their increasing size has raised several concerns. One major challenge is the substantial storage space required to hold these
models, which can be impractical for everyday devices such
as standard PCs and even more so for resource-constrained
edge devices [50]. Furthermore, as model sizes increase,
inference cost often lengthens, leading to delays that can
* Corresponding Author.

be frustrating for users who expect quick responses. Therefore, it is of practical interest and importance to compress
the model while maintaining performance similar to the full
model. To address the above concerns, various model compression techniques have been studied in recent years [14].
Pruning and quantization are two fundamental techniques that are widely deployed, each following different
methodologies. Structured pruning is perhaps the most
popular pruning scheme, which aims to remove redundant
structures in DNNs while preserving performance [10, 18].
Quantization reduces the bit width of the data flowing
through a DNN [14]. In practice, structured pruning is typically applied first to identify a high-performing subnetwork,
which is then quantized to further reduce its size and enhance its processing speed on specified hardware [23, 42].
However, treating pruning and quantization separately has
limitations. For example, more heavily structurally pruned
models are typically more sensitive to quantization and thus
require higher bit widths. Thus, joint structured pruning and
quantization becomes an important topic.

1.1. Challenges
Many studies [3, 23, 29, 37, 42, 47, 52, 55, 58, 61, 64] have
combined pruning and quantization to obtain high compression ratios. However, these joint methods are not commonly
used in practice due to one or more of the following reasons:
engineering difficulty, black-box optimization, and insufficient architecture generalization, which we now discuss.
Engineering Difficulties. First, many joint pruning and
quantization methods follow a two-stage process. For example, [52, 55, 58, 61] first determine the configurations
(pruning ratio and bit width) for each layer of the network,
and then train the pruned and quantized model. They require separate compression and retraining stages since the
two stages may be incompatible with each other. Thus, twostage pipelines increase the execution time, especially for
large datasets (e.g., ImageNet). For these reasons, a oneshot (all-at-once) framework is preferred. Second, while recent automated structured pruning frameworks propose dependency graphs to support generic architectures [11, 18],

15234

