This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAP-Net: A Unified Network for 6D Pose and Size Estimation of Categorical
Articulated Parts from a Single RGB-D Image
Jingshun Huang1∗

Haitao Lin1∗
1

Tianyu Wang1
2

Fudan University

Yanwei Fu1

Xiangyang Xue1

Yi Zhu2

Huawei, Noah’s Ark Lab

*

Class + Part Instance

RGBD-Art Dataset

Abstract
Unified Network
NPCS

This paper tackles category-level pose estimation of articulated objects in robotic manipulation tasks and introduces a new benchmark dataset. While recent methods estimate part poses and sizes at the category level, they often
rely on geometric cues and complex multi-stage pipelines
that first segment parts from the point cloud, followed by
Normalized Part Coordinate Space (NPCS) estimation for
6D poses. These approaches overlook dense semantic cues
from RGB images, leading to suboptimal accuracy, particularly for objects with small parts. To address these limitations, we propose a single-stage Network, CAP-Net, for estimating the 6D poses and sizes of Categorical Articulated
Parts. This method combines RGB-D features to generate
instance segmentation and NPCS representations for each
part in an end-to-end manner. CAP-Net uses a unified network to simultaneously predict point-wise class labels, centroid offsets, and NPCS maps. A clustering algorithm then
groups points of the same predicted class based on their estimated centroid distances to isolate each part. Finally, the
NPCS region of each part is aligned with the point cloud to
recover its final pose and size. To bridge the sim-to-real domain gap, we introduce the RGBD-Art dataset, the largest
RGB-D articulated dataset to date, featuring photorealistic
RGB images and depth noise simulated from real sensors.
Experimental evaluations on the RGBD-Art dataset demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms the stateof-the-art approach. Real-world deployments of our model
in robotic tasks underscore its robustness and exceptional
sim-to-real transfer capabilities, confirming its substantial
practical utility. Our dataset, code and pre-trained models
are available on the project page 2 .

CAP-Net

…

Pose Fitting

Sim2Real
Affordable Consumer-grade RGB-D Camera

Estimated Joints

Unseen Small Parts

Unseen Large Parts

Figure 1. Overview. CAP-Net is a unified approach for estimating the 6D pose and size of all articulated parts from RGB-D images, requiring only object-level masks instead of part-level ones.
The realistic training images in our RGBD-Art dataset allow this
synthetic-trained model to effectively adapt to real-world visual
perception tasks for robotic manipulation using an affordable RealSense camera.

1. Introduction
Accurately estimating object state is essential for robots to
perform diverse grasping and manipulation tasks [2, 15, 29,
39, 48, 49], as shown in Fig. 1. Recent works [4, 11, 34]
have advanced state estimation for rigid objects, but nonrigid objects like garments [5, 45], fluids [17, 24], and artic-

* indicates equal contributions.
* Prof. Yanwei Fu is also with Institute of Trustworthy Embodied Al,
and the School of Data Science, Fudan University
2 Webpage. https://shanehuanghz.github.io/CAPNet

11654

