This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilled Prompt Learning for Incomplete Multimodal Survival Prediction
Yingxue Xu1 Fengtao Zhou1 Chenyu Zhao1 Yihui Wang1 Can Yang2 Hao Chen1B
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 2 Department of Mathematics
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{yxueb,fzhouaf,cyzhao,ywangrm}@connect.ust.hk, {macyang,jhc}@ust.hk

Abstract

Modality-common Knowledge
Modality-specific Knowledge of
Missing modality

Observed Modality
Missing Modality

The integration of multimodal data including pathology images and gene profiles is widely applied in precise survival prediction. Despite recent advances in multimodal
survival models, collecting complete modalities for multimodal fusion still poses a significant challenge, hindering
their application in clinical settings. Current approaches
tackling incomplete modalities often fall short, as they typically compensate for only a limited part of the knowledge
of missing modalities. To address this issue, we propose
a Distilled Prompt Learning framework (DisPro) to utilize
the strong robustness of Large Language Models (LLMs)
to missing modalities, which employs two-stage prompting
for compensation of comprehensive information for missing modalities. In the first stage, Unimodal Prompting
(UniPro) distills the knowledge distribution of each modality, preparing for supplementing modality-specific knowledge of the missing modality in the subsequent stage. In
the second stage, Multimodal Prompting (MultiPro) leverages available modalities as prompts for LLMs to infer the
missing modality, which provides modality-common information. Simultaneously, the unimodal knowledge acquired
in the first stage is injected into multimodal inference to
compensate for the modality-specific knowledge of the missing modality. Extensive experiments covering various missing scenarios demonstrated the superiority of the proposed
method. The code is available at https://github.
com/Innse/DisPro.

Retrieved sample

(a) Generation-based
Imputation & Imputation-free

(b) Retrieval-based
Imputation

Distribution of
Missing modality
(c) Ours

Figure 1. Insights for existing incomplete multimodal learning and
comparison to the proposed method. (a) Generation-based Imputation and Imputation-free approaches, (b) Retrieved-based Imputation and (c) Ours.

pectation of having full access to complete modalities for
integration is not always achievable, especially in clinical
scenarios, due to various factors such as the cost of data
gathering and privacy issues. For example, acquiring genomic data still comes at a high cost due to the technology
and infrastructure required for gene sequencing, especially
in underdeveloped areas [43]. Inevitably, it is challenging
to adapt previously established multimodal survival models [30, 42] to real-world clinical settings. As a result, building a multimodal survival model that is robust to incomplete
modalities data is an urgent issue for clinical practice.
Currently, mainstream approaches addressing incomplete modalities issues include imputation-based and
imputation-free methods [8, 34]. The former approaches
aim to impute the missing modality based on observed
modalities, primarily achieved in two ways including generation [3, 23, 29] and retrieval [4, 40]. In terms of generationbased imputation, generative models are typically employed
for synthesizing features or raw data of missing modalities
from available modalities. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), these
methods usually can only impute modality-common information, as the modality-specific information unique to the
missing modality cannot be generated out of thin air. Moreover, the goal of retrieval-based imputation methods is to fill
in missing modalities by seeking the most similar sample of
the missing modality from the training set. This way tends

1. Introduction
Multimodal Survival Prediction typically incorporates
pathology slides and genomic data complementary to each
other for precise prognosis analysis. Pathology data can
provide qualitative morphological insights, while quantitative molecular information can be obtained from genomic
data [5, 35, 36]. Despite progress [5, 10, 36] in multimodal
survival analysis, these models typically require complete
modalities data for reliable performance. However, the ex-

5102

