This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PCDreamer: Point Cloud Completion Through Multi-view Diffusion Priors
Guangshun Wei1

Yuan Feng1
1

(a) Input

Long Ma1

Chen Wang1

Yuanfeng Zhou1

Changjian Li2

Shandong University 2 University of Edinburgh
https://gsw-d.github.io/PCDreamer/

(b) Input of other view

(c) CRA-PCN [30]

(d) SVDFormer [55]

(e) Ours

(f) GT

Figure 1. Given a partial point cloud input (a) with (b) as a novel view for visualization purposes, the goal of point cloud completion is to
produce a complete point cloud retaining both the global and local geometric features. Existing methods (c, d) fail to neither recover local
thin structures (e.g., the lamp holder) nor capture the global symmetric parts (e.g., the back supporter of the chair), while our approach (e)
faithfully produces the desired shape compared with the ground truth (f).

Abstract

superior performance, especially in recovering fine details.

This paper presents PCDreamer, a novel method for
point cloud completion. Traditional methods typically extract features from partial point clouds to predict missing
regions, but the large solution space often leads to unsatisfactory results. More recent approaches have started to
use images as extra guidance, effectively improving performance, but obtaining paired data of images and partial
point clouds is challenging in practice. To overcome these
limitations, we harness the relatively view-consistent multiview diffusion priors within large models, to generate novel
views of the desired shape. The resulting image set encodes
both global and local shape cues, which are especially beneficial for shape completion. To fully exploit the priors,
we have designed a shape fusion module for producing an
initial complete shape from multi-modality input (i.e., images and point clouds), and a follow-up shape consolidation module to obtain the final complete shape by discarding
unreliable points introduced by the inconsistency from diffusion priors. Extensive experimental results demonstrate our

27243

1. Introduction
Point cloud completion plays a pivotal role in the advancement of 3D vision, serving as a crucial step in numerous applications, including autonomous driving [17, 29],
robotics [4, 35], and augmented reality [9]. Incomplete
point clouds, often resulting from scanning occlusions or
limited sensor range, pose significant challenges. Although
many encouraging approaches [6, 14, 30, 33, 39, 40, 42–
44, 47, 48, 50, 54, 55] have been proposed, there is still considerable room for improvement regarding global completeness and local geometric details of resulting point clouds.
This paper addresses this task, focusing on single-view
partial point clouds with self-occlusion [6, 14, 30, 33, 39,
42–44, 47, 48, 54]. As shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b), due
to the single-view nature of the scanning process, the selfocclusion often leads to the loss of more than half of the
3D shape. Typical cases, like the lamp without the whole
backside and the chair without most of the right side of the

