This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Long Video Tokenization via Coordinate-based Patch Reconstruction
Huiwon Jang1

Sihyun Yu1

Jinwoo Shin1
Pieter Abbeel2
1
KAIST 2 UC Berkeley

Abstract

Younggyo Seo2

Efficient tokenization of videos remains a challenge in training vision models that can process long videos. One promising direction is to develop a tokenizer that can encode long
video clips, as it would enable the tokenizer to leverage the
temporal coherence of videos better for tokenization. However, training existing tokenizers on long videos often incurs
a huge training cost as they are trained to reconstruct all
the frames at once. In this paper, we introduce CoordTok,
a video tokenizer that learns a mapping from coordinatebased representations to the corresponding patches of input videos, inspired by recent advances in 3D generative
models. In particular, CoordTok encodes a video into factorized triplane representations and reconstructs patches
that correspond to randomly sampled (x, y, t) coordinates.
This allows for training large tokenizer models directly on
long videos without requiring excessive training resources.
Our experiments show that CoordTok can drastically reduce the number of tokens for encoding long video clips.
For instance, CoordTok can encode a 128-frame video with
128⇥128 resolution into 1280 tokens, while baselines need
6144 or 8192 tokens to achieve similar reconstruction quality. We further show that this efficient video tokenization enables memory-efficient training of a diffusion transformer
that can generate 128 frames at once.

on a similar intuition that train a tokenizer to encode videos
into factorized representations [21, 66, 67]. However, a key
limitation is that existing tokenizers are typically trained to
encode short video clips because of high training cost, but it
is more likely that tokenizers can better exploit the temporal
coherence when they are trained on longer videos. For instance, because tokenizers are trained to reconstruct all the
frames at once, their training cost increases linearly with the
length of videos (see Figure 1a). This makes it difficult to
train tokenizers that can encode long videos and thus capture the temporal coherence of videos (see Figure 1b).
In this paper, we aim to design a video tokenizer that can
be easily scaled up to encode long videos. To this end, we
draw inspiration from recent works that have successfully
trained large 3D generative models in a compute-efficient
manner [18, 19, 24, 29]. Their key idea is to train a model
that learns a mapping from randomly sampled (x, y, z) coordinates to RGB and density values instead of training with
all the possible coordinates at once.
In particular, we ask: can we utilize a similar idea to design a scalable video tokenizer? Actually, there have been
recent studies that formulate the video reconstruction as a
problem of learning the mapping from (x, y, t) coordinates
to RGB values [6, 22]. However, they rather focus on compressing each individual video instead of training a video
tokenizer that can encode a diverse set of videos.
We introduce CoordTok: Coordinate-based patch reconstruction for long video Tokenization, a scalable video tokenizer that learns a mapping from coordinate-based representations to the corresponding patches of input videos. The
key idea of CoordTok is to encode a video into factorized
triplane representations [22, 66] and reconstruct patches
that correspond to randomly sampled (x, y, t) coordinates
(see Figure 2). This enables the training of large tokenizers directly on long videos without excessive memory and
computational requirements (see Figure 1a).
To investigate whether training a video tokenizer on long
video clips indeed leads to more efficient tokenization, we
compare CoordTok with other baselines [11, 52, 63, 66] on
the UCF-101 dataset [42]. Our experiments show that, by
exploiting the temporal coherence of videos, CoordTok significantly reduces the number of tokens for encoding long

1. Introduction
Efficient tokenization of videos remains a challenge in developing vision models that can process long videos. While
recent video tokenizers have achieved higher compression
ratios [1, 2, 11, 54, 63, 64] compared to using image tokenizers for videos (i.e., frame-wise compression) [45, 69],
the vast scale of video data still requires us to design a more
efficient video tokenizer.
One promising direction for efficient video tokenization
is enabling video tokenizers to exploit the temporal coherence of videos. For instance, video codecs [28, 30, 34, 43]
extensively utilize such coherence for video compression by
extracting keyframes and encoding the difference between
them. In fact, there have been several recent works based

22853

