This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoCoGaussian: Leveraging Circle of Confusion for
Gaussian Splatting from Defocused Images
Jungho Lee1∗ Suhwan Cho1 Taeoh Kim2 Ho-Deok Jang2 Minhyeok Lee1
Geonho Cha2 Dongyoon Wee2 Dogyoon Lee1 Sangyoun Lee1
1 School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University

2 NAVER Cloud

https://Jho-Yonsei.github.io/CoCoGaussian
Defocused Image

With Circle of Confusion
Circle of Confusion

Camera

: Lens

Focus Plane

Without Circle of Confusion

Sharp Image

: Large Aperture

Image Sensor

Circle of Confusion
Camera

(a) Defocused Image Acquisition

(b) Reconstructed Gaussian Points

(c) Rendered Images

Figure 1. We propose CoCoGaussian, a novel framework for 3D scene reconstruction from defocused images. (a) With a large aperture,
radiance from the focus plane appears as a small circle of confusion (green) on the image sensor, while radiance from greater depths results
in larger circles (pink). (b) We visualize reconstructed Gaussians of CoCoGaussian, where the black dots indicate Gaussian means, while
the gray dots represent Gaussian means forming the circle of confusion, which decreases in size near the focus plane. (c) The defocused
image focuses on shallow depths, with circle size increasing with depth, as shown in (b). CoCoGaussian allows customization of defocused
images by adjusting the depth of field or focus plane, while sharp images can be obtained by rendering without the circle of confusion.

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has attracted significant
attention for its high-quality novel view rendering, inspiring research to address real-world challenges. While conventional methods depend on sharp images for accurate
scene reconstruction, real-world scenarios are often affected by defocus blur due to finite depth of field, making
it essential to account for realistic 3D scene representation. In this study, we propose CoCoGaussian, a Circle
of Confusion-aware Gaussian Splatting that enables precise 3D scene representation using only defocused images.
CoCoGaussian addresses the challenge of defocus blur by
modeling the Circle of Confusion (CoC) through a physically grounded approach based on the principles of photo-

graphic defocus. Exploiting 3D Gaussians, we compute the
CoC diameter from depth and learnable aperture information, generating multiple Gaussians to precisely capture the
CoC shape. Furthermore, we introduce a learnable scaling factor to enhance robustness and provide more flexibility in handling unreliable depth in scenes with reflective or
refractive surfaces. Experiments on both synthetic and realworld datasets demonstrate that CoCoGaussian achieves
state-of-the-art performance across multiple benchmarks.

1. Introduction

* This work was done during an internship at NAVER Cloud.

The emergence of the Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [20]
has brought significant attention to 3D scene representation for photo-realistic novel view synthesis. They reconstruct 3D scenes from images captured from multiple views

16101

