This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TSD-SR: One-Step Diffusion with Target Score Distillation for Real-World
Image Super-Resolution
Linwei Dong1,2 *
Qi Zhang2
1

Qingnan Fan2 *
Jinwei Chen2

Yihong Guo1
Yawei Luo1†

Zhonghao Wang3
Changqing Zou1,4

2
Zhejiang University
Vivo Mobile Communication Co. Ltd
3
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Zhejiang Lab

Abstract
Pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models are increasingly applied to real-world image super-resolution (RealISR) task. Given the iterative refinement nature of diffusion
models, most existing approaches are computationally expensive. While methods such as SinSR and OSEDiff have
emerged to condense inference steps via distillation, their
performance in image restoration or details recovery is not
satisfied. To address this, we propose TSD-SR, a novel distillation framework specifically designed for real-world image super-resolution, aiming to construct an efficient and
effective one-step model. We first introduce the Target Score
Distillation, which leverages the priors of diffusion models and real image references to achieve more realistic image restoration. Secondly, we propose a Distribution-Aware
Sampling Module to make detail-oriented gradients more
readily accessible, addressing the challenge of recovering
fine details. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
TSD-SR has superior restoration results (most of the metrics perform the best) and the fastest inference speed (e.g.
40 times faster than SeeSR) compared to the past Real-ISR
approaches based on pre-trained diffusion priors.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (ISR) [8, 9, 23, 26] aims to transform low-quality (LQ) images, which have experienced
noise or blur, into clear high-quality (HQ) images. Differing
from traditional ISR [6, 66], which assumes a known degradation process, real-world image super-resolution (RealISR) [46, 62] is designed to enhance real-world images that
have suffered from complex and unknown degradations,
thereby offering greater practical utility.
Generative models, particularly Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [11, 33, 37] and Diffusion Models (DMs)
* Equal contribution.

† Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Performance and efficiency comparison among RealISR methods. TSD-SR stands out for achieving high-quality
restoration with the fastest speed among diffusion-based models.
In contrast, existing models prioritize either speed or restoration
performance. The performance of each method is benchmarked
on an A100 GPU with the DRealSR dataset.

[17, 39, 41], have shown remarkable power in handling
Real-ISR task. GAN-based methods leverage adversarial
training, toggling between the generator and discriminator
to produce realistic images. While GANs are capable of
one-step inference, they are commonly hampered by issues
like mode collapse and training instability [2]. Recently,
Diffusion Models (DMs) have shown impressive performance in the realm of image generation [21, 47]. Their
robust priors empower them to produce more realistic images with richer details than GAN-based methods [39, 41].
Some researchers [29, 53, 56, 60] have successfully leveraged pre-trained DMs for Real-ISR task. However, due to
the iterative denoising nature of diffusion models [17], the
Real-ISR process is computationally expensive.
To achieve an efficient and one-step network akin to
GANs, several pioneering methods that condense the iter-

23174

