This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ROS-SAM: High-Quality Interactive Segmentation for Remote Sensing
Moving Object
Zhe Shan1 , Yang Liu2 , Lei Zhou1,∗ , Cheng Yan3 , Heng Wang1 , Xia Xie1,∗
1
Hainan University 2 Zhejiang University 3 Tianjin University

Abstract
The availability of large-scale remote sensing video data
underscores the importance of high-quality interactive segmentation. However, challenges such as small object
sizes, ambiguous features, and limited generalization make
it difficult for current methods to achieve this goal. In
this work, we propose ROS-SAM, a method designed to
achieve high-quality interactive segmentation while preserving generalization across diverse remote sensing data.
The ROS-SAM is built upon three key innovations: 1) LoRAbased fine-tuning, which enables efficient domain adaptation while maintaining SAM’s generalization ability, 2) Enhancement of network deep layers to improve the discriminability of extracted features, thereby reducing misclassifications, and 3) Integration of global context with local
boundary details in the mask decoder to generate highquality segmentation masks. Additionally, we redesign the
data pipeline to ensure the model learns to better handle objects at varying scales during training while focusing on high-quality predictions during inference. Experiments on remote sensing video datasets show that the data
pipeline boosts the IoU by 6%, while ROS-SAM increases
the IoU by 13%. Finally, when evaluated on existing remote sensing object tracking datasets, ROS-SAM demonstrates impressive zero-shot capabilities, generating masks
that closely resemble manual annotations. These results
confirm ROS-SAM as a powerful tool for fine-grained segmentation in remote sensing applications. Code is available
at: https://github.com/ShanZard/ROS-SAM.

Figure 1. The recognition and annotation of these remote sensing
video moving objects are particularly challenging due to factors
such as small object sizes, lack of distinct features, sparse distribution, and other complexities.

of frame-by-frame annotation make recognizing and segmenting these objects exceedingly difficult. As illustrated
in Figure 1, airplanes, cars, ships, and trains are the most
common moving objects in video satellite data, and both
labeling these objects and developing algorithms to detect
them are formidable challenges. At the same time, the lack
of pixel-level labeling information directly leads to many
algorithms that cannot be trained and inferred properly.
Remote sensing object tracking has been actively developed for years, with many labeled datasets already
available [6, 13, 26, 60, 63, 66]. It is natural to ask
whether remote sensing video object segmentation can be
achieved through interactive segmentation using existing
object tracking datasets. Furthermore, the primary advantage of this approach lies in its ability to transform existing
object tracking datasets into segmentation data, thereby advancing remote sensing video segmentation with minimal
additional cost.
The Segment Anything Model (SAM) [23] is a foun-

1. Introduction
Research into video satellite vision tasks has emerged as
one of the most promising and dynamic frontiers in remote
sensing today [6, 24, 25]. However, for remote sensing
video moving objects (RSVMO), the small size, ambiguous
features, high object density, and the complexity and cost
* Corresponding author: Lei Zhou (leizhou@hainanu.edu.cn), Xia Xie
(shelicy@hainanu.edu.cn)

3625

