This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-Fidelity Lightweight Mesh Reconstruction from Point Clouds
Chen Zhang
Wentao Wang
Ximeng Li
Xinyao Liao
Wanjuan Su
Wenbing Tao*
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multi-spectral Information Processing,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
CD=2.967
V=1217k
F=2434k

CD=0.638
V=60k
F=120k

CD=0.642
V=24k
F=48k

CD: chamfer distance↓
V: vertex number
F: face number

{zhangchen , wentaowang, ximengli, xinyao liao, suwanjuan, wenbingtao}@hust.edu.cn
NeuralPull

Ours (5%)

Ours (2%)

Ground Truth

0.1

0.01

Abstract
Recently, learning signed distance functions (SDFs) from
point clouds has become popular for reconstruction. To ensure accuracy, most methods require using high-resolution
Marching Cubes for surface extraction. However, this results in redundant mesh elements, making the mesh inconvenient to use. To solve the problem, we propose an adaptive meshing method to extract resolution-adaptive meshes
based on surface curvature, enabling the recovery of highfidelity lightweight meshes. Specifically, we first use pointbased representation to perceive implicit surfaces and calculate surface curvature. A vertex generator is designed
to produce curvature-adaptive vertices with any specified
number on the implicit surface, preserving the overall structure and high-curvature features. Then we develop a Delaunay meshing algorithm to generate meshes from vertices,
ensuring geometric fidelity and correct topology. In addition, to obtain accurate SDFs for adaptive meshing and
achieve better lightweight reconstruction, we design a hybrid representation combining feature grid and feature triplane for better detail capture. Experiments demonstrate
that our method can generate high-quality lightweight
meshes from point clouds. Compared with methods from
various categories, our approach achieves superior results,
especially in capturing more details with fewer elements.

Ours

MC

GT

Figure 1. The comparison of our adaptive meshing method with
MC using the same element count. The input SDFs for both methods are the same. Our method achieves a curvature-adaptive distribution of vertices and generates more detailed meshes.

1. Introduction

ing and editing. Although lightweight meshes can be extracted using MC with low-resolution grids, it often struggles to recover sharp features, resulting in significant loss of
detail (See Figure 1). Recovering high-fidelity lightweight
meshes is an important and valuable challenge in surface
reconstruction from point cloud.
More recently, some learning-based methods [6, 7, 26]
are proposed to improve traditional meshing algorithms and
construct more faithful meshes with low-resolution grids.
Instead of edge interpolation in MC, they apply 3D convolutions on the grids to predict vertices. Then, they modify
the meshing templates of traditional algorithms like MC and
Dual Contouring (DC) [15], or construct a Voronoi diagram
to generate the mesh. As alternatives to MC, these neural
methods improve detail preservation and can extract more
accurate low-resolution meshes. However, they still face
problems in recovering high-quality lightweight meshes:
1) Explicit geometry perception of the implicit surface is
lacking. Predicting vertices within a voxel through convolution cannot guarantee accurate distribution on the zerovalue surface of SDFs, with error depending on the voxel
size. When using a low-resolution grid with a large voxel
size, these methods represent dense, continuous SDFs as
sparse, discrete structures, leading to a significant loss of

With the development of neural representations, learning
signed distance fields (SDFs) from point clouds has become popular for solving the surface reconstruction problem [4, 9, 10, 20, 24, 24, 31, 34, 36]. To maximize reconstruction accuracy, these methods typically require highresolution Marching Cubes (MC) [21] to generate densely
packed meshes with excessive vertices and faces. This leads
to excessive memory requirements, limiting the practical
applicability of the mesh for downstream tasks like render* Corresponding author.

11739

