This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Student Splatting and Scooping
Jialin Zhu1 , Jiangbei Yue2 , Feixiang He1 , He Wang 1,3 *
1
University College London, UK 2 University of Leeds, UK
3
AI Centre, University College London, UK

Abstract
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) provides a new
framework for novel view synthesis, and has spiked a new
wave of research in neural rendering and related applications. As 3DGS is becoming a foundational component of many models, any improvement on 3DGS itself can
bring huge benefits. To this end, we aim to improve the
fundamental paradigm and formulation of 3DGS. We argue that as an unnormalized mixture model, it needs to
be neither Gaussians nor splatting. We subsequently propose a new mixture model consisting of flexible Student’s
t distributions, with both positive (splatting) and negative
(scooping) densities. We name our model Student Splatting
and Scooping, or SSS. When providing better expressivity,
SSS also poses new challenges in learning. Therefore, we
also propose a new principled sampling approach for optimization. Through exhaustive evaluation and comparison,
across multiple datasets, settings, and metrics, we demonstrate that SSS outperforms existing methods in terms of
quality and parameter efficiency, e.g. achieving matching
or better quality with similar numbers of components, and
obtaining comparable results while reducing the component
number by as much as 82%.

sian mixture, which provides two advantages. As a generalpurpose distribution, Gaussians can approximate an arbitrary density function hence good expressivity. Also, Gaussians have analytical forms under e.g. affine transformation,
enabling quick evaluation in 3D-2D projection, thus quick
learning from images. Meanwhile, splatting provides a flexible way of identifying only the relevant Gaussians to an
image for learning. Despite the success, the framework can
still suffer from insufficient expressivity [16, 34], and low
parameter efficiency, i.e. needing a large number of components [17, 28]. Therefore, we re-examine the three key components in 3DGS: Gaussian, splatting, and the optimization.
Since its underlying principle is essentially to fit a 3D mixture model to a radiance field, we argue it needs not to be
restricted to Gaussians or splatting.

1. Introduction

To this end, we propose a simple yet effective generalization of 3DGS. We first replace Gaussians with Student’s
t distribution with one degree of freedom, referred to simply as t-distribution. Similar to Gaussians, t-distribution
also enjoys good properties such as analytical forms under affine transformation. More importantly, t-distribution
can be seen as a generalization of Gaussians and therefore
is more expressive. t-distribution has a control parameter
for the tail fatness, representing distributions ranging from
Cauchy distribution to Gaussian distribution, and any distribution inbetween. Compared with Gaussians, Cauchy is
fat-tailed, i.e. a single Cauchy can cover a larger area with
comparatively higher densities than a Gaussian. Furthermore, by making this control parameter learnable, we learn
components with a wide range of varying tail thicknesses.

Presented initially as a neural rendering technique, 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [13] has quickly become a versatile component in various systems, e.g. geometry reconstruction, autonomous driving [3, 6]. Given its importance
as a foundational component, very recently researchers start
to investigate possible alternatives to the basic framework of
3DGS, e.g. more expressive distributions instead of Gaussians [8, 18], more principled optimization [14], which all
focus on improving the model expressivity. Our research is
among these attempts.
The key to 3DGS’ success lies in its name: Gaussian
and splatting. 3DGS can be seen as a (unnormalized) Gaus-

Next, we extend the splatting scheme which only operates in the positive density space. Inspired by mixture models with negative components [20], we propose to employ
both positive and negative components to splat (adding) and
scoop (subtracting) densities from the model. This leads to
more complex mathematical forms than 3DGS but we derive their close-form gradients for learning.

* Corresponding author, he wang@ucl.ac.uk

Finally, as the increased model complexity, optimization methods based on naive stochastic gradient descent become insufficient, due to parameter coupling. Therefore, we
propose a principled sampling scheme based on Stochastic

21045

