This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hyperspectral Pansharpening via Diffusion Models with Iteratively Zero-Shot
Guidance
Jin-Liang Xiao1,3 , Ting-Zhu Huang1 *, Liang-Jian Deng1 , Guang Lin2,3 , Zihan Cao1 , Chao Li3 , Qibin Zhao3 *
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, Tokyo, Japan
3
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan
Zero-shot networks

Abstract

• Few parameters
• Specific prior knowledge
• Training with one-pair inputs

Inputs:

Hyperspectral pansharpening refers to fusing a panchromatic image (PAN) and a low-resolution hyperspectral image (LR-HSI) to obtain a high-resolution hyperspectral image (HR-HSI). Recently, guiding pre-trained diffusion models (DMs) has demonstrated significant potential in this
area, leveraging their powerful representational abilities
while avoiding complex training processes. However, these
DMs are often trained on RGB images, not well-suited for
pansharpening tasks, limited in adapting to the hyperspectral images. In this work, we propose a novel guided diffusion scheme with zero-shot guidance and neural spatialspectral decomposition (NSSD) to iteratively generate the
RGB detail image and map the RGB detail image to target HR-HSI. Specifically, zero-shot guidance employs an
auxiliary neural network that trained only with a PAN and
LR-HSI to guide pre-trained DMs in generating the RGB
detail image, informed by specific prior knowledge. Then,
NSSD establishes a spectral mapping from the generated
RGB detail image to the final HR-HSI. Extensive experiments are conducted on Pavia, Washington DC, Chukusei, and FR1 datasets to demonstrate that the proposed
method significantly enhances the performance of DMs for
hyperspectral pansharpening tasks, outperforming existing
methods across multiple metrics and achieving improvements in visualization results. The code is available at
https://github.com/Jin-liangXiao/DM-zs.

Network

Guide
Pre-trained diffusion models
PAN

LR-HSI

• Large parameters
• Strong expressive capacity

Guidance
of DMs

Iterative
update

Output:

Spectral mapping
Spectral mapping

HR-HSI

Ground-Truth

RGB detail image

PLRDiff
(PSNR: 34.80dB)

HIR-Diff
(PSNR: 38.51dB)

Proposed
(PSNR: 40.50dB)

Figure 1. The upper row: illustration of the proposed method that
includes iterative update of zero-shot guidance for pre-trained
diffusion models and spectral mapping from RGB detail image to target HR-HSI. The bottom row: error map comparison
between state-of-the-art pre-trained diffusion based hyperspectral
pansharpening models (i.e., PLRDiff [30], HIR-Diff [29], and the
proposed method).

1. Introduction

(LR-HSIs) with abundant spectral information, due to hardware constraints. This separation highlights the need for
hyperspectral pansharpening, which aims to fuse these image types to generate high-resolution hyperspectral images
(HR-HSIs) [26].
Methods for hyperspectral pansharpening generally fall
into two categories: single-image approaches [10, 14, 16,
41, 47] and deep learning (DL) methods [4, 12, 13, 13, 15,
17, 18]. Single-image approaches require only a single image pair instead of an entire dataset for training, which can
save significant training costs [36]. While single-image approaches are effective, DL methods can provide stronger

Hyperspectral images (HSIs), rich in spatial and spectral information, have been extensively used in a variety of applications [22, 46, 48]. In practice, however, the spatial and
spectral information in HSIs are often divided across different image types: the panchromatic image (PANs) with high
spatial resolution and low-resolution hyperspectral images
* Corresponding author

12669

