This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Data Driven Mixture-of-Expert Extraction from Trained Networks
Uranik Berisha12 , Jens Mehnert1 and Alexandru Paul Condurache12
1

Automated Driving Research, Robert Bosch GmbH, 70469 Stuttgart, Germany

2

Institute for Signal Processing, University of Lübeck, 23562 Lübeck, Germany

{Uranik.Berisha,JensEricMarkus.Mehnert,AlexandruPaul.Condurache}@de.bosch.com

Abstract

Google’s JFT-300M dataset, comprising 300 million samples [6]. Other solutions, such as DeiT [25], aim to mitigate
the dependency on large datasets by employing strong data
augmentations along with regularizations.
In this work, we approach the problem from a different
angle by making use of the vast collection of pretrained networks available. Recent studies have shown that MLPs in
pretrained language transformers tend to group neurons into
subnetworks responsible for distinct functions [30]. For
most input, Zhang et al. [29] show that the MLPs exhibit
a high sparsity in their activation patterns, which they use
to form MoE variants of prevalent language transformers.
Since vision transformers must process spatially structured
image data, the transferability of methods from language
transformers, with their sequential structure, is not trivial.
Text tokens can exhibit different activation and modularity
patterns due to linguistic rather than spatial structures [6].
Building upon these works, our goal is to investigate
whether similar phenomenons emerge in ViTs and leverage
them to reduce the size of pretrained ViTs post-training. To
this end, we introduce a novel expert extraction method that
determines the number and size of the experts from the data.
This grounds expert configurations in data-driven insights
rather than manual selection, enhancing the robustness of
the method. Our expert extraction method consists of two
phases. First, we cluster the hidden activations in the MLPs
using the Hierarchical Density Based Spatial Clustering for
Applications with Noise (HDBSCAN) algorithm [1]. We
choose this algorithm, as it allows us to find the number and
shape of the experts from the data. In the second phase, we
use these clusters to extract subnetworks from the linear layers, prioritizing components based on their variance within
the activation patterns. During inference, a simple and efficient routing mechanism, derived from the similarity to the
input cluster mean of the corresponding subnetwork, allows
us to conditionally select the appropriate expert for processing.
This extraction process, performed once post-training,
generates a MoE variant of the model, which is why we
refer to our method as “expert extraction”.

Vision Transformers (ViTs) have emerged as the state-ofthe-art models in various Computer Vision (CV) tasks, but
their high computational and resource demands pose significant challenges. While Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) can
make these models more efficient, they often require costly
retraining or even training from scratch. Recent developments aim to reduce these computational costs by leveraging pretrained networks. These have been shown to produce
sparse activation patterns in the Multi-Layer Perceptrons
(MLPs) of the encoder blocks, allowing for conditional activation of only relevant subnetworks for each sample.
Building on this idea, we propose a new method to construct MoE variants from pretrained models. Our approach
extracts expert subnetworks from the model’s MLP layers
post-training in two phases. First, we cluster output activations to identify distinct activation patterns. In the second
phase, we use these clusters to extract the corresponding
subnetworks responsible for producing them. On ImageNet1k recognition tasks, we demonstrate that these extracted
experts can perform surprisingly well out of the box and require only minimal fine-tuning to regain 98% of the original
performance, all while reducing MACs and model size, by
up to 36% and 32% respectively.

1. INTRODUCTION
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have long dominated CV tasks such as image recognition [6]. However, recent advancements have increasingly shifted towards transformers as the base architecture [6, 25]. These models
have achieved remarkable results but at a significant computational cost [6]. Approaches, such as MoE methods
[2, 3, 23], address these computational demands during inference but require expensive and complex training procedures, including additional load-balancing loss terms to
ensure balanced expert selection [14]. Moreover, these
models must be trained from scratch on massive datasets
like ImageNet-21k, containing over 14 million samples, or

20082

