This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EntitySAM: Segment Everything in Video
Mingqiao Ye1, * Seoung Wug Oh2 Lei Ke3 Joon-Young Lee2
1
2
3
EPFL
Adobe Research
Carnegie Mellon University
Frame

0

51

63

66

69

72

87

Video

SAM2

DEVA

EntitySAM
(Ours)

Figure 1. Zero-shot video entity segmentation performance comparison on VIPEntitySeg dataset using models trained on COCO, showing:
1) SAM 2 [39] using Mask2Former [7] mask prompts for the initial frame, 2) Mask2Former with DEVA [11] association, and 3) our
proposed EntitySAM. Our EntitySAM enhances SAM 2 by automatically segmenting and tracking novel entities without requiring userspecified prompts, achieving superior performance compared to existing state-of-the-art zero-shot tracking methods.

Abstract
Automatically tracking and segmenting every video entity
remains a significant challenge. Despite rapid advancements in video segmentation, even state-of-the-art models
like SAM 2 struggle to consistently track all entities across a
video—a task we refer to as Video Entity Segmentation. We
propose EntitySAM, a framework for zero-shot video entity
segmentation. EntitySAM extends SAM 2 by removing the
need for explicit prompts, allowing automatic discovery and
tracking of all entities, including those appearing in later
frames. We incorporate query-based entity discovery and
association into SAM 2, inspired by transformer-based object detectors. Specifically, we introduce an entity decoder
to facilitate inter-object communication and an automatic
prompt generator using learnable object queries. Additionally, we add a semantic encoder to enhance SAM 2’s semantic awareness, improving segmentation quality. Trained
on image-level mask annotations without category information from the COCO dataset, EntitySAM demonstrates
strong generalization on four zero-shot video segmentation
tasks: Video Entity, Panoptic, Instance, and Semantic Segmentation. Results on six popular benchmarks show that

EntitySAM outperforms previous unified video segmentation methods and strong baselines, setting new standards
for zero-shot video segmentation. Our code and models are
at github.com/ymq2017/entitysam.

1. Introduction

* This work was done during an internship at Adobe Research.

Video segmentation is an essential task for various applications in video scene understanding, including video editing, AR/VR, and robotic perception. There are roughly two
lines of video segmentation approaches. One line of approaches focuses on selecting semantic thing/stuff from predefined sets [27, 28, 48]. While these methods show strong
performance in the benchmark, the predictions are limited
to a pre-defined class set and the training data domain.
Another line of approaches works by initialing the information about the target object. The most common approach
in this group is semi-supervised video object segmentation
(VOS) which tracks a given mask in the first frame. The recent SAM 2 [39] also falls into this group. SAM 2 generalizes the VOS task by taking multiple prompt types, including masks, boxes, and clicks similar to image segmentation
methods [19, 22], and enables interactive video segmentation. Trained on large-scale training data, SAM 2 shows

24234

