This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DELT: A Simple Diversity-driven EarlyLate Training for Dataset Distillation
Zhiqiang Shen*

Ammar Sherif*
Zeyuan Yin
VILA Lab, MBZUAI

Shitong Shao

{zhiqiang.shen, zeyuan.yin}@mbzuai.ac.ae {ammarsherif90, 1090784053sst}@gmail.com

Prior Dataset Distillation

Abstract

IPC1

bird

bird

𝑻
IPC1:N

…

Prior

Ours

𝑁×𝑻

𝑻 + 𝑻 − 𝐑𝐈 … + 𝐑𝐈

IPC1

Early-optimized image

IPC1:N

IPCN𝑻𝑵

IPCN

Computation

𝑻𝟐

batch-to-global
matching

Full

𝑻

𝑻𝟏

IPC2

…

batch-to-global
matching

…

Full

IPC2

IPC1

𝑻

…

Recent advances in dataset distillation have led to solutions
in two main directions. The conventional batch-to-batch
matching mechanism is ideal for small-scale datasets and
includes bi-level optimization methods on models and syntheses, such as FRePo, RCIG, and RaT-BPTT, as well as
other methods like distribution matching, gradient matching, and weight trajectory matching. Conversely, batchto-global matching typifies decoupled methods, which are
particularly advantageous for large-scale datasets. This
approach has garnered substantial interest within the community, as seen in SRe2 L, G-VBSM, WMDD, and CDA. A
primary challenge with the second approach is the lack of
diversity among syntheses within each class since samples
are optimized independently and the same global supervision signals are reused across different synthetic images. In
this study, we propose a new Diversity-driven EarlyLate
Training (DELT) scheme to enhance the diversity of images in batch-to-global matching with less computation.
Our approach is conceptually simple yet effective, it partitions predefined IPC samples into smaller subtasks and
employs local optimizations to distill each subset into distributions from distinct phases, reducing the uniformity induced by the unified optimization process. These distilled
images from the subtasks demonstrate effective generalization when applied to the entire task. We conduct extensive experiments on CIFAR, Tiny-ImageNet, ImageNet-1K,
and its sub-datasets. Our approach outperforms the previous state-of-the-art by 2∼5% on average across different
datasets and IPCs (images per class), increasing diversity
per class by more than 5% while reducing synthesis time by
up to 39.3% for enhancing the training efficiency.

Our DELT Distillation

IPCN

Our DELT generated images

Late-optimized image

Figure 1. Distilling datasets to IPCN requires N ×T iterations in
traditional distillation processes (left) but fewer iterations in our
EarlyLate strategy (right). IPC1:N represents a set of images
from 1 to N . Red shaded area is our saved computational cost.

sible and affordable for the general public. Previous approaches [3–5, 13, 17, 20, 33, 39, 40, 44] primarily employ a batch-to-batch matching technique, where information like features, gradients, and trajectories from a local original data batch are used to supervise and train a
corresponding batch of generated data. The strength of
this method lies in its ability to capture fine-grained information from the original data, as each batch’s supervision signals vary. However, the downside is the necessity to repeatedly input both original and generated data for
each training iteration, which significantly increases memory usage and computational costs. Recently, a new decoupled method [18, 36, 37] has been proposed to separate the model training and data synthesis, also it leverages the batch-to-global matching to avoid inputting original data during distilled data generation. This solution has
demonstrated great advantage on large-scale datasets like
ImageNet-1K [26, 37] and ImageNet-21K [36]. However,
as shown in Fig. 2, a significant limitation of this approach
is the lack of diversity caused by the mechanism of synthesizing each data point individually, where supervision is
repetitively applied across various synthetic images. For
instance, SRe2 L [37] utilizes globally-counted layer-wise

1. Introduction
In the era of large models and large datasets, dataset distillation has emerged as a crucial strategy to enhance training efficiency and make advanced technologies more acces* Equal contribution. Work done while Ammar and Shitong visiting
MBZUAI. Code is at: https://github.com/VILA-Lab/DELT.

4797

