This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-Vocabulary Functional 3D Scene Graphs for Real-World Indoor Spaces
Chenyangguang Zhang1,2
Alexandros Delitzas2,3
Xiangyang Ji1
Marc Pollefeys2,4
1

Tsinghua University

2

ETH Zürich

3

MPI for Informatics

Abstract

Fangjinhua Wang2
Francis Engelmann2,5
4

Microsoft

Posed RGB-D Frames

We introduce the task of predicting functional 3D scene
graphs for real-world indoor environments from posed
RGB-D images. Unlike traditional 3D scene graphs that
focus on spatial relationships of objects, functional 3D
scene graphs capture objects, interactive elements, and
their functional relationships. Due to the lack of training data, we leverage foundation models, including visual language models (VLMs) and large language models (LLMs), to encode functional knowledge. We evaluate our approach on an extended SceneFun3D dataset and
a newly collected dataset, FunGraph3D, both annotated
with functional 3D scene graphs. Our method significantly
outperforms adapted baselines, including Open3DSG and
ConceptGraph, demonstrating its effectiveness in modeling
complex scene functionalities. We also demonstrate downstream applications such as 3D question answering and
robotic manipulation using functional 3D scene graphs. See
our project page at https://openfungraph.github.io.

Stanford University

Functional 3D Scene Graph

Fig. 1. Functional 3D Scene Graphs. Given an input sequence of
posed RGB-D frames of an indoor environment, our method predicts a functional 3D scene graph by detecting objects, identifying
interactive elements, and inferring functional relationships. This
enables the representation of interactions, functions, and scene dynamics, going beyond existing 3D scene graph methods that are
constrained to spatial relationships between static objects.

1. Introduction
This paper introduces functional 3D scene graphs for realworld indoor spaces from posed RGB-D images. 3D scene
graphs offer a lightweight, abstract representation for capturing the comprehensive semantic structure of an environment [4]. They support a variety of applications, including 3D scene alignment [66], image localization [51],
graph-conditioned 3D scene generation [21, 97], as well as
robotics navigation [83] and task planning [2, 61].
Recent advances in 3D scene graph prediction [4, 11, 27,
40, 41, 63, 64, 78, 84], have enabled exciting developments
across multiple areas, including scene graph inference from
3D reconstructions [11, 78], applications for robotic interactions [27, 84], online scene graph generation [84], openvocabulary 3D scene graphs [40, 41] and large-scale, hierarchical scene graphs [4, 63, 64]. The performance of
recent scene graph methods also benefits from advancements in 3D scene understanding techniques [14, 57, 70],
which they rely on to extract objects and their semantics for
modeling inter-object relationships. However, existing 3D

5

Ruida Zhang1

scene graph estimation methods [27, 40, 78, 84] face important limitations: graph nodes are typically restricted to
objects, and edges represent only spatial relationships. For
instance, edges primarily capture relative positions, such as
‘the TV is mounted on the wall’ or ‘the flower is placed
on the table’—information already implicitly encoded by
object positions. Crucially, these methods lack representations of small interactive elements [17] and their functional relationships with other scene objects, which are essential for finer-grained interactions (e.g., flipping a switch
to turn on a light), making them less suitable for higherlevel functional reasoning. The key idea of this paper is to
enhance 3D scene graphs with the capability to represent
functional relationships between objects and their interactive elements. A 3D scene graph that captures both functionalities and interactions opens up significant opportuni-

19401

