This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Language of Motion:
Unifying Verbal and Non-verbal Language of 3D Human Motion
Changan Chen∗ Juze Zhang∗ Shrinidhi K. Lakshmikanth∗ Yusu Fang Ruizhi Shao
Gordon Wetzstein Li Fei-Fei Ehsan Adeli
Stanford University

Generative Pre-training
Co-speech gesture generation
Input 



Editable gesture generation

Text to motion

Emotion understanding

  Sit cross-legged” 

  “A person is striking a golf ball”

What emotion is conveyed by the movements
in the body motion?

Output

A person expresses the emotion of “happiness”.

Figure 1. We introduce a language-model-based motion understanding and generation framework that takes in any of the audio/motion/text
modalities and outputs the desired target modality. Coupled with our generative pre-training strategy, our model demonstrates competitive
performance on an array of tasks, showing promising signs toward uniﬁed verbal and non-verbal language of human motions.

Abstract
Human communication is inherently multimodal, involving a combination of verbal and non-verbal cues such as
speech, facial expressions, and body gestures. Modeling
these behaviors is essential for understanding human interaction and for creating virtual characters that can communicate naturally in applications like games, ﬁlms, and
virtual reality. However, existing motion generation models are typically limited to speciﬁc input modalities—either
speech, text, or motion data—and cannot fully leverage the
diversity of available data. In this paper, we propose a
novel framework that uniﬁes verbal and non-verbal language using multimodal language models for human motion understanding and generation. This model is ﬂexible
in taking text, speech, and motion or any combination of
them as input. Coupled with our novel pre-training strategy, our model not only achieves state-of-the-art perfor* indicates equal contribution

mance on co-speech gesture generation but also requires
much less data for training. Our model also unlocks an array of novel tasks such as editable gesture generation and
emotion prediction from motion. We believe unifying the
verbal and non-verbal language of human motion is essential for real-world applications, and language models offer
a powerful approach to achieving this goal. Project page:
languageofmotion.github.io.

1. Introduction
Human communication is multimodal. We use spoken and
body language, including hand gestures, facial expressions,
body postures and emotional expressions to interact with
each other effectively. For example, people use linguistic cues along with body language, including hand gestures, facial expressions, overall body posture, and even
emotional expressions to interact with the environment effectively. Modeling these multimodal behaviors is essen-

6200

