This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-View Completion Models are Zero-shot Correspondence Estimators
Honggyu An1∗
Jin Hyeon Kim2∗
Seonghoon Park3
Jaewoo Jung1
Jisang Han1
Sunghwan Hong2†
Seungryong Kim1†
1

KAIST

2

Korea University

3

Samsung Electronics

Figure 1. Cross-view completion models [92, 93] are zero-shot correspondence estimators. Given a pair of images consisting of target
(left) and source (right) images, we visualize the attended region in the source image corresponding to a query point marked in the target
image in blue, where the point with the highest attention is marked in red. Although cross-view completion models [92, 93] are not trained
with correspondence-supervision, its cross-attention map already establishes precise correspondences.

Abstract

such as segmentation, detection, and optical flow through
transfer learning [34, 59, 89, 102].
Recent advances in self-supervised representation learning have introduced cross-view completion [92, 93] as a
powerful pretext task, which extends the masked image
modeling [37] to two views, where one view is masked and
reconstructed using information from the unmasked view.
Cross-view completion, in essence, leverages spatial relationships between multiple views of the same scene to learn
consistent geometric features. By training models to align
information across views through a cross-attention layer,
this approach inherently enhances structure and geometry
awareness, requiring the model to capture geometric structure and maintain spatial coherence across viewpoints. This
approach has thus shown notable success, with recent works
such as DUSt3R [86, 92, 93] achieving state-of-the-art performance in complex geometric vision tasks across both 2D
and 3D domains, such as optical flow, stereo depth, depth
estimation, and 3D reconstruction [74, 86, 93].
However, much less is understood about the mechanisms through which the cross-view completion paradigm
functions effectively. In this work, we aim to investigate

In this work, we explore new perspectives on crossview completion learning by drawing an analogy to selfsupervised correspondence learning. Through our analysis,
we demonstrate that the cross-attention map within crossview completion models captures correspondence more effectively than other correlations derived from encoder or
decoder features. We verify the effectiveness of the crossattention map by evaluating on both zero-shot matching and
learning-based geometric matching and multi-frame depth
estimation.

1. Introduction
Representation learning [33, 36, 65, 92, 93] is a foundational problem in computer vision field, as it aims to extract
meaningful visual cues from image collections. This enables enhanced performance in various downstream tasks
∗ : Equal contribution
† : Co-corresponding author

1103

