This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified Framework for Heterogeneous Semi-supervised Learning
Marzi Heidari∗ , Abdullah Alchihabi∗ , Hao Yan∗ , Yuhong Guo∗†
∗
School of Computer Science, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada
†
Canada CIFAR AI Chair, Amii, Canada
{marziheidari@cmail., abdullahalchihabi@cmail., haoyan6@cmail., yuhong.guo@}carleton.ca

Abstract
In this work, we introduce a novel problem setup termed
as Heterogeneous Semi-Supervised Learning (HSSL), which
presents unique challenges by bridging the semi-supervised
learning (SSL) task and the unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) task, and expanding standard semi-supervised learning to cope with heterogeneous training data. At its core,
HSSL aims to learn a prediction model using a combination
of labeled and unlabeled training data drawn separately
from heterogeneous domains that share a common set of
semantic categories. This model is intended to differentiate the semantic categories of test instances sampled from
both the labeled and unlabeled domains. In particular, the
labeled and unlabeled domains have dissimilar label distributions and class feature distributions. This heterogeneity,
coupled with the assorted sources of the test data, introduces
significant challenges to standard SSL and UDA methods.
Therefore, we propose a novel method, Unified Framework
for Heterogeneous Semi-supervised Learning (Uni-HSSL),
to address HSSL by directly learning a fine-grained classifier
from the heterogeneous data, which adaptively handles the
inter-domain heterogeneity while leveraging both the unlabeled data and the inter-domain semantic class relationships
for cross-domain knowledge transfer and adaptation. We
conduct comprehensive experiments and the experimental
results validate the efficacy and superior performance of the
proposed Uni-HSSL over state-of-the-art semi-supervised
learning and unsupervised domain adaptation methods.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models, owing to their hierarchical learned
representations and intricate architectures, have monumentally advanced the state-of-the-art across a myriad of tasks
[18]. Nonetheless, the success of deep learning has been
often contingent on the availability of copious amounts of
labeled data. Data annotation, especially in specialized domains, is not only resource-intensive but can also entail
exorbitant costs [32]. Consequently, semi-supervised learn-

ing (SSL) has been popularly studied, aiming to successfully
utilize the free available unlabeled data to help train deep
models in an annotation efficient manner [35].
However, current SSL methods assume that the unlabeled
and labeled data are sampled from similar (homogeneous)
distributions [25]. Such an assumption presents substantial
practical limitations to applying traditional SSL methods to
a wide range of application domains, where labeled and unlabeled data can have different distributions. For example, in
the field of medical imaging, it is common for labeled MRI
scans to be sourced from state-of-the-art research hospitals,
while an influx of unlabeled scans could emanate from a
myriad of rural clinics, each with its distinct scanning equipment and calibration idiosyncrasies. Similar heterogeneity
patterns manifest in domains like aerial imagery, wildlife
monitoring, and retail product classification. In such settings,
the challenge lies in leveraging the unlabeled data given its
dissimilarity with its labeled counterpart.
Therefore, to address the current limitations of the traditional SSL, we propose a novel heterogeneous semisupervised learning (HSSL) task, where the training data
consist of labeled and unlabeled data sampled from different
distribution domains. The two domains contain a common
set of semantic classes, but have different label and class
feature distributions. The goal of HSSL is to train a model
using the heterogeneous training data so that it can perform
well on a held-out test set sampled from both the labeled
and unlabeled domains. Without posing distribution similarity assumptions between the labeled and unlabeled data,
HSSL is expected to be applicable to a broader range of realworld scenarios compared to standard SSL. This novel heterogeneous semi-supervised learning task however is much
more challenging due to the following characteristics: (1)
The domain gap, expressed as divergence between class feature distributions across the labeled and unlabeled domains,
presents a significant impediment to model generalization
and learning. (2) The absence of annotated samples from
the unlabeled domain during training further compounds
the complexity of the task. (3) Considering that the test
set comprises samples from both domains, the devised so-

15371

