This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReCapture: Generative Video Camera Controls for
User-Provided Videos using Masked Video Fine-Tuning
David Junhao Zhang1,2
Roni Paiss1
Shiran Zada1
Nikhil Karnad1
1
1
2∗
Yael Pritch
Inbar Mosseri
Mike Zheng Shou
Neal Wadhwa1
1
Google 2 Show Lab, National University of Singapore

David E. Jacobs1
Nataniel Ruiz1∗

generative-video-camera-controls.github.io
Source Video

Source Video

T

ReCapture

T

ReCapture

Figure 1. Using a user-provided source video, ReCapture creates a new version with a customized camera trajectory, preserving the subject
and scene motion while revealing viewpoints not seen in the original.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recently, diffusion models have enabled significant advances in video generation and editing [10, 25, 29, 30,
32, 52, 61, 68, 84, 89, 92, 93, 96, 98, 100], revolutionizing workflows in digital content creation. Camera control plays a vital role in practical applications of video
generation and editing, allowing for greater customization
and stronger user experience. Recent efforts have introduced camera control capabilities to video diffusion models [2, 27, 35, 79], yet, in this case the videos are entirely
generated by the video model from a text-prompt and are
neither captured in the real world, nor provided by a user.
Effectively generating new videos with user-specified camera motion from an existing user-provided video that contains complex scene motion is still an open and challenging
problem.

Recently, breakthroughs in video modeling have allowed
for controllable camera trajectories in generated videos.
However, these methods cannot be directly applied to userprovided videos that are not generated by a video model.
In this paper, we present ReCapture, a method for generating new videos with novel camera trajectories from a single
user-provided video. Our method allows us to re-generate
the reference video, with all its existing scene motion, from
vastly different angles and with cinematic camera motion.
Notably, using our method we can also plausibly hallucinate parts of the scene that were not observable in the reference video. Our method works by (1) generating a noisy
anchor video with a new camera trajectory using multiview
diffusion models or depth-based point cloud rendering and
then (2) regenerating the anchor video into a clean and
temporally consistent reangled video using our proposed
masked video fine-tuning technique.

The task is inherently ill-posed due to the limited amount
of information in the reference video: one cannot know exactly how the scene looks like from all angles if there is not
full knowledge of the scene’s 4D content. However, this
does not preclude an approximate solution that is plausible and appreciated by users. Previous studies have shown

∗ Corresponding Author

2050

