This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Thin-Shell-SfT: Fine-Grained Monocular Non-rigid 3D Surface Tracking
with Neural Deformation Fields
Navami Kairanda1 Marc Habermann1, 2 Shanthika Naik3 Christian Theobalt1, 2 Vladislav Golyanik1
1
MPI for Informatics, SIC 2 VIA Research Center 3 IIT Jodhpur

Abstract
3D reconstruction of highly deformable surfaces (e.g.
cloths) from monocular RGB videos is a challenging problem, and no solution provides a consistent and accurate
recovery of fine-grained surface details. To account for
the ill-posed nature of the setting, existing methods use deformation models with statistical, neural, or physical priors. They also predominantly rely on nonadaptive discrete
surface representations (e.g. polygonal meshes), perform
frame-by-frame optimisation leading to error propagation,
and suffer from poor gradients of the mesh-based differentiable renderers. Consequently, fine surface details such as
cloth wrinkles are often not recovered with the desired accuracy. In response to these limitations, we propose ThinShell-SfT, a new method for non-rigid 3D tracking that represents a surface as an implicit and continuous spatiotemporal neural field. We incorporate continuous thin shell
physics prior based on the Kirchhoff-Love model for spatial regularisation, which starkly contrasts the discretised
alternatives of earlier works. Lastly, we leverage 3D Gaussian splatting to differentiably render the surface into image
space and optimise the deformations based on analysis-bysynthesis principles. Our Thin-Shell-SfT outperforms prior
works qualitatively and quantitatively thanks to our continuous surface formulation in conjunction with a specially
tailored simulation prior and surface-induced 3D Gaussians. See our project page at https://4dqv.mpiinf.mpg.de/ThinShellSfT.

Input Video
(Last Frame)

Ours
Input View

Ours
Novel View

Ground Truth

Previous Best

Figure 1. Our Thin-Shell-SfT approach reconstructs high-fidelity
deformable 3D surface geometry with fine-grained wrinkles from
a monocular video, while the previous best method [33] struggles.
The coloured tracks (“Ours, Input View”) visualise the 3D Gaussian trajectories over time and across all input video frames.

1. Introduction

53, 65]; they rely on 2D point tracks across monocular images (NRSfM) [53, 65] or between the input image and
the template (SfT) [3, 8]. Recent physics-based SfT approaches [33, 67] demonstrate state-of-the-art results and
cause a paradigm shift from geometric- [3, 8, 52] to physicsbased constraints and from 2D-point-based [8, 50] to dense
photometric loss using differentiable renderers. However,
even such approaches as ϕ-SfT [33] do not support fine
wrinkles and require multiple hours to reconstruct a limited number of frames (≈50) of a single object, which is
due to the underlying surface mesh representation, i.e., an
explicit and discrete. First, determining the mesh resolution
for a specific scene is difficult, e.g. selecting a high resolution could prohibitively increase the memory and computational cost, while a lower resolution might not account for
fine-scale deformations. Second, the Finite Element Mesh
(FEM)-based differentiable physics simulators [42, 43] lead
to inconsistent simulations at different resolutions, preventing the adoption of coarse-to-fine strategies for tracking. Third, simulator-based approaches [33, 67] optimise
frame-by-frame and can get stuck in local minima. Moreover, mesh-based differentiable renderers used in recent approaches [33, 67] are nonadaptive and do not support the
complex remeshing required for the dynamic details arising
in deformable scenes.

Non-rigid 3D reconstruction and tracking of general deformable surfaces from a monocular RGB camera is an important, challenging and ill-posed problem that is far from
being solved [71]. It has applications in game development,
robotics and augmented reality, to name a few areas.
Prior works on temporally-coherent general surface reconstruction can be grouped into Shape-from-Template
(SfT) [3, 8, 33] and Non-Rigid Structure-from-Motion [39,

11373

