This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Where the Devil Hides: Deepfake Detectors Can No Longer Be Trusted
Shuaiwei Yuan Junyu Dong Yuezun LiB
School of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China

Abstract
With the advancement of AI generative techniques,
Deepfake faces have become incredibly realistic and nearly
indistinguishable to the human eye. To counter this, Deepfake detectors have been developed as reliable tools for assessing face authenticity. These detectors are typically developed on Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) and trained using third-party datasets. However, this protocol raises a
new security risk that can seriously undermine the trustfulness of Deepfake detectors: Once the third-party data
providers insert poisoned (corrupted) data maliciously,
Deepfake detectors trained on these datasets will be injected “backdoors” that cause abnormal behavior when
presented with samples containing specific triggers. This is
a practical concern, as third-party providers may distribute
or sell these triggers to malicious users, allowing them to
manipulate detector performance and escape accountability.
This paper investigates this risk in depth and describes
a solution to stealthily infect Deepfake detectors. Specifically, we develop a trigger generator, that can synthesize
passcode-controlled, semantic-suppression, adaptive, and
invisible trigger patterns, ensuring both the stealthiness and
effectiveness of these triggers. Then we discuss two poisoning scenarios, dirty-label poisoning and clean-label poisoning, to accomplish the injection of backdoors. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness, stealthiness, and
practicality of our method compared to several baselines.

1. Introduction
Deepfake is a contemporary term that describes AI-driven
face forgery techniques. With the rapid advancement of
generative models, the Deepfake technique has become increasingly accessible and widespread, raising significant security concerns, such as privacy invasion [10], political misinformation [5], and economic fraud [21]. In response,
Deepfake detection has emerged as the most effective solution, gaining considerable attention in recent years.
B Corresponds to Yuezun Li (liyuezun@ouc.edu.cn)

Third-party data providers
Fake faces

Add

Real faces

Trigger
generator
Trigger
Passcode
For example, “123”
Training

Real

Add

• Passcodecontrolled
• Representationsuppression
• Adaptive
• Invisible

Trigger
generator

Deepfake
detector
Fake face

Trigger

Passcode: “234”
Add

Fake

Trigger
generator

Deepfake
detector
Fake face

Trigger

Figure 1. Overview of the security risk: Deepfake detectors face
potential vulnerabilities from third-party data providers who could
intentionally corrupt their data by adding passcode-controlled,
representation-suppression, adaptive, and invisible triggers.

Currently, most state-of-the-art Deepfake detectors are
based on Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) due to their significant learning capacities [13, 24, 31, 35, 40, 48]. To
fully exploit their capacity, these methods typically rely on
large-scale third-party datasets for training, e.g., FF++ [39],
Celeb-DF [25]. This reliance presents a new security problem: malicious data providers can intentionally corrupt
datasets (see Fig. 1). When detectors are trained on these
datasets, backdoors are injected into them, allowing these
infected detectors to perform normally on benign samples
but malfunction when present with samples containing specific patterns (triggers). This vulnerability significantly
undermines the real-world application of Deepfake detectors. For example, the attackers can acquire or purchase
these triggers from third-party data providers, allowing any
Deepfake face to bypass detection simply by adding the triggers.
In this paper, we thoroughly investigate this problem and
describe effective solutions to carry out such attacks. To
make the attack stealthiness, we describe a trigger genera-

8764

