This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridge Frame and Event: Common Spatiotemporal Fusion
for High-Dynamic Scene Optical Flow
Hanyu Zhou1, 2 *, Haonan Wang1 , Haoyue Liu1 , Yuxing Duan1 , Yi Chang1 , Luxin Yan1†
1
National Key Lab of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
hy.zhou@nus.edu.sg

yanluxin@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

World space

y

Image space
Fast motion

Feature space

First frame

Class B
blur

High-dynamic scene optical flow is a challenging task, which
suffers spatial blur and temporal discontinuous motion due
to large displacement in frame imaging, thus deteriorating
the spatiotemporal feature of optical flow. Typically, existing
methods mainly introduce event camera to directly fuse the
spatiotemporal features between the two modalities. However, this direct fusion is ineffective, since there exists a large
gap due to the heterogeneous data representation between
frame and event modalities. To address this issue, we explore
a common-latent space as an intermediate bridge to mitigate
the modality gap. In this work, we propose a novel common
spatiotemporal fusion between frame and event modalities
for high-dynamic scene optical flow, including visual boundary localization and motion correlation fusion. Specifically,
in visual boundary localization, we figure out that frame
and event share the similar spatiotemporal gradients, whose
similarity distribution is consistent with the extracted boundary distribution. This motivates us to design the common
spatiotemporal gradient to constrain the reference boundary localization. In motion correlation fusion, we discover
that the frame-based motion possesses spatially dense but
temporally discontinuous correlation, while the event-based
motion has spatially sparse but temporally continuous correlation. This inspires us to use the reference boundary to
guide the complementary motion knowledge fusion between
the two modalities. Moreover, common spatiotemporal fusion can not only relieve the cross-modal feature discrepancy,
but also make the fusion process interpretable for dense and
continuous optical flow. Extensive experiments have been
performed to verify the superiority of the proposed method.

* The author is currently with National University of Singapore, but this
work was finished at Huazhong University of Science and Technology.
† Corresponding author.

discrete

Map

Class A
Second frame
z

Slow motion

Map

Frame

Map

Fuse

Class B

Spatial
feature

Temporal
feature

Fuse

Frame

Spatial cues

Bridge

misaligned

Temporal cues
Map

Class A

(a) Problem of high-dynamic optical flow

Gap

Event

Feature
manifold

discontinuous
x

Fuse

(b) Direct spatiotemporal fusion
w/o Fusion

Common space
Map

Event

Fuse

push

Fuse

(c) Common spatiotemporal fusion
w/ Direct fusion

w/ Common fusion

(d) Optical flows estimated by different paradigms

Figure 1. Illustration of problem and idea. High-dynamic target
in world space cause degraded motion with spatial blur and temporal discontinuity in image space, resulting in the discretization
of spatiotemporal features in feature space. Direct spatiotemporal
fusion introduces event camera to assist frame camera, and directly
fuses their spatiotemporal features. However, this direct fusion
suffers the feature misalignment, since there exists a large gap due
to the heterogeneous data representation between frame and event
modalities. In this work, we explore the common space to bridge
the gap, thus guiding the frame-event spatiotemporal feature fusion.

1. Introduction
Optical flow is a task of modeling the pixel-level temporal
correspondence from the spatial features between adjacent
frames. Optical flow has made great progress in conventional
dynamic scenes with ideal imaging, but paid little attention
to the challenging high-dynamic scenes, i.e., fast motion.
The main reason is that fast motion in the world space brings
in the degradation of large displacement to the frame-based
imaging space, thus breaking the basic spatiotemporal assumption of optical flow in Fig. 1 (a). On the one hand, large
displacement leads to the spatial blur of visual textures due
to long exposure, violating the photometric constancy assumption. On the other hand, large displacement causes the
temporal discontinuity of motion trajectory due to low frame

27904

