This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DoraCycle: Domain-Oriented Adaptation of Unified Generative Model
in Multimodal Cycles
Rui Zhao, Weijia Mao, Mike Zheng Shou*
Show Lab, National University of Singapore
Abstract

I2T Gen & T2I Gen

Adapting generative models to specific domains presents
an effective solution for satisfying specialized requirements.
However, adapting to some complex domains remains challenging, especially when these domains require substantial
paired data to capture the targeted distributions. Since unpaired data from a single modality, such as vision or language, is more readily available, we utilize the bidirectional mappings between vision and language learned by
the unified generative model to enable training on unpaired
data for domain adaptation. Specifically, we propose DoraCycle, which integrates two multimodal cycles: text-toimage-to-text and image-to-text-to-image. The model is optimized through cross-entropy loss computed at the cycle
endpoints, where both endpoints share the same modality. This facilitates self-evolution of the model without reliance on annotated text-image pairs. Experimental results
demonstrate that for tasks independent of paired knowledge, such as stylization, DoraCycle can effectively adapt
the unified model using only unpaired data. For tasks involving new paired knowledge, such as specific identities,
a combination of a small set of paired image-text examples and larger-scale unpaired data is sufficient for effective domain-oriented adaptation. The code will be released
at https://github.com/showlab/DoraCycle.

Paired
Loss

Unified
Generative
Model

Multimodal Cycles

Paired
Loss

Image-Text Pairs
(a) Training on paired data

Cycle
Loss

Unified
Generative
Model

Images

Cycle
Loss

Texts

(b) Training in Multimodal Cycles

Figure 1. Training paradigms for unified generative models. (a)
Traditional training involves using paired image-text data and optimizing the unified model with paired losses for both image-to-text
(I2T) and text-to-image (T2I) generation tasks. (b) In contrast,
the proposed multimodal cycle training framework leverages unpaired images and texts. By using cycle-consistency losses, the
unified model learns to maintain consistency between input and
output across modalities, enabling adaptation without the need for
extensive paired datasets.

verse settings, is a highly complex task that demands vast
amounts of paired frames and captions data. Collecting
such paired data, especially for multimodal tasks involving
vision and language, is often laborious and impractical, limiting the potential to adapt generative models at scale.
High-quality image-text paired data is relatively rare and
scarce, but unpaired images and texts are readily available
in our daily lives, such as video websites, image platforms,
and content from novel websites. Therefore, we aim to explore whether it is possible to adapt generative models to
target domains based on unpaired data. To achieve this
goal, it is crucial for the model to have an internal capability to align the two modalities to some extent. Fortunately,
recent advancements in unified generative models have encouraged us to pursue this direction.
Recent advanced unified generative models [14, 18, 58,
67, 77] have shown great potential in unifying multimodal

1. Introduction
The adaptation of pre-trained generative models to specific
domains is an important aspect of advancing personalized
content creation, from stylized media outputs to customized
identity generation [47, 62]. However, effectively adapting generative models to complex domains remains challenging, particularly when these domains require extensive
amounts of paired data to accurately capture the desired distributions. For instance, learning the visual styles and character identities across a unique movie, which involves understanding multiple characters, their relationships, and di* Corresponding Author.

2835

