This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

B OOT P LACE: Bootstrapped Object Placement with Detection Transformers
Hang Zhou1
Xinxin Zuo2
Rui Ma3†
Li Cheng1
1
University of Alberta 2 Concordia University 3 Jilin University
Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the copy-paste image-to-image
composition problem with a focus on object placement
learning. Prior methods have leveraged generative models to reduce the reliance for dense supervision. However,
this often limits their capacity to model complex data distributions. Alternatively, transformer networks with a sparse
contrastive loss have been explored, but their over-relaxed
regularization often leads to imprecise object placement.
We introduce B OOT P LACE, a novel paradigm that formulates object placement as a placement-by-detection problem. Our approach begins by identifying suitable regions of
interest for object placement. This is achieved by training
a specialized detection transformer on object-subtracted
backgrounds, enhanced with multi-object supervisions. It
then semantically associates each target compositing object with detected regions based on their complementary
characteristics. Through a boostrapped training approach
applied to randomly object-subtracted images, our model
enforces meaningful placements through extensive paired
data augmentation. Experimental results on established
benchmarks demonstrate B OOT P LACE’s superior performance in object repositioning, markedly surpassing stateof-the-art baselines on Cityscapes and OPA datasets with
notable improvements in IOU scores. Additional ablation
studies further showcase the compositionality and generalizability of our approach, supported by user study evaluations. Code is available at https://github.com/
RyanHangZhou/BOOTPLACE

Figure 1. Our approach, B OOT P LACE, detects regions of interest
(represented as bounding boxes) for object composition and assigns each target object to its best-matched detected region. Each
object is connected to each detected region with weighted connections, with the bold arrow indicating the strongest link.

1. Introduction

applications in content creation [55] and data augmentation [1, 12, 38].
The evolution of image-to-image composition as a standardized input-output interface has enabled precise image
editing and enhanced downstream tasks such as semantic segmentation and object detection [13, 53]. Another
promising direction involves image-guided composition using diffusion models [8, 17, 29, 40], which excels in blending performance but often struggles to preserve the appearance and orientation of the composed objects.
A key challenge in precise placement learning lies in
the difficulty of training models to accurately place objects
due to sparse supervision of ground-truth location labels.
Early approaches addressed this by employing generative
models [2, 22, 51, 53] conditioned on joint embeddings of
scene images and object patches. These models generated
placements using 2D spatial transformations of the object
or its bounding box coordinates, bypassing the need for
explicit and dense supervision through compositionalityaware saliency maps. Alternatively, transformer-based approaches [55] have been used to regress bounding box
placements by directly learning an object-to-background association. This introduces relaxed constraints to mitigate
the scarcity of labels. A more recent study [54] increases
label availability by manually annotating positive and negative composite pairs, enabling the network to learn to avoid
suboptimal object placements. However, the reliance on
human-annotation is labor-intensive and prone to inaccuracies, limiting scalability for large-scale applications.

Compositional modeling is an emerging research area in
both computer vision and computer graphics, focusing on
constructing visual scenes by assembling components, objects, or elements with precise placement and interaction.
Task-agnostic approaches, such as image-to-image [22,
51], 3D-object-to-image [18, 47], and 3D-object-to-3Dobject [33, 48] composition, have gained wide-ranging
† Corresponding author.

19294

