This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GauSTAR: Gaussian Surface Tracking and Reconstruction
Chengwei Zheng1
1

Lixin Xue1

ETH Zürich

2

Juan Zarate1

HKUST(GZ)

3

Jie Song1,2,3

HKUST

Multi-view
Capture

t

Consistent
Tracking

New Surface
Generated

Appearance

Geometry

Tracking

(b)

(a)

Figure 1. We propose GauSTAR, a novel method that (a) enables photo-realistic rendering, surface reconstruction, and 3D tracking for
dynamic scenes while handling topology changes. (b) GauSTAR adapts to topology changes through two mechanisms: consistent tracking
for stable surfaces (red circles) and dynamic surface generation for newly appearing geometry (orange circles).

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting techniques have enabled efficient
photo-realistic rendering of static scenes. Recent works
have extended these approaches to support surface reconstruction and tracking. However, tracking dynamic surfaces
with 3D Gaussians remains challenging due to complex
topology changes, such as surfaces appearing, disappearing, or splitting. To address these challenges, we propose
GauSTAR, a novel method that achieves photo-realistic rendering, accurate surface reconstruction, and reliable 3D
tracking for general dynamic scenes with changing topology. Given multi-view captures as input, GauSTAR binds
Gaussians to mesh faces to represent dynamic objects. For
surfaces with consistent topology, GauSTAR maintains the
mesh topology and tracks the meshes using Gaussians. For

regions where topology changes, GauSTAR adaptively unbinds Gaussians from the mesh, enabling accurate registration and generation of new surfaces based on these optimized Gaussians. Additionally, we introduce a surfacebased scene flow method that provides robust initialization
for tracking between frames. Experiments demonstrate that
our method effectively tracks and reconstructs dynamic surfaces, enabling a range of applications. Our project page
with the code release is available at https://ethait.github.io/GauSTAR/.

1. Introduction
In the realm of dynamic scene representations, we seek
methods capable of delivering photorealistic renderings

16543

