This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Causal Composition Diffusion Model for Closed-loop Traffic Generation
Haohong Lin1 *, Xin Huang2 , Tung Phan2 , David Hayden2 ,
Huan Zhang3 , Ding Zhao1 , Siddhartha Srinivasa2 , Eric Wolff2 , Hongge Chen2
1
CMU, 2 Cruise LLC, 3 UIUC
haohongl@cmu.edu, hongge.chen@getcruise.com

1. Introduction
Reliable closed-loop traffic simulation is essential for assessing autonomous vehicle (AV) safety in diverse and complex
scenarios [1–5]. Simulations must be both realistic, capturing the intricacies of real-world driving, and controllable,
allowing customization aligned with user preferences. However, balancing realism with controllability remains a significant challenge. Previous works often prioritize one aspect,
optimizing either realism or user-specified objectives [3, 5].
How to jointly achieve both objectives under safety-critical
conditions remains fruitful yet unresolved.
* This work was done when Haohong was an intern at Cruise LLC.

5
13

7

5
13 7

5
13 7

Distance-based

Realistic ❌

Spatial Reasoning #

Safety-critical ✅
Model: CTG

Model: TrafficSim

Realistic ✅

Simulation is critical for safety evaluation in autonomous
driving, particularly in capturing complex interactive behaviors. However, generating realistic and controllable traffic
scenarios in long-tail situations remains a significant challenge. Existing generative models suffer from the conflicting
objective between user-defined controllability and realism
constraints, which is amplified in safety-critical contexts. In
this work, we introduce the Causal Compositional Diffusion
Model (CCDiff), a structure-guided diffusion framework to
address these challenges. We first formulate the learning
of controllable and realistic closed-loop simulation as a
constrained optimization problem. Then, CCDiff maximizes
controllability while adhering to realism by automatically
identifying and injecting causal structures directly into the
diffusion process, providing structured guidance to enhance
both realism and controllability. Through rigorous evaluations on benchmark datasets and in a closed-loop simulator,
CCDiff demonstrates substantial gains over state-of-the-art
approaches in generating realistic and user-preferred trajectories. Our results show CCDiff’s effectiveness in extracting
and leveraging causal structures, showing improved closedloop performance based on key metrics such as collision rate,
off-road rate, FDE, and comfort. For more details, welcome
to check our project website.

Safety-critical ❌
Model: STRIVE

Model: CCDiff

5
13 7

Ours

Abstract

7

5

Figure 1. Comparison of safety-critical scenario generation methods, featuring CCDiff alongside existing methods (STRIVE, CTG,
and TrafficSim). The illustrated scenario involves Car 13 executing an unprotected left turn, prompting Car 7 to change lanes and
interfere with Car 5. Unlike other methods, CCDiff successfully
achieves both realism and controllability in generating this safetycritical scenario. In the right column, CCDiff ’s spatial reasoning
method is compared to a distance-based baseline approach. CCDiff
accurately captures the causal relationships between key agents,
identifying crucial interactions with greater precision and spatial
alignment than distance-based reasoning.

Traffic agent simulation often resorts to either (i) datadriven approaches that generate the most probable trajectories based on scene context or (ii) rule-based approaches
that maximize alignment with a user’s control. However,
both approaches face key limitations for effective scenario
generation.
Data-driven scenario generation faces two primary challenges. First, the rarity of collision and near-miss events in
public datasets limits the ability of data-driven methods to
generate safety-critical scenarios. As shown in prior studies [2, 6], even a small domain mismatch, such as changes in
road structure or the behavior of surrounding vehicles, can
cause significant regressions. Second, closed-loop simulation requires that generated trajectories continuously interact with the simulated environment, so current predictions

27542

