This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffusionDrive: Truncated Diffusion Model for End-to-End Autonomous Driving
Bencheng Liao1,2,⋄ Shaoyu Chen2,3 Haoran Yin3 Bo Jiang2,⋄ Cheng Wang1,2,⋄ Sixu Yan2
Xinbang Zhang3 Xiangyu Li3 Ying Zhang3 Qian Zhang3 Xinggang Wang2
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
2
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
3
Horizon Robotics
Code & Model & Demo: hustvl/DiffusionDrive

Abstract
(a)

Recently, the diffusion model has emerged as a powerful
generative technique for robotic policy learning, capable of
modeling multi-mode action distributions. Leveraging its
capability for end-to-end autonomous driving is a promising direction. However, the numerous denoising steps in
the robotic diffusion policy and the more dynamic, openworld nature of traffic scenes pose substantial challenges
for generating diverse driving actions at a real-time speed.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel truncated
diffusion policy that incorporates prior multi-mode anchors
and truncates the diffusion schedule, enabling the model
to learn denoising from anchored Gaussian distribution to
the multi-mode driving action distribution. Additionally, we
design an efficient cascade diffusion decoder for enhanced
interaction with conditional scene context. The proposed
model, DiffusionDrive, demonstrates 10× reduction in denoising steps compared to vanilla diffusion policy, delivering superior diversity and quality in just 2 steps. On the
planning-oriented NAVSIM dataset, with aligned ResNet34 backbone, DiffusionDrive achieves 88.1 PDMS without
bells and whistles, setting a new record, while running at a
real-time speed of 45 FPS on an NVIDIA 4090. Qualitative
results on challenging scenarios further confirm that DiffusionDrive can robustly generate diverse plausible driving
actions.

Encode

Interacting

Scene Representation
(b)

Encode

Ego Query

Encode

Multi-mode
Trajectories
Score of Each Anchor

Denoise

Scene Rep.+Gaussian Distribution

(d)

Encode

MLP

Scoring

Scene Representation+Vocabulary

(c)

Reg Single-mode
Trajectory

Diffusion Policy

Denoise
Scoring

Scene Rep.+Anchored Gaussian Dist.

Multi-mode
Trajectories

p=1
p=0

Confidence Score

Multi-mode
Trajectories

Truncated Diffusion Policy

Figure 1. The comparison of different end-to-end paradigms.
(a) Single mode regression [8, 16, 20]. (b) Sampling from vocabulary [4, 25]. (c) Vanilla diffusion policy [7, 19]. (d) The proposed
truncated diffusion policy.

End-to-end autonomous driving has gained significant attention in recent years due to advancements in perception
models (detection [5, 17, 24, 42], tracking [54–56], online
mapping [27, 28, 32], etc.), which directly learns the driving policy from the raw sensor inputs. This data-driven ap-

proach offers a scalable and robust alternative to traditional
rule-based motion planning, which often struggles to generalize to complex real-world driving settings.
To effectively learn from data, mainstream end-to-end
planners (e.g., Transfuser [8], UniAD [16], VAD [20]) typically regress a single-mode trajectory from an ego-query
as shown in Fig. 1a. However, this paradigm does not account for the inherent uncertainty and multi-mode nature
of driving behaviors. Recently, VADv2 [20] introduces
a large fixed vocabulary of anchor trajectories (4096 anchors) to discretize the continuous action space and capture a broader range of driving behaviors, and then samples from these anchors based on predicted scores as shown
in Fig. 1b. However, this large fixed-vocabulary paradigm
is fundamentally constrained by the number and quality of
anchor trajectories, often failing in out-of-vocabulary scenarios. Furthermore, managing a large number of anchors
presents significant computational challenges for real-time
applications. Rather than discretizing the action space,
diffusion model [7] has proven to be a powerful genera-

⋄ Intern of Horizon Robotics;
Wang (xgwang@hust.edu.cn).

To distinguish the term “multimodal” used to describe input data, we
use “multi-mode” in this paper to refer to diverse planning decisions.

1. Introduction

Corresponding author: Xinggang

12037

