This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Morpheus: Text-Driven 3D Gaussian Splat Shape and Color Stylization
Jamie Wynn*1

Zawar Qureshi*1 Jakub Powierza1 Jamie Watson1,2 Mohamed Sayed1
1
2
Niantic
UCL
https://nianticlabs.github.io/morpheus/

Figure 1. We introduce a new method for stylization of novel views using text prompts. The output of our method is a stylized 3D Gaussian
Splatting model of which we show renders here. Our method allows stylization control of both appearance and shape. Using the same
prompt, our method can produce different stylizations with variable shape alteration, allowing for more striking shape and color stylization
compared to GaussCtrl [87]. We show multiple stylizations of the same scene. Code online.

Abstract

Exploring real-world spaces using novel-view synthesis
is fun, and reimagining those worlds in a different style
adds another layer of excitement. Stylized worlds can also
be used for downstream tasks where there is limited training data and a need to expand a model’s training distribution. Most current novel-view synthesis stylization techniques lack the ability to convincingly change geometry.
This is because editing geometry while maintaining multiview consistency is very challenging. In this work, we propose a new autoregressive 3D Gaussian Splatting stylization method. As part of this method, we contribute a new
RGBD diffusion model that allows for strength control over
appearance and shape stylization. To ensure consistency
across stylized frames, we use a combination of novel depthguided cross attention, feature injection, and a ControlNet
conditioned on composite frames for guiding the stylization
of new frames. We validate our method via extensive quali-

tative results, quantitative experiments, and a user study.

1. Introduction
As humans, we want to explore worlds and stories beyond
what we experience in our daily lives for entertainment or
education. Our history of art reflects this; we started with
paintings on stone walls, moved on to pigment on canvas, mastered the art and technicalities of photography, and
then invented moving pictures. When this was not enough,
we created better ways of experiencing these worlds by either adding a sense of depth as with stereoscopes or Sensorama [29, 83] or by allowing freedom and control over
viewpoint [7]. More recently, these experiences have been
realized by simulating a world using computer generated
graphics. Realism is achieved with work by artists to make
textures and models, and then work by graphics researchers
to allow real-time renders of these complex and detailed
* denotes equal contribution.

7825

