This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Parameter-efficient Fine-tuning in Hyperspherical Space for Open-vocabulary
Semantic Segmentation
Zelin Peng1 , Zhengqin Xu1 , Zhilin Zeng1 , Yu Huang1 , Yaoming Wang2 , and Wei Shen1(B)
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Meituan
{zelin.peng, fate311, bernardeschi, yellowfish, wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation seeks to label each
pixel in an image with arbitrary text descriptions. Visionlanguage foundation models, especially CLIP, have recently
emerged as powerful tools for acquiring open-vocabulary
capabilities. However, fine-tuning CLIP to equip it with
pixel-level prediction ability often suffers three issues: 1)
high computational cost, 2) misalignment between the two
inherent modalities of CLIP, and 3) degraded generalization
ability on unseen categories. To address these issues, we propose H-CLIP, a symmetrical parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) strategy conducted in hyperspherical space for both
of the two CLIP modalities. Specifically, the PEFT strategy
is achieved by a series of efficient block-diagonal learnable
transformation matrices and a dual cross-relation communication module among all learnable matrices. Since the
PEFT strategy is conducted symmetrically to the two CLIP
modalities, the misalignment between them is mitigated. Furthermore, we apply an additional constraint to PEFT on the
CLIP text encoder according to the hyperspherical energy
principle, i.e., minimizing hyperspherical energy during finetuning preserves the intrinsic structure of the original parameter space, to prevent the destruction of the generalization
ability offered by the CLIP text encoder. Extensive evaluations across various benchmarks show that H-CLIP achieves
new SOTA open-vocabulary semantic segmentation results
while only requiring updating approximately 4% of the total parameters of CLIP. The code is available at: https:
//github.com/SJTU-DeepVisionLab/H-CLIP.

1. Introduction
The aim of open-vocabulary semantic segmentation is to
create a segmentation model capable of labeling each pixel
in an image with categories that are not limited to a speB Corresponding Author: wei.shen@sjtu.edu.cn

cific closed set according to text descriptions. Visionlanguage foundation models [5, 9, 10, 12, 18, 19, 21, 23, 30–
33, 39, 45, 48, 52, 53, 55, 66], especially CLIP [45], are
often utilized to endow open-vocabulary recognition capabilities. Consequently, open-vocabulary semantic segmentation
essentially boil down to transferring these vision-language
foundation models, originally trained with image-level supervision, to perform pixel-level predictions.
To this end, current methods [7, 27, 47, 59, 61, 62, 65,
67, 68] typically fine-tune CLIP on a benchmark dataset
with segmentation annotations, i.e., COCO [2], to equip it
with the segmentation ability. However, this often leads to
three main issues. First, fine-tuning CLIP on limited categories would affect its generalization ability, resulting in
significant performance degradation on unseen categories.
Second, current fine-tuning methods for open-vocabulary
segmentation are usually asymmetrical [29, 61, 65], i.e., typically freezing CLIP’s text encoder and fine-tuning its image
encoder. This strategy inevitably causes a potential obstacle:
misalignment. More specifically, the misalignment arises
from different alignment granularities. The text encoder
maintains image-to-text alignment, while the image encoder
shifts from image-to-text to pixel-to-text alignment. Due to
these different alignment goals, the optimization process is
largely impeded, leading to sub-optimal performance. Third,
although remarkable performance gains, these approaches often rely on computationally extensive full fine-tuning, which
raises concerns about scalability and affordability.
To address these issues, we propose a symmetric
parameter-efficient fine-tuning strategy for CLIP, dubbed
H-CLIP. First, H-CLIP is fine-tuned in hyperspherical space,
where uniform vector magnitudes enhance the continuity
and smoothness of adjacent pixel features [56], improving
boundary precision and regional consistency. Additionally,
to preserve CLIP’s generalization ability, we are inspired by
the hyperspherical energy principle [38, 44], which suggests
that maintaining the same hyperspherical energy in the hypersphere space during fine-tuning preserves the intrinsic
structure, i.e., generalization capability. Specifically, we in-

15009

