This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CCIN: Compositional Conflict Identification and Neutralization for
Composed Image Retrieval
Jian Zhao2,3, * Zechao Hu1 Zhengwei Yang1 Hao Li1 Lei Jin4
Zheng Wang1,† Xuelong Li2
1
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science,
Wuhan University 2 Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Optics and Electronics (iOPEN),
Northwestern Polytechnical University 4 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Likai Tian1,∗

{tianlikai, 00034599, yzw aim, sc.lihao}@whu.edu.cn, zhaojian90@u.nus.edu,
jinlei@bupt.edu.cn, wangzwhu@whu.edu.cn, li@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) is a multi-modal task
that seeks to retrieve target images by harmonizing a reference image with a modified instruction. A key challenge in CIR lies in compositional conflicts between the
reference image (e.g., blue, long sleeve) and the modified
instruction (e.g., grey, short sleeve). Previous works attempt to mitigate such conflicts through feature-level manipulation, commonly employing learnable masks to obscure conflicting features within the reference image. However, the inherent complexity of feature spaces poses significant challenges in precise conflict neutralization, thereby
leading to uncontrollable results. To this end, this paper proposes the Compositional Conflict Identification and
Neutralization (CCIN) framework, which sequentially identifies and neutralizes compositional conflicts for effective
CIR. Specifically, CCIN comprises two core modules: 1)
Compositional Conflict Identification module, which utilizes LLM-based analysis to identify specific conflicting attributes, and 2) Compositional Conflict Neutralization module, which first generates a kept instruction to preserve
non-conflicting attributes, then neutralizes conflicts under
collaborative guidance of both the kept and modified instructions. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of CCIN over the state-of-the-arts. Code repository:
https://github.com/LikaiTian/CCIN .

Figure 1. An example of the multi-modal query that contains
compositional conflicts (e.g., shirt color, sleeve length, and letter color), which may misrepresent the user intention and result in
ambiguous retrieval results. To address this issue, we propose the
CCIN framework to sequentially identify and neutralize such conflicts, thereby contributing to positive retrieval.

modified instruction into a composed query, which differs
from traditional image retrieval tasks [26, 35, 43, 53, 57]
that proceed with single-modal queries. By capitalizing
on the strengths of both modalities, CIR significantly
enhances search flexibility in practical applications [49].
Several studies [2–4, 10, 25, 28] have investigated CIR
by employing various multi-modal fusion strategies to
enhance query representations. However, these fusion
approaches often struggle to address inherent discrepancies
in CIR scenarios, where the visual modality serves as the
foundational reference while the textual modality conveys
specific modifications. In line with TG-CIR [45], we refer
to this discrepancy as compositional conflict (as shown in
the middle area of Figure 1). Integrating the multi-modal

1. Introduction
Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) offers a holistic approach by integrating both the reference image and the
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

3974

