This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C TRL -D: Controllable Dynamic 3D Scene Editing with Personalized 2D Diffusion
Kai He
Chin-Hsuan Wu
University of Toronto

Igor Gilitschenski
Vector Institute

{hekai, chwu, gilitschenski}@cs.toronto.edu

“Turn him into a

joker”

“Turn his body into a bronze statue”

Input Scenes

“What if the man was painted in

style?”

“Give him a

hat”

“Put him in a

suit”

“What if it was painted in

“Give him a pair of

sunglasses”

“Turn him into a robot”

style?”

“Turn him into a Superman”

Figure 1. We present C TRL -D, a dynamic 3D scene editing framework that enables controllable, high-quality, consistent scene edits by
editing only a single image using any 2D editing approach. Our framework is also compatible with both monocular and multi-camera
scenes. Please see our project page for more dynamic visualizations: https://IHe-KaiI.github.io/CTRL-D/.

Abstract
Achieving controllable and consistent editing in dynamic
3D scenes remains a significant challenge. Previous work
is largely constrained by its editing backbones, resulting in
inconsistent edits and limited controllability. We propose to
address this challenge using personalized diffusion models.
In our work, we introduce a novel framework that first finetunes the InstructPix2Pix model, followed by a two-stage
optimization of the scene based on deformable 3D Gaussians. The fine-tuning enables the model to “learn” the
editing ability from a single edited reference image. This reduces the more complex task of dynamic scene editing to the
more simple 2D image editing problem. By directly learning
editing regions and styles from the reference, our approach
enables consistent and precise local edits without the need
for tracking desired editing regions, effectively addressing
key challenges in dynamic scene editing. Then, our twostage optimization progressively edits the trained dynamic
scene, using a designed edited image buffer to accelerate
convergence and improve temporal consistency. Compared

to state-of-the-art methods, our approach offers more flexible and controllable local scene editing, achieving highquality and consistent results.

1. Introduction

26630

The advent of efficient 3D representations, such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [40] and 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [27], has revolutionized the real-world scene capture, enabling photorealistic novel-view synthesis. With a
growing interest in dynamic scenes, several works [5, 59,
65, 70, 71] have extended NeRF and 3DGS to this setting, significantly broadening their scope of applications.
Building on these developments, there is an increasing demand for editing existing scenes—a capability essential for
various applications such as virtual and augmented reality
(VR/AR), content creation, and simulation. While recent
advances in static 3D scene editing have achieved promising results, the controllable and consistent editing of dynamic 3D scenes remains underexplored.

