This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FG2 : Fine-Grained Cross-View Localization by Fine-Grained Feature Matching
Zimin Xia Alexandre Alahi
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
{zimin.xia,alexandre.alahi}@epfl.ch

GT
Ours

Abstract
We propose a novel fine-grained cross-view localization
method that estimates the 3 Degrees of Freedom pose of a
ground-level image in an aerial image of the surroundings
by matching fine-grained features between the two images.
The pose is estimated by aligning a point plane generated
from the ground image with a point plane sampled from the
aerial image. To generate the ground points, we first map
ground image features to a 3D point cloud. Our method
then learns to select features along the height dimension to
pool the 3D points to a Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) plane. This
selection enables us to trace which feature in the ground
image contributes to the BEV representation. Next, we sample a set of sparse matches from computed point correspondences between the two point planes and compute their relative pose using Procrustes alignment. Compared to the
previous state-of-the-art, our method reduces the mean localization error by 28% on the VIGOR cross-area test set.
Qualitative results show that our method learns semantically consistent matches across ground and aerial views
through weakly supervised learning from the camera pose.

Figure 1. Fine-grained cross-view localization estimates the 3 DoF
pose of a ground image (left) on an aerial image (right) of the surroundings. Our method tackles this task by matching fine-grained
local features across views, providing interpretable results. The
matched correspondences are semantically consistent and learned
without ground truth labels. Here are a few selected predictions.

In fact, fine-grained cross-view localization is common
in everyday life, such as when people use Google Satellite
Maps [13] to determine their position. In this process, people first identify surrounding landmarks, such as buildings
and lane markings, understand their relative positions, and
then compare them to the aerial image. However, existing
methods do not fully follow this intuitive approach.
Global descriptor-based methods [20, 46, 47] generate
descriptors at candidate locations in the aerial image and
compare them to the descriptor of the query ground image.
Intuitively, this approach mimics imagining what would be
visible in the ground view at each candidate location given
the aerial view but is not how humans naturally approach localization. Local feature-based methods typically transform
the ground image into a Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) representation using homography [36, 39]. However, homography
applies only to the ground plane, limiting these methods by
overlooking above-ground objects, such as buildings. Besides, some methods [9, 34] estimate the ground camera’s
pose by densely comparing the ground view BEV representation to the aerial view. Yet humans tend to localize
based on a few distinct objects [7, 44], rather than the entire
panoramic scene. Moreover, no existing method explicitly
identifies which objects in the ground view match those in
the aerial view, making localization results hard to interpret.
We bridge the above gaps by proposing a novel finegrained cross-view localization method that aligns with hu-

1. Introduction
Visual localization aims to estimate the camera pose of a
given image relative to a representation of a scene. For
large-scale applications like autonomous driving and outdoor mobile robotics, the scalability of this representation
is crucial, as mapping is expensive [50]. Recently, using
aerial imagery for accurate visual localization [20, 29, 33–
36, 39, 42, 43, 46–48] has gained increasing interest due to
its global coverage. This task, named fine-grained crossview localization, aims to estimate the 3 Degrees of Freedom (DoF) pose, i.e., the planar location and yaw orientation, of a query ground-level image on an aerial image that
covers the ground camera’s local surroundings. In practice,
the aerial image can be identified using noisy position estimates from onboard Global Navigation Satellite System
(GNSS) in vehicles or robots, which contain errors up to
tens of meters in urban canyons [4].

6362

