This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Explainable and Unprecedented Accuracy
in Matching Challenging Finger Crease Patterns
Zhenyu Zhou Chengdong Dong Ajay Kumar
Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
{zhenyucs.zhou, chengdong.dong}@connect.polyu.hk, ajay.kumar@polyu.edu.hk
Same Suspect?

Knuckle Crease
Keypoint Correspondences

Graph Similarity

High
Match
(a)

(c)

(e)

High
Match
(b)

(d)

(f)

Figure 1. (a)-(b) sample matched knuckle image pairs from two identities, (c)-(d) uncovering knuckle crease point deep feature correspondences, (e)-(f) recovering respective graphs and computing respective graph similarity scores to identify persons.

Abstract

abuse images and videos, and continues to receive thousands of such images every week. Finger Knuckle patterns
are often the only evidence left in such images to identify
the suspects, and law enforcement has successfully used
such evidence for the prosecution [1–4]. However, such
knuckle crease pattern matching is largely done manually
[5] and is very challenging to match from videos and millions of images in surveillance patterns. Therefore, completely automated capabilities are required to accurately detect and match such finger knuckle images. Recent advancements in this area have indicated [6] high capabilities
to detect knuckle patterns from complex videos and images.
However, the accuracy for matching such completely contactless knuckle images with varying knuckle crease poses
(referred here as challenging knuckle images) is extremely
poor 1 and achieving such advancement is the key focus of
this paper.
Completely contactless hand biometrics identification
offers enhanced hygiene and higher user acceptance.
Among various hand biometric traits, finger knuckle identification is the youngest [2, 8], and therefore, any largescale business applications are yet to emerge or compete
with other established traits like fingerprint or palmprint
from centuries of identification using paper-based inked impressions. The success of contactless palmprint [9, 10] is

The primary obstacle in realizing the full potential of finger crease biometrics is the accurate identification of deformed knuckle patterns, often resulting from completely
contactless imaging. Current methods struggle significantly
with this task, yet accurate matching is crucial for applications ranging from forensic investigations, such as child
abuse cases, to surveillance and mobile security. To address this challenge, our study introduces the largest publicly available dataset of deformed knuckle patterns, comprising 805,768 images from 351 subjects. We also propose
a novel framework to accurately match knuckle patterns,
even under severe pose deformations, by recovering interpretable knuckle crease keypoint feature templates. These
templates can dynamically uncover graph structure and feature similarity among the matched correspondences. Our
experiments, using the most challenging protocols, illustrate significantly outperforming results for matching such
knuckle images. For the first time, we present and evaluate a theoretical model to estimate the uniqueness of 2D
finger knuckle patterns, providing a more interpretable and
accurate measure of distinctiveness, which is invaluable for
forensic examiners in prosecuting suspects.

1. Introduction
The Victim Identification Programme in the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) has acquired millions of child

1 Best methods for such cross-pose knuckle matching can only achieve
2.74% of GAR in [7] or 2.89% of GAR in [6] at FAR of 0.01%.

6212

