This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Doppelgängers and Adversarial Vulnerability
George Kamberov*
University of Alaska Anchorage
Anchorage, AK 99508
gkamberov@alaska.edu

Abstract
Machine learning (ML) classifiers can make mistakes that
are perceptually and cognitively disturbing to humans. The
most notorious examples of such errors are adversarial visual metamers. This paper investigates the phenomenon of
adversarial Doppelgängers (AD), which encompasses adversarial visual metamers, and compares the performance
and robustness of ML classifiers to human performance.
We find that ADs are inputs that are close to each other
with respect to a perceptual metric defined in this paper, and
show that ADs are qualitatively different from the usual adversarial examples. The vast majority of classifiers are vulnerable to ADs and robustness-accuracy trade-offs may not
improve them. Some classification problems do not admit
any AD-robust classifiers because the underlying classes
are ambiguous. We provide criteria to determine whether
a classification problem is well defined; describe the structure and attributes of AD-robust classifiers; introduce and
explore the notions of conceptual entropy and regions of
conceptual ambiguity for classifiers that are vulnerable to
AD attacks; and discuss methods to bound the AD fooling
rate of an attack. We define the notion of classifiers that exhibit hypersensitive behavior, that is, classifiers whose only
mistakes are adversarial Doppelgängers. Improving the AD
robustness of hypersensitive classifiers is equivalent to improving accuracy. We identify conditions guaranteeing that
all classifiers with sufficiently high accuracy are hypersensitive.

cluding perceptual metamers, is a manifestation of the existence of Doppelgängers: different inputs or stimuli that are
perceptually indiscriminable. The research community has
engaged in active studies of adversarial vulnerability ever
since the publication of [73]. Adversarial Doppelgängers,
that is, adversarial examples which are Doppelgängers, are
qualitatively different from the vast majority of known adversarial examples which humans readily discriminate from
correctly classified input samples (Figure 2). There is no

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Most people cannot discriminate image (a) from image
(b). MobileNetV2 classifies the later image as “persian” and the
former picture as “taby”.

1. Introduction
Perceptual metamers1 are the most striking adversarial examples studied by the machine learning community. Two
perceptual metamers are shown in Figure 1. The phenomenon of metamersim studied in the visual domain, in-

(a) Labrador

(b) Weimeraner

Figure 2. Applying a Fast Signed Gradient perturbation to the
image (a) classified by MobileNetV2 as Labrador yields the image
(b) which is classified by MobileNetV2 as Weimeraner.

* This material is based upon work supported by the National Science

Foundation under Grant No. 2433241
1 “images that are physically distinct but perceptually indistinguishable”, [6]. See also “metameric images”, [37]

10244

