This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Power of Context: How Multimodality Improves Image Super-Resolution
Kangfu Mei∗ 1,2 , Hossein Talebi1 , Mojtaba Ardakani1 ,
Vishal M. Patel2 , Peyman Milanfar1 , Mauricio Delbracio1
1
Google, 2 Johns Hopkins University
Project Page: https://mmsr.kfmei.com/
Inputs

Outputs

Reference

A close-up of a
male lion with
a dark mane,
light tan face,
and pink tongue
sticking out . . .

LR

LR (Zoomed)

Caption

PASD

SeeSR

MMSR (Ours)

HR

Depth

Segmentation

Edge

PASD (Zoomed)

SeeSR (Zoomed)

MMSR (Zoomed)

HR (Zoomed)

Figure 1. Our Multimodal Super-Resolution (MMSR) method leverages the rich context of multimodal guidance, including image captions,
depth maps, semantic segmentation maps, and edges inferred from LR. MMSR surpasses state-of-the-art methods by producing more
realistic results and suppressing artifacts that, while plausible, are inconsistent with the information present in the LR input.

ing semantic identity and texture details. While it is not
essential to treat SISR as a regression problem, past methods [17, 29, 37, 62] typically use a deep neural network to
learn a direct mapping from low-resolution images to highresolution images. Even though these regression-based methods achieve good scores on paired metrics like PSNR and
SSIM, they have failed to produce results with high quality
comparable to natural images, a task at which recent generative models have excelled [5, 12, 14]. The advent of powerful
generative models, such as autoregressive models [10, 51]
and diffusion models [47, 53, 54], has revolutionized image
generation tasks, including text-to-image synthesis. This has
inspired recent efforts to leverage these pre-trained generative models for downstream tasks like SISR [6, 41, 53]. For
instance, very recent works [50, 71] achieve super-resolution
by leveraging emerging vision-language models (e.g., Gemini [56], LLaVA [36], ChatGPT-4 [1]) and pretrained text-toimage models to first generate captions from low-resolution
images and then use these captions as prompts to generate
high-resolution images.

Abstract
Single-image super-resolution (SISR) remains challenging due to the inherent difficulty of recovering finegrained details and preserving perceptual quality from
low-resolution inputs. Existing methods often rely on
limited image priors, leading to suboptimal results. We
propose a novel approach that leverages the rich contextual information available in multiple modalities –
including depth, segmentation, edges, and text prompts–
to learn a powerful generative prior for SISR within a
diffusion model framework. We introduce a flexible network architecture that effectively fuses multimodal information, accommodating an arbitrary number of input
modalities without requiring significant modifications to
the diffusion process. Crucially, we mitigate hallucinations, often introduced by text prompts, by using spatial
information from other modalities to guide regional textbased conditioning. Each modality’s guidance strength
can also be controlled independently, allowing steering
outputs toward different directions, such as increasing
bokeh through depth or adjusting object prominence via
segmentation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our model surpasses state-of-the-art generative SISR
methods, achieving superior visual quality and fidelity.

1. Introduction

While providing rich textual descriptions can significantly
enhance the quality of generated images [4, 19, 34], relying
solely on text for SISR poses challenges. Recent works [7,
26, 35, 77] have shown that text prompts cannot represent
spatial relationships. This implies that textual information,
such as texture descriptions, can only be applied to the whole
image. Figure 1 provides a representative example. Previous
text-based super-resolution methods [65, 68] use a ‘lion’

Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to generate highresolution images from low-resolution inputs while preserv∗ This work was done during an internship at Google.

23141

