This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Edit Away and My Face Will not Stay:
Personal Biometric Defense against Malicious Generative Editing
Hanhui Wang1,∗ , Yihua Zhang2,∗ , Ruizheng Bai3 , Yue Zhao1 , Sijia Liu2† , Zhengzhong Tu3†
1

University of Southern California

2

Michigan State University

3

Texas A&M University

hanhuiwa@usc.edu, zhan1908@msu.edu, liusiji5@msu.edu, tzz@tamu.edu
∗

Adversarial
Perturbation
against
Malicious
Editing

Undefended
Image

Add glasses

†

Equal contribution

Corresponding authors

Defense
Algorithm

Adversarial
Perturbation

Make the hair pink

Add glasses.

Before
Editing
Wear police suit.

Defended
Image

Make the hair pink.

Before
Editing
Add whiskers

Wear police suit.

Add whiskers

FaceLock: Erase biometric information after any editing.

Prior Art: Cancel off the editing effects.

Figure 1. An illustration of adversarial perturbation generation for safeguarding personal images from malicious editing. Perturbations
generated by prior work [1, 2] aim to cancel off editing effects, resulting in instability due to the diversity of editing instructions. In contrast,
FACE L OCK does not prevent edits from being applied but instead erases critical biometric information (e.g., human facial features) after
editing, making it agnostic to specific prompts and achieving superior performance.

Abstract
Recent advancements in diffusion models have made generative image editing more accessible than ever. While these
developments allow users to generate creative edits with
ease, they also raise significant ethical concerns, particularly regarding malicious edits to human portraits that
threaten individuals’ privacy and identity security. Existing
general-purpose image protection methods primarily focus
on generating adversarial perturbations to nullify edit effects.
However, these approaches often exhibit instability to protect
against diverse editing requests. In this work, we introduce
a novel perspective to personal human portrait protection
against malicious editing. Unlike traditional methods aiming
to prevent edits from taking effect, our method, FACE L OCK,

optimizes adversarial perturbations to ensure that original
biometric information—such as facial features—is either
destroyed or substantially altered post-editing, rendering the
subject in the edited output biometrically unrecognizable.
Our approach innovatively integrates facial recognition and
visual perception factors into the perturbation optimization
process, ensuring robust protection against a variety of editing attempts. Besides, we shed light on several critical issues
with commonly used evaluation metrics in image editing and
reveal cheating methods by which they can be easily manipulated, leading to deceptive assessments of protection.
Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that FACE L OCK significantly outperforms all baselines in defense performance against a wide range of malicious edits. Moreover,
our method also exhibits strong robustness against purifi-

23806

