This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViiNeuS: Volumetric Initialization for Implicit Neural Surface reconstruction of
urban scenes with limited image overlap
Hala Djeghim1,2

Nathan Piasco1
Moussab Bennehar1
Luis Roldão1
1
2
Dzmitry Tsishkou
Désiré Sidibé
1
Noah’s Ark, Huawei Paris Research Center, France
2
IBISC, Univ. Evry Paris-Saclay , Evry, France.

ViiNeuS

StreetSurf [11]

Figure 1. We introduce ViiNeuS, a novel SDF initialization method tailored to accurately reconstruct large-scale driving scenes from
RGB images with limited overlaps. Extensive experiments on popular driving datasets show the superiority of ViiNeuS’s mesh (left) over
previous state-of-the-art methods such as StreetSurf[11] (right). The figure presents both the initial mesh and the textured one as derived
from both techniques.

Abstract
Neural implicit surface representation methods have recently shown impressive 3D reconstruction results. However, existing solutions struggle to reconstruct driving
scenes due to their large size, highly complex nature and
their limited visual observation overlap. Hence, to achieve
accurate reconstructions, additional supervision data such
as LiDAR, strong geometric priors, and long training times
are required. To tackle such limitations, we present ViiNeuS, a new hybrid implicit surface learning method that
efficiently initializes the signed distance field to reconstruct
large driving scenes from 2D street view images. ViiNeuS’s
hybrid architecture models two separate implicit fields: one
representing the volumetric density of the scene, and another one representing the signed distance to the surface.
To accurately reconstruct urban outdoor driving scenarios,
we introduce a novel volume-rendering strategy that relies
on self-supervised probabilistic density estimation to sample points near the surface and transition progressively from
volumetric to surface representation. Our solution permits
a proper and fast initialization of the signed distance field

without relying on any geometric prior on the scene, compared to concurrent methods. By conducting extensive experiments on four outdoor driving datasets, we show that
ViiNeuS can learn an accurate and detailed 3D surface representation of various urban scene while being two times
faster to train compared to previous state-of-the-art solutions.

1. Introduction

11854

Achieving accurate 3D reconstruction from multi-viewconsistent images has been an important topic in computer
vision and computer graphics communities for decades. A
3D representation of the perceived environment is fundamental for many tasks, such as scene re-lighting [47], scene
editing [48] and 3D object insertion for artificial data augmentation [40].
Recently, neural implicit surface representation methods [38, 44] have shown impressive 3D surface reconstruction performance from monocular images, achieving
highly detailed and precise mesh representations. Such
methods are originally inspired by Neural Radiance Fields

