This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniPose: A Unified Multimodal Framework for Human
Pose Comprehension, Generation and Editing
Yiheng Li1,2 , Ruibing Hou1 * , Hong Chang1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, China
2

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

yiheng.li@vipl.ict.ac.cn,{houruibing,changhong,sgshan,xlchen}@ict.ac.cn
Pose Comprehension

Pose Generation

Given the SMPL pose <pose>,
please give the corresponding
text description.

Clarify how the body
differs in poses <pose_1>
and <pose_2>.

Please generate the SMPL pose from the
description: This person supports his body with
the right leg, stretches his left leg backward,
and extends his hands to both sides.

The person is in a seated position with their
right leg crossed over the left leg. The right
arm is extended forward and the left arm is
extended to the side.

Raise your body and stay in a squatting position,
raise your arms and place them in front of you,
and turn your head to face forward.

Take a look at the image <image>
and return the SMPL pose
parameters for the figure shown.

Look at the image <image> and
generate a description of the
person's posture.
The person stands upright with both knees
straight. Their right arm is bent at a right
angle, parallel to the ground, while the left arm
is bent with the hand near the right shoulder.
The left foot is forward, and the right foot is
behind.

Contrast the poses
shown in <image_1>
and <image_2>.

Turn slightly to the right. Bend your right knee
and elbow at 90 degrees, keeping your right
thigh parallel to the ground. Align your left hand
with your left thigh and knee, and shift your left
foot slightly left. Adjust your right hand to side.

Pose Edit
Refine the given <pose> following the
guidance: Put down your left leg and
stretch it as straight as possible.
Extend your right arm forward and
your left arm backward.

Figure 1. UniPose can handle pose comprehension, generation and editing tasks under different instructions within a unified framework.

Abstract

available at https://github.com/liyiheng23/UniPose.

1. Introduction

Human pose plays a crucial role in the digital age. While
recent works have achieved impressive progress in understanding and generating human poses, they often support
only a single modality of control signals and operate in
isolation, limiting their application in real-world scenarios. This paper presents UniPose, a framework employing Large Language Models (LLMs) to comprehend, generate, and edit human poses across various modalities, including images, text, and 3D SMPL poses. Specifically,
we apply a pose tokenizer to convert 3D poses into discrete pose tokens, enabling seamless integration into the
LLM within a unified vocabulary. To further enhance the
fine-grained pose perception capabilities, we facilitate UniPose with a mixture of visual encoders, among them a posespecific visual encoder. Benefiting from a unified learning
strategy, UniPose effectively transfers knowledge across different pose-relevant tasks, adapts to unseen tasks, and exhibits extended capabilities. This work serves as the first
attempt at building a general-purpose framework for pose
comprehension, generation, and editing. Extensive experiments highlight UniPose’s competitive and even superior
performance across various pose-relevant tasks. Code is

27805

Human pose plays a pivotal role in various humancentric applications such as VR and healthcare. Numerous
studies focus on single-pose comprehension, i.e., producing
posture-relevant description from a 3D body pose [13] or
human image [18], as well as pose generation, i.e., creating
complex 3D poses from textual descriptions [13, 27, 39] or
human images [9, 15, 19, 55, 68]. Recently, a few studies have explored the relationship between pairs of poses
[12, 21, 33]. These studies investigate pose-pair comprehension, where textual instruction is produced based on the
differences between two 3D poses, and pose editing, where
corrected 3D body pose is generated based on an initial pose
and modification instruction. However, a key limitation of
existing work is that pose comprehension, generation, and
editing are predominantly studied in isolation. In reality,
human pose cognition and communication inherently involve seamless transitions between multiple pose-relevant
modalities, including 3D SMPL poses [44], textual descriptions, and human images. This highlights the need for a
unified multimodal framework capable of simultaneously
handling pose comprehension, generation, and editing.

