This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Animate and Sound an Image
Xihua Wang1
Ruihua Song1B
Chongxuan Li1
Xin Cheng1
Boyuan Li1
Yihan Wu1
Yuyue Wang1
Hongteng Xu1
Yunfeng Wang2
1
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
ZHI-TECH GROUP
xihuaw@ruc.edu.cn, songruihua bloon@outlook.com

Abstract
This paper addresses a promising yet underexplored task,
Image-to-Sounding-Video (I2SV) generation, which animates a static image and generates synchronized sound simultaneously. Despite advances in video and audio generation models, challenges remain to develop a unified model
for generating naturally sounding videos. In this work, we
propose a novel approach that leverages two separate pretrained diffusion models and makes vision and audio influence each other during generation based on the Diffusion
Transformer (DiT) architecture. First, the individual video
and audio pretrained generation models are decomposed
into input, output, and expert sub-modules. We propose using a unified joint DiT block to integrate the expert submodules to effectively model the interaction between the two
modalities, resulting in high-quality I2SV generation. Then,
we introduce a joint classifier-free guidance technique to
boost the performance during joint generation. Finally, we
conduct extensive experiments on three popular benchmark
datasets, and in both objective and subjective evaluation
our method surpass all the baseline methods in almost all
metrics. Case studies show our generated sounding videos
are high quality and synchronized between video and audio.

Figure 1. Cases for Image-to-Sounding-Video (I2SV) generation.
Comparison with the other four schemes shows that our method
significantly outperforms the other schemes regarding synchronization between the generated video and audio when animating
and sounding an image in high quality. Zoom in to see details.

1. Introduction

Several works initially address sounding video generation, either unconditionally or via text conditioning. Unconditional approaches [39, 43, 47] are limited to specific
domains, such as dance [26] or landscapes [25] scenes, hindering an efficient exploration of open-domain capabilities.
The unconditional generation also falls short when compared to conditional generation in terms of quality [27].
Text-conditioned approaches [18, 33, 44] offer more flexibility but face bottlenecks in processing the text modality. The performance heavily relies on constructing highquality video-audio captions and modeling alignment with
caption. This diverts the model’s focus away from modeling
the interaction between video and audio modalities, leading to a lack of sufficient fine-grained cross-modal interactions. Some works explore guidance techniques [13, 49]
to enhance performance of aforementioned approaches at
inference time, but do not directly address their problems.
Both paths achieve generating sounding videos in suboptimal quality, neither shows to be a scalable way to explore
sounding video generation with stable generation quality
and focusing on audiovisual interaction mechanisms.

The real world is constantly in motion and sound. Mimicking this dynamic nature is essential for content generation and foundational for building world models. For a
long time, the generative community has predominantly
focused on single-modality synthesis, exploring architectures [16, 36], generative frameworks [29, 34], and scaling properties [3, 10, 36] to enhance video or audio quality.
Though capable of producing high-fidelity video [3, 23, 51]
or audio [10, 32] separately, current single-modality generators struggle to create naturally paired sounding videos
Bridging two modalities to jointly generate sounding videos
remains understudied, persisting as an open challenge.

23369

