This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Forming Auxiliary High-confident Instance-level Loss
to Promote Learning from Label Proportions
Tianhao Ma1,2, *, Han Chen1,2, *, Juncheng Hu1,2 , Yungang Zhu1,2 , Ximing Li1,2,†
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education,
Jilin University, China
{matianhao2120, 2002chenhan}@gmail.com, {jchu, zhuyungang}@jlu.edu.cn, liximing86@gmail.com

Abstract
Learning from label proportions (LLP), i.e., a challenging weakly-supervised learning task, aims to train a classifier by using bags of instances and the proportions of
classes within bags, rather than annotated labels for each
instance. Beyond the traditional bag-level loss, the mainstream methodology of LLP is to incorporate an auxiliary instance-level loss with pseudo-labels formed by predictions. Unfortunately, we empirically observed that
the pseudo-labels are are often inaccurate due to oversmoothing, especially for the scenarios with large bag sizes,
hurting the classifier induction. To alleviate this problem,
we suggest a novel LLP method, namely Learning from
Label Proportions with Auxiliary High-confident Instancelevel Loss (L2 P - AHIL). Specifically, we propose a dual
entropy-based weight (DEW) method to adaptively measure
the confidences of pseudo-labels. It simultaneously emphasizes accurate predictions at the bag level and avoids
overly smoothed predictions. We then form high-confident
instance-level loss with DEW, and jointly optimize it with
the bag-level loss in a self-training manner. The experimental results on benchmark datasets show that L2 P - AHIL
can surpass the existing baseline methods, and the performance gain can be more significant as the bag size increases. The implementation of our method is available at
https://github.com/TianhaoMa5/LLP-AHIL.

class1

class2

Bag0

class3

class1

Training dataset

class2

class3

Bagn

Result

Input
Classifier

Figure 1. Before training, the data is grouped and only the proportion information is retained. Classifier training is performed
using unlabeled data and proportions in bag units, and finally the
instance classification task is completed.

1. Introduction

number of precisely labeled training instances due to various difficulties such as high annotation costs [34, 36] and
privacy protection concerns [12]. Consequently, training
instances with incomplete, inexact, and inaccurate supervision are often available only [50]. The demand for learning with such weak supervision facilitates the development
of Weakly-Supervised Learning (WSL) [40], ranging many
specific paradigms, e.g., semi-supervised learning [18, 49],
partial label learning [20, 27], and positive-unlabeled learning [10, 13], to name just a few.

During the past decades, supervised learning has been
proven to gain significant success in diverse real-world applications, in which one can easily collect loads of training
instances with precise supervision [21, 22]. Unfortunately,
in many scenarios, it is challenging to collect a sufficient
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Recently, an emerging paradigm of WSL, known as
Learning from Label Proportions (LLP) as shown in Fig. 1,
has gained increasing attention within the machine learning community [2, 4, 11, 48], and it has been broadly applied across various computer vision domains such as re-

20592

