This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Probing the Mid-level Vision Capabilities of Self-Supervised Learning
Xuweiyi Chen1 Markus Marks2 Zezhou Cheng1
1
University of Virginia 2 California Institute of Technology

Abstract

Wall Microwave

1. Introduction
Mid-level vision capabilities [41] (Fig. 1a) play a vital role
in human visual development and daily life activities. By
the age of one, children can re-organize retinal images
into objects (i.e., perceptual grouping), construct the visual world in three dimensions (i.e., 3D geometric understanding), track moving objects (i.e., cross-view correspondence), grasp and bite these objects without knowing their
semantics, and purposefully navigate through the 3D world.
Importantly, such mid-level perception is developed without
supervision [32].
On the other hand, self-supervised learning (SSL) in
computer vision has made significant strides [5–8, 25, 42,

Input

Generic Object Seg. Depth Estimation

Surface Normal

Semantic Seg.

Wall Microwave
Bin Chair Bin

3D Geometric Correspondence

Image Similarity

(a) Mid-level vision

R 2 = 0.23

Caltech256 Classification

80

Depth Estimation

Mid-level vision capabilities — such as generic object localization and 3D geometric understanding — are
not only fundamental to human vision but are also crucial for many real-world applications of computer vision.
These abilities emerge with minimal supervision during
the early stages of human visual development. Despite
their significance, current self-supervised learning (SSL)
approaches are primarily designed and evaluated for highlevel recognition tasks, leaving their mid-level vision capabilities largely unexamined.
In this study, we introduce a suite of benchmark protocols to systematically assess mid-level vision capabilities
and present a comprehensive, controlled evaluation of 22
prominent SSL models across 8 mid-level vision tasks. Our
experiments reveal a weak correlation between mid-level
and high-level task performance. We also identify several
SSL methods with highly imbalanced performance across
mid-level and high-level capabilities, as well as some that
excel in both. Additionally, we investigate key factors contributing to mid-level vision performance, such as pretraining objectives and network architectures. Our study provides a holistic and timely view of what SSL models have
learned, complementing existing research that primarily focuses on high-level vision tasks. We hope our findings guide
future SSL research to benchmark models not only on highlevel vision tasks but on mid-level as well.

Bin Chair Bin

75
70
40

60

ImageNet Linear Classification

80

90

Classification & Detection
(b) High-level vision

R 2 = 0.97

80
70
60
50
40

40

60

ImageNet Linear Classification

80

Jigsaw
ClusterFit
BYOL
DINO (ViT-B/16)
DeepCluster-v2
Barlow Twins
iBOT
RotNet
SwAV
DenseCL
MoCo v3 (ViT-B/16)
NPID
SimCLR
DINO (RN-50)
MAE
SeLa-v2
MoCo v2
MoCo v3 (RN-50)
MaskFeat
NPID++
SimSiam
PIRL
(c) SSLs for mid-level and high-level vision w.r.t. ImageNet classification

Figure 1. Mid-Level Vision vs. High-Level Vision Tasks. We
provide a comprehensive evaluation of prominent self-supervised
learning methods (SSLs) across a wide range of mid-level vision
tasks (a), complementing the standard evaluation in high-level vision tasks (b). Although SSL performance in mid-level vision
tasks (e.g., depth estimation) is positively correlated with ImageNet linear probing, this correlation is much weaker than that
observed among high-level vision tasks, as shown in (c) by the R2
statistics.

45, 46, 66, 71]. The goal of SSL is to learn visual representations from unlabeled data so that these pretrained
representations can be applied to a wide range of downstream tasks, reducing the need for human annotations and
enhancing learning efficiency and performance. However,
SSL is predominantly evaluated based on performance in
high-level visual recognition tasks, such as image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation (Fig. 1b).
At the same time, the mid-level vision capabilities of SSL
models are largely under-explored. To fill this gap, this pa-

30095

