This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WISH: Weakly Supervised Instance Segmentation using Heterogeneous Labels
Hyeokjun Kweon*
Chung-Ang University

Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST

hyeokjunkweon@cau.ac.kr

kjyoon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Instance segmentation traditionally relies on dense pixellevel annotations, making it costly and labor-intensive. To
alleviate this burden, weakly supervised instance segmentation utilizes cost-effective weak labels, such as image-level
tags, points, and bounding boxes. However, existing approaches typically focus on a single type of weak label,
overlooking the cost-efficiency potential of combining multiple types. In this paper, we introduce WISH, a novel heterogeneous framework for weakly supervised instance segmentation that integrates diverse weak label types within a
single model. WISH unifies heterogeneous labels by leveraging SAM’s prompt latent space through a multi-stage
matching strategy, effectively compensating for the lack of
spatial information in class tags. Extensive experiments on
Pascal VOC and COCO demonstrate that our framework
not only surpasses existing homogeneous weak supervision
methods but also achieves superior results in heterogeneous
settings with equivalent annotation costs.

Figure 1. Comparison of homogeneous and heterogeneous settings. Left shows homogeneous setting, where every image in
dataset is annotated with a single weak label type. The right shows
the proposed heterogeneous WSIS, a generalized approach that allows different weak label types across samples for a single dataset.

1. Introduction

tain less information but are far easier and cheaper to acquire. Motivated by this cost-efficiency and high practicality, throughout the last decade, several forms of weak supervision have been explored in WSIS, including image-level
class tags [1, 16, 47, 49], sparsely labeled points [2, 16, 26,
27, 33, 41], and bounding boxes [8, 15, 24, 25, 30, 39].
Despite these efforts, most existing WSIS methods focus on improving segmentation performance using a single
type of weak label, which we term the homogeneous setting. In practical scenarios, however, there is no inherent
reason to restrict supervision to a single weak label type.
Instead, leveraging multiple types of weak labels in a heterogeneous manner, as in Fig. 1, can be more effective,
considering their varying costs and complementary information. For example, while class tags are the most accessible, they provide no localization information, whereas
bounding boxes, though more costly, offer much richer localization cues. Therefore, a strategy that labels part of the
training data with class tags and other parts with bounding
boxes could be a more cost-effective solution. Yet, the community lacks studies exploring this heterogeneous setting.
In this context, this paper makes two key contributions
to advance the field of WSIS. First, we propose a novel
heterogeneous framework, named WISH, that simultaneously leverages multiple types of weak labels, generaliz-

Instance segmentation [6, 7, 12, 40] is a fundamental task
in computer vision that aims to predict the pixels associated with each semantic instance within an image. With
advances in learning-based methods, various instance segmentation paradigms have been extensively studied. However, these methods typically rely on fully supervised learning [6, 7, 12, 40], which requires pixel-level segmentation
ground truth (GT) and places a significant burden on the
annotation process. This challenge is particularly critical
in applications such as autonomous driving and robotics,
where large-scale, detailed annotations are essential.
To address this issue, Weakly Supervised Instance Segmentation (WSIS) [1, 2, 8, 15, 16, 24–27, 30, 33, 39, 41,
47, 49] has emerged, reducing the annotation burden by utilizing more cost-effective weak labels. Compared to dense
pixel-wise annotations (i.e., GT masks), weak labels con* This work has been done while at KAIST.

25377

