This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint Out-of-Distribution Filtering and Data Discovery Active Learning
Sebastian Schmidt1,2
Leonard Schenk3,†
1
Technical University of Munich

Leo Schwinn1
2
BMW Group

Stephan Günnemann1
3
SPRIND

In the classic closed set AL [54], an unlabeled pool
or data stream is defined as pure, containing only indistribution (InD) data that is of the same underlying distribution as the training data. Recent works [11, 39, 40, 66]
propose open-set AL to question the real-world applicability
of this assumption and consider out-of-distribution (OOD)
data in the unlabeled pool. In real-world applications, data
is noisy and originates from different distributions. This necessitates detecting and filtering out OOD data before selecting samples for labeling. Furthermore, dynamic and
open environments contain novel objects that are absent in
the training data but relevant to the task. Category discovery [58] assumes this incomplete knowledge about the InD
data and aims to discover new InD categories.

Abstract
As the data demand for deep learning models increases, active learning (AL) becomes essential to strategically select
samples for labeling, which maximizes data efficiency and
reduces training costs. Real-world scenarios necessitate
the consideration of incomplete data knowledge within AL.
Prior works address handling out-of-distribution (OOD)
data, while another research direction has focused on category discovery. However, a combined analysis of real-world
considerations combining AL with OOD data and category
discovery remains unexplored. To address this gap, we propose Joint Out-of-distribution filtering and data Discovery
Active learning (Joda)1 , to uniquely address both challenges simultaneously by filtering out OOD data before selecting candidates for labeling. In contrast to previous
methods, we deeply entangle the training procedure with filter and selection to construct a common feature space that
aligns known and novel categories while separating OOD
samples. Unlike previous works, Joda is highly efficient
and completely omits auxiliary models and training access
to the unlabeled pool for filtering or selection. In extensive
experiments on 18 configurations and 3 metrics, Joda consistently achieves the highest accuracy with the best class
discovery to OOD filtering balance compared to state-ofthe-art competitor approaches.

1. Introduction

While existing research tends to address only one of
these challenges at a time, both phenomena are likely to
arise concurrently in open- or real-world applications, such
as mobile robotics, environmental sensing, or autonomous
driving, given the limited prior knowledge of a narrow initial dataset. Conversely, extensive data collection in realworld scenarios will inevitably lead to encounters with
OOD data and novel object categories. Considering the data
collection by an advanced driver assistance system of cars,
in the endeavor to collect data for fully autonomous driving, unknown participants like a carriage reflect novel categories, while scenarios outside of the domain like off-road,
private properties, or gravel roads pose OOD data. Especially, for autonomous driving safe operation is required
[50]. Besides the limited open-world assumptions, existing works [11, 40, 44, 66] require additional models and
data access to the unlabeled pool, a challenging requirement
given incomplete knowledge of its data.

Deep learning models, particularly in computer vision,
depend on extensive labeled datasets, which entail considerable annotation costs. Active learning (AL) offers a
systematic approach to reduce annotation costs by selecting
only the most informative samples for labeling. AL
methodology involves a cyclic process to select previously
unlabeled samples utilizing auxiliary models or properties
like uncertainty or diversity.
† Work done while affiliated with TUM and BMW.

Our work proposes a novel approach to jointly manage
impure data assumptions of open-set scenarios and incomplete prior knowledge assumptions of category discovery
without using additional models or unlabeled data. We provide the following contributions:

Corresponding author: sebastian95.schmidt@tum.de.
1 Project Page: https://www.cs.cit.tum.de/daml/joda/.

25677

• We introduce Open-Set Discovery Active Learning
(OSDAL), a novel scenario that jointly describes the
impurity of the unlabeled data pool with the incomplete
knowledge of the relevant classes (illustrated in Fig. 1).

