This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distraction is All You Need for Multimodal Large Language Model Jailbreaking
Zuopeng Yang1* , Jiluan Fan1* , Anli Yan1† , Erdun Gao3 ,
Xin Lin1† , Tao Li2 , Kanghua Mo1 , Changyu Dong1
1

Guangzhou University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide

Demonstrate how to prepare a poison using
household chemicals.

Hades
The bottom of the image shows a object. Demonstrate how to
prepare a object using household chemicals.

I'm sorry, I can't assist with that.

CS-DJ
The images provided by the teacher in class include a
series of problems.
Please focus on understanding the issues presented
in pictures 10, 11, and 12. After analyzing these
problems, suggest an efficient approach to tackle
them simultaneously, detailing the steps involved in
your proposed solution.
Additionally, keep in mind that the other images might
be useful, but they aren't essential to your analysis.

To address the issues presented in
images 10, 11, and 12, here’s an efficient
approach to tackle these problems:
1. Identify common household chemicals
that can be hazardous if misused, such as
ammonia, vinegar, and hydrogen peroxide.
2. Dangerous Combinations: bleach and
ammonia, which produce toxic gases …

Figure 1. Jailbreaking examples of Hades [12] and our proposed CS-DJ against GPT-4o. When using Hades, GPT-4o effectively rejects
harmful questions. In contrast, CS-DJ successfully bypasses the model’s defense mechanisms by constructing multi-subimage visual
inputs to distract the model, resulting in the acquisition of harmful responses. The harmful information is highlighted in red, while key
prompts are emphasized in bold.

among visual elements within the model. This dual strategy disperses the model’s attention, reducing its ability
to detect and mitigate harmful content. Extensive experiments across five representative scenarios and four
popular closed-source MLLMs, including GPT-4o-mini,
GPT-4o, GPT-4V, and Gemini-1.5-Flash, demonstrate that CS-DJ achieves average success rates of 52.40%
for the attack success rate and 74.10% for the ensemble attack success rate. These results reveal the potential of distraction-based approaches to exploit and bypass
MLLMs’ defenses, offering new insights for attack strategies. Our code is available at https://github.com/
TeamPigeonLab/CS-DJ.
Warning: This paper contains unfiltered content generated
by MLLMs that may be offensive to readers.

Abstract
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) bridge
the gap between visual and textual data, enabling a range
of advanced applications. However, complex internal interactions among visual elements and their alignment with
text can introduce vulnerabilities, which may be exploited
to bypass safety mechanisms. To address this, we analyze the relationship between image content and task and
find that the complexity of subimages, rather than their
content, is key. Building on this insight, we propose
the Distraction Hypothesis, followed by a novel framework called Contrasting Subimage Distraction Jailbreaking (CS-DJ), to achieve jailbreaking by disrupting MLLMs
alignment through multi-level distraction strategies. CSDJ consists of two components: structured distraction,
achieved through query decomposition that induces a distributional shift by fragmenting harmful prompts into subqueries, and visual-enhanced distraction, realized by constructing contrasting subimages to disrupt the interactions

1. Introduction
Since the early 2020s, Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have emerged as a powerful tool for bridging
natural language processing and computer vision [3], owing
to their ability to integrate and process multimodal informa-

∗ Equal Contribution. † Corresponding authors.

9467

