This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedBiP: Heterogeneous One-Shot Federated Learning with Personalized Latent
Diffusion Models
Haokun Chen1,2,5 * Hang Li1,2 Yao Zhang1,5 Jinhe Bi1 Gengyuan Zhang1,5
Yueqi Zhang4 Philip Torr3 Jindong Gu3* Denis Krompass2 Volker Tresp1,5
1
Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich 2 Siemens Technology 3 University of Oxford
4
Technical University of Munich 5 Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)

Abstract

real
pretrained
FedBiP

One-Shot Federated Learning (OSFL), a special decentralized machine learning paradigm, has recently gained significant attention. OSFL requires only a single round of
client data or model upload, which reduces communication
costs and mitigates privacy threats compared to traditional
FL. Despite these promising prospects, existing methods
face challenges due to client data heterogeneity and limited data quantity when applied to real-world OSFL systems. Recently, Latent Diffusion Models (LDM) have shown
remarkable advancements in synthesizing high-quality images through pretraining on large-scale datasets, thereby
presenting a potential solution to overcome these issues.
However, directly applying pretrained LDM to heterogeneous OSFL results in significant distribution shifts in synthetic data, leading to performance degradation in classification models trained on such data. This issue is particularly pronounced in rare domains, such as medical imaging,
which are underrepresented in LDM’s pretraining data. To
address this challenge, we propose Federated Bi-Level Personalization (FedBiP), which personalizes the pretrained
LDM at both instance-level and concept-level. Hereby,
FedBiP synthesizes images following the client’s local data
distribution without compromising the privacy regulations.
FedBiP is also the first approach to simultaneously address feature space heterogeneity and client data scarcity
in OSFL. Our method is validated through extensive experiments on three OSFL benchmarks with feature space heterogeneity, as well as on challenging medical and satellite
image datasets with label heterogeneity. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of FedBiP, which substantially outperforms other OSFL methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/HaokunChen245/FedBiP.

* Corresponding
to
dong.gu@outlook.com

haokun.chen@siemens.com

and

real
pretrained
FedBiP

(a) DomainNet, airplane, quickdraw

(b) DermaMNIST, dermatofibroma class

Figure 1. Feature map visualization of client images (real), synthetic images by prompted pretrained LDM (pretrained), and our
method (FedBiP) on two datasets. FedBiP mitigates the strong
distribution shifts between pretrained LDM and client local data.

1. Introduction

jin-

Federated Learning (FL) [29] is a decentralized machine
learning paradigm, in which multiple clients collaboratively
train neural networks without centralizing their local data.
However, traditional FL frameworks require frequent communication between a server and clients to transmit model
weights, which would lead to significant communication
overheads [16]. Additionally, such frequent communication
increases system susceptibility to privacy threats, as transmitted data can be intercepted by attackers who may then
execute membership inference attacks [27]. In contrast, a
special variant of FL, One-Shot Federated Learning (OSFL)
[10], serves as a promising solution. OSFL requires only
single-round server-client communication, thereby enhancing communication efficiency and significantly reducing the
risk of interception by malicious attackers. Therefore, we
focus on OSFL given its promising properties.
Despite these promising prospects, existing methods for
OSFL face significant challenges when applied to realworld scenarios. Previous works [10, 23] require additional
public datasets, presenting challenges in privacy-critical domains such as medical data [26], where acquiring data that
conforms to client-specific distributions is often impractical. Alternatively, they can involve the transmission of entire model weights [50] or local training data [53], which are
inefficient and increase the risk of privacy leakage. More-

30440

