This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

F3 OCUS - Federated Finetuning of Vision-Language Foundation Models with
Optimal Client Layer Updating Strategy via Multi-objective Meta-Heuristics
Pramit Saha1
Felix Wagner1
Divyanshu Mishra1
Can Peng1
Anshul Thakur1
1,2
1,3,4
David A. Clifton
Konstantinos Kamnitsas
J. Alison Noble1
1

University of Oxford, 2 Oxford-Suzhou Centre for Advanced Research,
3
Imperial College London, 4 University of Birmingham
pramit.saha@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Effective training of large Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
on resource-constrained client devices in Federated Learning (FL) requires the usage of parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) strategies. To this end, we demonstrate the
impact of two factors viz., client-specific layer importance
score that selects the most important VLM layers for finetuning and inter-client layer diversity score that encourages
diverse layer selection across clients for optimal VLM layer
selection. We first theoretically motivate and leverage the
principal eigenvalue magnitude of layerwise Neural Tangent Kernels and show its effectiveness as client-specific
layer importance score. Next, we propose a novel layer
updating strategy dubbed F3 OCUS that jointly optimizes
the layer importance and diversity factors by employing
a data-free, multi-objective, meta-heuristic optimization on
the server. We explore 5 different meta-heuristic algorithms
and compare their effectiveness for selecting model layers
and adapter layers towards PEFT-FL. Furthermore, we release a new MedVQA-FL dataset involving overall 707,962
VQA triplets and 9 modality-specific clients and utilize it to
train and evaluate our method. Overall, we conduct more
than 10,000 client-level experiments on 6 Vision-Language
FL task settings involving 58 medical image datasets and 4
different VLM architectures of varying sizes to demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method. Project Page:
https://pramitsaha.github.io/FOCUS/

Figure 1. Distinction of our approach from prior works. (a) illustrates vanilla layer-selection process, which only selects parameter subsets based on the local client data without considering
the requirements of the other clients. (b) depicts our approach,
F 3 OCU S, which refines the client-specific layer selection by
jointly maximizing overall client-specific importance score and
layer selection diversity score across clients.

1. Introduction

text data. Fine-tuning these models with task-specific data
is crucial for adapting them to specialized applications.
However, gathering diverse training data centrally is challenging, especially in fields like healthcare, where strict
privacy regulations prevent data aggregation across different centers. To address the privacy concerns, Federated Learning (FL) [2, 34, 47, 55] allows models to be
trained directly on local devices, such as in healthcare clinics, without sharing sensitive data. Yet, fine-tuning large
models locally is difficult due to limited computational
power and smaller datasets, which hinders VLM adaptation.
Balancing privacy with these resource limitations requires

Large Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have made significant advancements in multi-modal learning, excelling
in tasks like Visual Question Answering (VQA) [9, 35,
45, 46, 51]. Their effectiveness stems from their extensive parameters often reaching millions or billions, allowing them to learn complex representations of image and

20006

