This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Image-like Diffusion Method for Human-Object Interaction Detection
Xiaofei Hui

Haoxuan Qu† Hossein Rahmani
Lancaster University

Jun Liu

{x.hui, h.qu5, h.rahmani, j.liu81}@lancaster.ac.uk

Abstract
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection often faces high
levels of ambiguity and indeterminacy, as the same interaction can appear vastly different across different humanobject pairs. Additionally, the indeterminacy can be further exacerbated by issues such as occlusions and cluttered
backgrounds. To handle such a challenging task, in this
work, we begin with a key observation: the output of HOI
detection for each human-object pair can be recast as an
image. Thus, inspired by the strong image generation capabilities of image diffusion models, we propose a new framework, HOI-IDiff. In HOI-IDiff, we tackle HOI detection
from a novel perspective, using an Image-like Diffusion
process to generate HOI detection outputs as images. Furthermore, recognizing that our recast images differ in certain properties from natural images, we enhance our framework with a customized HOI diffusion process and a slice
patchification model architecture, which are specifically tailored to generate our recast “HOI images”. Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of our framework.

Figure 1. Illustration of the HOI image (of shape H × W × 2)
formed over a human-object pair in (a) in which the human is
watching and pushing the box. In this figure, we illustrate the case
in which H = 5 and W = 6. We use a black pixel to represent a
pixel with value 0, and a white pixel to represent a pixel with value
1. As shown, the HOI image I hoi in (d) is formed as the product
of the vector v obj in (b) and the matrix mint in (c), in which v obj
(of shape H) represents the object classification result, and mint
(of shape W × 2) represents the interaction prediction result.

1. Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection aims to predict all interactions between each human-object pair in an
image, with each interaction represented as a <humaninteraction-object> triplet. Its significance spans across diverse applications, such as robotics [41], visual question answering [6], and image captioning [59]. Recently, it has
gained a great deal of research attention [34, 39, 52, 54, 55,
58, 62, 63]. Despite growing efforts, HOI detection still
remains a challenging task. One reason is that the same interaction can look very differently across different humanobject pairs, while different interactions can sometimes appear visually similar [2, 7]. Additionally, challenges also
arise from other factors such as occlusions and cluttered
backgrounds [28, 52, 67]. These challenges can lead to high
noise and indeterminacy (ambiguity) in the HOI detection
†

Corresponding Author

process, resulting in error-prone predictions [7].
Recently, showing superb performance in generating
high-quality images, image diffusion models [19, 43] have
become powerful image generators across various fields
[23, 27]. Specifically, these models typically transform
noisy, indeterminate images into high-quality, determinate
ones by gradually removing the noise. This process intuitively breaks down the potentially large gap between noisy
images and high-quality ones into a series of smaller steps
[49], making the transition smooth and quite manageable.
Motivated by the efficacy of image diffusion models, in
this work, for HOI detection—a task that also involves noise
and indeterminacy—we explore tackling it through an image diffusion process. We start our exploration with a key
observation: the outputs of HOI detection for each humanobject pair can also form an image. Specifically, since HOI
detection for each human-object pair can be viewed as two

14002

