This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HistoFS: Non-IID Histopathologic Whole Slide Image Classification via
Federated Style Transfer with RoI-Preserving

1

Farchan Hakim Raswa1
Chun-Shien Lu2*
Jia-Ching Wang1
2
CSIE, National Central University, Taiwan, ROC
IIS, Academia Sinica, Taiwan, ROC

farchan.hakim.r@g.ncu.edu.tw, lcs@iis.sinica.edu(*Corresponding Author), jcw@csie.ncu.edu.tw

Abstract
Federated learning for pathological whole slide image
(WSI) classification allows multiple clients to train a global
multiple instance learning (MIL) model without sharing
their privacy-sensitive WSIs. To accommodate the nonindependent and identically distributed (non-i.i.d.) feature
shifts, cross-client style transfer has been popularly used
but is subject to two fundamental issues: (1) WSI contains
multiple morphological structures, each corresponding to a
distinct style. (2) Performing style transfer may potentially
shift the region of interests (RoIs) in the augmented WSIs.
To address these challenges, we propose HistoFS, a federated learning framework for computational pathology on
non-i.i.d. feature shifts in WSI classification. Specifically,
we introduce pseudo bag styles that capture multiple style
variations within a single WSI. In addition, an authenticity
module is introduced to ensure that RoIs are preserved, allowing local models to learn WSIs with diverse styles while
maintaining essential RoIs. Extensive experiments validate the superiority of HistoFS over state-of-the-art methods on three clinical datasets. Our code is available at
https://lalakitchen.github.io/HistoFS/.

1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Histopathology Whole Slide Image (WSI) classification
plays a crucial role in computational pathology by automating disease diagnosis [5, 6]. Since WSIs are gigabyte-sized
images that capture a wide range of cellular and tissue structures, the Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) model [7–10]
is well-suited for this task by treating a WSI as a bag containing thousands of smaller “patch” images. Furthermore,
the pseudo-bag concepts [11–13] are introduced to partition
thousands of patch features into smaller bags. On the other
hand, to enable clients/institutions to collaboratively train a
global model without sharing sensitive WSI data, HistoFL
[3] and PointTransformerFL [4] introduce federated learn-

Figure 1. Challenges in federated learning for WSIs. The patch
features extracted by the pre-trained SSL-ViT encoder [1] from
four distinct institutions are visualized via t-SNE (t-distributed
Stochastic Neighbor Embedding) [2]. Each institution is considered to be a client with a unique client-specific style. It is clear
that WSIs from different institutions are well-separated. However,
prior works (e.g., [3, 4]) overlook the diverse distribution of WSIs
from different institutions, leading to sub-optimal performance.

ing (FL) for WSIs in computational pathology. However,
as an example illustrated in Fig. 1, patch features extracted
from WSIs of different institutions are non-independent and
non-identically distributed (non-i.i.d.) [14, 15], indicating a
shift in the feature space at the WSI level due to data heterogeneity resulted from distinct device scanners or data acquisition protocols used across different clients. This challenge
remains relatively unexplored [3, 4, 16, 17], and often leads
to sub-optimal performance in real-world scenarios.
In a different way, style transfer can deal with the issue
of feature shifts as well. As in [18–20], styles can be interpreted as a kind of feature distributions characterized by the
mean and standard deviation (i.e., statistical properties) of
extracted features. So, augmenting local data through crossclient style transfer (e.g., CCST [21] and StableFDG [22])
has become a popular paradigm for addressing non-i.i.d.
feature shifts within FL training. Although these methods
offer promising performance, they are still subject to the
following limitations.
• First, a WSI consists of thousands of smaller “patch” im-

30251

