This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoSER: Towards Consistent Dense Multiview Text-to-Image
Generator for 3D Creation
Bonan Li1,2 * Zicheng Zhang1∗

Xingyi Yang2

1

Xinchao Wang2†

2

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
National University of Singapore
libonan@ucas.ac.cn zhangzicheng19@mails.ucas.ac.cn xyang@u.nus.edu xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Figure 1. CoSER aims to generate detailed, diverse and detaild 3D objects from text prompts. All prompts are from T3Bench [13] and the
templated is set as “A DSLR photo of ..., 3d asset”. Better see in color and 2x zoom.

Abstract

conduct weighted down-sampling along the spatial dimension based on scores, thereby facilitating prominent information fusion across all views with lightweight computation. Technically, the core module is built by integrating the
attention mechanism with a selective state space model, exploiting the robust learning capabilities of the former and
the low overhead of the latter. Extensive evaluation shows
that CoSER is capable of producing dense, high-fidelity,
content-consistent multiview images that can be flexibly integrated into various 3D generation models.

Generating dense multiview images from text prompts is
crucial for creating high-fidelity 3D assets. Nevertheless, existing methods struggle with space-view correspondences, resulting in sparse and low-quality outputs. In
this paper, we introduce CoSER, a novel consistent dense
Multiview Text-to-Image Generator for Text-to-3D, achieving both efficiency and quality by meticulously learning
neighbor-view coherence and further alleviating ambiguity through the swift traversal of all views. For achieving
neighbor-view consistency, each viewpoint densely interacts with adjacent viewpoints to perceive the global spatial
structure, and aggregates information along motion paths
explicitly defined by physical principles to refine details. To
further enhance cross-view consistency and alleviate content drift, CoSER rapidly scan all views in spiral bidirectional manner to aware holistic information and then scores
each point based on semantic material. Subsequently, we

1. Introduction
Creating 3D content from text is an important task in computer vision and graphics for its potential applications in advertising, robotics, digital games and the meta-verse. Previous works [3, 26, 33] primarily optimise 3D representations using score distillation sampling [38] of Text-toImage (T2I) models, ensuring that rendered images from
any viewpoint maintain high fidelity while aligning with

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

2880

