This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual Exposure Stereo for Extended Dynamic Range 3D Imaging
Juhyung Choi
POSTECH

Jinnyeong Kim
POSTECH

Mario Bijelic
Princeton University

Seokjun Choi
POSTECH

Jinwoo Lee
KAIST

Felix Heide
Princeton University

Samuel Brucker
Torc Robotics

Seung-Hwan Baek
POSTECH

es

Dual exposure

ag

e

er

St

m
oi

Alternating frames

Fra

me
(a) Dual-exposure stereo imaging

(b) Captured dual exposure images

[px]
30

20

10

(c) Disparity from the exposure 1 frame

(d) Disparity from the exposure 2 frame

(e) Disparity from the dual-exposure frame

0

Figure 1. We introduce dual-exposure stereo, a method for extended dynamic range (DR) 3D imaging. (a) We control the dual exposures
synchronously set for the stereo camera to expand the effective DR of 3D imaging. From (b) the captured dual-exposure stereo images, we
estimate (e) a disparity map that preserves details in both the under- and over-exposed images of the dual-exposure pair, which cannot be
faithfully reconstructed in (c)&(d) one-exposure results.

Abstract
Achieving robust stereo 3D imaging under diverse illumination conditions is challenging due to the limited
dynamic range of conventional cameras, causing existing
stereo depth estimation methods to suffer from under- or
over-exposed images. In this paper, we propose dualexposure stereo that combines auto-exposure control and
dual-exposure bracketing to achieve stereo 3D imaging with
extended dynamic range. Speciﬁcally, we capture stereo image pairs with alternating dual exposures, which automatically adapt to scene illumination and effectively distribute
the scene dynamic range across the dual-exposure frames.
We then estimate stereo depth from these dual-exposure
stereo images by compensating for motion between consecutive frames. To validate our approach, we develop a

robotic vision system, acquire real-world HDR stereo video
datasets, and generate additional synthetic datasets. Experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms
existing exposure control methods.

1. Introduction
Robust 3D imaging is critical for autonomous systems, such
as robots and self-driving vehicles, which depend on depth
perception to navigate and interact with their environments.
Stereo imaging is a popular 3D imaging technique that estimates depth from disparity by matching corresponding pixels in images captured by two cameras. Recent advancements in neural networks have signiﬁcantly improved stereo
disparity estimation, making stereo imaging a practical and
cost-effective solution [27].

6283

