This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Opportunistic Single-Photon Time of Flight
Sotiris Nousias1* Mian Wei1* Howard Xiao1 Maxx Wu1 Shahmeer Athar1 Kevin J. Wang1
Anagh Malik1 David A. Barmherzig1 David B. Lindell1, 2 Kiriakos N. Kutulakos1, 2
1

Dept. of Computer Science, University of Toronto

2

Vector Institute

Abstract
Scattered light from pulsed lasers is increasingly part of our
ambient illumination, as many devices rely on them for active 3D sensing. In this work, we ask: can these “ambient”
light signals be detected and leveraged for passive 3D vision? We show that pulsed lasers, despite being weak and
fluctuating at MHz to GHz frequencies, leave a distinctive
sinc comb pattern in the temporal frequency domain of incident flux that is specific to each laser and invariant to
the scene. This enables their passive detection and analysis with a free-running SPAD camera, even when they are
unknown, asynchronous, out of sight, and emitting concurrently. We show how to synchronize with such lasers computationally, characterize their pulse emissions, separate their
contributions, and—if many are present—localize them in
3D and recover a depth map of the camera’s field of view.
We use our camera prototype to demonstrate (1) a first-ofits-kind visualization of asynchronously propagating light
pulses from multiple lasers through the same scene, (2) passive estimation of a laser’s MHz-scale pulse repetition frequency with mHz precision, and (3) mm-scale 3D imaging
over room-scale distances by passively harvesting photons
from two or more out-of-view lasers.

1. Introduction
Our environments are increasingly illuminated by faint but
extremely fast light signals. Devices such as lidars on
robots, cars, and drones [43, 45, 66], proximity sensors
and time-of-flight (ToF) cameras in smartphones [18, 48,
75], along with wireless light-based communication systems [54, 62, 77], all emit light fluctuating at frequencies
from MHz to GHz. This light is generally considered useful only to the emitting device, due to the precise synchronization and calibration required to detect it. ToF cameras,
for instance, use a dedicated light source that emits periodic signals in sync with their sensor, enabling accurate
measurement of the time delay between emission and detection [13, 41]. To nearby cameras, however, these signals
blend into the ambient background, contributing to noise or,
worse, interfering with their own measurements [30, 58].
In this work we ask: can such fast “ambient” light signals be automatically detected and leveraged for passive 3D
vision? As a first step toward answering this question, we
* Joint first authors: {sotiris,mianwei}@cs.toronto.edu
Project website: https://compimaging.dgp.toronto.edu/opportunistic

show that this is indeed possible to do with a time-resolving
single-photon camera, as long as some of the ambient light
comes from pulsed lasers—a light source technology used
in smartphone flash lidars [48] and many advanced beamscanning lidar systems [44].
Our focus is on scenarios where several independent and
unknown pulsed lasers are present in a scene, each acting as
a point light source. This occurs, for example, when many
flash lidar devices are active, or when beams from different
lasers illuminate distinct points in an environment. In such
settings, each laser can be thought of as an ultra-fast strobe
light, periodically flooding the scene with nanosecond- or
sub-nanosecond pulses a few million times a second [60].
To passively harvest this light, we develop an incident
flux model suited for cases where an unknown number of
lasers emit pulses asynchronously from beyond the camera’s line of sight, possibly amid other sources of strong
ambient light. We then combine this model with passive
ultra-wideband imaging [85] to automatically detect the
lasers’ presence; characterize their pulse emissions; separate their image contributions; and—if two or more lasers
are detected—localize them in 3D while also recovering a
depth map of the camera’s field of view. The only requirements are that (1) the single-photon camera can passively
timestamp photon arrivals concurrently and asynchronously
across all its pixels, and (2) both the camera and the lasers
remain stationary for the (sub-second) exposure duration.
The resulting approach is entirely passive: it emits no light
of its own, relying instead on detecting and repurposing
light from other lasers operating nearby. We call this novel
form of 3D imaging opportunistic single-photon ToF.
Opportunistic harvesting of various signals has been
practiced since at least the 1930s, when reflections from
ambient BBC radio signals were used to detect incoming
aircraft [9, 40]. Since then, serendipitous ambient signals
have enabled passive imaging across diverse domains, including coherent optical [21, 38], acoustic [8, 68, 78, 94],
sonar [19, 20, 87], radar [27–29, 53, 79], wifi [1–4] and microwave [50, 92, 93, 95]. Our work is motivated by similar
principles, but applied to the domain of incoherent optical
ToF. In computer vision, high-speed cameras and motion
enhancement techniques have been used to reveal hidden
motions in the world [82, 83, 89], sense sound [22], and analyze mechanical vibrations [23, 72]. The visual signals we
exploit here are considerably faster and much dimmer.

15852

