This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DivPrune: Diversity-based Visual Token Pruning for Large Multimodal Models
Saeed Ranjbar Alvar, Gursimran Singh† , Mohammad Akbari† , Yong Zhang
Huawei Technologies Canada Co., Ltd.
{saeed.ranjbar.alvar1, gursimran.singh1, mohammad.akbari, yong.zhang3}@huawei.com

Abstract
Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have emerged as powerful models capable of understanding various data modalities, including text, images, and videos. LMMs encode both
text and visual data into tokens that are then combined and
processed by an integrated Large Language Model (LLM).
Including visual tokens substantially increases the total token count, often by thousands. The increased input length
for LLM significantly raises the complexity of inference, resulting in high latency in LMMs. To address this issue,
token pruning methods, which remove part of the visual
tokens, are proposed. The existing token pruning methods either require extensive calibration and fine-tuning or
rely on suboptimal importance metrics which results in increased redundancy among the retained tokens. In this paper, we first formulate token pruning as Max-Min Diversity Problem (MMDP) where the goal is to select a subset
such that the diversity among the selected tokens is maximized. Then, we solve the MMDP to obtain the selected
subset and prune the rest. The proposed method, DivPrune,
reduces redundancy and achieves the highest diversity of
the selected tokens. By ensuring high diversity, the selected
tokens better represent the original tokens, enabling effective performance even at high pruning ratios without requiring fine-tuning. Extensive experiments with various LMMs
show that DivPrune achieves state-of-the-art accuracy over
16 image- and video-language datasets. Additionally, DivPrune reduces both the end-to-end latency and GPU memory usage for the tested models. The code is available here⋄ .

Figure 1. Comparison of different visual token pruning methods
across various pruning ratios for LLaVA 1.5-7B. The y-axis is the
performance averaged on COCO (CIDEr), OKVQA (Acc), POPE
(F1), and MMBench (Acc). The x-axis is the TFLOP ratio of the
model after token pruning compared to the original model before
pruning. The proposed method significantly outperforms all baselines. Note that, unlike other methods, FitPrune uses an additional
calibration step to prune tokens.

as embeddings. These tokens are then combined and processed by an integrated LLM. The inclusion of visual tokens significantly increases the total number of tokens, often adding thousands to the combined set. Since the running
time and memory requirements scale quadratically with input size [7, 8, 15, 38], the addition of visual tokens can substantially raise the running time for LMMs. Hence, many of
these models often struggle to meet the demands of lowlatency applications, particularly in resource-constrained
environments [46].
Previous research [4, 36, 47] has demonstrated that there
is a high degree of redundancy in the visual information
processed by LMMs. As a result, visual token pruning has
emerged as a promising solution to address the computational complexity challenges faced by LMMs. Specifically,
previous research has demonstrated that reducing the number of visual tokens by 50% [4] to 95% [36] can significantly enhance the inference speed of LMMs.
While promising, token pruning methods have certain

1. Introduction
Following the success of Large Language Models (LLMs)
in language understanding [1, 6, 40], Large Multimodal
Models (LMMs) [19, 22, 23, 52] have emerged to handle
diverse data types like images and video, by leveraging
the foundational capabilities of LLMs. Typically, LMMs
encode text and visual modalities into tokens, also known
† Authors have equal contributions.
⋄ https://github.com/vbdi/divprune

9392

