This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MetricGrids: Arbitrary Nonlinear Approximation with Elementary Metric
Grids based Implicit Neural Representation
Shuai Li1†
Chong Lv1
Xun Cai1
Yanbo Gao1 *
2
1
1
Chuankun Li
Hui Yuan
Jinglin Zhang
1
2
Shandong University
North University of China

Shu Wang1 *

Abstract
This paper presents MetricGrids, a novel grid-based
neural representation that combines elementary metric
grids in various metric spaces to approximate complex
nonlinear signals. While grid-based representations are
widely adopted for their efficiency and scalability, the existing feature grids with linear indexing for continuous-space
points can only provide degenerate linear latent space
representations, and such representations cannot be adequately compensated to represent complex nonlinear signals by the following compact decoder. To address this
problem while keeping the simplicity of a regular grid structure, our approach builds upon the standard grid-based
paradigm by constructing multiple elementary metric grids
as high-order terms to approximate complex nonlinearities, following the Taylor expansion principle. Furthermore, we enhance model compactness with hash encoding
based on different sparsities of the grids to prevent detrimental hash collisions, and a high-order extrapolation decoder to reduce explicit grid storage requirements. experimental results on both 2D and 3D reconstructions demonstrate the superior fitting and rendering accuracy of the
proposed method across diverse signal types, validating
its robustness and generalizability. Code is available at
https://github.com/wangshu31/MetricGrids.

2D Image Fitting

Baseline(Residual)

Ours(Residual)

NeRF Reconstruction

Baseline

Ours

Figure 1. Illustration of the nonlinear fitting capabilities for various type of signals using the existing INR method and our MetricGrids.

1. Introduction

The original INRs utilize a fully connected network with
parameters shared across the entire input domain, resulting
in a compact model [5, 36]. However, its expressive ability
is constrained by spectral bias [3, 38, 53] and the capacity of the network [20], making it challenging to fit highfrequency and complex signals. To address this limitation,
hybrid representations have been proposed [47, 51, 52],
which store latent space features at discrete vertex coordinates and use a decoder for reconstruction. Features are typically stored in grid-based structures, such as feature maps
for 2D signals and feature volumes for 3D signals [21, 28].
The input coordinates can be used to directly retrieve the
corresponding features through indexing rules.
In order to represent complex details, hybrid representations need to establish a dense feature grid in the entire signal input domain to ensure that the feature at continuousspace points can be obtained with high accuracy based
on the stored points. Especially considering that different signals show different complexity and sparsity among
the space, a regular grid-based representation often leads
to large storage and redundancy. Various methods have
been proposed for efficient grid structure. Early methods focused on modifying grid structures through heuristic modifications such as pruning and merging to create signal-

Implicit neural representations (INRs) [49] have emerged
as a novel paradigm for signal representation, demonstrating superior performance in reconstructing various signals,
including 2D images, 3D videos, 3D shapes, and radiance
fields [9–11, 34, 48]. INRs leverage neural networks to
establish a mapping between continuous coordinates and
target outputs by employing regularly sampled signal values as training data and optimizing the network parameters.
* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

21381

