This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning from Neighbors: Category Extrapolation for Long-Tail Learning
Jiahui Liu1 Chuofan Ma1 Chunfeng Yuan2 Xiaojuan Qi1 *
1
The University of Hong Kong
2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zhaosz,xjqi}@eee.hku.hk
Shizhen Zhao1

Xin Wen1

Abstract
Balancing training on long-tail data distributions remains
a long-standing challenge in deep learning. While methods such as re-weighting and re-sampling help alleviate the
imbalance issue, limited sample diversity continues to hinder models from learning robust and generalizable feature
representations, particularly for tail classes. In contrast
to existing methods, we offer a novel perspective on longtail learning, inspired by an observation: datasets with
finer granularity tend to be less affected by data imbalance. In this paper, we investigate this phenomenon through
both quantitative and qualitative studies, showing that increased granularity enhances the generalization of learned
features in tail categories. Motivated by these findings, we
propose a method to increase dataset granularity through
category extrapolation. Specifically, we introduce open-set
fine-grained classes that are related to existing ones, aiming to enhance representation learning for both head and
tail classes. To automate the curation of auxiliary data, we
leverage large language models (LLMs) as knowledge bases
to search for auxiliary categories and retrieve relevant images through web crawling. To prevent the overwhelming presence of auxiliary classes from disrupting training,
we introduce a neighbor-silencing loss that encourages the
model to focus on class discrimination within the target
dataset. During inference, the classifier weights for auxiliary categories are masked out, leaving only the target class
weights for use. Extensive experiments on three standard
long-tail benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach, notably outperforming strong baseline methods
that use the same amount of data. The project is available
at shizhen-zhao.github.io/LT_Neighbors/.

(a) Baseline

(b) Reweighting / Resampling

(c) Data Augmentation

(d) Category Extrapolation (Ours)

Tail Class

Auxiliary Tail Classes

Figure 1. Holistic comparison to previous philosophy. (a) Data
imbalance between head and tail classes makes biased features; (b,
c): Previous methods are still bounded by existing known classes;
(d) We instead seek help from auxiliary open-set data.

1. Introduction

dealing with real-world applications, they generally face
highly imbalanced (e.g., long-tailed) data distribution: instances are dominated by a few head classes, and most
classes only possess a few images [9, 12, 38, 39]. Learning in such an imbalanced setting is challenging as the
instance-rich (or head) classes dominate the training procedure [1, 6, 31, 44]. Without considering this situation,
models tend to classify tailed class samples as similar head
categories, leading to significant performance degradation
on tail categories [26, 27, 41, 47].
Existing works tackle challenges in long-tail learning
from various perspectives. An earlier stream is to rebalance the learning signal (e.g., re-weighting [7] and resampling [3]). Yet, they inevitably face the scarcity of data
and suffer from over-fitting on tail classes (Fig. 1b). Another straightforward fix is to augment training samples into
diverse ones through image transformations [4, 8, 42, 43].
These methods typically increase the loss weights or en-

Deep models have shown extraordinary performance on
large-scale curated datasets [10, 11, 18, 33]. But when
* Corresponding author

30483

