This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DUNE: Distilling a Universal Encoder from Heterogeneous 2D and 3D Teachers
Mert Bülent Sarıyıldız
Pau de Jorge

Philippe Weinzaepfel
Thomas Lucas
Diane Larlus
Yannis Kalantidis
NAVER LABS Europe
https://europe.naverlabs.com/dune

Abstract
Recent multi-teacher distillation methods have unified the
encoders of multiple foundation models into a single encoder, achieving competitive performance on core vision
tasks like classification, segmentation, and depth estimation. This led us to ask: Could similar success be achieved
when the pool of teachers also includes vision models specialized in diverse tasks across both 2D and 3D perception?
In this paper, we define and investigate the problem of heterogeneous teacher distillation, or co-distillation—a challenging multi-teacher distillation scenario where teacher
models vary significantly in both (a) their design objectives and (b) the data they were trained on. We explore data-sharing strategies and teacher-specific encoding, and introduce DUNE, a single encoder excelling in
2D vision, 3D understanding, and 3D human perception.
Our model achieves performance comparable to that of its
larger teachers, sometimes even outperforming them, on
their respective tasks. Notably, DUNE surpasses MASt3R
in Map-free Visual Relocalization with a much smaller encoder.

1. Introduction
Computer vision has seen the rise of foundation models [6]
such as DINO-v2 [33] or SAM [51]. Trained on massive
web-crawled datasets, they provide representations useful
for multiple downstream tasks. A recent body of work including AM-RADIO [37], Theia [44] or UNIC [42] has successfully unified the encoders of several of these foundation models into a single compact encoder via multi-teacher
distillation. Although an impressive feat, this line of research has so far only distilled models all trained on data of
a similar nature, composed of “generic” web-crawled images. In fact, in all recent works [30, 37, 42], distilling using the ImageNet-1K [14] dataset suffices to match teacher
performance for tasks like classification, segmentation and
monocular depth.

Figure 1. DUNE is a universal encoder for 2D and 3D tasks distilled from heterogeneous teachers. It enables multi-task inference
with a single encoder. Teachers are DINO-v2 [33], MASt3R [25],
and Multi-HMR [3] (see Fig. 3 for distillation details).

In this work we study heterogeneous teacher distillation,
or co-distillation.1 We consider a set of teacher models as
heterogeneous if they vary significantly with respect to both
(a) the tasks these teachers are trained for and (b) the visual domains of their training data. We seek to answer the
following question: Can we train a single encoder that excels at widely diverse tasks by distilling from state-of-theart heterogeneous models?
To that end, we distinguish between task-agnostic teachers, aimed at producing representations that generalize
across several tasks, and specialized teachers that achieve
state-of-the-art performance on one specific task. Given the
heterogeneity in training data across teachers, we examine
which data should be used for distillation. Finally, we study
the use of projectors, modules used in multi-teacher distillation to ensure compatibility across teachers and capture
teacher-specific information. More specifically we question
the projector design when distilling heterogeneous teachers
with abundant specialized information.
1 In chemistry, co-distillation refers to distillation performed on mixtures in which the compounds are not miscible.

30084

