This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Foveated Instance Segmentation
Hongyi Zeng∗ Wenxuan Liu∗ Tianhua Xia
New York University

Jinhui Chen Ziyun Li
Meta Reality Labs

Sai Qian Zhang
New York University

Abstract
Instance segmentation is essential for augmented reality
and virtual reality (AR/VR) as it enables precise object
recognition and interaction, enhancing the integration of
virtual and real-world elements for an immersive experience. However, the high computational overhead of segmentation limits its application on resource-constrained
AR/VR devices, causing large processing latency and degrading user experience. In contrast to conventional scenarios, AR/VR users typically focus on only a few regions
within their field of view before shifting perspective, allowing segmentation to be concentrated on gaze-specific areas.
This insight drives the need for efficient segmentation methods that prioritize processing instance of interest, reducing
computational load and enhancing real-time performance.
In this paper, we present a foveated instance segmentation (FovealSeg) framework that leverages real-time user
gaze data to perform instance segmentation exclusively
on instance of interest, resulting in substantial computational savings. Evaluation results show that FSNet
achieves an IoU of 0.56 on ADE20K and 0.54 on LVIS,
notably outperforming the baseline. The code is available at https : / / github . com / SAI - Lab - NYU /
Foveated-Instance-Segmentation

Figure 1. (a) An example on gaze location for the AR user. (b)
Trace of eye gaze within a segment.

Despite its importance, the segmentation task poses substantial computational challenges, particularly on resourcelimited AR/VR devices, largely due to the high resolution
of input images captured by these devices. For instance, the
Meta Ray-Ban glasses feature a 12-megapixel camera capable of recording 1440P video [33], which results in significant computational overhead during instance segmentation.
This high data volume results in considerable computational
latency, which can severely limits performance and responsiveness, ultimately degrading the overall user experience
by impeding real-time interaction and fluidity.

1. Introduction

In contrast to conventional use cases, AR/VR device
users have a unique behavior: they tend to focus on only
some small areas within a view before shifting to another
view. For instance, as shown in Figure 1, a user wearing
AR glasses stands in a bedroom. In the left part of Figure 1 (a), the user looks at the bed for a few seconds before turning head to look at the wardrobe, as depicted in the
right part of Figure 1 (a). In this scenario, the sequential
video frames can be divided into two segments based on
head movement. Within the first segment, where the frames
are highly similar, the gaze is primarily focused on the bed,
allowing instance segmentation to be performed only on the
bed. Similarly, in the second segment, segmentation can be
limited to the wardrobe. This insight offers an inherently
efficient solution for instance segmentation in AR/VR environments by prioritizing the processing of instances of in-

Semantic segmentation [4, 22, 28, 48], a fundamental task
in computer vision, involves partitioning an image into
meaningful regions to facilitate the analysis and interpretation of its visual content. Instance segmentation [5, 14, 45,
50] takes this further by identifying and delineating each
individual object instance within an image, which plays a
critical role in augmented reality (AR) as it enables precise
object recognition and separation in real-world scenes, allowing for more accurate interaction, manipulation, and integration of virtual elements with physical objects for an
immersive and context-aware user experience 1 .
0∗ Equal contribution
1 Experiments were conducted at New York University (NYU).

24496

