This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Layer- and Timestep-Adaptive Differentiable Token Compression Ratios for
Efficient Diffusion Transformers
Haoran You1,2, *, Connelly Barnes2 , Yuqian Zhou2 , Yan Kang2 ,
Zhenbang Du1 , Wei Zhou1 , Lingzhi Zhang2 , Yotam Nitzan2 , Xiaoyang Liu2 ,
Zhe Lin2 , Eli Shechtman2 , Sohrab Amirghodsi2 , Yingyan (Celine) Lin1
1

Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract

2

Adobe Research

Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) have achieved state-of-theart (SOTA) image generation quality but suffer from high
latency and memory inefficiency, making them difficult to
deploy on resource-constrained devices. One major efficiency bottleneck is that existing DiTs apply equal computation across all regions of an image. However, not all image
tokens are equally important, and certain localized areas
require more computation, such as objects. To address this,
we propose DiffCR, a dynamic DiT inference framework
with differentiable compression ratios, which automatically
learns to dynamically route computation across layers and
timesteps for each image token, resulting in efficient DiTs.
Specifically, DiffCR integrates three features: (1) A tokenlevel routing scheme where each DiT layer includes a router
that is fine-tuned jointly with model weights to predict token
importance scores. In this way, unimportant tokens bypass
the entire layer’s computation; (2) A layer-wise differentiable ratio mechanism where different DiT layers automatically learn varying compression ratios from a zero initialization, resulting in large compression ratios in redundant
layers while others remain less compressed or even uncompressed; (3) A timestep-wise differentiable ratio mechanism
where each denoising timestep learns its own compression
ratio. The resulting pattern shows higher ratios for noisier
timesteps and lower ratios as the image becomes clearer.
Extensive experiments on text-to-image and inpainting tasks
show that DiffCR effectively captures dynamism across token, layer, and timestep axes, achieving superior tradeoffs between generation quality and efficiency compared to
prior works. The project website is available here.

27]. Among these, Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) [1, 27]
stand out for their superior scalability. However, diffusion models, particularly DiTs, are hampered by substantial computational and memory demands, which limits their
efficiency in generation and deployment. For instance, generating a 1024px image with full context on a single A100
GPU can take 19.48 seconds and require >40GB GPU
memory [26, 28]. One major efficiency bottleneck in most
DiTs stems from the uniform application of computation
across all image regions, despite varying levels of complexity in different areas [26, 30, 55]. Such an efficiency bottleneck suggests an ideal DiT inference framework could have
adaptive and dynamic computation across three key axes in
DiTs: token, layer, and timestep.
Various techniques have been proposed to address the
efficiency bottleneck along the three aforementioned key
axes: (1) token merging [2], pruning [43], and downsampling [37]; (2) layer [17] or channel [9] pruning; and (3)
few-step distillation and sampling [21, 33, 44, 54]. While
promising, the techniques (1-2) for the most part rely on
heuristics, such as heuristic rules for token importance and
channel and layer pruning rules. Moreover, compression ratios are often uniform across layers or adjusted empirically
based on prior experience. In addition, most approaches focus on a single efficiency axis, overlooking the compounded
effect of combining optimizations across all three.

1. Introduction

To achieve a unified and learnable dynamic DiT inference framework with differentiable compression ratios
across layers and timesteps, three key challenges must be
tackled: (1) Token Perspective: Developing a learnable token importance metric that adapts to visual content, as not
all tokens are equally important. (2) Layer Perspective: Designing mechanisms to autonomously learn adaptive compression ratios for each layer, optimizing processing efficiency, since not all layers contribute equally. (3) Timestep
Perspective: Developing methods to learn and apply compression ratio patterns effectively across timesteps, as not
all timesteps are equally important. We make the following

Diffusion models have recently demonstrated outstanding
performance in image generation, with architectures evolving from U-Nets [13, 28, 32, 39] to Transformers [1, 3, 4,
* Work done while interning at Adobe.

18072

