This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Context-Enhanced Memory-Refined Transformer for Online Action Detection
Zhanzhong Pang
National University of Singapore

Fadime Sener
Meta Reality Labs

Angela Yao
National University of Singapore

pang@comp.nus.edu.sg

famesener@meta.com

ayao@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Online Action Detection (OAD) detects actions in streaming videos using past observations. State-of-the-art OAD
approaches model past observations and their interactions
with an anticipated future. The past is encoded using shortand long-term memories to capture immediate and longrange dependencies, while anticipation compensates for
missing future context. We identify a training-inference discrepancy in existing OAD methods that hinders learning
effectiveness. The training uses varying lengths of shortterm memory, while inference relies on a full-length shortterm memory. As a remedy, we propose a Context-enhanced
Memory-Refined Transformer (CMeRT). CMeRT introduces
a context-enhanced encoder to improve frame representations using additional near-past context. It also features a
memory-refined decoder to leverage near-future generation
to enhance performance. CMeRT 1 achieves state-of-theart in online detection and anticipation on THUMOS’14,
CrossTask, and EPIC-Kitchens-100.

(a) Imbalanced context exposure in short-term memory, where frames
can only access the past: current frame t has full short-term context
(ts ∽ t), while intermediate frame tm has only partial (ts ∽ tm ).

LSTR (Memory only)
TeSTra (Memory only)
MAT (Memory+Anticip.)
CMeRT (Memory+Anticip.)

0.600

Loss

0.575
0.550
0.525
0.500
0.475
0.450

ts

tm

Frame Index

t

(b) Frame losses within the short-term memory, showing learning biases
toward earlier and intermediate frames.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Existing methods exhibit poorly learned frame representations due to imbalanced context exposure and non-causal leakage.

Online Action Detection (OAD) identifies actions in a video
stream based on only past observations. This task is crucial for applications like autonomous driving [23], surveillance [34, 41], and AR assistants [4, 12, 25, 38, 39, 54],
where immediate and accurate detection is essential.
Effective OAD requires sufficient temporal support from
past frames. Recent methods [8, 21, 45, 49, 53] partition past
observations into long- and short-term memories, and enrich
frames in short-term memory with both immediate and longrange contexts to capture a range of temporal dependencies.
A causal mask [44] is typically applied to short-term frames,
restricting each frame to access only previous frames so that
predictions rely solely on past. This causal masking makes
each frame in short-term memory function as if it were the
most recent observed frame, allowing all short-term frames
to be used as training samples to improve training efficiency.
State-of-the-art OAD approaches [8, 21, 45] further leverage
action anticipation to generate pseudo-futures, compensating

for the absence of a true future context in OAD. In these
works, all frames in the short-term memory are used for
training, with each frame having different level of immediate
context. However, inference relies exclusively on the latest
frame, which has access to the full short-term context.
In this paper, we identify a training-inference discrepancy
present in state-of-the-art OAD methods and reveal how this
discrepancy introduces biases into training, limiting effective modeling of the latest frame for inference. As shown
in Fig. 1, we observe two sources of bias. (1) The causal
mask applied to the short-term memory exposes frames to
imbalanced amounts of context relative to frame position.
While the latest frame t has full short-term context, the earliest ts has none due to its position. This imbalance in context degrades learning quality, resulting in less informative
representations (large loss) for earlier frames in all SOTA
models [45, 49, 53]. These poor representations hinder the
classifier’s ability to effectively predict the latest frame. (2)
Using anticipation as the pseudo-future to enrich short-term

1 Code: https://github.com/pangzhan27/CMeRT.

8700

