This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GET: Unlocking the Multi-modal Potential of CLIP for
Generalized Category Discovery
Enguang Wang1 , Zhimao Peng1 , Zhengyuan Xie1 , Fei Yang2,1 *, Xialei Liu2,1 , Ming-Ming Cheng2,1
1
2
VCIP, CS, Nankai University
NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
{enguangwang,zhimao796,xiezhengyuan}@mail.nankai.edu.cn
{feiyang,xialei,cmm}@nankai.edu.cn

(a) GCD with visual information v.s. multi-modal information

Abstract

Forest (old)

Willow tree (new)

Maple tree (old)

95.8%

Given unlabelled datasets containing both old and new categories, generalized category discovery (GCD) aims to accurately discover new classes while correctly classifying old
classes. Current GCD methods only use a single visual
modality of information, resulting in a poor classification of
visually similar classes. As a different modality, text information can provide complementary discriminative information, which motivates us to introduce it into the GCD task.
However, the lack of class names for unlabelled data makes
it impractical to utilize text information. To tackle this
challenging problem, in this paper, we propose a Text Embedding Synthesizer (TES) to generate pseudo text embeddings for unlabelled samples. Specifically, our TES leverages the property that CLIP can generate aligned visionlanguage features, converting visual embeddings into tokens of the CLIP’s text encoder to generate pseudo text embeddings. Besides, we employ a dual-branch framework,
through the joint learning and instance consistency of different modality branches, visual and semantic information
mutually enhance each other, promoting the interaction and
fusion of visual and text knowledge. Our method unlocks the
multi-modal potentials of CLIP and outperforms the baseline methods by a large margin on all GCD benchmarks,
achieving new state-of-the-art. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/enguangW/GET.

48.6%

66.1%

47.7%

44.6%

0%
SimGCD
-CLIP

SimGCD
-CLIP

Ours

Ours

SimGCD
-CLIP

Ours

(b) Generate text embeddings for unlabelled data
l

u

images
Forest Maple tree
classnames
Labelled

Mapping & Aligning
align

Unabelled

Implicit
align

Text Embeddings

images
Unlabelled
classnames
Image Embeddings

Figure 1. The motivation of our method. (a) Current GCD methods [45] rely on single visual features, resulting in poor classification of visually similar classes; Our approach introduces text information, improving the discriminative capabilities of the model.
(b) Our proposed method maps image embeddings to text embeddings while simultaneously achieving modal alignment.

1. Introduction

learned from labeled data. As a realistic extension to NCD,
generalized category discovery (GCD) [41] assumes that
the unlabelled data come from both known and unknown
classes, rather than just unknown classes as in NCD. The
model needs to accurately discover unknown classes while
correctly classifying known classes of the unlabelled data,
breaking the close-set limitation, making GCD a challenging and meaningful task.
Previous GCD methods [35, 41, 45, 48, 51] utilize a
DINO [5] pre-trained ViT as the backbone network to expect good initial discrimination ability of the model, thereby
facilitating fine-tuning on the training data. Although
promising results have been achieved, these representations
derived from a single visual backbone often struggle with
visually similar categories, such as the classes in all finegrained datasets and some super-class subsets of generic
datasets. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), replacing the backbone of

Deep neural networks trained on large amounts of labeled data have shown powerful visual recognition capabilities [23]. Although this is heartening, the close-set assumption severely hinders the deployment of the model in
practical application scenarios. Recently, novel class discovery (NCD) [15] has been proposed to categorize unknown classes of unlabelled data, leveraging knowledge
* Corresponding author.

20296

