This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feature Information Driven Position Gaussian Distribution Estimation
for Tiny Object Detection
Jinghao Bian1 Mingtao Feng1,3 * Weisheng Dong1 Fangfang Wu1 Jianqiao Luo2
Yaonan Wang2 Guangming Shi1
1
Xidian University, 2 Hunan University
3
Jiangxi Communication Terminal Industrial Technology Research Institute

Abstract
Tiny object detection remains challenging in spite of the
success of generic detectors. The dramatic performance
degradation of generic detectors on tiny objects is mainly
due to the the weak representations of extremely limited
pixels. To address this issue, we propose a plug-and-play
architecture to enhance the extinguished regions. We for
the first time exploit the regions to be enhanced from the
perspective of pixel-wise amount of information. Specifically, we model the entire image pixels feature information
by minimizing Information Entropy loss, generating an information map to attentively highlight weak activated regions in an unsupervised way. To effectively assist the above
phase with more attention to tiny objects, we next introduce
the Position Gaussian Distribution Map, explicitly modeled
using a Gaussian Mixture distribution, where each Gaussian component’s parameters depend on the position and
size of object instance labels, serving as supervision for further feature enhancement. Taking the information map as
prior knowledge guidance, we construct a multi-scale position gaussian distribution map prediction module, simultaneously modulating the information map and distribution
map to focus on tiny objects during training. Extensive experiments on three public tiny object datasets demonstrate
the superiority of our method over current state-of-the-art
competitors.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (a) Input image; (b) feature map P2 from DetectoRS [31]; (c) enhanced feature; (d) and (e) are proposed information map σ and predicted position distribution map Mpd2 .

Deep learning-based architectures have significantly advanced general object detection [27, 32, 34]. However,
their performance declines sharply when detecting tiny objects [8]. As defined in the AI-TOD benchmark [44], tiny
objects are categorized by pixel count: very tiny (2-8 pixels), tiny (8–16 pixels), and small (16-32 pixels). Given the
prevalence of tiny objects in real-world contexts (e.g., traffic monitoring [24], sea rescue [56], and wildlife population
* Corresponding author

30376

assessment [19]), it is crucial to bridge the gap between tiny
and general object detection.
Several pioneering efforts have been introduced to address this challenge. One prominent approach is scaleaware feature fusion, which constructs hierarchical feature
representations [12, 22, 25, 26, 31, 38, 49]. This method
leverages network features at varying depths to detect objects at corresponding scales, and fusion between deep and
shallow features bridges the spatial-semantic gap between
lower and higher pyramid levels, enhancing small object detection. Another approach emphasizes target regions using
attention mechanisms [23, 29, 50, 52, 55]. Inspired by the
human visual system [3, 9], attention-based methods filter
irrelevant information and highlight tiny objects by modeling feature map importance weights.
Although existing methods partially mitigate this issue,
they remain ineffective when tiny object pixel counts are
extremely limited. We contend that previous approaches
overlook a fundamental challenge: weak tiny object representations of extremely limited pixels. Unlike normal-sized
objects, tiny object representations with limited pixels are
consistently diminished through successive neural network
downsampling, ultimately resulting in the suppressed activation of features. The information loss caused by downsampling is extremely fatal to tiny objects compared to general objects, leading to extremely weak and indiscriminative representations. As shown in Fig. 1(b), representations
for tiny objects in generic detectors are faint and nearly in-

