This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Open-Vocabulary Audio-Visual Event Localization
Jinxing Zhou1
1

Dan Guo2
Yiran Zhong5

Ruohao Guo3
Xiaojun Chang1,6

Yuxin Mao4
Jingjing Hu2
Meng Wang2,*

MBZUAI 2 HFUT 3 PKU 4 NWPU 5 OpenNLPLab 6 USTC
https://github.com/jasongief/OV-AVEL

(a) Audio-Visual Event Localization (AVEL)

Abstract

1. Introduction
Audio-visual learning, an essential sub-field of multimodal
learning, has garnered increasing attention in recent years,
∗ : Meng Wang is the corresponding author (wangmeng@hfut.edu.cn)

Audio
(A)

dog barking

dog barking

dog barking

dog barking

background

dog barking

background

dog barking

dog barking

dog barking

Visual
(V)
0s

AVEvent

2s

dog barking

4s

background

6s

dog barking

8s

dog barking

10s

background

(b) AVEL in Different Settings
Training

Inference
seen

seen

unseen

seen

unseen

Prediction

category

category

“unknown”

category

category

Setting

Closed-Set

Data

The Audio-Visual Event Localization (AVEL) task aims
to temporally locate and classify video events that are both
audible and visible. Most research in this field assumes a
closed-set setting, which restricts these models’ ability to
handle test data containing event categories absent (unseen) during training. Recently, a few studies have explored AVEL in an open-set setting, enabling the recognition of unseen events as “unknown”, but without providing category-specific semantics. In this paper, we advance the field by introducing the Open-Vocabulary AudioVisual Event Localization (OV-AVEL) problem, which requires localizing audio-visual events and predicting explicit
categories for both seen and unseen test data at inference.
To address this new task, we propose the OV-AVEBench
dataset, comprising 24,800 videos across 67 real-life audiovisual scenes (seen:unseen = 46:21), each with manual
segment-level annotation. We also establish three evaluation metrics for this task. Moreover, we investigate two
baseline approaches, one training-free and one using a further fine-tuning paradigm. Specifically, we utilize the unified multimodal space from the pretrained ImageBind model
to extract audio, visual, and textual (event classes) features. The training-free baseline then determines predictions by comparing the consistency of audio-text and visualtext feature similarities. The fine-tuning baseline incorporates lightweight temporal layers to encode temporal relations within the audio and visual modalities, using OVAVEBench training data for model fine-tuning. We evaluate
these baselines on the proposed OV-AVEBench dataset and
discuss potential directions for future work in this new field.

Open-Set

Open-Vocabulary

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of the AVEL task, which aims to temporally localize segments containing events that are both audible
andseen
visible, and identify their categories. (b) Studies of AVEL in
unseen settings. In contrast to previous closed-set and open-set
different
settings, we explore a more practical open-vocabulary AVEL problem, which needs to infer explicit event categories for both seen
and unseen test data (i.e., data containing classes seen and unseen
during training). Each color represents a distinct event class.

resulting in the development of various research tasks, such
as sound-source localization [4, 11, 13, 23, 30, 33] and
segmentation [10, 12, 14, 24, 25, 50, 52], audio-visual
video parsing [5, 8, 37, 45, 47, 51, 53, 54] and generation [16, 26, 35], question answering [17–20, 44], etc. In
this paper, we focus on a fundamental research task of
Audio-Visual Event Localization (AVEL) [36]. As shown
in Fig. 1(a), given a video containing both audio and visual streams, the AVEL task aims to temporally localize
segments that contain an audio-visual event (i.e., both audible and visible) and identify its category. For segments
that do not satisfy this condition (i.e., only audible/visible
or neither), their category is assigned to a special background class. In other words, this task requires perceiving
the semantic alignment between audio and visual modali-

8362

NFJUcL2

