This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MARVEL-40M+: Multi-Level Visual Elaboration for High-Fidelity
Text-to-3D Content Creation
Sankalp Sinha1∗

Mohammad Sadil Khan1∗†

Didier Stricker1
1,2

DFKI

1

Sk Aziz Ali2

RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau
sankalp.sinha@dfki.de

Muhammad Usama1

Shino Sam1

Muhammad Zeshan Afzal1
1

MindGarage

2

BITS Pilani, Hyderabad

mohammad.khan@dfki.de

The 3D model shows the cholesterol
molecule with four fused rings, carbon
(grey), hydrogen (white), and a single
oxygen (red) atom. It has a flat, twisted
shape and includes a hydroxyl group.

1988 Soviet Union coin, 5 kopeck, 25
mm diameter, cupro-nickel, circular,
reeded edge, star, wheat stalks,
hammer and sickle, "CCCP," number
"5," golden color [...]

Tyranid Genestealer, a predatory
creature with an elongated skull, jointed
arms, a muscular body, strong legs, a
whip-like tail, and bony spines.

An old, moss-covered wishing well.
Rough stones, aged wood, rusty
chains, mushrooms, fallen leaves,
and twigs create an enchanting,
ancient, and rustic atmosphere.

Detailed, samurai armor, steel,
engraved patterns, leather straps,
aged look.

The 3D model is a Japanese house with a
rectangular shape [...] pitched roof. The
walls are dark brown wood, and the roof
is bright red. The house has a small porch
with steps, [...] Bamboo trees surround
the house, and the ground has sandy...
areas with green mossy rocks and grass.

A medieval fantasy tavern with a
wooden building, purple roof, black
chimney, and wooden fence. Features
include a pine tree, barrels, and a well.
Decorated with red [...] banners [...] Set
on an octagonal platform, surrounded
by blue ground and green plants.

Stitches is a cute, plush-like bear with a
large head and small body. He has [...]
black X-shaped eyes. His fur is yellow
with purple patches and blue ear tips.
He wears a white shirt with colorful stars.
Stitches stand [...] circular base with a
brown surface and a green pattern.

A red panda in a bamboo forest,
showing its round, soft face framed
by white markings around its eyes
and snout. The reddish-brown fur on
its back is dense, with a bushy tail
ringed in alternating shades of red
and brown. Its small, dark eyes [...]

An island with vibrant, multicolored
trees, featuring pink, orange, and blue
foliage. Waterfalls [...] weathered
stone and moss, and hanging vines for
detail. Glowing crystals in shades of
teal and purple with colorful flowers
[...] fantasy RPG setting.

MARVEL-FX3D Results

MARVEL 40M+ Annotations

Figure 1. Left: Examples of MARVEL annotations created using our proposed pipeline, which produces high-quality, domain-specific and
multi-level text descriptions for 3D assets (Sec 3.1). Right: Qualitative results from MARVEL-FX3D, our two-stage text-to-3D pipeline,
which can generate textured mesh from text within 15s (Sec 3.3). Please zoom in for details.

Abstract

level descriptions, ranging from detailed (150-200 words)
to concise semantic tags (10-20 words). This structure supports both fine-grained 3D reconstruction and rapid prototyping. Furthermore, we incorporate human metadata from
source datasets into our annotation pipeline to add domainspecific information in our annotation and reduce VLM hallucinations. Additionally, we develop MARVEL-FX3D, a
two-stage text-to-3D pipeline. We fine-tune Stable Diffusion
with our annotations and use a pretrained image-to-3D network to generate 3D textured meshes within 15s. Extensive
evaluations show that MARVEL-40M+ significantly outperforms existing datasets in annotation quality and linguistic diversity, achieving win rates of 72.41% by GPT-4 and

Generating high-fidelity 3D content from text prompts
remains a significant challenge in computer vision due to
the limited size, diversity, and annotation depth of the existing datasets. To address this, we introduce MARVEL40M+, an extensive dataset with 40 million text annotations
for over 8.9 million 3D assets aggregated from seven major 3D datasets. Our contribution is a novel multi-stage
annotation pipeline that integrates open-source pretrained
multi-view VLMs and LLMs to automatically produce multi* Equally contributing first authors.
† Corresponding Author.

8105

