This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TAET: Two-Stage Adversarial Equalization Training on Long-Tailed
Distributions
Wang Yu-Hang1 , Junkang Guo1 , Aolei Liu1 , Kaihao Wang1 ,
Zaitong Wu1 , Zhenyu Liu1 , Wenfei Yin1 , Jian Liu1, *
1
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
{wangyuhang, 2023110577, lal, 2022218133,
2022217463, 2023217514, wenfeiyin, jianliu}@mail.hfut.edu.cn

Abstract
Adversarial robustness remains a significant challenge in deploying deep neural networks for real-world
applications. While adversarial training is widely acknowledged as a promising defense strategy, most existing
studies primarily focus on balanced datasets, neglecting
the fact that real-world data often exhibit a long-tailed
distribution, which introduces substantial challenges to
robustness. In this paper, we provide an in-depth analysis of adversarial training in the context of long-tailed
distributions and identify the limitations of the current
state-of-the-art method, AT-BSL, in achieving robust
performance under such conditions. To address these
challenges, we propose a novel training framework, TAET,
which incorporates an initial stabilization phase followed
by a stratified, equalization adversarial training phase.
Furthermore, prior work on long-tailed robustness has
largely overlooked a crucial evaluation metric—Balanced
Accuracy. To fill this gap, we introduce the concept
of Balanced Robustness, a comprehensive metric that
measures robustness specifically under long-tailed distributions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method outperforms existing advanced defenses, yielding
significant improvements in both memory and computational efficiency. We believe this work represents a
substantial step forward in tackling robustness challenges
in real-world applications. Our paper code can be found at
https://github.com/BuhuiOK/TAET-Two-Stage-AdversarialEqualization-Training-on-Long-Tailed-Distributions

Figure 1. Top: The distribution of accuracy and adversarial robustness across different classes in a long-tail distributions, with
gray bars representing the sample counts of each class. AT-BSL
(left) exhibits poorer performance on the tail classes (7, 8, 9)
and Class 3. Bottom: The evaluation includes both balanced accuracy and robustness, comparing long-tail recognition methods,
adversarial training, state-of-the-art defenses, and our proposed
approach. The results demonstrate that our method outperforms
the others in both balanced accuracy and performance on weak
classes.

1. Introduction

attacks [13, 35], a challenge that continues to raise concerns in both academia and industry. These attacks introduce subtle perturbations to input data, leading to erroneous predictions and revealing the vulnerabilities of neural networks to malicious disturbances, which pose significant security risks to the deployment of modern computer vision models in real-world applications [24]. To address this issue, researchers have developed a variety of
techniques[30, 38, 46, 47] aimed at enhancing adversarial
robustness. Among these, Adversarial Training (AT) [26]
is widely regarded as one of the most effective strategies

In recent years, deep learning has achieved groundbreaking advancements in computer vision [16]. However, deep
neural networks remain highly susceptible to adversarial
* Corresponding author

15476

