This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gromov–Wasserstein Problem with Cyclic Symmetry
Shoichiro Takeda
Yasunori Akagi
NTT Corporation
{shoichiro.takeda, yasunori.akagi}@ntt.com

Abstract
We propose novel fast algorithms for the Gromov–
Wasserstein problem (GW) with cyclic symmetry of input
data. This problem naturally appears as an object-matching
task, which underlies various real-world computer vision
applications, e.g., image registration, point cloud registration, stereo matching, and 3D reconstruction. Gradientbased algorithms have been widely used to solve GW, and
our main idea is to utilize the following remarkable property that emerges in GW with cyclic symmetry: By setting
the initial solution to have cyclic symmetry, all intermediate
solutions and matrices that appear in the gradient-based algorithms have the same cyclic symmetry until convergence.
Based on this property, our gradient-based algorithms restrict the solution space to have cyclic symmetry and update
only one symmetric part of solutions and matrices at each
iteration, resulting in faster computation. Moreover, our algorithms solve the optimal transport problem at each iteration, which also exhibits cyclic symmetry. This problem can
be solved efficiently, and as a result, our algorithms perform
significantly faster. Experiments showed the effectiveness of
our algorithms in synthetic and real-world data with strict
and approximate cyclic symmetry.

1. Introduction
Given a discrete probability measure and a metric matrix
on each of two discrete metric-measure spaces, the discrete
Gromov–Wasserstein problem (GW) finds a coupling that
is as close to an isometry between the two measures as possible. The coupling distortion from isometry is quantifiable and is called Gromov–Wasserstein distance (GWD).
The GWD is an effective tool that compares or matches two
metric-measure spaces, and thus GW has been studied in
various research areas, e.g., object matching [25, 28, 42],
generative modeling [10], and domain adaptation [12].
Existing approaches to solve GW include gradient-based
algorithms, and the conditional gradient method (CG) was
proposed recently [41]. This algorithm iterates the following three processes until convergence: (i) it computes the

gradient of the objective function in GW at the current solution, (ii) solves the optimal transport problem (OT) [20]
with the computed gradient as the cost to obtain the update
direction, and (iii) updates the current solution in that direction. In addition, the entropy-regularized GW (EGW)
has attracted much attention [28, 31, 49] because it offers a
concise and fast projected gradient method (PG). This algorithm iterates the same processes as CG until convergence
but solves the entropy-regularized OT (EOT) [13] instead
of OT. As another line of work to solve GW faster, algorithms using special structures of input data have been proposed, e.g., algorithms for GW with low-rank [29] or hierarchical [48] structures of input data. Besides, several algorithms provide closed-form solutions to GW with some
special structures of input data, such as 1-dimensional input
data [42] and tree metric structure [23].
In this paper, we propose novel fast algorithms for GW
with a new and ubiquitous special structure, cyclic symmetry, of input data. Specifically, we assume K-order cyclic
symmetry of input data; the input m- and n-dimensional
probability measures are given as concatenations of K
copies of m′ (:= m/K)- and n′ (:= n/K)-dimensional vectors, respectively, and the input m×m and n×n metric matrices are block circulant matrices consisting of K matrices
with size m′ × m′ and n′ × n′ , respectively (see Assumption 1). Such GW with cyclic symmetry naturally appears
as an object-matching task, which underlies various realworld computer vision applications (see Sec. 4). To solve
this new GW efficiently, we developed fast versions of CG
and PG using cyclic symmetry. Our main idea is to utilize
the following remarkable property that emerges in this new
problem: By setting the initial solution as a m × n block
circulant matrix consisting of K matrices with size m′ × n′ ,
all intermediate solutions and matrices that appear in CG
and PG also become m × n block circulant matrices consisting of K matrices with size m′ × n′ until convergence
(see Theorem 1 and the later discussion). This property ensures that we can restrict the solution space to such a block
circulant matrix in CG and PG and update only the K matrices with size m′ × n′ instead of the whole m × n matrix,
which results in fast versions of CG and PG. We call this fast

21011

