This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SSHNet: Unsupervised Cross-modal Homography Estimation
via Problem Reformulation and Split Optimization
Junchen Yu1,2 Si-Yuan Cao1,2,3 * Runmin Zhang2 Chenghao Zhang2
Zhu Yu2 Shujie Chen4 Bailin Yang4 Hui-Liang Shen2
1

Ningbo Innovation Center, Zhejiang University
3

NingboTech University

4

2

College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University

Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Big Data and Future ECommerce Technology, Hangzhou, China

{yujunchen,cao_siyuan,runmin_zhang,zch00,yu_zhu}@zju.edu.cn
{chenshujie,ybl}@zjgsu.edu.cn

shenhl@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Correct
homography

Solution space

(b) Homography
direct supervision

Loss value

We propose a novel unsupervised cross-modal homography estimation learning framework, named Split Supervised
Homography estimation Network (SSHNet). SSHNet reformulates the unsupervised cross-modal homography estimation into two supervised sub-problems, each addressed
by its specialized network: a homography estimation network and a modality transfer network. To realize stable
training, we introduce an effective split optimization strategy to train each network separately within its respective
sub-problem. We also formulate an extra homography feature space supervision to enhance feature consistency, further boosting the estimation accuracy. Moreover, we employ a simple yet effective distillation training technique to
reduce model parameters and improve cross-domain generalization ability while maintaining comparable performance. The training stability of SSHNet enables its cooperation with various homography estimation architectures. Experiments reveal that the SSHNet using IHN as
homography estimation network, namely SSHNet-IHN, outperforms previous unsupervised approaches by a significant margin. Even compared to supervised approaches
MHN and LocalTrans, SSHNet-IHN achieves 47.4% and
85.8% mean average corner errors (MACEs) reduction on
the challenging OPT-SAR dataset. Source code is available
at https://github.com/Junchen-Yu/SSHNet.

Loss value

(a) Content consistency
indirect supervision

Correct
homography

Solution space

Figure 1. Comparison of the solution space between (a) Content
consistency indirect supervision and (b) Homography direct supervision. The content consistency indirect supervision may mislead
the training due to local minima, while homography direct supervision won’t.

1. Introduction

multi-modal image restoration [10, 27], and multi-spectral
image fusion [39, 44]. Recent supervised homography estimation approaches [4, 5, 9, 20, 34, 42] have demonstrated
their superiority in handling large deformation and modality gaps. However, since multi-modal images are captured
by different sensors, the ground-truth homography deformations are usually unknown in real-world applications.
To avoid using labeled data, unsupervised homography estimation approaches have emerged. Existing approaches [19, 28, 38, 40] typically optimize the similarity
between the warped source image and target image through
intensity-based losses. Some multi-modal image registration
approaches [1, 11] transferred an image into the other modality, using mono-modal similarity metrics on image content to
measure the correctness of motion. The previous state-of-theart (SOTA) approach [41] combined cross-modal intensitybased learning with intra-modal self-supervised learning for
homography knowledge injection. Notably, almost all the
previous approaches fully or partially rely on the content
consistency of images or feature maps to indirectly assess
the correctness of homography estimation. As illustrated
in Fig. 1a, due to the non-convexity of the image signal,
loss value of content consistency indirect supervision has

Cross-modal homography estimation aims to solve the global
perspective transformation between two images under different modalities. It is widely used in various computer vision tasks, such as GPS-denied robotic localization [14, 36],
* Corresponding author.

16685

