This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Advancing Manga Analysis:
Comprehensive Segmentation Annotations for the Manga109 Dataset
Minshan Xie1 , Jian Lin2 , Hanyuan Liu, Chengze Li2 , Tien-Tsin Wong3
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence (CPII), Hong Kong SAR
2
Saint Francis University, Hong Kong SAR 3 Monash University, Australia
1

msxie92@gmail.com, {jlin,czli}@sfu.edu.hk, drhanyuanliu@gmail.com, TT.Wong@monash.edu

Abstract

screentone (pattern) to distinguish and/or represent regions/
textures/emotions. Such screentones do not exist in natural
photographs and introduce the domain gap.
To cope with comic-specific tasks, there exist color
illustration/comic datasets, such as DanbooRegion [56],
COMICS [18] and BCBId [9], to allow fine-tuning of models originally trained on natural images [43], for successful
color comic adaptation. However, they are less successful
in B/W manga due to the large domain gap. The most wellknown and popular large-scale B/W manga dataset available
is Manga109 [11]. Unfortunately, the original annotation of
Manga109 is limited to bounding boxes (Figure 1(a)). They
are not detail enough for effective fine-tuning the naturalphoto-trained models on fine-grained recognition, because
the screentone often confuses the models.
To better understand the region semantics and high-level
elements of B/W manga, a more accurate segmentation is
crucial to enable a deeper understanding of the visual and
textual elements in a manga. This requires the segmentation
of a manga page into meaningful regions, including individual manga panels, characters, faces, speech balloons, texts,
and links between characters and balloons. In this paper,
we introduce our annotation-augmented Manga109 dataset,
named MangaSeg. Our major contribution includes meticulously creating over 700,000 segmentation annotations for
10,130 double-sided manga pages, and their meticulous categorization into frames (or panels), balloons, texts, character
faces, and character bodies. Such annotations enable the full
potential of machine learning in analyzing B/W manga for
various applications. Figures 1(b)-(d) provide a glimpse of
the pages from the Manga109 dataset and our augmented
annotations.
It seems that the bounding boxes from the original
Manga109 dataset can be used as the starting point for obtaining accurate segmentation. But they are too rough to be
useful. For instance, the body bounding box, may not enclose the whole body, but enclose the irrelevant background.
Instead, to obtain the precise segmentation, we start with
the original manga pages without any annotation, and then

Manga, a popular form of multimodal artwork, has traditionally been overlooked in deep learning advancements due to
the absence of a robust dataset and comprehensive annotation. Manga segmentation is the key to the digital migration
of manga. There exists a significant domain gap between
the manga and the natural images, that fails most existing
learning-based methods. To address this gap, we introduce
an augmented segmentation annotation for the Manga109
dataset, a collection of 109 manga volumes, that offers intricate artworks in a rich variety of styles. We introduce a
detailed annotation that extends beyond the original simple
bounding boxes to the segmentation masks with pixel-level
precision. It provides object category, location, and instance
information that can be used for semantic segmentation and
instance segmentation. We also provide a comprehensive
analysis of our annotation dataset from various aspects. We
further measure the improvement of the state-of-the-art segmentation model after training it with our augmented dataset.
The benefits of this augmented dataset are profound, with the
potential to significantly enhance manga analysis algorithms
and catalyze the novel development in digital art processing
and cultural analytics. This annotation, named MangaSeg,
is publicly available at https://huggingface.co/
datasets/MS92/MangaSegmentation.

1. Introduction
Comic is a popular form of visual storytelling that delights
readers with its unique blend of art and narrative. There
are roughly two typical types of comics: Japanese-style
manga, mainly produced in black-and-white (B/W), and
color comics, produced in color. Current AI research in
image analysis and synthesis usually regards comics as one
kind of image. However, there exists a significant domain
gap between comic and natural photographs, especially for
B/W manga. Due to the lack of color, manga artists utilize

8869

