This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Degradation-Aware Feature Perturbation for All-in-One Image Restoration
Xiangpeng Tian, Xiangyu Liao, Xiao Liu, Meng Li, Chao Ren*
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Sichuan University, China

Abstract
All-in-one image restoration aims to recover clear images from various degradation types and levels with a unified model. Nonetheless, the significant variations among
degradation types present challenges for training a universal model, often resulting in task interference, where the
gradient update directions of different tasks may diverge
due to shared parameters. To address this issue, motivated
by the routing strategy, we propose DFPIR, a novel allin-one image restorer that introduces Degradation-aware
Feature Perturbations(DFP) to adjust the feature space to
align with the unified parameter space. In this paper, the
feature perturbations primarily include channel-wise perturbations and attention-wise perturbations. Specifically,
channel-wise perturbations are implemented by shuffling
the channels in high-dimensional space guided by degradation types, while attention-wise perturbations are achieved
through selective masking in the attention space. To achieve
these goals, we propose a Degradation-Guided Perturbation Block (DGPB) to implement these two functions, positioned between the encoding and decoding stages of the
encoder-decoder architecture. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that DFPIR achieves state-of-the-art performance on several all-in-one image restoration tasks including image denoising, image dehazing, image deraining,
motion deblurring, and low-light image enhancement. Our
codes are available at https://github.com/TxpHome/DFPIR.

Feature Channels

Rainy

Encoder

Noisy

Hazy

Degradation
Type Prompts

Blurry

Channel Order
Adjustment

P

P

P

P

TopK Attention And Decoder

{tianxp, liaoxiangyu1, liux, limeng scu}@stu.scu.edu.cn, chaoren@scu.edu.cn

P Degradation-Guided Channel Perturbation

Figure 1. This figure demonstrates the channel-wise perturbation
method of DFPIR, where channel shuffle assigns unique channel
orders for different degradation types.

degradation solutions perform well under specific conditions, they often struggle to generalize effectively to multiple degradation scenarios. Consequently, recent research
has shifted toward multi-degradation restoration techniques,
delivering state-of-the-art performance for known combinations of degradations [3, 33, 56, 57]. However, these approaches typically require separate networks for each degradation type, leading to large model sizes and high computational demands.

1. Introduction

Recently, all-in-one approaches(also known as multidegradation or multi-task image restoration) have gained
prominence by addressing multiple image degradations
within a unified model [6, 21, 38, 39, 49, 55, 59]. While
these methods have achieved state-of-the-art results, they
often overlook the relationships and distinctive characteristics among different degradation types due to shared parameters. For example, MedIR [55] demonstrates that the
gradient update directions between different tasks are inconsistent or even opposite. According to the characteristics of existing methods, current all-in-one image restoration methods can be roughly divided into two categories:
(1) one solution is to modify the parameter space to fit the
model for different degradations [21, 38, 49, 59]; (2) and the
other solution is to modify the feature space to align with
the shared parameter space [8, 39, 55]. Both approaches
require incorporating degradation information into the network to mitigate the interference between different degra-

Image restoration, a fundamental task in computer vision,
has been widely studied, with a primary focus on addressing individual degradation types, such as noise, haze, rain,
or blur. Recently, deep learning-based approaches have
achieved remarkable progress in single-degradation restoration tasks, including denoising [15, 26, 35, 36, 42, 61],
deraining [2, 17, 22, 48, 54], dehazing [5, 9, 40, 45, 51],
and deblurring [7, 19, 37, 37, 60]. While these single* Corresponding author

28165

