This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D3 CTTA: Domain-Dependent Decorrelation for Continual Test-Time Adaption
of 3D LiDAR Segmentation

1

Jichun Zhao1 , Haiyong Jiang1 *, Haoxuan Song1 , Jun Xiao1* , Dong Gong2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 2 University of New South Wales
zhaojichun23@mails.ucas.ac.cn, haiyong.jiang@ucas.ac.cn,

songhaoxuan24@mails.ucas.ac.cn, xiaojun@ucas.ac.cn, dong.gong@unsw.edu.au

Abstract
Adapting pre-trained LiDAR segmentation models to dynamic domain shifts during testing is of paramount importance for the safety of autonomous driving. Most existing methods neglect the influence of domain changes and
point density in continual test-time adaption (CTTA), relying on backpropagation and large batch sizes for stability. We approach this problem with three insights: 1)
Point clouds at different distances usually have different
densities resulting in distribution disparities; 2) The feature distribution of different domains varies, and domainaware parameters can alleviate domain gaps; 3) Features are highly correlated and make segmentation of different labels confusing. To this end, this work presents
D3 CTTA, an online backpropagation-free framework for
3D continual test-time adaption for LiDAR segmentation.
D3 CTTA consists of a distance-aware prototype learning
module to integrate LiDAR-based geometry prior and a
domain-dependent decorrelation module to reduce feature
correlations among different domains and different categories. Extensive experiments on three benchmarks showcase that our method achieves a state-of-the-art performance compared to both backpropagation-based methods
and backpropagation-free methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/ZhaoJichun1/D3CTTA.

1. Introduction
Leveraging simulation data to train segmentation models
for autonomous driving becomes a favorable choice for its
scalable label collection and wide coverage of diverse corner cases [33, 38]. However, real-world testing scenes have
a very different data distribution from the synthetic ones,
raising a critical problem for the robustness and safety of
autonomous driving. Moreover, a driving car can encounter
dynamic and diverse domain changes over time due to dif* Joint Corresponding Authors. Haiyong is the Project Lead.

ferent sensor configurations, environmental changes, and
viewpoint shifts. To address these problems, we aim at online continual test-time adaptation (CTTA) for LiDAR segmentation without access to the source domain.
The origin of CTTA can be traced to test-time adaption
(TTA) [14, 40, 47, 48] that adapts a source-trained model to
a single specific domain at test time. Therefore, TTA-based
methods are designed for adapting to a single test domain
rather than handling continuous domain shifts. The seminal work on CTTA, CoTTA[41], utilizes the mean teacher
framework for continual parameter updating and stochastic restoration to mitigate cumulative errors. Subsequent
works [1, 2, 9, 23] follow the mean teacher framework
and focus on improving pseudo-label quality and stabilizing
model updates across domains. Particularly, GIPSO [33]
addresses 3D TTA by utilizing a highly time-consuming geometric feature encoder for label propagation. While effective, these methods require computationally expensive
backpropagation and some even need large batch sizes for
stable parameter updates, limiting their practicality for autonomous driving scenes. Furthermore, most of these methods are primarily designed for 2D classification tasks and
merely leverage the unique density distributional properties
of LiDAR data, particularly when point cloud density and
geometric structures vary significantly across domains.
To address these issues, we propose a domain-aware
backpropagation-free approach for 3D LiDAR CTTA,
termed D3 CTTA. The first idea is to leverage density variations within a LiDAR scan to enhance domain adaptation.
Traditional prototype-based methods [14] construct a prototype for each category. Considering varying point cloud
densities usually result in distributional disparities [5, 11,
12, 43], representing them with different prototypes according to densities is a better choice. The density of LiDAR
points is correlated to their distance to the LiDAR sensor,
therefore we can construct distance-aware prototypes for
better discriminativity. Moreover, the semantic consistency
among neighboring regions also provides a geometric clue
to select reliable predictions for model adaption.

11864

