This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SemGeoMo: Dynamic Contextual Human Motion Generation
with Semantic and Geometric Guidance

1

Peishan Cong1,2, *, Ziyi Wang1, *, Yuexin Ma1,†, Xiangyu Yue 2,†
ShanghaiTech University 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{congpsh,wangzy17,mayuexin}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Generating reasonable and high-quality human interactive motions in a given dynamic environment is crucial
for understanding, modeling, transferring, and applying
human behaviors to both virtual and physical robots. In
this paper, we introduce an effective method, SemGeoMo,
for dynamic contextual human motion generation, which
fully leverages the text-affordance-joint multi-level semantic and geometric guidance in the generation process, improving the semantic rationality and geometric correctness
of generative motions. Our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance on three datasets and demonstrates superior
generalization capability for diverse interaction scenarios.
The project page and code can be found at https://
4dvlab.github.io/project_page/semgeomo/.

How to avoid the
falling of vase?

How to
manipulate
the pillow?

How to interact with
a coming person?

Semantics - How to interact
A person lift the vase, bend down and squat
down, and then place it on the ground.

Geometry - Where to interact
contact position

affordance map

point cloud

SemGeoMo

1. Introduction
Dynamic contextual human motion generation [19, 21, 22]
aims to generate human interaction motions that are both
commonsense and geometrically accurate, adapting seamlessly to real dynamic environments. Its core lies in constructing an interaction-oriented world model for humans,
enabling reasonable adaptation to changes of interactive
objects or people. This interaction-oriented world model
can support a wide range of applications, including humanrobot interaction, closed-loop simulators, intelligent sports
coaching, and immersive VR/AR gaming experiences.
As the importance of interaction becomes increasingly
recognized, some studies have evolved from text-driven human motion generation [4, 6, 16, 31, 32, 49] to text-driven
joint generation of human-object or human-human interactions [2, 22, 23, 37, 42]. However, generating motions

Figure 1. Given sequential point clouds of interactive targets, SemGeoMo generates realistic and high-quality human interactive motions along with corresponding textual descriptions. By leveraging
both semantic and geometric guidance, our method ensures the semantic coherence and geometric accuracy of the generated results.

* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. This work was supported
by NSFC (No.62206173, No. 62306261), Shanghai Frontiers Science Center of Human-centered Artificial Intelligence (ShangHAI), MoE Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Human-Machine Collaboration (KLIPHuMaCo), and the Shun Hing Institute of Advanced Engineering (SHIAE)
No. 8115074.

jointly for both the human and the interactive target creates an excessively large search space, often leading to suboptimal generation results. Additionally, the lack of finegrained control over the generated data hinders the creation
of personalized interactive motions, limiting its applicability to real-world scenarios such as humanoid operation and
human-robot interaction.
Recently, contextual human motion generation has garnered increasing attention for its ability to produce controllable interactions based on specified scenario conditions. However, many works [3, 14, 35, 38, 40] only focus
on generating coarse-grained human trajectories and motions in static environments with fixed furniture or layouts

17561

