This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Depth without Video Models
Bingxin Ke1 Dominik Narnhofer1 Shengyu Huang1 Lei Ke2 Torben Peters1
Katerina Fragkiadaki2 Anton Obukhov1 Konrad Schindler1
1
ETH Zurich 2 Carnegie Mellon University

   


$%))('&! # ("" "%
  

Figure 1. The RollingDepth model takes an unconstrained video and reconstructs a corresponding depth video. Unlike methods that rely
on video diffusion models, it extends a single-image monodepth estimator such that it can process short snippets. To account for temporal
context, snippets with varying frame rates are sampled from the video, processed, and reassembled through a global alignment algorithm
to obtain long, temporally coherent depth videos. Depth is colour-coded near
far.

Abstract

triplets) to depth snippets. (ii) a robust, optimization-based
registration algorithm that optimally assembles depth snippets sampled at various different frame rates back into a
consistent video. RollingDepth is able to efficiently handle long videos with hundreds of frames and delivers more
accurate depth videos than both dedicated video depth estimators and high-performing single-frame models. Project
page: rollingdepth.github.io.

Video depth estimation lifts monocular video clips to 3D by
inferring dense depth at every frame. Recent advances in
single-image depth estimation, brought about by the rise of
large foundation models and the use of synthetic training
data, have fueled a renewed interest in video depth. However, naively applying a single-image depth estimator to every frame of a video disregards temporal continuity, which
not only leads to flickering but may also break when camera
motion causes sudden changes in depth range. An obvious
and principled solution would be to build on top of video
foundation models, but these come with their own limitations; including expensive training and inference, imperfect
3D consistency, and stitching routines for the fixed-length
(short) outputs. We take a step back and demonstrate how
to turn a single-image latent diffusion model (LDM) into a
state-of-the-art video depth estimator. Our model, which we
call RollingDepth, has two main ingredients: (i) a multiframe depth estimator that is derived from a single-image
LDM and maps very short video snippets (typically frame

1. Introduction
Inferring 3D scene structure from a video stream is a fundamental capability of a vision system. Besides its scientific relevance as an elementary building block of machine
perception, it has a broad range of applications, including
mobile robotics and autonomous driving, augmented reality, media production, and content creation.
Traditionally, a video would be converted into a 3D
world model by recovering the camera trajectory with
structure-from-motion (SfM) techniques [16, 53], then ap-

7233

