This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedCS: Coreset Selection for Federated Learning
Chenhe Hao1 , Weiying Xie1, *, Daixun Li1 , Haonan Qin1 , Hangyu Ye1 , Leyuan Fang2 , Yunsong Li1
1
Xidian University, 2 Hunan University
{23011210919,ldx,wagyr}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {wyxie,qinhaonan}@xidian.edu.cn
fangleyuan@gmail.com, ysli@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Top—1 Accuracy (%)

Federated Learning (FL) is an emerging direction in distributed machine learning that enables jointly training a
model without sharing the data. However, as the size of
datasets grows exponentially, computational costs of FL increase. In this paper, we propose the first Coreset Selection criterion for Federated Learning (FedCS) by exploring
the Distance Contrast (DC) in feature space. Our FedCS
is inspired by the discovery that DC can indicate the intrinsic properties inherent to samples regardless of the networks. Based on the observation, we develop a method
that is mathematically formulated to prune samples with
high DC. The principle behind our pruning is that high DC
samples either contain less information or represent rare
extreme cases, thus removal of them can enhance the aggregation performance. Besides, we experimentally show
that samples with low DC usually contain substantial information and reflect the common features of samples within
their classes, such that they are suitable for constructing
coreset. With only two time of linear-logarithmic complexity operation, FedCS leads to significant improvements
over the methods using whole dataset in terms of computational costs, with similar accuracies. For example, on
the CIFAR-10 dataset with Dirichlet coefficient α = 0.1,
FedCS achieves 58.88% accuracy using only 44% of the entire dataset, whereas other methods require twice the data
volume as FedCS for same performance.

FedCS (ours)
EL2N (NeurIPS2021)
Forgetting (ICLR2019)
Dyn-Unc (CVPR2024)
Moderate (ICLR2019)
GradND (NeurIPS2021)
Whole dataset
Methods
EL2N
Forgetting
Dyn-Unc
GradND
Moderate
FedCS (ours)
0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.44
0.44
0.57
0.44
0.44
0.70

0.7

Pruning rate

Figure 1. Perforamance comparison between FedCS and other
coreset selection methods from low to high pruning rate on
CIFAR-10 with ResNet-18 in FL with highly data distribution heterogeneous, where Dirichlet coefficient α is set to 0.1. The table
on the right shows the maximum pruning rates (p) achieved by
various methods without degrading model performance.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL), as a distributed machine learning paradigm, has been widely explored in fields such as
computer vision [5], medical analysis [18], and autonomous
driving [10]. However, low training efficiency is an inherent challenge in FL due to the high consumption of computational resources. Specifically, as datasets on clients explosively grow, learning from these large-scale datasets be* Corresponding author

15434

comes progressively time-consuming, leading to the training efficiency decrease of FL.
Currently, numerous works aim to reduce the computational costs by employing network pruning [14] in FL.
Typical approaches generate client-specific subnetworks to
decrease network size in local training [16, 29]. While
network pruning effectively reduces computational costs,
it also introduces structural differences among client networks, which posing challenges for network aggregation
and coordination. In contrast, coreset selection methods can
avoid these issues by removing data from the dataset without altering the network structure [27, 30]. Due to the consistency of data distribution, a significant portion of data is
redundant [27, 30], meaning it can be excluded from training without sacrificing performance. However, the coreset
selection work in FL lacks an effective lossless pruning criterion. As a result, applying existing gradient-matchingbased coreset selection frameworks or coreset selection criterion to FL will lead to (1) insufficient privacy protection
and (2) exacerbation of data distribution imbalance. On the
one hand, existing coreset selection framework in FL re-

