This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tra-MoE: Learning Trajectory Prediction Model from Multiple Domains
for Adaptive Policy Conditioning
Jiange Yang 1,2 Haoyi Zhu2,3 Yating Wang2,4 Gangshan Wu1 Tong He2 Limin Wang1,2 *
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 University of Science and Technology of China, 4 Tongji University
jiangeyang.jgy@gmail.com, {gswu,lmwang}@nju.edu.cn,
{zhuhaoyi, wangyating, hetong}@pjlab.org.cn

https://github.com/MCG-NJU/Tra-MoE

Abstract

Success rate on
in-domain tasks

Learning from multiple domains is a primary factor that influences the generalization of a single unified robot system. In
this paper, we aim to learn the trajectory prediction model by
using broad out-of-domain data to improve its performance
and generalization ability. Trajectory model is designed to
predict any-point trajectories in the current frame given an
instruction and can provide detailed control guidance for
robotic policy learning. To handle the diverse out-of-domain
data distribution, we propose a sparsely-gated MoE (Top-1
gating strategy) architecture for trajectory model, coined
as Tra-MoE. The sparse activation design enables good
balance between parameter cooperation and specialization,
effectively benefiting from large-scale out-of-domain data
while maintaining constant FLOPs per token. In addition,
we further introduce an adaptive policy conditioning technique by learning 2D mask representations for predicted
trajectories, which is explicitly aligned with image observations to guide action prediction more flexibly. We perform
extensive experiments on both simulation and real-world scenarios to verify the effectiveness of Tra-MoE and adaptive
policy conditioning technique. We also conduct a comprehensive empirical study to train Tra-MoE, demonstrating
that our Tra-MoE consistently exhibits superior performance
compared to the dense baseline model, even when the latter
is scaled to match Tra-MoE’s parameter count.

Without MoE
With MoE (Top-1 gating)

61.4
57.6

9.4
51.8

(a) small

52.0

(b) large Data scale

Figure 1. (a) Training with small-scale, in-domain data. (b) Joint
training with in-domain data and large-scale, out-of-domain data.

forts [43, 51, 71, 72] focus on learning a generalist model capable of unifying various tasks. In contrast, in robot learning,
due to data scarcity and homogeneity, some groundbreaking
methods [2, 37] resort to training only using in-domain data.
Recently, some works [3, 4, 52, 61, 69] have shifted to learn
from action-free human video data. A particularly scalable
and promising paradigm [5, 20, 59, 63, 65] involves learning
a trajectory prediction model from action-free video data,
and then using small-scale action-labeled demonstrations to
learn trajectory-guided policies, thereby achieving greater
sample efficiency and better generalization.

1. Introduction

Despite the potential benefits, it still remains underexplored how to effectively leverage broad out-of-domain
video data for jointly training trajectory models. In particular, the impact of incorporating data encompassing diverse
environments, objects, skills and embodiments has not fully
investigated for in-domain tasks. For instance, ATM [63], a
notable work in this field, mainly relies on in-domain data
(same tasks and environments) for training both trajectory

In computer vision and natural language processing, significant progress has been made through learning models from
multiple domains data. For example, many works use board
data to perform self-supervised pre-training, and then adapt
to diverse downstream tasks through zero-shot [1, 10, 49] or
fine-tuning [13, 15, 23, 58]. Additionally, some research ef* Corresponding author.

6960

