This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EntityErasure: Erasing Entity Cleanly via Amodal Entity Segmentation and
Completion
Yixing Zhu1 Qing Zhang1,4∗ Yitong Wang2 Yongwei Nie3 Wei-Shi Zheng1,4
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
ByteDance Inc 3 South China University of Technology, China
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
Input

Inpainting mask Our amodal seg.

PowerPaint [52] CLIPAway [8]

Ours

MAT [20]

Figure 1. Comparison with previous methods on object erasure. As shown, our method can cleanly erase objects without generating
unwanted sundries that appear in the results of other methods.

Abstract
This paper presents EntityErasure, a novel diffusion-based
inpainting method that can effectively erase entities without inducing unwanted sundries. To this end, we propose to address this problem by dividing it into amodal
entity segmentation and completion, such that the region
to inpaint takes only entities in the non-inpainting area
as reference, avoiding the possibility to generate unpredictable sundries. Moreover, we develop two entity segmentation based metrics for quantitatively assessing the performance of object erasure, which are shown be more effective than existing metrics. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach outperforms other state-of-the-art
object erasure methods. Our code and data are available at
https://zyxunh.github.io/EntityErasure-ProjectPage/.

built upon Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [9],
but they often do not perform well in open-world scenarios.
Thanks to the powerful generation capabilities of diffusion
models [32], diffusion-based inpainting [8, 52] has emerged
to be a preferable choice for object erasure. However, these
methods may generate unwanted sundries (see Fig. 1).
In order to address the above problem, PowerPaint [52]
proposes to learn task-related embedding for object generation/erasure, and introduces classifier-free-guidance to help
avoid generating sundries. CLIPAway [8] leverages CLIP
embeddings to make diffusion model focus on background
regions while excluding foreground elements. Inst-Paint
[44] adopts text prompts to guide diffusion model remove
objects, while MagicEraser [17] improves the erasure effect
by increasing the background weight and reducing the foreground weight in self attention. However, these methods
are less effective in avoiding sundries in complex scenes,
which motivates us to tackle object erasure from a different
perspective.
In this paper, we present EntityErasure, a diffusion-based
inpainting method that can generate high-quality object erasure results free of sundries. Particularly, we propose to
treat object erasure as a multi-entity amodal completion
problem. To do so, we first perform amodal entity segmentation, and then utilize the segmentation output to guide

1. Introduction
Object erasure is a widely used technique in the field of image editing, which aims to remove the specified object and
fill the area with coherent image content without generating new sundries. Early methods [4, 20, 27] are primarily
∗ Corresponding author (zhangq93@mail.sysu.edu.cn).

28274

