This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Training-free Anomaly Detection with Vision and Language
Foundation Models
Jinjin Zhang1,2 Guodong Wang1,2 Yizhou Jin2 Di Huang1,2 *
State Key Laboratory of Complex and Critical Software Environment,
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
1

{jinjin.zhang, wanggd, yizhou.jin, dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

Normal Images

Anomaly detection is valuable for real-world applications,
such as industrial quality inspection. However, most approaches focus on detecting local structural anomalies
while neglecting compositional anomalies incorporating
logical constraints. In this paper, we introduce LogSAD,
a novel multi-modal framework that requires no training
for both Logical and Structural Anomaly Detection. First,
we propose a match-of-thought architecture that employs
advanced large multi-modal models (i.e. GPT-4V) to generate matching proposals, formulating interests and compositional rules of thought for anomaly detection. Second, we elaborate on multi-granularity anomaly detection,
consisting of patch tokens, sets of interests, and composition matching with vision and language foundation models. Subsequently, we present a calibration module to
align anomaly scores from different detectors, followed
by integration strategies for the final decision. Consequently, our approach addresses both logical and structural anomaly detection within a unified framework and
achieves state-of-the-art results without the need for training, even when compared to supervised approaches, highlighting its robustness and effectiveness. Code is available
at https://github.com/zhang0jhon/LogSAD.

2 oranges and
1 nectarine

15 pushpins

orange tag,
orange juice

1 long screw,
1 short screw

2-clamp connector,
yellow cable

cherry tag,
banana juice

2 long screws

2-clamp connector,
blue cable

Structural Anomalies

Logical Anomalies

1 orange and
2 nectarines

16 pushpins

Figure 1. Examples of structural and logical anomalies in MVTec
LOCO dataset [4]. Compositional multi-modal feature matching
plays a crucial role in unified anomaly detection, particularly in
identifying and categorizing logical anomalies effectively.

1. Introduction

to detect logical anomalies, such as incorrect wiring of circuits, permissible objects occurring in invalid locations, or
the absence of essential components [4]. To address this
issue, several approaches have been proposed for logical
anomaly detection [13, 16], yielding decent performance
through accurate mask annotations and training efforts.
Despite considerable efforts in logical anomaly detection, many approaches focus primarily on the visual modality, which is necessary but insufficient for detecting highlevel anomalies with logical constraints and often lack the
ability to identify compositional aspects. Furthermore, the
need for precise annotations and intricate architectures complicates the practical applications in realistic scenarios, especially when addressing both structural and logical anomalies. As illustrated in Fig. 1, although visual feature matching is predominant in structural anomaly detection, compo-

Anomaly detection is widely employed in real-world applications, particularly in industrial quality inspection, to
identify anomalies with limited normal data [2, 11, 20, 29].
Existing anomaly detection methods have demonstrated impressive performance on anomaly detection datasets such as
MVTec AD [3] and VisA [44], which are biased towards local structural anomalies like scratches, dents, or contaminations. However, those anomaly detection methods often fail
* Corresponding author.

15204

