This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DViN: Dynamic Visual Routing Network for Weakly Supervised
Referring Expression Comprehension

1

Xiaofu Chen1 Yaxin Luo1 Gen Luo2 * Jiayi Ji3 Henghui Ding4
MBZUAI 2 OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 Xiamen University

Yiyi Zhou3
Fudan University

4

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on weakly supervised referring expression comprehension (REC), and identify that the lack of
fine-grained visual capability greatly limits the upper performance bound of existing methods. To address this issue,
we propose a novel framework for weakly supervised REC,
namely Dynamic Visual routing Network (DViN), which
overcomes the visual shortcomings from the perspective of
feature combination and alignment. In particular, DViN
is equipped with a novel sparse routing mechanism to efficiently combine features of multiple visual encoders in
a dynamic manner, thus improving the visual descriptive
power. Besides, we further propose an innovative weakly
supervised objective, namely Routing-based Feature Alignment (RFA), which facilitates the visual understanding of
routed features through the intra-modal and inter-modal
alignment. To validate DViN, we conduct extensive experiments on four REC benchmark datasets. Experiments
demonstrate that DViN achieves state-of-the-art results on
four benchmarks while maintaining competitive inference
efficiency. Besides, the strong generalization ability of DViN
is also validated on weakly supervised referring expression
segmentation. Source codes are anonymously released at:
https://github.com/XxFChen/DViN .

Attribute+Long
Attribute
Simple
Figure 1. Performance break-downs with the expression
difficulty. “Simple” refers to the group of short expressions
(length≤20) without attributes. Compared to the “simple” group,
expressions of “Attribute” group further contain attribute words.
“Attribute+Long” group contains longer expressions (length>20)
than “Attribute” group.

1. Introduction

focused on weakly supervised learning for REC [5, 10, 24,
25, 28, 47, 49]. Among them, early works [5, 24] often formulated weakly supervised REC using a two-stage pipeline,
which requires an expensive region proposal stage. Recently, the one-stage framework [10, 54] has become a popular paradigm for weakly supervised REC due to its superior efficiency. For example, RefCLIP [10] utilizes anchor
features from a pre-trained one-stage detector to represent
candidate objects and directly matches them with text features to determine the target referent. Based on this efficient
framework, contrastive-based objectives are used to achieve
effective weakly supervised learning.

Referring Expression Comprehension (REC), also known
as visual grounding, is the task of locating target objects in images based on a given natural language description [4, 22]. As a vision-language (VL) task, REC has
shown great potential in various real-world applications,
e.g., robot navigation [9] and image editing [33]. Therefore, numerous efforts have been devoted to REC recently.
Despite the progress, most REC methods [8, 26, 52] usually require extensive object-level labels for their supervised
learning, leading to expensive annotation costs.
To address this challenge, increasing attention has been
* Corresponding author

Despite the effectiveness, existing one-stage weakly supervised REC remains significantly inferior in fine-grained
object recognition. As shown in Fig. 1, the state-of-the-art
approach called RefCLIP achieves promising accuracy on
simple descriptions, but greatly falls short on fine-grained
ones, e.g., attribute descriptions. To explain, visual features of existing methods are pre-trained on limited categories, e.g., 80 classes of MS-COCO [20], limiting their
fine-grained recognition ability. Moreover, without accurate
annotations, weakly supervised approaches [18, 39] struggle with efficiently learning novel instance-level visual con-

14347

