This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unified Medical Lesion Segmentation via Self-referring Indicator
Xiaoqi Zhao Lihe Zhang* Tiancheng Wang
Dalian University of Technology

Query

“Enhanced”
Features

Cross
Fuse

The recently emerged in-context-learning-based (ICLbased) models have the potential towards the unification
of medical lesion segmentation. However, due to their
cross-fusion designs, existing ICL-based unified segmentation models fail to accurately localize lesions with lowmatched reference sets. Considering that the query itself
can be regarded as a high-matched reference, which better indicates the target, we design a self-referencing mechanism that adaptively extracts self-referring indicator vectors from the query based on coarse predictions, thus effectively overcoming the negative impact caused by lowmatch reference sets. To further facilitate the self-referring
mechanism, we introduce reference indicator generation to
efficiently extract reference information for coarse predictions instead of using cross-fusion modules, which heavily
rely on reference sets. Our designs successfully address the
challenges of applying ICL to unified medical lesion segmentation, forming a novel framework named SR-ICL. Our
method achieves state-of-the-art results on 8 medical lesion
segmentation tasks with only 4 image-mask pairs as reference. Notably, SR-ICL still accomplishes remarkable performance even when using weak reference annotations such
as boxes and points, and maintains fixed and low memory
consumption even if more tasks are combined. We hope that
SR-ICL can provide new insights for the clinical application
of medical lesion segmentation.

Segment

High-matched
Reference

“Contaminated”
Features

Segment

Query

Cross
Fuse

Low-matched
Reference

Cross
Fuse

Abstract

Cross
Fuse

Shijie Chang

Prediction
Dice: 69.6

Prediction
Dice: 88.6

(a)
(b)

Reference

Indicator

Head
Dice: 95.2

Query

Shared

Update

Self-referring

Prediction

Figure 1. Illustration of different ICL-based unified segmentation frameworks. (a) In current ICL-based models, different reference sets lead to contrasting results due to cross-fusion mechanisms. High-matched reference enhances query features, while
low-matched reference contaminates them. (b) Our solution: Individually extract information from reference sets and queries, adaptively extracting information from the query itself for lesion segmentation.

1. Introduction

ing methods have become the dominant solution for MLS
tasks [14, 34, 48, 59].
Due to the diversity of modalities and lesions, previous methods typically train a separate set of parameters for
each modality and each type of lesion to accomplish specific tasks. Traditional segmentation models [6, 21, 35]
fail to use a single set of parameters to accomplish various challenging MLS tasks. Inspired by the unified interactive segmentation model SAM [25], MedSAM [29] accomplishes unified interactive medical segmentation based
on large-scale hybrid medical datasets. However, the interactive model requires weak annotation of each query image, making it difficult to apply in practice. Recently, many
in-context-learning-based (ICL-based) segmentation models have emerged. Benefiting from the ICL paradigm [30],

Medical lesion segmentation (MLS) is an important subtask
in the field of medical image analysis with high research
value and rich clinical applications [33]. MLS tasks encompass various medical imaging modalities, such as computed
tomography (CT), magnetic resonance (MR), and optical
coherence tomography (OCT), and various lesions in different body regions, such as colon polyps, thyroid nodules,
and brain tumors. Automatic and accurate segmentation of
lesions in medical images is an important means of assisting clinical medical diagnosis. In recent years, deep learn* Corresponding author.

10414

