This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Random Conditioning with Distillation for Data-Efficient
Diffusion Model Compression
Dohyun Kim1 * Sehwan Park1 * Geonhee Han1
Seung Wook Kim2 Paul Hongsuck Seo1
1
Dept. of CSE, Korea University 2 NVIDIA
{a12s12, shp216, rtrt505, phseo}@korea.ac.kr,
seungwookk@nvidia.com

Camera-Ready

(a) Non-Animal Condition

(b) Animal Condition

Student
w/ Rand Cond

Student
w/o Rand Cond

Diffusion models generate high-quality images through
progressive denoising but are computationally intensive due
to large model sizes and repeated sampling. Knowledge distillation—transferring knowledge from a complex teacher to
a simpler student model—has been widely studied in recognition tasks, particularly for transferring concepts unseen
during student training. However, its application to diffusion models remains underexplored, especially in enabling
student models to generate concepts not covered by the
training images. In this work, we propose Random Conditioning, a novel approach that pairs noised images with
randomly selected text conditions to enable efficient, imagefree knowledge distillation. By leveraging this technique,
we show that the student can generate concepts unseen in
the training images. When applied to conditional diffusion model distillation, our method allows the student to
explore the condition space without generating conditionspecific images, resulting in notable improvements in both
generation quality and efficiency. This promotes resourceefficient deployment of generative diffusion models, broadening their accessibility for both research and real-world
applications. Code, models, and datasets are available
at: https://dohyun- as.github.io/RandomConditioning

Teacher

Abstract

Figure 1. Qualitative Comparison of Baseline and Our Method
Trained Without Animal Image Data. We train models on a
dataset excluding animal-related images, both without and with
random conditioning. Each row represents (from top to bottom)
the teacher model, the model trained without random conditioning,
and the model trained with random conditioning. In (a), samples
are generated conditioned on captions unrelated to animals, and
in (b), samples are generated conditioned on captions related to
animals. The captions used to generate these samples are provided
in Sec. L of the Supp. Mat. for reference.

1. Introduction

images that accurately align with text prompts. Despite
their impressive performance, these models come with significant computational demands, driven by a large number
of sampling steps and extensive model parameters. Consequently, there has been growing interest in developing
more efficient versions of these models. In this work, we
focus on compressing conditional diffusion models to make
them more efficient, especially in common real-life scenarios where access to large-scale data is limited, due to practical challenges such as hardware limitations, privacy concerns and licensing restrictions.
Knowledge distillation is a technique that transfers
knowledge from one trained network, often a more complex
model called the teacher, to another, typically a simpler network known as the student. Through the use of soft targets [15, 81, 86, 88] or intermediate features [6, 31, 58, 85]

Diffusion models have emerged as powerful generative
frameworks capable of producing high-quality outputs in
various domains, such as image [17, 51, 54–57, 60],
video [1, 2, 11, 18, 19, 76], and audio [20, 34, 80], by
progressively denoising random noise through a sequence
of learned steps. Particularly, text-to-image diffusion models trained on large-scale datasets—such as Stable Diffusion [51, 55–57]—excel at generating visually appealing
* Equal contribution

18607

386 -> D
388 -> F
turtle sw
over/un
693 -> D

St

Th
Bo

M
Pr

