This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding Multi-Task Activities from Single-Task Videos
Yuhan Shen
Northeastern University

Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University

shen.yuh@northeastern.edu

e.elhamifar@northeastern.edu

measure water

Abstract
We introduce and develop a framework for Multi-Task Temporal Action Segmentation (MT-TAS), a novel paradigm
that addresses the challenges of interleaved actions when
performing multiple tasks simultaneously. Traditional action segmentation models, trained on single-task videos,
struggle to handle task switches and complex scenes inherent in multi-task scenarios. To overcome these challenges,
our MT-TAS approach synthesizes multi-task video data
from single-task sources using our Multi-task Sequence
Blending and Segment Boundary Learning modules. Additionally, we propose to dynamically isolate foreground
and background elements within video frames, addressing the intricacies of object layouts in multi-task scenarios
and enabling a new two-stage temporal action segmentation framework with Foreground-Aware Action Refinement.
Also, we introduce the Multi-task Egocentric Kitchen Activities (MEKA) dataset, containing 12 hours of egocentric
multi-task videos, to rigorously benchmark MT-TAS models. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our framework effectively bridges the gap between single-task training and multi-task testing, advancing temporal action segmentation with state-of-the-art performance in complex environments.1

transfer water to kettle

place tortilla on board

spread jelly

pour water to mug

roll tortilla

tea
pinwheels
Time

(a) Multi-Task Temporal Action Segmentation

single-task videos

multi-task videos

(b) Comparison between frames from single-task videos v.s. multi-task videos

Figure 1. (a) Multi-task temporal action segmentation involves segmenting actions from interleaved tasks. It requires capturing interruptions and
resumptions in the execution of each task. (b) Comparison between frames
from single-task and multi-task videos. In multi-task videos, at each time
instant, the scene often contains objects from tasks different from the currently executed one (highlighted by purple boxes).

1. Introduction

within egocentric videos [5, 36, 52, 54, 65, 77], where activities are captured from a first-person perspective, enabling
fine-grained analysis of human actions, which is essential
for applications such as real-time personalized assistance,
embodied agents and efficient video content retrieval.
In this paper, we study the new problem of Multi-Task
Temporal Action Segmentation (MT-TAS), which explicitly
focuses on scenarios where users perform multiple tasks
by interleaving their steps within a single video, see Fig.
1. There are two major challenges that existing TAS models face in addressing MT-TAS. First, despite the notable
progress through deep learning techniques [1, 6, 14, 17, 41,
42, 45, 49, 84], current TAS models have primarily focused
on scenarios where each video contains actions related to
a single high-level task, such as assembling a piece of furniture or cooking a specific recipe. This single-task focus
limits the applicability of TAS models to the multi-task setting since i) they are biased to predict actions/steps from
only one task at the inference time, ii) when performing
several tasks, the environment and the scene often contains
objects relevant to multiple tasks, which adds complexity

Consider a typical morning routine, when you prepare
breakfast: you start making oatmeal and while waiting for
it to cook, you brew coffee and pack your food for lunch.
In fact, in our daily lives, we often perform multiple tasks
simultaneously. For computer vision systems to accurately
analyze such behaviors and provide useful assistance, they
must comprehend these complex and interleaved activities.
Temporal action segmentation (TAS) has emerged as a crucial technology for understanding human activities by partitioning videos into meaningful segments, each corresponding to a distinct action or step [17, 22, 24, 31, 33, 48, 49, 64,
73, 84, 88]. Recently, TAS has attracted growing interests
1 Code: https://github.com/Yuhan-Shen/MT-TAS.

19120

