This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Temporal Action Detection Model Compression by Progressive Block Drop
Xiaoyong Chen1,2* , Yong Guo3 ,* Jiaming Liang2 , Sitong Zhuang2 , Runhao Zeng1,2† , Xiping Hu1,4†
1
Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory for Emotional Intelligence and Pervasive Computing,
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, 2 Shenzhen University,
3
South China University of Technology, 4 Beijing Institute of Technology
xiaoyongchencs@gmail.com, zengrh@smbu.edu.cn, huxp@smbu.edu.cn

Abstract
Temporal action detection (TAD) aims to identify and localize action instances in untrimmed videos, which is essential for various video understanding tasks. However, recent improvements in model performance, driven by larger
feature extractors and datasets, have led to increased computational demands. This presents a challenge for applications like autonomous driving and robotics, which rely
on limited computational resources. While existing channel pruning methods can compress these models, reducing the number of channels often hinders the parallelization efficiency of GPU, due to the inefficient multiplication between small matrices. Instead of pruning channels,
we propose a Progressive Block Drop method that reduces
model depth while retaining layer width. In this way, we
still use large matrices for computation but reduce the number of multiplications. Our approach iteratively removes
redundant blocks in two steps: first, we drop blocks with
minimal impact on model performance; and second, we
employ a parameter-efficient cross-depth alignment technique, fine-tuning the pruned model to restore model accuracy. Our method achieves a 25% reduction in computational overhead on two TAD benchmarks (THUMOS14 and
ActivityNet-1.3) to achieve lossless compression. More critically, we empirically show that our method is orthogonal
to channel pruning methods and can be combined with it to
yield further efficiency gains.

and datasets have improved model performance but also significantly increased computational demands [40]. However,
many TAD applications, such as autonomous driving [59]
and robotics [44], operate under limited computational resources. Thus, reducing computational complexity is crucial for deploying TAD in real-world scenarios.
A typical TAD model [67, 70] consists of a feature extractor and an action detection head. Due to the long duration of videos, the feature extractor processes video segments individually, and these segment-level features are
then combined before being passed to the detection head.
As shown in Figure 1, our experiments show that the feature extraction phase accounts for 95% of the total model
computation, since it processes many segments, while the
detection head processes only a single video-level feature.
Thus, reducing the complexity of the feature extractor is key
to improving TAD model efficiency.
Pruning [14, 18, 20, 48] is a common model compression technique, which removes redundant weights based on
their importance. This results in a slim-and-tall network
structure, where the model’s hidden layer dimensions are
reduced but depth remains unchanged, as illustrated in Figure 1. However, studies have shown [24, 45] that for the
same number of parameters, a deep-and-thin network may
have slower inference speeds compared to a shallow-andwide network. The reason for this is that, during GPU inference, operations on larger matrices tend to have higher
parallelism and are thus more efficient than multiple operations on smaller matrices.
To explore the feasibility of reducing the architectural
depth of TAD models, we conduct preliminary experiments
on the THUMOS14 dataset [28], which is widely used for
this task. We raise the following key observations from Figure 2: 1) There is a slight discrepancy between the input
and output features of certain blocks. 2) Dropping specific
blocks results in only a minimal decrease in model performance. 3) Simultaneously dropping multiple blocks leads
to a more significant performance drop (Table 3). These
results motivate us to investigate TAD model compression

1. Introduction
Temporal action detection aims to identify action instances
and localize their start and end times in untrimmed videos.
This task underpins many video understanding applications,
including video question answering [33] and video captioning [17]. Recent advancements in larger feature extractors
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

29225

