This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Laboratory to Real World: A New Benchmark Towards Privacy-Preserved
Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification

1

Yan Jiang1,2 , Hao Yu2 , Xu Cheng1 *, Haoyu Chen2 , Zhaodong Sun1,2 , Guoying Zhao2
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology
2
Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu

{jiangyan,xcheng,zhaodong.sun}@nuist.edu.cn

{hao.2.yu,chen.haoyu,guoying.zhao}@oulu.fi

https://github.com/Joey623/L2RW

Abstract
Aiming to match pedestrian images captured under
varying lighting conditions, visible-infrared person reidentification (VI-ReID) has drawn intensive research attention and achieved promising results. However, in real-world
surveillance contexts, data is distributed across multiple devices/entities, raising privacy and ownership concerns that
make existing centralized training impractical for VI-ReID.
To tackle these challenges, we propose L2RW, a benchmark
that brings VI-ReID closer to real-world applications. The
rationale of L2RW is that integrating decentralized training into VI-ReID can address privacy concerns in scenarios
with limited data-sharing regulation. Specifically, we design protocols and corresponding algorithms for different
privacy sensitivity levels. In our new benchmark, we ensure
the model training is done in the conditions that: 1) data
from each camera remains completely isolated, or 2) different data entities (e.g., data controllers of a certain region)
can selectively share the data. In this way, we simulate
scenarios with strict privacy constraints which is closer to
real-world conditions. Intensive experiments with various
server-side federated algorithms are conducted, showing
the feasibility of decentralized VI-ReID training. Notably,
when evaluated in unseen domains (i.e., new data entities),
our L2RW, trained with isolated data (privacy-preserved),
achieves performance comparable to SOTAs trained with
shared data (privacy-unrestricted). We hope this work offers a novel research entry for deploying VI-ReID that fits
real-world scenarios and can benefit the community.

1. Introduction
The growing need for dependable pedestrian identification across all hours has made visible-infrared person reidentification (VI-ReID) a key technology [38, 46, 49].
* Corresponding Author

Privacy-invasive

Privacy-preserved

Centralized training

Decentralized training
Entity
Level

Entity 1 . . . . .

Entity N

Entity 1 . . . . .

Entity N

Camera
Level

(a) Existing setting

(b) L2RW setting

Figure 1. Illustration of existing setting and the proposed L2RW
setting. (a) The existing setting relies on centralized training,
allowing unrestricted data sharing between cameras or entities,
which brings serious privacy concerns. (b) Unlike this, our L2RW
framework introduces camera-level and entity-level privacy regulation, simulating real-world privacy-preserved VI-ReID scenes.

It solves the challenge of identifying individuals in different spectral modalities, such as visible during the day
and infrared at night. However, although existing methods
[30, 39–42, 47, 48, 51] achieve encouraging advancements,
their deployment in real-world scenarios remains limited.
In our view, the current experimental setting of the VIReID in the field is idealized and impedes its advancement
to real-world applications. Specifically, current approaches
[3, 15, 17, 25, 27, 31, 40, 41, 52] rely predominantly on
centralized training, where data from multiple sources is aggregated on a central platform. While beneficial for learning
modality-shared representations, they neglect practical constraints, especially in privacy and ownership concerns. In
real-world scenarios, data is stored in a distributed manner,
surveillance images are subject to strict privacy restrictions,
etc. This centralized training not only complicates data
sharing but also increases the risk of data leakage, bringing serious privacy concerns in real-world deployment.
Based on the above observation, we argue that it is essential to establish a benchmark that protects data privacy
while still enabling effective VI-ReID. Therefore, we pro-

8828

