This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MeshArt: Generating Articulated Meshes with Structure-Guided Transformers
Daoyi Gao1

Yawar Siddiqui1,2
Lei Li1
Angela Dai1
1
2
Technical University of Munich
Meta

Figure 1. MeshArt creates articulated 3D objects hierarchically, part-by-part with transformers by first generating high-level object structures endowed with articulations (left) and then predicting triangle mesh faces for each part (right) with structure and local connectivity
guidance. Our mesh generations have clean and compact triangulations and can be animated at different articulation states.

1. Introduction
Abstract
Articulated 3D object generation is fundamental for creating realistic, functional, and interactable virtual assets
which are not simply static. We introduce MeshArt, a hierarchical transformer-based approach to generate articulated 3D meshes with clean, compact geometry, reminiscent of human-crafted 3D models. We approach articulated mesh generation in a part-by-part fashion across two
stages. First, we generate a high-level articulation-aware
object structure; then, based on this structural information,
we synthesize each part’s mesh faces. Key to our approach
is modeling both articulation structures and part meshes as
sequences of quantized triangle embeddings, leading to a
unified hierarchical framework with transformers for autoregressive generation. Object part structures are first generated as their bounding primitives and articulation modes;
a second transformer, guided by these articulation structures, then generates each part’s mesh triangles. To ensure
coherency among generated parts, we introduce structureguided conditioning that also incorporates local part mesh
connectivity. MeshArt shows significant improvements over
state of the art, with 57.1% improvement in structure coverage and a 209-point improvement in mesh generation FID.

Articulated objects are ubiquitous in real-world environments – for instance, cabinet doors are openable, office
chairs typically swivel, car wheels and doors rotate and
move. These articulations are generally tied to the core
functionality of these objects (e.g., storage for cabinets, ease
of movement for chairs, movement of cars), and are thus
key to representing realistic, interactable objects. Such objects are already widely represented in computer graphics
applications as triangle meshes, carefully crafted by skilled
3D artists. This enables high visual quality while maintaining a compact representation that readily supports the articulated motion of various object parts.
Recent advances in generative modeling for vision and
graphics have produced remarkable progress in generating
static 3D objects [4, 6, 30–32, 44] as well as complex static
3D scenes [22, 29, 41], leveraging various 3D representations, from voxels and point clouds to neural fields and
even 3D meshes. However, generating articulated objects
with dynamic, functional parts remains an underexplored
challenge. The primary difficulties lie in not only modeling possible functional part motions but also generating
clean and compact part geometries that respect the articulation structures. In particular, generating articulated objects as triangle meshes enables natural support of changing topological structure (e.g., open vs. closed doors in a

618

