This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Cost-Effective Learning: A Synergy of Semi-Supervised and Active
Learning
Tianxiang Yin1,2,3 , Ningzhong Liu1,3*, Han Sun1,3
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
School of Computer Science/School of Software, Luoyang Institute of Science and Technology
3
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
{yintx,sunhan}@nuaa.edu.cn, lnz nuaa@163.com

Abstract
Active learning (AL) and semi-supervised learning (SSL)
both aim to reduce annotation costs: AL selectively annotates high-value samples from the unlabeled data, while
SSL leverages abundant unlabeled data to improve model
performance. Although these two appear intuitively compatible, directly combining them remains challenging due
to fundamental differences in their frameworks. Current
semi-supervised active learning (SSAL) methods often lack
theoretical foundations and often design AL strategies tailored to a specific SSL algorithm rather than genuinely integrating the two fields. In this paper, we incorporate AL
objectives into the overall risk formulation within the mainstream pseudo-label-based SSL framework, clarifying key
differences between SSAL and traditional AL scenarios. To
bridge these gaps, we propose a feature re-alignment module that aligns the features of unlabeled data under different augmentations by leveraging clustering and consistency constraints. Experimental results demonstrate that
our module enables flexible combinations of SOTA methods from both AL and SSL, yielding more efficient algorithm
performance.

with little or no contribution, maximizing the informational
value of labeled samples. On the other hand, SSL directly leverages a large amount of unlabeled data to explore the contained information. Given their complementary strengths, a natural strategy is to combine AL and SSL
to achieve more cost-effective learning. One promising approach is to integrate the SSL process within an iterative
AL framework: Initially, a small set of labeled samples and
a large pool of unlabeled data are used to train the model using an SSL algorithm. After training is complete, an AL algorithm selects the most informative samples from the unlabeled dataset for labeling. These newly labeled samples are
then added to the labeled set, and SSL is reapplied, thereby
refining the model iteratively.
Previous studies have explored the performance of combining AL with SSL and found that simple integration
approaches have not achieved the expected performance
gains[3]. In recent years, some studies have tried to combine AL and SSL [4–6], but these efforts often focus on developing specific AL methods tailored to SSL algorithms,
rather than genuinely integrating state-of-the-art techniques
from both fields. In this paper, we propose a novel approach
for flexibly and effectively merging AL and SSL.

1. Introduction

In this work, we first analyze the overall risk loss
in the current mainstream pseudo-label-based SSL framework. We then introduce AL objectives into this framework, providing a theoretical examination of the key differences in sample selection strategies between SSAL and
AL. Through this analysis, we find that the upper bound of
the risk loss in SSAL is influenced by two types of errors:
pseudo error and margin error. These errors directly correspond to the two primary strategies in AL sample selection:
diversity-based and uncertainty-based strategies.

In recent years, deep learning has made remarkable
progress in various domains. However, these advances depend heavily on a vast amount of high-quality labeled data.
Despite the decreasing cost of acquiring unlabeled data, the
annotation of these data still requires substantial human labor costs. Therefore, in practical applications, the high
cost of data labeling remains a pressing issue that needs to
be addressed. Active learning(AL)[1] and semi-supervised
learning(SSL)[2] can effectively tackle this problem. AL
selects valuable samples for labeling while ignoring those
* Corresponding author is Ningzhong Liu

However, directly applying these two types of selection
strategies to SSAL presents two issues. The first challenge
arises with diversity-based methods, which rely heavily on
the clustering assumption [7], assuming that samples within

10163

