This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MambaIC: State Space Models for High-Performance Learned
Image Compression
Fanhu Zeng1 *, Hao Tang2 , Yihua Shao3 , Siyu Chen3 , Ling Shao4 , Yan Wang1†
1
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
2
School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
University of Science and Technology Beijing
4
UCAS-Terminus AI Lab, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Abstract

ͲϮϬ

A high-performance image compression algorithm is crucial for real-time information transmission across numerous ﬁelds. Despite rapid progress in image compression,
computational inefﬁciency and poor redundancy modeling
still pose signiﬁcant bottlenecks, limiting practical applications. Inspired by the effectiveness of state space models (SSMs) in capturing long-range dependencies, we leverage SSMs to address computational inefﬁciency in existing
methods and improve image compression from multiple perspectives. In this paper, we integrate the advantages of
SSMs for better efﬁciency-performance trade-off and propose an enhanced image compression approach through reﬁned context modeling, which we term MambaIC. Speciﬁcally, we explore context modeling to adaptively reﬁne the
representation of hidden states. Additionally, we introduce
window-based local attention into channel-spatial entropy
modeling to reduce potential spatial redundancy during
compression, thereby increasing efﬁciency. Comprehensive
qualitative and quantitative results validate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of our approach, particularly for highresolution image compression. Code is released at https:
//github.com/AuroraZengfh/MambaIC.

1. Introduction
Image compression is a crucial aspect of image storage
and transmission, particularly in the era of high-deﬁnition,
high-resolution, and large-scale digital images. In recent
decades, traditional image formats such as JPEG [33],
BPG [4], and VVC [5] have signiﬁcantly advanced the digitalization process. With the rapid development of modern architectures like CNNs [20, 40], Transformers [9, 23],
and others [32, 39], many learned image compression (LIC)
* Work done during internship at AIR, Tsinghua University
† Corresponding author. <wangyan@air.tsinghua.edu.cn>

BD-Rate over VVC(%)

Ours
Ͳϭϱ

MambaVC
ELIC

ͲϭϬ

Ͳϱ

Ϭ

ϱ

ϰϴϬǆϮϳϬ

ϱϭϮǆϳϲϴ

ϭϮϬϬǆϭϮϬϬ

ϭϵϮϬǆϭϬϴϬ

ϮϬϰϴǆϭϰϰϬ

Resolution (pixel)

Figure 1. Performance of typical image compression approaches
when resolution varies. Notably, our MambaIC consistently outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods [19, 35] and gets a more
substantial improvement when the image scales up.

methods have emerged to achieve a better performanceefﬁciency trade-off. These methods typically consist of
an encoder, decoder, and entropy model, and are optimized end-to-end. Recent works [19, 22, 26] even surpass the classical standards [5], demonstrating their potential to lead next-generation image compression standards
and drive real-world applications in related industries.
Despite the rapid advancements achieved by pioneering
works in both CNNs [3, 19] and Transformers [25, 34],
limitations in performance and computational complexity hinder their practical applications. Speciﬁcally, while
Transformer-based methods generally outperform CNNbased methods, they suffer from quadratic complexity proportional to pixel numbers, resulting in signiﬁcant latency
particularly for high-resolution image compression. Although efforts are made [22, 26] with well-designed modules to reduce computational load, the balance between performance and efﬁciency remains unsolved. This highlights
the need for improving efﬁciency while maintaining highperformance in image compression.
In contrast to designing delicated modules, another way

18041

