This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual-Agent Optimization framework for Cross-Domain Few-Shot Segmentation
Zhaoyang Li1∗
Yuan Wang1 *
Wangkai Li1
Tianzhu Zhang1,2†
Xiang Liu3
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
National Key Laboratory of Deep Space Exploration, Deep Space Exploration Laboratory
3
Dongguan University of Technology
{lizhaoyang, wy2016, lwklwk}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn, liuxiang@dgut.edu.cn

Abstract

Source domain

Cross-Domain Few-Shot Segmentation (CD-FSS) extends
the generalization ability of Few-Shot Segmentation (FSS)
beyond a single domain, enabling more practical applications. However, directly employing conventional FSS
methods suffers from severe performance degradation in
cross-domain settings, primarily due to feature sensitivity
and support-to-query matching process sensitivity across
domains. Existing methods for CD-FSS either focus on
domain adaptation of features or delve into designing
matching strategies for enhanced cross-domain robustness.
Nonetheless, they overlook the fact that these two issues
are interdependent and should be addressed jointly. In this
work, we tackle these two issues within a unified framework
by optimizing features in the frequency domain and enhancing the matching process in the spatial domain, working
jointly to handle the deviations introduced by the domain
gap. To this end, we propose a coherent Dual-Agent Optimization (DATO) framework, including a consistent mutual
aggregation (CMA) and a correlation rectification strategy
(CRS). In the consistent mutual aggregation module, we
employ a set of agents to learn domain-invariant features
across domains, and then use these features to enhance
the original representations for feature adaptation. In
the correlation rectification strategy, the agent-aggregated
domain-invariant features serve as a bridge, transforming
the support-to-query matching process into a referable feature space and reducing its domain sensitivity. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the efficacy of our approach.

Source domain

(a) Transfer
Target domain

Domain-Adaptive Agents
Target domain

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. The source-domain-optimized model suffers from a significant performance drop in CD-FSS due to feature domain sensitivity and matching process domain sensitivity. To address this
issue, we employ a set of domain-adaptive agents to coherently
handle these challenges.

datasets and elaborate algorithms. However, the reliance
on extensive annotated data limits the fully-supervised segmentation models to predefined training categories. FewShot Segmentation (FSS) [35] is proposed to derive segmentation models capable of generalizing to novel classes
without the need for laborious data collection and model retraining. The current top-performing FSS methods [9, 18,
34, 45] adopt meta-learning to capture transferable category
correspondence, essentially optimizing an intra-class yet
cross-instance feature-matching process. Though achieving
considerable progress, these FSS methods perform poorly
when confronted with domain shifts in novel categories.
To address the above challenges, the Cross-Domain
Few-Shot Segmentation (CD-FSS) [20] task has garnered
increasing attention, which aims to transfer the metaknowledge from source domain to target-domain (Figure 1(a) → Figure 1(b)). However, when the model optimized on the source domain is transferred to the target domain, it suffers from a significant performance drop (Figure 1(b)) due to two main challenges: ❶ The model optimized on the source domain tends to overfit to source-

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation [26] has achieved conspicuous
achievements attributed to the development of large-scale
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

9849

