This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D IFF V SGG: Diffusion-Driven Online Video Scene Graph Generation
Mu Chen1 , Liulei Li2 , Wenguan Wang1†, Yi Yang1
1

ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University 2 ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney

https://github.com/kagawa588/DiffVsgg

(a) Offline Training

Pred.

T3
Pred.

Unified
Generation
Spatial-temporal
Reasoning
Cond.

Object Class.

Box Regression

Predicate Class.
Current Frame

Scene Graph Prediction

Object Class. & Box Regression

(b) Online Training

Prior Frame

Scene Graph Prediction

T2
Object
Detector

Predicate Class.

Top-leading solutions for Video Scene Graph Generation
(VSGG) typically adopt an offline pipeline. Though demonstrating promising performance, they remain unable to handle real-time video streams and consume large GPU memory. Moreover, these approaches fall short in temporal reasoning, merely aggregating frame-level predictions over a
temporal context. In response, we introduce D IFF V SGG, an
online VSGG solution that frames this task as an iterative
scene graph update problem. Drawing inspiration from Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) which generate images via
denoising a latent feature embedding, we unify the decoding of object classification, bounding box regression, and
graph generation three tasks using one shared feature embedding. Then, given an embedding containing unified features of object pairs, we conduct a step-wise Denoising on
it within LDMs, so as to deliver a clean embedding which
clearly indicates the relationships between objects. This
embedding then serves as the input to task-specific heads
for object classification, scene graph generation, etc. D IF F V SGG further facilitates continuous temporal reasoning,
where predictions for subsequent frames leverage results of
past frames as the conditional inputs of LDMs, to guide the
reverse diffusion process for current frames. Extensive experiments on three setups of Action Genome demonstrate
the superiority of D IFF V SGG.

Spatial Trans. Dec.

T1
Pred.

Temporal Trans. Enc.

Abstract

Denoising Diffusion

Figure 1. (a) Existing VSGG solutions typically adopt an offline
training pipeline, dividing the problem into various components:
object detection, temporal association, and contextual aggregation.
(b) D IFF V SGG introduces a new paradigm that performs spatialtemporal reasoning directly as each frame is processed sequentially, enabling progressive, online updates to the scene graph.

1. Introduction

Top-leading VSGG approaches typically adopt an offline
pipeline [30, 69, 94], where scene graphs are generated independently for each frame and then aggregated along the
temporal dimension (i.e., Fig. 1(a)). Though demonstrating
strong performance, they require full video sequences as inputs, which faces challenges in processing long videos containing hundreds of frames due to GPU memory constraints,
and is unable to handle real-time video streams for applications like autonomous driving and augmented reality [100].
Moreover, the dealing of temporal cues focuses solely on
the global aggregation of frame-level predictions via Transform blocks. This falls short in the reasoning over temporal space, which is essential for modeling the dynamic
changes of interactions between subjects and objects, and

Video Scene Graph Generation (VSGG) is receiving growing attention as it benefits a wide range of downstream tasks
(e.g., video caption [34, 91], video retrieval [31, 50], and
visual question answering [49, 87]). To deliver a holistic
understanding of the underlying spatial-temporal dynamics
within scenes, this task aims to construct a sequence of directed graphs where nodes represent objects and edges describe inter-object relationships (a.k.a., predicate).
† Corresponding author.

29161

