This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Removing Reflections from RAW Photos
Eric Kee

Adam Pikielny

Kevin Blackburn-Matzen
Adobe Inc.
{kee,pikielny,matzen,levoy}@adobe.com

Captured Photo

Our Result

Marc Levoy

Our Result (Reflection)

Zhang

Context
Captured Photo

DSRNet

Our Result

Zhang

Context

w/o context

DSRNet

Figure 1. Results of our reflection removal system. We use linear (RAW) images with an optional contextual photo, and output the clean
and reflection images in linear color for editing, at full resolution (shown at 2K). Prior works use tone-mapped images at ≈ 256p, yielding
lower quality and inaccurate color. Brightness/contrast changes relative to captured photos arise from reflection removal, and are correct.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Taking pictures through glass is difficult. Light reflects off
of the glass and linearly mixes with the subject, creating a
distraction. Photos from cars and airplanes show the cabin,
photos from buildings include the ceiling lights, paintings
are covered by haze, and window shopping shots are photobombed by the photographer—to name just a few cases.
Removing unwanted reflections is difficult because they
occur in a diverse range of locations and situations. Locations include shopping spots, traveling (cars, planes), buildings, museums, and special cases (eyeglasses, screens). Reflections depend on the time, lighting (e.g. incandescent),
scene (trees, streets), illuminant power, and appearance
(complex textures or simple shapes). These factors create
priors because glass is placed carefully in the world.
One way to remove reflections involves capturing a second photo with a black material placed behind the glass to
allow only reflected light to reach the camera. If this reflection image, and the original mixture image, are stored in a

We describe a system to remove real-world reflections from
images for consumer photography. Our system operates on
linear (RAW) photos, and accepts an optional contextual
photo looking in the opposite direction (e.g. the “selfie”
camera on a mobile device). This optional photo disambiguates what should be considered the reflection. The system is trained solely on synthetic mixtures of real RAW photos, which we combine using a reflection simulation that
is photometrically and geometrically accurate. Our system
comprises a base model that accepts the captured photo and
optional context photo as input, and runs at 256p, followed
by an up-sampling model that transforms 256p images to
full resolution. The system produces preview images at 1K
in 4.5-6.5s on a MacBook or iPhone 14 Pro. We show SOTA
results on RAW photos that were captured in the field to embody typical consumer photos, and show that training on
RAW simulation data improves performance more than the
architectural variations among prior works.

161

