This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Co-op: Correspondence-based Novel Object Pose Estimation
Sungphill Moon

Hyeontae Son
Dongcheol Hur
NAVER LABS

Sangwook Kim

{sungphill.moon, son.ht, dongcheol.hur, o.s.w.a.l.k}@naverlabs.com

Abstract
We propose Co-op, a novel method for accurately and
robustly estimating the 6DoF pose of objects unseen during training from a single RGB image. Our method requires only the CAD model of the target object and can precisely estimate its pose without any additional fine-tuning.
While existing model-based methods suffer from inefficiency
due to using a large number of templates, our method enables fast and accurate estimation with a small number of
templates. This improvement is achieved by finding semidense correspondences between the input image and the
pre-rendered templates. Our method achieves strong generalization performance by leveraging a hybrid representation that combines patch-level classification and offset regression. Additionally, our pose refinement model estimates
probabilistic flow between the input image and the rendered
image, refining the initial estimate to an accurate pose using a differentiable PnP layer. We demonstrate that our
method not only estimates object poses rapidly but also outperforms existing methods by a large margin on the seven
core datasets of the BOP Challenge, achieving state-of-theart accuracy.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, significant improvements in the
accuracy of 6D object pose estimation have been achieved
through advancements in deep learning methods [33, 35,
46, 47, 54, 58, 63]. However, despite their remarkable accuracy, these methods are challenging to apply in diverse,
real-world environments because handling new objects requires acquiring large amounts of data and retraining the
models for several hours or even days.
To address these challenges, recent studies have explored
various methods. One approach is the category-level methods [33, 59], which estimate the pose of unseen objects
within known categories but struggle with entirely new
ones. Another approach aims for generalization by training
on large-scale pose estimation datasets and is divided into
two types: model-free and model-based methods. However,

Figure 1. Examples of 6D pose estimation of novel objects. Our
method estimates semi-dense or dense correspondences between
the input image and rendered images and uses them to estimate
the pose.

model-free methods [18, 29, 36, 53] often face challenges
with low-texture object and report results only on limited
datasets or those without occlusions.
Given these limitations, model-based unseen object pose
estimation methods [27, 38, 41, 44, 62] that utilize 3D CAD
models have been gaining attention. These model-based
methods typically consist of three processes—object detection, coarse pose estimation, and pose refinement—or
sometimes include a fourth process, pose selection. Since
previous works like CNOS [40] and SAM-6D [32] have already addressed object detection with excellent generalization performance, we concentrate our research on the subsequent pose estimation process.
In this paper, we propose Co-op (Correspondence-based
Novel Object Pose Estimation), a novel method for accurately and robustly estimating the 6DoF pose of objects unseen during training from a single RGB image. Our research begins with the consideration of how to effectively
define and find correspondences between two images to
achieve object pose estimation with excellent generalization
performance.
By setting object pose estimation as finding correspondences between two images, our model is trained at the

11622

