This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HORP: Human-Object Relation Priors Guided HOI Detection
Pei Geng, Jian Yang, Shanshan Zhang*
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information
of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{peigeng,csjyang,shanshan.zhang@njust.edu.cn}

Abstract
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection aims to predict
the <Human, Interaction, Object> triplets, where the core
challenge lies in recognizing the interaction of each humanobject pair. Despite recent progress thanks to more advanced model architectures, HOI performance remains unsatisfactory. In this work, we first perform some failure
analysis and find that the accuracy of the no-interaction category is extremely low, largely hindering the improvement
of overall performance. We further look into the error types
and find the mis-classification between no-interaction and
with-interaction ones can be handled by human-object relation priors. Specifically, to better distinguish no-interaction
from direct interactions, we propose 3D location prior,
which indicates the distance between human and object;
as of no-interaction vs. indirect interactions, we propose
gaze area prior, which denotes whether human can see the
object or not. The above two types of human-object relation priors are represented by text and are combined with
the original visual features, generating multi-modal cues
for interaction recognition. Experimental results on the
HICO-DET and V-COCO datasets demonstrate that our
proposed human-object relation priors are effective and
our method HORP surpasses previous methods under various settings and scenarios. In particular, the usage of our
priors significantly enhances the model’s recognition ability for the no-interaction category. Code is available at
https://github.com/namegp/HORP.

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction Detection (HOI) has received
widespread attention as an essential computer vision task in
recent years. Based on object detection, HOI adds more advanced action understanding and is widely applied in tasks
such as image retrieval [8, 13], image captioning [3, 26, 41],
* Corresponding author.

(a)

direct
interaction

indirect
interaction

(b)

Figure 1. The accuracy of no-interaction is much lower than that of
with-interaction (a); those no-interaction samples are easily misclassified as both direct and indirect interactions (b).

and human action recognition [16, 20, 25, 31, 49]. The
core of the HOI task is to predict the <Human, Interaction,
Object> triplets in the image, which consists of two key
subtasks: detecting humans and objects [18, 19, 47, 48];
categorizing the interaction of each human-object pair,
which is vital for the HOI task due to the diversity of interaction categories and the complexity of the scenes.
Existing methods [5, 15, 37, 51, 53] usually improve
HOI detection through more accurate interaction recognition. Despite significant advancements in previous work,

25325

