This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language-Guided Audio-Visual Learning for Long-Term Sports Assessment
Huangbiao Xu1,2 , Xiao Ke1,2 ,* Huanqi Wu1,2 , Rui Xu1,2 , Yuezhou Li1,2 , Wenzhong Guo1,2
1
Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Networking Computing and Intelligent Information Processing,
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350108, China
2
Engineering Research Center of Big Data Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Fuzhou 350108, China
kex@fzu.edu.cn,{huangbiaoxu.chn, wuhuanqi135, xurui.ryan.chn, liyuezhou.cm}@gmail.com

Abstract

GFLOPs
MLAVL (Ours)

Long-term sports assessment is a challenging task in video
understanding since it requires judging complex movement
variations and action-music coordination. However, there
is no direct correlation between the diverse background music and movements in sporting events. Previous works require a large number of model parameters to learn potential
associations between actions and music. To address this
issue, we propose a language-guided audio-visual learning (MLAVL) framework that models “audio-action-visual”
correlations guided by low-cost language modality. In our
framework, multidimensional domain-based actions form
action knowledge graphs, motivating audio-visual modalities to focus on task-relevant actions. We further design
a shared-specific context encoder to integrate deep multimodal semantics, and an audio-visual cross-modal fusion
module to evaluate action-music consistency. To match the
sport’s rules, we then propose a dual-branch prompt-guided
grading module to weigh both visual and audio-visual performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves state-of-the-art on four public long-term
sports benchmarks while maintaining low parameters.1

PAMFN
GDLT

QTD
CoFInAl

Modality

TPT
MLP-Mixer

Audio-Visual
M-BERT

Visual-Only

(a) Result preview on the FS1000 dataset
·
·
·

GT:
29.52

·
·
·

Visual

·
·
·

Visual

Audio

Audio-Visual
Learning

·
·
·

Pred.:
20.35

a video of ···
a music suitable for ···
back spin
swing
half-flip
gliding
dance steps
···

Action Text

GT:
29.52

Audio

Language-Guided
Audio-Visual Learning

What should I
focus on?

Yes! I should focus on
audio-action-visual correlations.

(b) Audio-visual learning

(c) Language-guided audio-visual learning (ours)

Pred.:
29.35

Figure 1. (a) Spearman’s correlation against computational cost
on FS1000. Existing SOTA audio-visual models (PAMFN [57],
MLP-Mixer [47], M-BERT [23]) and visual-only models
(QTD [10], CoFInAl [65], TPT [2], GDLT [48]) are compared.
Our MLAVL achieves SOTA performance while maintaining the
low computational cost. (b) Existing audio-visual models require
larger parameters to learn weak associations between actions and
music. (c) The proposed method utilizes low-cost language to
guide the focus on action correlations in audio-visual modalities.

1. Introduction
cent methods [12, 47, 52, 57] introduce rich and diverse information from additional modalities (e.g., audio, language,
and optical flow) to tackle long-term sports assessment.
Long-term sports events often consider the interaction
between athletes and background music. For example, in
figure skating and rhythmic gymnastics, the synchronization between movements and musical rhythm is a key factor considered by judges when scoring. Actions mismatching the music receive lower scores. Thus, assessing actionmusic consistency is essential for long-term sports assessment. However, the loud background music at sports events
often obscures sounds directly associated with actions (e.g.,
landing and hitting sounds), making it challenging for mod-

Action quality assessment (AQA) has attracted wide attention due to its applications in sports, healthcare [9, 27, 59,
66], skill determination [11, 51, 62] and others. Sports assessment, as the primary focus of AQA has seen numerous
solutions, particularly for short-term actions [2, 21, 39, 50,
53, 54, 56, 64]. However, long-term sports analysis is still
challenging since its minutes of action videos contain richer
and more complex correlations. Understanding and assessing the performance quality of different sub-actions under
the same action category can be confusing. Therefore, re* Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/XuHuangbiao/MLAVL

23967

