This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Overcoming Shortcut Problem in VLM for Robust Out-of-Distribution Detection
Zhuo Xu1 *, Xiang Xiang1,2 ∗ †, Yifan Liang1
1
National Key Lab of Multi-Spectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
Peng Cheng National Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
Vision-language models (VLMs), such as CLIP, have
shown remarkable capabilities in downstream tasks. However, the coupling of semantic information between the
foreground and the background in images leads to significant shortcut issues that adversely affect out-of-distribution
(OOD) detection abilities. When confronted with a background OOD sample, VLMs are prone to misidentifying it
as in-distribution (ID) data. In this paper, we analyze the
OOD problem from the perspective of shortcuts in VLMs
and propose OSPCoOp which includes background decoupling and mask-guided region regularization. We first decouple images into ID-relevant and ID-irrelevant regions
and utilize the latter to generate a large number of augmented OOD background samples as pseudo-OOD supervision. We then use the masks from background decoupling
to adjust the model’s attention, minimizing its focus on IDirrelevant regions. To assess the model’s robustness against
background interference, we introduce a new OOD evaluation dataset, ImageNet-Bg, which solely consists of background images with all ID-relevant regions removed. Our
method demonstrates exceptional performance in few-shot
scenarios, achieving strong results even in one-shot setting,
and outperforms existing methods. The code and proposed
ImageNet-Bg are available at https://github.com/
HAIV-Lab/OSPCoOp_Imagenet-bg.

Figure 1. The significant shortcut issue with CLIP. The gray
patches in the image possess the highest similarity to the ground
truth. CLIP classifies the image solely based on the background
region. Ridiculously, when the ID-relevant regions are removed,
CLIP produces higher logits on the background interference.

1. Introduction

Traditional OOD detection methods primarily focus on
single-modal models [9, 17, 18, 30, 31, 46, 48, 56], which
are trained from scratch in a fully supervised manner, requiring substantial amounts of data and resources. Recently,
vision-language models (VLMs) [26, 40, 53] like CLIP [40]
have demonstrated remarkable zero-shot performance and
can be applied to various downstream tasks with minimal
parameter tuning [20, 60]. However, despite their extensive
semantic understanding, VLMs still encounter challenges
with OOD data, as it is impractical to enumerate every label
these models may encounter [33, 57]. Consequently, OOD
detection based on VLMs is attracting increasing attention.

In open-world scenarios [3, 22], the deployed machine
learning models may encounter out-of-distribution (OOD)
samples [17] not present during training. Incorrect predictions on OOD samples can lead to serious consequences,
especially in critical fields like autonomous driving [12].
Thus, the ability to detect OOD samples is crucial.
* Equal contribution; co-first author
† Correspondence to xex@hust.edu.cn; also with School of CST

Previous studies on CLIP-based OOD detection can be
categorized into two main types: training-free and trainingrequired methods [37]. Training-free methods leverage
CLIP’s incredible zero-shot capabilities for OOD detection [21, 33]. However, their performance is restricted by
the fixed feature space of CLIP and the manually designed
prompts. In contrast, training-required methods [27, 38] in-

15402

