This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

I2VGuard: Safeguarding Images against Misuse in Diffusion-based
Image-to-Video Models

1

Xun Guo2
Wengang Zhou1
Yan Lu2
Dongnan Gui1, *
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Microsoft Research Asia
{gdn2001@mail., zhwg@}ustc.edu.cn {xunguo, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Original Image

Generated video from original image.

Guarded Image

Generated video from guarded image.

Original Image

Generated video from original image.

Guarded Image

Generated video from guarded image.

Figure 1. Results of our I2VGuard. We present original images, guarded images, and their corresponding SVD-generated videos. All
results are generated with the same seed. Our method effectively safeguards images from animation in image-to-video generation.

Abstract
Recent advances in image-to-video generation have enabled animation of still images and offered pixel-level controllability. While these models hold great potential to transform single images into vivid and dynamic videos, they also
carry risks of misuse that could impact privacy, security, and
copyright protection. This paper proposes a novel approach
that applies imperceptible perturbations on images to degrade the quality of the generated videos, thereby protecting
images from misuse in white-box image-to-video diffusion
models. Specifically, we function our approach as an adversarial attack, incorporating spatial, temporal, and diffusion
attack modules. The spatial attack shifts image features from

their original distribution to a lower-quality target distribution, reducing visual fidelity. The temporal attack disrupts
coherent motion by interfering with temporal attention maps
that guide motion generation. To enhance the robustness
of our approach across different models, we further propose a diffusion attack module leveraging contrastive loss.
Our approach can be easily integrated with mainstream
diffusion-based I2V models. Extensive experiments on SVD,
CogVideoX, and ControlNeXt demonstrate that our method
significantly impairs generation quality in terms of visual
clarity and motion consistency, while introducing only minimal artifacts to the images. To the best of our knowledge, we
are the first to explore adversarial attacks on image-to-video
generation for security purposes.

* Work done during internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

12595

