This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tripartite Weight-Space Ensemble for Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning
Juntae Lee

Munawar Hayat Sungrack Yun
Qualcomm AI Research†

{juntlee,hayat,sungrack}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Few-shot class incremental learning (FSCIL) enables the
continual learning of new concepts with only a few training examples. In FSCIL, the model undergoes substantial
updates, making it prone to forgetting previous concepts
and overfitting to the limited new examples. Most recent
trend is typically to disentangle the learning of the representation from the classification head of the model. A wellgeneralized feature extractor on the base classes (many examples and many classes) is learned, and then fixed during incremental learning. Arguing that the fixed feature
extractor restricts the model’s adaptability to new classes,
we introduce a novel FSCIL method to effectively address
catastrophic forgetting and overfitting issues. Our method
enables to seamlessly update the entire model with a few
examples. We mainly propose a tripartite weight-space ensemble (Tri-WE). Tri-WE interpolates the base, immediately
previous, and current models in weight-space, especially
for the classification heads of the models. Then, it collaboratively maintains knowledge from the base and previous
models. In addition, we recognize the challenges of distilling generalized representations from the previous model
from scarce data. Hence, we suggest a regularization loss
term using amplified data knowledge distillation. Simply intermixing the few-shot data, we can produce richer data enabling the distillation of critical knowledge from the previous model. Consequently, we attain state-of-the-art results
on the miniImageNet, CUB200, and CIFAR100 datasets.

1. Introduction
The ability of a model to continually adapt with the availability of new data is highly desirable for many real-world
applications. Few-shot class-incremental learning (FSCIL)
has recently gained significant research attention as evidenced by several studies [17, 25, 29, 42, 45], because it
offers a promising learning paradigm. It enables the model
† Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

and/or its subsidiaries.

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed method (FE: feature extractor, Cls. head: classification head). Through Tri-WE, at tth incremental session, Cls. head is composed by interpolating the weights
of the Cls. heads covering the classes until base, (t − 1)th, tth sessions, respectively. For ADKD regularization loss, the input fewshot data are amplified to reliably mine generalized knowledge of
the model of the previous (t − 1)th session. After incremental
learning, deployed components are outlined in green.

to flexibly expand its classification capabilities to new concepts using only a few training examples. FSCIL starts by
training a model on numerous base classes with abundant
labeled data. In each subsequent incremental session, the
model encounters only a limited number of labeled data
for new classes, along with a single prototype for each of
the previously learned classes. Hence, FSCIL faces multiple challenges, including the retention of previously learned
knowledge and the prevention of overfitting to the limited
examples of new data.
To address these challenges, the most recent works are
based on separating learning the representation from the
classification. They rely on constructing a robust feature
embedding space using plentiful base class data. In subsequent incremental learning where only a few labeled data
for new classes are available, the embedding space remains
fixed, and the focus is shifted to learning the classifier for
the new classes. This strategy is intended to avoid accumulated model collapse or overfitting due to the limited
data. For example, [25, 42] refrain from altering any base

15329

