This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LatentHOI: On the Generalizable Hand Object Motion Generation
with Latent Hand Diffusion.
Muchen Li*1,2

Sammy Christen6

Renjie Liao1,2,3

Chengde Wan5

Leonid Sigal1,2,3,4

Yujun Cai5

Shugao Ma5

Figure 1. Examples of motion generated by our method for unseen objects.

Abstract
Current research on generating 3D hand-object interaction
motion primarily focuses on in-domain objects. Generalization to unseen objects is essential for practical applications,
yet it remains both challenging and largely unexplored. In
this paper, we propose LatentHOI, a novel approach designed to tackle the challenges of generalizing hand-object
interaction synthesis to unseen objects. Our main insight lies
in decoupling high-level temporal motion from fine-grained
spatial hand-object interactions via a latent diffusion model
coupled with a Grasping Variational Autoencoder (GraspVAE). This configuration introduces regularization by enforcing a conditional dependency between spatial grasping
and temporal motion, as well as through the regularized
latent space for better generalization ability. We conducted
extensive experiments in an unseen-object setting on both
single-hand grasping and bi-manual motion datasets, including GRAB, DexYCB† , and OakInk. Quantitative and
qualitative evaluations demonstrate that our method significantly enhances the realism and physical plausibility of
generated motions for unseen objects, both in single and
bimanual manipulations, compared to the state-of-the-art.

1 University of British Columbia; 2 Vector Institute for AI; 3 Canada

CIFAR AI Chair; 4 NSERC CRC Chair; 5 Meta Reality Lab, Redmond; 6
ETH Zurich, Switzerland;
* Corresponding author, work partially done during a internship at Meta
Reality Lab, Redmond. Contact: muchenli@cs.ubc.ca

1. Introduction
Synthesizing 3D motion of humans is important for a variety
of applications in computer graphics and robotics. Such
approaches can benefit 3D simulations, game design and
provide data for robotic imitation learning. Hand-object
interactions (HOI), which involve the complex motion of
hands engaging with diverse objects, present a unique and
challenging domain for 3D motion synthesis. Hands are dexterous and have many degrees of freedom; the contact state
with the object can change rapidly during interaction, and
minor perturbations—such as penetrations, temporal jitter,
and lack of contact—are highly noticeable. The grasping
pose also varies across different objects, given the subtle
nuances introduced by object shape and semantics.
To make hand-object interaction motion synthesis effective for downstream tasks, generative models need to be
capable of generalizing to unseen object geometry. However, one of the challenges for achieving such generalization
ability lies in the lack of available data. From a practical
point of view, capturing high-quality hand-object interaction at scale is difficult and expensive, since fine-grained
hand-object interaction poses usually require a much more
accurate annotation (compared, e.g., to human motion capture),which is further complicated by heavy occlusions. As a
result, most of the publicly available datasets for hand-object

17416

† Data collection, analysis, and experiments involving DexYCB were con-

ducted at the University of British Columbia.

