This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ParaHome: Parameterizing Everyday Home Activities
Towards 3D Generative Modeling of Human-Object Interactions
Jeonghwan Kim*

Jisoo Kim*
Jeonghyeon Na
Seoul National University

Hanbyul Joo

{roastedpen,jlogkim,prom317,hbjoo}@snu.ac.kr
https://jlogkim.github.io/parahome

Figure 1. Our system captures the detailed 3D movements of the human body, hands, and diverse objects, along with text descriptions.

Abstract
To enable machines to understand the way humans interact with the physical world in daily life, 3D interaction
signals should be captured in natural settings, allowing people to engage with multiple objects in a range of sequential
and casual manipulations. To achieve this goal, we introduce our ParaHome system designed to capture dynamic 3D
movements of humans and objects within a common home
environment. Our system features a multi-view setup with
70 synchronized RGB cameras, along with wearable motion
capture devices including an IMU-based body suit and hand
motion capture gloves. By leveraging the ParaHome system,
we collect a new human-object interaction dataset, including 486 minutes of sequences across 207 captures with 38
participants, offering advancements with three key aspects:
(1) capturing body motion and dexterous hand manipulation
motion alongside multiple objects within a contextual home
environment; (2) encompassing sequential and concurrent
manipulations paired with text descriptions; and (3) including articulated objects with multiple parts represented by 3D
parameterized models. We present detailed design justifications for our system, and perform key generative modeling
* Equal contribution

experiments to demonstrate the potential of our dataset.

1. Introduction
Our daily routines involve interactions with various objects, where we perform complex, sequential, and dexterous motions. Machines, however, struggle to mimic these
behaviors, as the connection between human action and environmental responses (e.g., pulling a refrigerator handle
to open it) is challenging to model. The major obstacle is
the lack of large-scale datasets capturing 3D human-object
interactions (HOIs) in natural and casual settings, including the 3D motions of human bodies, hands, and objects
within a common spatio-temporal space. Existing datasets
cover limited aspects: capturing human motion without objects [29, 44, 50, 68, 86], capturing human body motions
in a static environment without dexterous hand manipulations [36, 85, 101], focusing on hand and object interactions
in static postures without motions [3, 9, 33, 40], or considering relatively simple and atomic interactions such as
grasping a single object [1, 23, 60, 89, 100, 114]. While a
few recent datasets try to capture both body motion and dexterous hand manipulation, they are often captured in a less
natural setup (e.g., a simple table setup), containing limited

1816

