This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hiding Images in Diffusion Models by Editing Learned Score Functions
Haoyu Chen, Yunqiao Yang, Nan Zhong, and Kede Ma*
City University of Hong Kong
{haoychen3-c, yqyang.cs}@my.cityu.edu.hk, {nzhong, kede.ma}@cityu.edu.hk
https://github.com/haoychen3/DMIH/

Abstract
Hiding data using neural networks (i.e., neural steganography) has achieved remarkable success across both discriminative classifiers and generative adversarial networks.
However, the potential of data hiding in diffusion models remains relatively unexplored. Current methods exhibit limitations in achieving high extraction accuracy, model fidelity,
and hiding efficiency due primarily to the entanglement of
the hiding and extraction processes with multiple denoising
diffusion steps. To address these, we describe a simple yet
effective approach that embeds images at specific timesteps
in the reverse diffusion process by editing the learned score
functions. Additionally, we introduce a parameter-efficient
fine-tuning method that combines gradient-based parameter selection with low-rank adaptation to enhance model
fidelity and hiding efficiency. Comprehensive experiments
demonstrate that our method extracts high-quality images
at human-indistinguishable levels, replicates the original
model behaviors at both sample and population levels, and
embeds images orders of magnitude faster than prior methods. Besides, our method naturally supports multi-recipient
scenarios through independent extraction channels.

1. Introduction
The evolution of data hiding has paralleled advancements in
digital media, progressing from traditional bitstream manipulations [8] to deep learning paradigms [1, 3, 60]. A prevailing scheme of hiding data with neural networks adopts an
autoencoder architecture, where an encoding network embeds a secret message into some cover media, and a decoding network is responsible for retrieving the message.
Despite demonstrated feasibility, its practical deployment
faces three fundamental constraints. First, the requirement
for secure transmission of the decoding network creates logistical vulnerabilities [10, 11]. Second, state-of-the-art steganalysis tools [4, 12, 18, 19, 33, 52, 57] can detect the
* Corresponding author.

embedded message from the cover media (commonly in
the forms of digital images and videos) with high accuracy, leading to compromised secrecy. Last, multi-recipient
scenarios necessitate complex key design and management [3, 25, 53, 55, 65].
A paradigm shift emerges with hiding data in neural
networks [5, 32, 44, 50, 51], where secret data is embedded directly into model parameters. This approach evades
conventional steganalysis methods, which are typically designed to analyze stego multimedia rather than neural network weights. Initially, such hiding methods showed success in discriminative models [32, 44, 50, 51]. However, recent attention has shifted towards generative models due to
their increased utility and wider adoption. Moreover, generative models can directly produce secret data without the
need for a separate decoding network, thus inherently resolving transmission security issues. For instance, Chen et
al. [5] proposed to embed images at specific locations of the
learned distributions by deep generative models, which has
proven effective with SinGANs [41], a variant of generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [14].
The advent of diffusion models [21, 47] introduces new
opportunities for this generative probabilistic hiding approach. Despite slightly different purposes (backdooring or
watermarking), existing approaches [6, 7, 36] face critical
bottlenecks (see Table 1). First, they are inadequate in hiding complex natural images of rich structures and textures,
with reconstruction peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) ≤ 25
dB. Second, they compromise model fidelity, with Fréchet
inception distance (FID) [20] degradation exceeding 100%,
raising detectability concerns. Last, they require full model
retraining or fine-tuning (≥ 10 GPU hours) to learn parallel
secret diffusion processes.
In this paper, we describe a simple yet effective approach
to hiding images in diffusion models. We identify that editing the learned score functions (by inserting secret key-toimage mappings) at specific timesteps enables precise image embedding without disrupting the original chain of the
reverse diffusion process. The stego diffusion model is pub-

18663

