This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Completion as Enhancement:
A Degradation-Aware Selective Image Guided Network for Depth Completion
Zhiqiang Yan Zhengxue Wang Kun Wang Jun Li* Jian Yang*
PCA Lab†, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{yanzq,zxwang,kunwang,junli,csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Coarse but Dense

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the Selective Image Guided
Network (SigNet), a novel degradation-aware framework
that transforms depth completion into depth enhancement
for the first time. Moving beyond direct completion using convolutional neural networks (CNNs), SigNet initially
densifies sparse depth data through non-CNN densification
tools to obtain coarse yet dense depth. This approach eliminates the mismatch and ambiguity caused by direct convolution over irregularly sampled sparse data. Subsequently,
SigNet redefines completion as enhancement, establishing
a self-supervised degradation bridge between the coarse
depth and the targeted dense depth for effective RGB-D fusion. To achieve this, SigNet leverages the implicit degradation to adaptively select high-frequency components (e.g.,
edges) of RGB data to compensate for the coarse depth.
This degradation is further integrated into a multi-modal
conditional Mamba, dynamically generating the state parameters to enable efficient global high-frequency information interaction. We conduct extensive experiments on the
NYUv2, DIML, SUN RGBD, and TOFDC datasets, demonstrating the state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance of SigNet.

Our solution
Previous methods

CNN Completion
Precise but Sparse

Precise and Dense

Figure 1. Illustration of our main concept. It redefines depth completion as depth enhancement. We first transform sparse depth input via non-CNN densification tools [14, 15], yielding coarse but
dense depth. Then we predict the precise and dense depth from the
coarse depth by leveraging degradation assumption [43, 59, 62].

1. Introduction

depth with varying point distributions, while convolutions
are spatially invariant with fixed kernel shapes. Moreover, it
is ambiguous for convolutions to distinguish between valid
and invalid depth measurements since unknown pixels in
the sparse depth are recognized as zero.

Depth completion [27, 38, 48, 50] aims to predict a dense
depth map from sparse and noisy depth measurements, often using the corresponding RGB image for auxiliary guidance. The resulting dense depth map can benefit various downstream applications such as scene reconstruction
[36, 39, 47, 68] and self-driving [22, 45, 51, 63, 65, 67].
The key challenges of this task lie in the sparse depth
input data [21, 38, 40, 49, 50]. We summarize these challenges as mismatch and ambiguity. As shown in Fig. 1,
the mismatch is caused by the irregularly sampled sparse
* Corresponding authors
† PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-

To address these challenges, several excellent methods
[21, 38, 40] have been proposed. For instance, SparseConvs [40] proposes sparsity invariant CNNs that explicitly
model the location of missing data. To avoid directly convolving on sparse depth, Liu et al. [21] employs kernels
learned by differentiable kernel regression layers to interpolate sparse data. BPNet [38] develops bilateral propagation,
where the coefficients are generated based on both radiometric difference and spatial distance. These data-driven
schemes are robust and impressive. However, they still cannot fully avoid the application of convolution on incomplete
depth data, even though the depth data has become denser.

Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, School of Computer
Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology.

26943

