This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling Vision Pre-Training to 4K Resolution
Baifeng Shi1,2*
Jan Kautz2

Boyi Li1,2
Song Han2

Han Cai2
Yao Lu2
Sifei Liu2
Trevor Darrell1
Pavlo Molchanov2
1

UC Berkeley

2

Marco Pavone2
Hongxu Yin2

NVIDIA

https://nvlabs.github.io/PS3

Pre-Training Resolution

PS3 Pre-Training

PS3

SigLIP

SigLIP

SigLIP Pre-Training

PS3
378x378

ViT

ViT

Pre-Training Cost (4K Res)
A street view
in the morning.

1134x1134

The red sign
says stop.

378 x 378

3780x3780

Stop.

The red sign says stop. /
What does the red sign say?

PS3

Accuracy on 4KPro
Qwen2-VL

Patch
Selection

Resolution: 3780 x 3780

SigLIP

VILA-HD

VILA-HD

Inference Latency
What does
the red
sign say?

select

Qwen2-VL
VILA-HD

Figure 1. Left: Regular vision models such as SigLIP [44] processes images at a low resolution (e.g., 378 × 378 pixels), which is not
enough for many daily tasks such as spotting the stop sign while driving. In contrast, PS3 is able to both encode low-res features and
efficiently process high-res information of 4K-resolution images via top-down patch selection, i.e., selectively processing relevant patches
based on any text prompt. Top Right: SigLIP is pre-trained by contrasting global vision features and global captions, which is costly for
high-resolution images. PS3 is pre-trained with additional contrast between local high-res features with local captions, enabling pre-training
at 4K resolution with 79× less cost than SigLIP. Bottom Right: VILA-HD uses PS3 to selectively process high-res regions based on the user
prompt, outperforming state-of-the-art MLLMs such as Qwen2-VL [38] on the proposed 4KPro benchmark while achieving 2.96× speedup.

Abstract

LLM (MLLM), the resulting model, named VILA-HD, significantly improves high-resolution visual perception compared
to baselines without high-resolution vision pre-training such
as AnyRes and S2 while using up to 4.3× fewer tokens. PS3
also unlocks appealing scaling properties of VILA-HD, including scaling up resolution for free and scaling up test-time
compute for better performance. Compared to state of the
arts, VILA-HD outperforms previous MLLMs such as NVILA
and Qwen2-VL across multiple benchmarks and achieves better efficiency than latest token pruning approaches. Finally,
we find current benchmarks do not require 4K-resolution
perception, which motivates us to propose 4KPro, a new
benchmark of image QA at 4K resolution, on which VILAHD outperforms all previous MLLMs, including a 14.5%
improvement over GPT-4o, and a 3.2% improvement and
2.96× speedup over Qwen2-VL.

High-resolution perception of visual details is crucial for
daily tasks. Current vision pre-training, however, is still
limited to low resolutions (e.g., 378×378 pixels) due to the
quadratic cost of processing larger images. We introduce
PS3 that scales CLIP-style vision pre-training to 4K resolution with a near-constant cost. Instead of contrastive
learning on global image representation, PS3 is pre-trained
by selectively processing local regions and contrasting them
with local detailed captions, enabling high-resolution representation learning with greatly reduced computational
overhead. The pre-trained PS3 is able to both encode the
global image at low resolution and selectively process local high-resolution regions based on their saliency or relevance to a text prompt. When applying PS3 to multi-modal
* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.

9631

