This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DocLayLLM: An Efficient Multi-modal Extension of Large Language Models
for Text-rich Document Understanding
Wenhui Liao1† , Jiapeng Wang1,2† , Hongliang Li1 , Chengyu Wang2∗ , Jun Huang2 , Lianwen Jin1,3∗
1
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
Alibaba Cloud Computing, Hangzhou, China
3
SCUT-Zhuhai Institute of Modern Industrial Innovation, Zhuhai, China
{eelwh, eejpwang, eehongliangli}@mail.scut.edu.cn, eelwjin@scut.edu.cn
{chengyu.wcy, huangjun.hj}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

document corpora and fine-tuning their models on specific
downstream tasks like key information extraction (KIE) and
visual question answering (VQA) [39, 40]. However, these
pre-training tasks often diverge significantly from downstream tasks, requiring the model to acquire substantial
task-specific knowledge during fine-tuning. This may result
in limited generalization capability across different tasks
and datasets.

Text-rich document understanding (TDU) requires comprehensive analysis of documents containing substantial textual content and complex layouts. While Multimodal Large
Language Models (MLLMs) have achieved fast progress
in this domain, existing approaches either demand significant computational resources or struggle with effective multi-modal integration. In this paper, we introduce
DocLayLLM, an efficient multi-modal extension of LLMs
specifically designed for TDU. By lightly integrating visual
patch tokens and 2D positional tokens into LLMs’ input
and encoding the document content using the LLMs themselves, we fully take advantage of the document comprehension capability of LLMs and enhance their perception of
OCR information. We have also deeply considered the role
of chain-of-thought (CoT) and innovatively proposed the
techniques of CoT Pre-training and CoT Annealing. Our
DocLayLLM can achieve remarkable performances with
lightweight training settings, showcasing its efficiency and
effectiveness. Experimental results demonstrate that our
DocLayLLM outperforms existing OCR-dependent methods
and OCR-free competitors. Code and model are available
at https://github.com/whlscut/DocLayLLM.

With the rapid development of large language models
(LLMs), their impressive versatility and generalization capabilities have captured widespread interest [74]. This has
led many researchers [17, 38, 61, 76, 79] to overcome the
challenges of TDU with LLMs. Initially, efforts focused on
employing multi-modal large language models (MLLMs)
for OCR-free TDU, where document images are fed into
MLLMs, directly generating responses to comprehension
tasks. These MLLMs, which can process images and text
inputs, are among the most recent advancements in this
domain. To date, several general MLLMs have been developed to manage diverse scenarios, and researchers often build their TDU models based on these general models. However, these TDU models typically require highresolution image inputs to recognize dense text in documents and a large volume of training data to effectively develop this capability, both of which bring significant computational demands. Furthermore, within the extensive collections of image and instruction data used to train these models, the training data for downstream evaluation tasks was
often included, which might potentially impact the assessment of their generalization to previously unseen datasets.

1. Introduction
Text-rich document understanding (TDU) focuses on analyzing documents with extensive text and complex layouts, requiring a combined understanding of text, layout,
and images. Early research [1, 2, 12, 15, 20, 28, 33–
37, 44, 52, 55, 65, 68, 69, 72, 73, 77] often used BERTlike [8] Transformer-based document encoders (DE), designing various pre-training tasks for large-scale unlabeled

To overcome the constraints of OCR-free methods,
scholars have pursued diverse methodologies for integrating OCR information into LLMs. Initial strategies [14, 70]
involved inputting coordinates of OCR bounding boxes as
numeric text. However, this textual representation of numbers often resulted in excessively long inputs that could

† Equal contribution.
* Co-corresponding authors.

4038

