This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Large-scale Multi-view Tensor Clustering with Implicit Linear Kernels
Jiyuan Liu1 , Xinwang Liu1 *, Chuankun Li2 , Xinhang Wan1 , Hao Tan1 , Yi Zhang1 , Weixuan Liang1
Qian Qu1 , Yu Feng1 , Renxiang Guan1 , Ke Liang1
1
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China. 410072.
2
North University of China, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China. 030051.
liujiyuan13@nudt.edu.cn, *Corresponding author

Abstract
Multi-view clustering is a long-standing hot topic in machine learning communities, due to its capability of integrating data information from multiple sources and modalities. By utilizing tensor Singular Value Decomposition (tSVD) technique with the tensor rotation trick, recent advances have achieved remarkable improvements on clustering performance. However, we find this is attributed to
the inadvertent use of sequential information of sorted data
samples, i.e. inadvertent label use, which violates the unsupervised learning setting. On the other hand, existing
large-scale approaches are mostly developed on the basis
of matrix factorization or anchor techniques, thereby fail
to consider the similarities among all data samples, preventing from further performance improvement. To address
the above issues, we first analyze the tensor rotation trick
and recommend to remove it from tensor clustering. On
its basis, a novel large-scale multi-view tensor clustering
method is developed by incorporating the pair-wise similarities with implicit linear kernel function. To solve the
resultant optimization problem, we design an efficient algorithm of linear complexity. Moreover, extensive experiments
are conducted and corresponding results well support the
aforementioned finding and validate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of electrical device and information technology, the data is collected from multiple
sources with different modalities, which is widely known
as multi-view data. In literature, it refers to the multiple descriptions of a same set of data samples which can be separated semantically. For instance, in the Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis, the doctor would probably collect data from
a series of medical tests, such as neurological examination, ElectroEncephaloGram (EEG), Computed Tomography (CT) scan, etc. In this background, multi-view cluster-

20727

ing is a representative of unsupervised learning paradigms
to deal with multi-view data and achieves promising performance in recent years [13, 28–31, 43, 44, 46, 47, 52], since
it can enhance the consistent information while integrate the
complementary information of different data views. Apart
from the rich research interests in academic research, the
methods are also applied in numerous real-world scenarios,
such as Bioinformatics [24, 51], Geoscience [6], Internet of
Things [9], etc.
Recently, a volume of multi-view clustering methods
employ tensor techniques to utilize the high-order correlations among different data views, which is annotated to
multi-view tensor clustering [5, 18, 19, 50]. In the pioneer
research, a tensor nuclear norm minimization constraint
is proposed on the basis of tensor-Singular Value Decomposition (t-SVD) and imposed on the clustering objective
function, leading to remarkable performance improvements
[50]. Also, other constraints are developed based on t-SVD
subsequently, such as the popular weighted tensor Schatten p-norm minimization [10, 48, 49], enhanced tensor rank
minimization [16], etc. To deal with large-scale data, a volume of multi-view clustering methods aims to design algorithms and corresponding optimization strategies of linear
complexity. Some of them are developed on the basis of
matrix factorization where the data is decomposed into two
parts, i.e. coefficient matrix and base matrix [8, 11, 14, 27].
On contrary, another branch of them reduces the computation complexity by building kernel matrix or similarity matrix with sample anchors of limited numbers [15, 23].
Among the above methods, two drawbacks are observed
and severely limit the further development of multi-view
clustering. On one hand, almost all multi-view tensor clustering approaches employ the tensor rotation trick, as shown
in Fig. 2, along with incorporating the t-SVD based constraints. Since t-SVD requires to adopt Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) on the 3-rd dimension of target tensor, the data
sequential information is used inadvertently. Unfortunately,
the existing methods overlook this and perform clustering
on the data sorted in groups, thereby introducing the data

