This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiSciPLE: Learning Interpretable Programs for Scientific Visual Discovery
Utkarsh Mall1 Cheng Perng Phoo2 Mia Chiquier1 Bharath Hariharan2 Kavita Bala2 Carl Vondrick1
1
2
Columbia University
Cornell University
Correspondence: um2171@columbia.edu

disciple.cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Visual data is used in numerous different scientific workflows ranging from remote sensing to ecology. As the
amount of observation data increases, the challenge is not
just to make accurate predictions but also to understand the
underlying mechanisms for those predictions. Good interpretation is important in scientific workflows, as it allows
for better decision-making by providing insights into the
data. This paper introduces an automatic way of obtaining such interpretable-by-design models, by learning programs that interleave neural networks. We propose DiSciPLE (Discovering Scientific Programs using LLMs and
Evolution) an evolutionary algorithm that leverages common sense and prior knowledge of large language models
(LLMs) to create Python programs explaining visual data.
Additionally, we propose two improvements: a program
critic and a program simplifier to improve our method further to synthesize good programs. On three different realworld problems, DiSciPLE learns state-of-the-art programs
on novel tasks with no prior literature. For example, we can
learn programs with 35% lower error than the closest noninterpretable baseline for population density estimation.

Figure 1. We introduce a framework to discover interpretable, predictive programs for scientific computer vision tasks.

1. Introduction

to train excellent predictive models that learn the relationships between a satellite image and the population. However, understanding why certain regions are densely populated is crucial for urban planning and policy decisions —
black-box predictions offer no interpretation of what makes
a region have a high population. Scientists themselves want
to derive insight from the models, not just predict.
While there have been many works that train
interpretable vision models (for example conceptbottlenecks [20, 27]), these models are often limited
to simple functions of primitive concepts, such as bag
of words. These simple functions do not scale to the
realistic complexity of our visual world and the complex
relationships between its many rich scientific indicators,
resulting in poor accuracy. A promising direction to
model rich relationships without foregoing interpretability
is to learn programs on top of conceptual primitives.
Recently, code generation methods such as ViperGPT and
VisProg [14, 36] have demonstrated that large language
models are able to synthesize programs with competitive
performance on many vision tasks, and the representations
are interpretable by construction because programs are
human-readable. However, while these methods work well
for established vision tasks, they often fail to generalize
to scientific applications of computer vision because the
tasks are new and outside the scope of the training data on
the internet. LLMs lack the requisite knowledge to answer
novel or domain-specific questions, and as we will show,
directly applying such zero-shot code generation methods
on scientific domains is not effective.

Many modern scientific workflows are built on top of visual data. Researchers in remote sensing, climate science,
ecology, and other sciences use images as a window into
our world to estimate population density, the amount of
biomass, poverty indicators, and so on. There is a massively increasing volume of visual data, be it from an everexpanding set of satellites, widespread camera traps, or images uploaded on the web, that is available to domain experts, and computer vision has the potential to meaningfully
assist scientists in using it for scientific insight.
Scientific applications of computer vision, however, are
demanding tasks because we want models that not only predict outcomes but also reveal underlying mechanisms. For
example, a researcher who studies demography may be able

29258

