This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Understanding and Quantifying Uncertainty
for Text-to-Image Generation
Gianni Franchi,1 * Nacim Belkhir,2 * Dat Nguyen Trong,1
Guoxuan Xia,3 Andrea Pilzer4
U2IS, ENSTA Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, 1 Mirai,2
Imperial College London,3 NVIDIA4

Training Dataset

Test Time

<prompts>
Uncertainty
Quantification
concept 1

concept 2

concept 3

Generated Images

Prompt-based UNCertainty Estimation for Text-to-Image (T2I) Generation

Bias Extraction

Deep Fake Prevention

Copyright Prevention

Figure 1. Examples of Applications for Uncertainty Quantification in Text-to-Image Generation. Text-to-image generation models
may exhibit uncertainty, and that need to be quantified since it can provide insights into the model’s training dataset, aiding in deepfake
prevention, detecting model biases, and protecting copyrighted content from unauthorized generation.

Abstract

erated image, and then compares the caption with the original prompt in the more semantically meaningful text space.
PUNC also enables the disentanglement of both aleatoric
and epistemic uncertainties via precision and recall, which
image-space approaches are unable to do. Extensive experiments demonstrate that PUNC outperforms state-of-theart uncertainty estimation techniques across various settings. Uncertainty quantification in text-to-image generation models can be used on various applications including
bias detection, copyright protection, and OOD detection.
We also introduce a comprehensive dataset of text prompts
and generation pairs to foster further research in uncertainty quantification for generative models. Our findings
illustrate that PUNC not only achieves competitive performance but also enables novel applications in evaluating

Uncertainty quantification in text-to-image (T2I) generative models is crucial for understanding model behavior
and improving output reliability. In this paper, we are the
first to quantify and evaluate the uncertainty of T2I models with respect to the prompt. Alongside adapting existing
approaches designed to measure uncertainty in the image
space, we also introduce Prompt-based UNCertainty Estimation for T2I models (PUNC), a novel method leveraging
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) to better address
uncertainties arising from the semantics of the prompt and
generated images. PUNC utilizes a LVLM to caption a gen* equal contribution
corresponding author - gianni.franchi@ensta-paris.fr

†

8062

