This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Style Evolving along Chain-of-Thought for Unknown-Domain Object Detection
Zihao Zhang1 , Aming Wu2 , Yahong Han1 *
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
zhangzihao2490@tju.edu.cn, amwu@xidian.edu.cn, yahong@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, a task of Single-Domain Generalized Object Detection (Single-DGOD) is proposed, aiming to generalize
a detector to multiple unknown domains never seen before
during training. Due to the unavailability of target-domain
data, some methods leverage the multimodal capabilities of
vision-language models, using textual prompts to estimate
cross-domain information, enhancing the model’s generalization capability. These methods typically use a single
textual prompt, referred to as the one-step prompt method.
However, when dealing with complex styles, such as the
combination of rain and night, we observe that the performance of the one-step prompt method tends to be relatively
weak. The reason may be that many scenes incorporate a
single style and a combination of multiple styles. The onestep prompt method may not effectively synthesize combined
information involving various styles. To address this limitation, we propose a new method, i.e., Style Evolving along
Chain-of-Thought, which aims to progressively integrate
and expand style information along the chain of thought,
enabling the continual evolution of styles. Specifically, by
progressively refining style descriptions and guiding the diverse evolution of styles, this method enhances the simulation of various style characteristics, enabling the model to
learn and adapt to subtle differences more effectively. Additionally, it exposes the model to a broader range of style
features with different data distributions, thereby enhancing
its generalization capability in unseen domains. The significant performance gains over five adverse-weather scenarios and the Real to Art benchmark demonstrate the superiorities of our method. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/ZZ2490/SE-COT.

Figure 1. Style evolution along Chain-of-Thought involves a process that progresses from coarse to fine, continuously refining and
expanding styles. (a) illustrates the style description guided by the
Chain-of-Thought. (b) demonstrates how using text prompts ranging from simple to complex guides style evolution, enabling the
model to progressively learn and adapt to subtle differences between styles.

1. Introduction

generalization. Though widely studied in image classification [15, 24, 32], it remains a developing area in object detection [10, 35]. Currently, there are two mainstream solutions. Firstly, decoupling domain-invariant features through
self-supervised methods enhances the model’s generalization ability in the target domain, such as [38, 39]. Secondly, some approaches utilize textual prompts to estimate
cross-domain information, enhancing the model’s generalization capability. Specifically, by employing a single textual prompt, these methods leverage the multimodal capabilities of vision-language models to simulate target domain
styles [3, 9] or estimate domain shifts [33], thereby improving the model’s detection performance in the target domain. This approach typically employs a single-step textual
prompt, hence referred to as the one-step prompt method.
Presently, one-step prompt methods have achieved state-of-

Single-domain generalization (DG) [2, 7, 34] aims to train
a model on source domains to generalize to unseen target
domains, posing a greater challenge than standard domain
* Corresponding author.

14225

