This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic and Sequential Alignment for Referring Video Object Segmentation
Feiyu Pan1
Hao Fang1
Fangkai Li1
Yanyu Xu1
Yawei Li2
Luca Benini2,3
Xiankai Lu1 *
1
2
3
Shandong University
ETH Zürich
University of Bologna
https://github.com/tavarich/SSA
semantic gap

Abstract

sequential gap

Decoder

𝛷𝛷𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑒𝑒
unaligned

…

Referring video object segmentation (RVOS) seeks to segment the objects within a video referred by linguistic expressions. Existing RVOS solutions follow a “fuse then select” paradigm: establishing semantic correlation between
visual and linguistic feature, and performing frame-level
query interaction to select the instance mask per frame with
instance segmentation module. This paradigm overlooks
the challenge of semantic gap between the linguistic descriptor and the video object as well as the underlying clutters in the video. This paper proposes a novel Semantic
and Sequential Alignment (SSA) paradigm to handle these
challenges. We first insert a lightweight adapter after the vision language model (VLM) to perform the semantic alignment. Then, prior to selecting mask per frame, we exploit
the trajectory-to-instance enhancement for each frame via
sequential alignment. This paradigm leverages the visuallanguage alignment inherent in VLM during adaptation and
tries to capture global information by ensembling trajectories. This helps understand videos and the corresponding descriptors by mitigating the discrepancy with intricate
activity semantics, particularly when facing occlusion or
similar interference. SSA demonstrates competitive performance while maintaining fewer learnable parameters.

Turtles
swimming

𝛷𝛷𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡

frame query

…

identical

video query

(a) Previous frameworks

semantic alignment

sequential alignment

Decoder

𝛷𝛷𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐
…

aligned

…

integrated

Turtles
swimming

𝛷𝛷𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐

(b) Our framework

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (a) Previous frameworks extracted features from independent extractors, while not effectively leverage the consistency
of the object query sequence. (b) Our SSA framework yields sufficient visual-linguistic interaction through semantic alignment by
Vision-Language Model and global video modeling via sequential
alignment.

Referring video object segmentation (RVOS) is an emerging multimodal video understanding task, which aims at
segmenting the target from a video based on linguistic description [7, 10, 18, 47]. It has diverse applications in fields
such as human-robot interaction [40, 41] and video editing [3], garnering attention from the academic community.
Traditional RVOS approaches [4, 54] typically focus on
simple yet static scenes with prominent object, where one
static expression referrs to only one target [10, 18, 47]. Such
isolated objects can be easily captured by static attributes in

a single frame. However, in real-world video scenarios, existing pipelines struggle to seamlessly interpret the motion
and multi-targets expressions with complex and dynamic
scenarios due to substantial movement, abrupt scene change
and non-salient targets [7, 26]. This leads to the challenge
of aligning both video-text and trajectory-instance relations.

* Corresponding author: Xiankai Lu.

RVOS in real-world environment requires explicitly
identifying the particular target trajectory referred by the
motion guidance. This underscores the necessity for robust
visual-text semantic understanding to establish the corre-

19067

