This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Balancing Two Classifiers via A Simplex ETF Structure for Model Calibration
Jiani Ni1
He Zhao2
Jintong Gao1
Dandan Guo∗1
Hongyuan Zha3
1
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University
CSIRO’s Data61
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
{nijn23,gaojt20}@mails.jlu.edu.cn

guodandan@jlu.edu.cn

Abstract

he.zhao@ieee.org

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance across various domains. However, despite their success, they often face calibration issues, particularly in safety-critical applications
such as autonomous driving and healthcare, where unreliable predictions can have serious consequences. Recent
research has started to improve model calibration from the
view of the classifier. However, the exploration of designing the classifier to solve the model calibration problem
is insufficient. Let alone most of the existing methods ignore the calibration errors arising from underconfidence. In
this work, we propose a novel method by Balancing learnable and ETF classifiers to solve the overconfidence or underconfidence problem for model CALibration named BalCAL. By introducing a confidence-tunable module and a
dynamic adjustment method, we ensure better alignment
between model confidence and its true accuracy. Extensive experimental validation shows that ours significantly
improves model calibration performance while maintaining high predictive accuracy, outperforming existing techniques. This provides a novel solution to the calibration
challenges commonly encountered in deep learning. Our
code is available at BalCAL.

more closely with their predicted accuracy, improving the
confidence calibration of DNNs has become a pivotal area
of research. Calibration approaches in DNNs are generally categorized into post-hoc and training-time methods.
Post-hoc methods, such as Temperature Scaling (TS) [11],
rescale output probabilities after training without modifying
internal features. In contrast, training-time methods like label smoothing (LS) [37], focal loss (FL) [23], and Mixup
[52] integrate calibration into the training process. Here,
we focus on training-time methods.
Recent training-time methods related to classifiers have
provided valuable insights. Such as the approach by [17],
aims to improve calibration by decoupling feature extraction from classification. Although this separation enhances
calibration, it may reduce model flexibility and limit generalization to out-of-distribution (OOD) data, highlighting a
critical trade-off between calibration and adaptability. Additionally, [44] found that weight decay regularization can
negatively affect the model calibratability, limiting calibration improvements achievable through post-hoc methods.
They proposed the weak classifier hypothesis, suggesting
that a weakly trained classification head aids the representation module in generating more calibratable features. Despite their effectiveness, it is questionable whether the exploration of designing the classifier to solve the model calibration problem is sufficient. Besides, most calibration
methods primarily address overconfidence and a few researchers address calibration errors stemming from underconfidence in model predictions [45].
In this work, we propose a novel method by fusing two
classifiers, denoted as BalCAL, which Balances two classifiers to solve the overconfidence or underconfidence problem for model CALibration. In addition to the learnable
standard classifier, we here consider another fixed Simplex
Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF) classifier from the Neural
Collapse (NC) phenomenon [31]. NC has emerged as a
significant phenomenon in deep learning, where as training progresses the features of the final layer and the classifiers tend to converge into highly structured and symmetric patterns and classifier weights converge to a Simplex ETF structure. Recent studies [33, 48] have demon-

1. Introduction
Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success across various domains, including image classification [8, 14, 51], object detection [15, 35],
and natural language processing [7, 43]. Despite their impressive performance, DNNs often exhibit calibration error, characterized by overconfidence, where the predicted
probabilities exceed the accuracy of their predictions [11].
This calibration error poses serious challenges in real-world
risk-sensitive applications, including autonomous driving
[4, 12], healthcare diagnostics [1, 36] and predicting credit
risk [6] where precise confidence estimates are crucial.
Consequently, to ensure that model predictions align

30712

