This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MultimodalStudio: A Heterogeneous Sensor Dataset and Framework for Neural
Rendering across Multiple Imaging Modalities
Federico Lincetto1
1

Gianluca Agresti2

Mattia Rossi2
2

University of Padova

Pietro Zanuttigh1

Sony Europe Limited

https://lttm.github.io/MultimodalStudio/

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed framework. MMS-FW exploits unaligned multimodal frames acquired by sensors with different
intrinsics to render perfectly aligned novel views for each modality. The mosaick pattern for each modality is shown in the top corners.

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent years, NeRF [30] and Gaussian Splatting
(GS) [16] greatly advanced the field of volume rendering
by enabling novel view synthesis with unprecedented photorealistic appearance. Their growing popularity has driven
research to employ these approaches for related tasks. This
is the case of multi-view 3D reconstruction, which received a strong boost first by the introduction of Signed
Distance Field (SDF) estimation methods [41, 45], then
thanks to the adoption of the multi-resolution feature structures [5, 6, 22, 31, 42], and finally with the exploitation of
the GS formulation [12, 14]. Other works explored the possibility to perform the material properties estimation along
with a NeRF or GS training, thus enabling the possibility
to understand, to replicate and to edit the interaction of the
incident light with the scene surfaces [15, 23, 27, 40].
Typically neural rendering methods rely exclusively on
RGB images, as these are convenient to capture and relatively straightforward to process. However, we argue that
they may not always be the optimal choice to address the
aforementioned tasks: there exist other imaging modalities
capable of measuring either the information carried by different spectral bands, for instance Near-Infrared (NIR) and

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have shown impressive performances in the rendering of 3D scenes from arbitrary
viewpoints. While RGB images are widely preferred for
training volume rendering models, the interest in other radiance modalities is also growing. However, the capability of
the underlying implicit neural models to learn and transfer
information across heterogeneous imaging modalities has
seldom been explored, mostly due to the limited training
data availability. For this purpose, we present MultimodalStudio (MMS): it encompasses MMS-DATA and MMS-FW.
MMS-DATA is a multimodal multi-view dataset containing 32 scenes acquired with 5 different imaging modalities:
RGB, monochrome, near-infrared, polarization and multispectral. MMS-FW is a novel modular multimodal NeRF
framework designed to handle multimodal raw data and
able to support an arbitrary number of multi-channel devices. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that
MMS-FW trained on MMS-DATA can transfer information
between different imaging modalities and produce higher
quality renderings than using single modalities alone. We
publicly release the dataset and the framework, to promote
the research on multimodal volume rendering and beyond.

10964

