This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Universal Scale-Adaptive Deformable Transformer for Image Restoration
across Diverse Artifacts
Hui Ji4
Xuyi He1
Yuhui Quan1
Ruotao Xu2,3 *
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Institute for Super Robotics, South China University of Technology
3
Key Laboratory of Large-Model Embodied-Intelligent Humanoid Robot
4
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore
csxuyihe@mail.scut.edu.cn, csyhquan@scut.edu.cn, rtxu@superobots.com, matjh@nus.edu.sg
1

Abstract
Structured artifacts are semi-regular, repetitive patterns that
closely intertwine with genuine image content, making their
removal highly challenging. In this paper, we introduce
the Scale-Adaptive Deformable Transformer, an network architecture specifically designed to eliminate such artifacts
from images. The proposed network features two key components: a scale-enhanced deformable convolution module
for modeling scale-varying patterns with abundant orientations and potential distortions, and a scale-adaptive deformable attention mechanism for capturing long-range relationships among repetitive patterns with different sizes and
non-uniform spatial distributions. Extensive experiments
show that our network consistently outperforms state-ofthe-art methods in diverse artifact removal tasks, including
image deraining, image demoiréing, and image debanding.

1. Introduction
Structured artifacts, in contrast to random noise, are repetitive patterns with similar appearance. Examples include
Moiré patterns caused by overlapping pattern interference,
rain streaks formed during image acquisition in rainy conditions, and banding effects resulting from color quantization.
See Figure 1 for an illustration. These artifacts often display
similar appearance that repeat in a quasi-periodic way over
large image regions. However, they can differ in size, intensity, orientation, and may exhibit certain shape distortions.
Additionally, their characteristics can vary across different
images due to changes in image content and capturing.
Removing structured artifacts has many applications.
Eliminating moiré patterns improves digital photography
* Corresponding author.

Code is available at: https://github.com/csxyhe/SADT

Figure 1. Structured artifacts with varying orientations, scales, and
may involve warping effect. From left to right: moiré, rain, band.

and screen captures. Rain streak removal improves the reliability of outdoor vision systems in rainy conditions, i.e.,
those used in autonomous driving and video surveillance.
Addressing banding artifacts is necessary in professional
imaging and printing to achieve smooth gradients and high
dynamic range. Additionally, structured artifact removal
finds applications in medical imaging, industrial quality inspection, and consumer electronics, enhancing image quality
and reliability. All these highlight a broad impact of structured artifacts removal across many real-world applications.
Structured artifact removal presents significant challenges
that differ from random noise removal. The primary difficulties arise due to the quasi-periodic nature of these artifacts
and their resemblance to authentic repeating image patterns
(e.g., textures). These artifacts often intertwine with natural image features, creating complex overlapping structures
that are difficult to disentangle from genuine image content. For instance, moiré patterns can closely mimic textile
textures, and banding effects may align with natural linear
features. Additionally, these artifacts often display noticeable variations in pattern size and geometric shape, further
complicating their identification and removal.

12731

