This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Historical Information for RGBE Visual Tracking with Mamba
Chuanyu Sun1 ,* Jiqing Zhang2 ,* Yang Wang1 , Huilin Ge3†, Qianchen Xia4†, Baocai Yin1,5†, Xin Yang1†
1
Key Laboratory of Social Computing and Cognitive Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
2
Dalian Maritime University 3 Jiangsu University of Science and Technology
4
The Future Laboratory,Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 5 Beijing University of Technology

Abstract
Combining the advantages of conventional and event
cameras for robust visual tracing has drawn extensive interest. However, existing tracking approaches heavily engage
in complex cross-modal fusion modules, leading to higher
computational complexity and training challenges. Besides,
these methods generally ignore the effective integration of
historical information, which is crucial to grasping the
change in the target’s appearance and motion trends. Given
the recent advancements in Mamba’s long-range modeling and linear complexity, we explore its potential in addressing the above issues in RGBE tracking tasks. Specifically, we first propose an efficient fusion module based
on Mamba, which utilizes a simple gate-based interaction
scheme to achieve effective modality-selective fusion. This
module can be seamlessly integrated into the encoding layer
of prevalent Transformer-based backbones. Moreover, we
further present a novel historical decoder that leverages
Mamba’s advanced long sequence modeling to effectively
capture the target appearance changes with autoregressive
queries. Extensive experiments show that our proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple
challenging short-term and long-term RGBE benchmarks.
Besides, the effectiveness of each key Mamba-based component of our approach is evidenced by our thorough ablation study.Code will be released at: https://github.
com/scy0712/MamTrack

Figure 1. Overview of MamTrack and its two main components:
(i) Multimodal Encoder is responsible for extracting and fusing
features from RGB and event modalities; (ii) Historical Decoder
is utilized to mine the temporal information of target appearance
changes.

growing trend of integrating them with conventional RGB
cameras for robust visual tracking tasks [10, 28, 32, 41–
43, 48]. These RGBE multimodal approaches can significantly enhance tracking performance in challenging conditions, such as fast motion and limited illumination. Although being effective, the above multimodal methods expend a substantial amount of labor on developing overly
intricate fusion algorithms. For example, FENet [41] employs a total of 8 self-attention and 4 complex cross-domain
attention operations to integrate event and frame features
at various levels. Implementing these sophisticated strategies will significantly increase the computational complexity and challenge of the training.
Moreover, the complex fusion designs make existing
RGBE methods usually overlook the mining and application of historical temporal information, which is crucial for
tracking as it captures changes in the target’s state. Several RGB-only trackers [1, 4, 38] have been developed to
update appearance information by replacing or fusing the
templates. Occasionally, these straightforward methods ineffectively filter out unreliable updated templates and thus
compromise the performance. To address this issue, some

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking (VOT) is a fundamental task in computer vision[21–23, 30, 46] that focuses on estimating the
position and shape of a target within video sequences based
on its initial state [1, 3, 5, 17, 35, 36, 38, 47].Owing to the
advantages of high temporal resolution and dynamic range
offered by event cameras [33, 34, 40], there has been a
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

6500

