This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GPAvatar: High-fidelity Head Avatars by Learning Efficient Gaussian Projections
Wei-Qi Feng1†
Dong Han1†
Ze-Kang Zhou1
Shunkai Li3
Xiaoqiang Liu3
Pengfei Wan3
Di Zhang3
Miao Wang1,2*
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory 3 Kuaishou Technology
{fengweiqi, dong.han, zekangzhou, miaow}@buaa.edu.cn
{lishunkai, liuxiaoqiang, wanpengfei, zhangdi08}@kuaishou.com

Rendering Speed (FPS)
The bubble size indicates memory usage.

32

450fps

31.88dB

31
30

GuassianBlendShape
PointAvatar
FlashAvatar

29
28
27

Novel View Synthesis

Face Reenactment

Ours
PSNR

33

INSTA
30

100

300

500

Quality, Speed and Memory Usage

Figure 1. Left and Middle: A monocular portrait video of an individual is used to reconstruct a 4D avatar, facilitating novel-view synthesis
and facial reenactment. Right: Our method is compared with state-of-the-art approaches in terms of visual quality, rendering speed and
memory usage, showcasing superior rendering quality coupled with computational efficiency and minimal memory usage.

tion strategy that dynamically allocates Gaussians to regions
with high expression variance, improving the facial detail
representation. Experimental results on three datasets show
that our method outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods in rendering quality and speed while reducing memory
usage in training and rendering.

Abstract
Existing radiance field-based head avatar methods have
mostly relied on pre-computed explicit priors (e.g., mesh,
point) or neural implicit representations, making it challenging to achieve high fidelity with both computational efficiency
and low memory consumption. To overcome this, we present
GPAvatar, a novel and efficient Gaussian splatting-based
method for reconstructing high-fidelity dynamic 3D head
avatars from monocular videos. We extend Gaussians in 3D
space to a high-dimensional embedding space encompassing
Gaussian’s spatial position and avatar expression, enabling
the representation of the head avatar with arbitrary pose and
expression. To enable splatting-based rasterization, a linear
transformation is learned to project each high-dimensional
Gaussian back to the 3D space, which is sufficient to capture expression variations instead of using complex neural
networks. Furthermore, we propose an adaptive densifica-

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of virtual reality and augmented
reality technologies, digital human technology demonstrates
substantial real-world relevance, while placing higher demands on rendering quality, generation efficiency, and resource consumption. Especially in film production, game
development, and social media, high-fidelity digital human
technology can deliver a deeply immersive experience to
users. We propose an avatar capable of rendering digital humans with high quality while ensuring rendering efficiency
and reduced resource consumption.
Given the complexity of human head shape, appearance,
and movement, the precise reconstruction of head avatar

† Equal Contribution. Work done while interning at Kuaishou Technology.
* Corresponding author.

250

