This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Modeling Multiple Normal Action Representations for Error Detection in
Procedural Tasks
Wei-Jin Huang1,∗

Yuan-Ming Li1,∗ Zhi-Wei Xia1 Yu-Ming Tang1 Kun-Yu Lin1
Jian-Fang Hu1 Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3,4,†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China;
4
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
{huangwj235, liym266}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
……

Error detection in procedural activities is essential for consistent and correct outcomes in AR-assisted and robotic systems. Existing methods often focus on temporal ordering
errors or rely on static prototypes to represent normal actions. However, these approaches typically overlook the
common scenario where multiple, distinct actions are valid
following a given sequence of executed actions. This leads
to two issues: (1) the model cannot effectively detect errors using static prototypes when the inference environment
or action execution distribution differs from training; and
(2) the model may also use the wrong prototypes to detect errors if the ongoing action label is not the same as
the predicted one. To address this problem, we propose
an Adaptive Multiple Normal Action Representation (AMNAR) framework. AMNAR predicts all valid next actions
and reconstructs their corresponding normal action representations, which are compared against the ongoing action
to detect errors. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
AMNAR achieves state-of-the-art performance, highlighting the effectiveness of AMNAR and the importance of modeling multiple valid next actions in error detection. The
code is available at https://github.com/iSEELaboratory/AMNAR.

Select

Compare

Prepare filter
Valid Action n

Boil water
Valid Action 1

Prepare filter
(Normal)

Potential Valid Actions
at time t

Top Matching
Action

Predict

Threshold
Check

…
√
1

t-2

Time:
Executed Actions
up to t-1

t-1

Prepare filter
(with error)

Normal
Action

/ ×
Error
Action

Ongoing Action
at time t

Figure 1. Illustration of error detection using multiple valid
next actions at time  t . After “Grinding Coffee Bean” at time  t-1 ,
valid next actions include “Boil Water” and “Prepare Filter.” The
best matching action is selected and compared with the ongoing
action. If their distance exceeds the threshold, the action is marked
as an error; otherwise, it is marked as normal.

1. Introduction

tasks (e.g., cooking, assembling toys, using tools, etc.).
Since procedural tasks require consistent outcomes without errors, being able to detect natural mistakes is a crucial
ability for next-generation AR assisted and robotic systems
[5, 11, 36, 38, 47, 48].
Achieving reliable error detection requires a foundational understanding of what a normal action should be, allowing comparison to the ongoing action. So, for error detection using AI, a key challenge is constructing a “normal
action representation” of the current action. Approximating a “normal action representation,” some current methods
[4, 7, 33] model transition relationships from correctly executed action sequences, thereby predicting the correct current action label based on prior actions. However, while
these approaches can detect label-level errors by comparing
predicted and actual action labels, they often fail to capture
the full representation of a normal action, leading them to

Understanding procedural activities is an important field in
video action understanding [19–23, 49, 50], as it reflects
how an AI model recognizes actions [1, 37, 39, 41, 44, 45],
separates steps [2, 6, 15, 17, 29, 43, 46], and plans movements [10, 12, 26, 35], similar to how humans conduct daily
*: Equal contributions. †: Corresponding author.

27794

