This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PartGen: Part-level 3D Generation and Reconstruction
with Multi-View Diffusion Models
Minghao Chen1,2 Roman Shapovalov2 Iro Laina1 Tom Monnier2
Jianyuan Wang1,2 David Novotny2 Andrea Vedaldi1,2
1
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford 2 Meta AI
silent-chen.github.io/PartGen
Part-Aware Text-to-3D

Part-Aware Image-to-3D

Selected Parts

Selected Parts

Input Image

Text prompt

> A beagle in
a detective’s
outfit

3D Decomposition

Selected Parts

3D Part Editing

Unstructured 3D

Original

“Magician hat”

“Brown hat with
police badge"

“Red hat with
blue texture”

Figure 1. We introduce PartGen, a pipeline that generates compositional 3D objects similar to a human artist. It can start from text,
an image, or an existing, unstructured 3D object. It consists of a multi-view diffusion model that identifies plausible parts automatically
and another that completes and reconstructs them in 3D, accounting for their context, i.e., the other parts, to ensure that they fit together
correctly. Additionally, PartGen enables 3D part editing based on text instructions, enhancing flexibility and control in 3D object creation.

3D object, dividing it into meaningful components. A second multi-view diffusion model then processes each part individually, filling in occlusions and generating completed
views, which are subsequently passed to a 3D reconstruction network. The completion process ensures that the reconstructed parts integrate cohesively by considering the
context of the entire object, compensating for missing information caused by occlusions and, in extreme cases, hallucinating entirely invisible parts based on contextual cues.
We evaluate PartGen on both generated and real 3D assets,
demonstrating significant improvements over segmentation
and part completion baselines. We also showcase downstream applications such as text-guided 3D part editing.

Abstract
Text- or image-to-3D generators and 3D scanners can now
produce 3D assets with high-quality shapes and textures,
but as single, fused entities lacking meaningful structure.
In contrast, most applications and creative workflows require 3D assets to be composed of distinct, meaningful
parts that can be independently manipulated. To bridge
this gap, we introduce PartGen, a novel approach for generating, from text, images, or unstructured 3D objects, 3D
objects composed of meaningful parts. Our method leverages a multi-view diffusion model to extract plausible and
view-consistent part segmentations from multiple views of a
Work completed during Minghao Chen’s internship at Meta.

5881

