This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Schedule On the Fly: Diffusion Time Prediction for
Faster and Better Image Generation
Zilyu Ye1,2,†

Zhiyang Chen1,4,∗

Tiancheng Li1,2 Zemin Huang1 Weijian Luo1,3 Guo-Jun Qi1,4,∗
MAPLE Lab, Westlake University
2
South China University of Technology, 3 Peking University
4
Institute of Advanced Technology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study
1

zilyuye@foxmail.com, {chenzhiyang, litiancheng, huangzemin}@westlake.edu.cn
deke1@xiaohongshu.com, guojunq@gmail.com

https://github.com/maple-research-lab/TPDM

formance across a variety of tasks, including image synthesis [15, 16, 38, 39, 42], video generation [4, 11, 59], and
others [18, 32, 35, 44]. As a multi-step denoising framework, diffusion models progressively refine random noise
into coherent data through iterative sampling, which underlies their impressive capabilities in generating high-quality,
diverse outputs.

Abstract
Diffusion and flow matching models have achieved remarkable success in text-to-image generation. However, these
models typically rely on the predetermined denoising schedules for all prompts. The multi-step reverse diffusion process can be regarded as a kind of chain-of-thought for generating high-quality images step by step. Therefore, diffusion models should reason for each instance to determine
the optimal noise schedule adaptively, achieving high generation quality with sampling efficiency. In this paper, we
introduce the Time Prediction Diffusion Model (TPDM) for
this. TPDM employs a plug-and-play Time Prediction Module (TPM) that predicts the next noise level based on current latent features at each denoising step. We train the
TPM using reinforcement learning to maximize a reward
that encourages high final image quality while penalizing
excessive denoising steps. With such an adaptive scheduler, TPDM not only generates high-quality images that are
aligned closely with human preferences but also adjusts diffusion time and the number of denoising steps on the fly, enhancing both performance and efficiency. With Stable Diffusion 3 Medium architecture, TPDM achieves an aesthetic
score of 5.44 and a human preference score (HPS) of 29.59,
while using around 50% fewer denoising steps to achieve
better performance.

Inference with a diffusion model involves selecting a
noise scheduler, e.g. how the noise level changes step by
step when denoising from Gaussian noise. This naturally
forms a kind of chain-of-thought [54], as it determines how
the model gradually generates a real image. Many works
reveal that different noise schedules could greatly affect the
model performance [16]. The leading flow-matching models, Stable Diffusion 3 [8] and FLUX [19], provide recommended noise schedulers according to the targets’ resolution. Sabour [41] and Xia [56] explore ways to fine-tune
the schedule for a model, improving either its efficiency or
overall performance. In addition, some one-step generators
[13, 29–31] also achieve impressive performance. Despite
the excellent performance they achieve, most of these works
hold the assumption that there exists a universally applicable schedule that is optimal for all prompts and images,
which is doubtful.

1. Introduction

Let us see some examples in Fig. 4. The rightmost images contain more complex visual structures generated from
longer prompts. These examples make it necessary for the
diffusion model to engage a longer chain of sampling steps
to generate richer contents. In contrast, the images on the
left have simpler structures (e.g., a single object and uniform background) that can be generated with a shorter chain
of fewer steps. Moreover, as discussed later, the noise level
set by diffusion time t for each step matters a lot in properly
determining how a sample should be denoised at various
steps to eventually generate a high quality image. Thus, we

In recent years, deep generative models, including diffusion models [10, 45, 47] have achieved extraordinary perThe project was supported by MAPLE Lab at Westlake University.
† The work was done during an internship at MAPLE lab.
∗ Corresponding author. G.-J. Qi conceived and formulated the idea.

23412

