This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EventSplat: 3D Gaussian Splatting from Moving Event Cameras for Real-time
Rendering
Toshiya Yura1,2

Ashkan Mirzaei2

toshiya.yura@sony.com

ashkan@cs.toronto.edu

Igor Gilitschenski2
gilitschenski@cs.toronto.edu
1

Sony Semiconductor Solutions Corporation, 2 University of Toronto

Abstract
We introduce a method for using event camera data in novel
view synthesis via Gaussian Splatting. Event cameras offer
exceptional temporal resolution and a high dynamic range.
Leveraging these capabilities allows us to effectively address the novel view synthesis challenge in the presence
of fast camera motion. For initialization of the optimization process, our approach uses prior knowledge encoded
in an event-to-video model. We also use spline interpolation for obtaining high quality poses along the event camera trajectory. This enhances the reconstruction quality
from fast-moving cameras while overcoming the computational limitations traditionally associated with event-based
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) methods. Our experimental evaluation demonstrates that our results achieve higher
visual fidelity and better performance than existing eventbased NeRF approaches while being an order of magnitude
faster to render.

1. Introduction
Event cameras are a vision modality that draws strong inspiration from biological vision and neuromorphic design. In
these sensors, each pixel operates independently by triggering events upon a log-intensity change above a pre-defined
threshold [16, 37]. This results in an asynchronous data
stream as opposed to capturing absolute intensity values at
fixed intervals in traditional cameras. Event cameras offer low latency, high temporal resolution, and a high dynamic range while also ensuring minimal energy consumption [8, 38]. Consequently, they are particularly suitable for
dynamic and challenging lighting conditions, as well as environments with rapid camera motions where classical cameras may exhibit strong motion blur [38, 63, 64, 78]. These
advantages have motivated the adoption of event cameras in

26876

a wide range of applications covering most of the traditional
computer vision tasks [13, 15, 27, 50, 51].
Recently, novel view synthesis has seen significant advances. This progress has been particularly driven by the
emergence and development of Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [1–3, 33, 46, 74]. Recent works have led to NeRF
improvements in terms of rendering speed, and adoption of
NeRFs in 3D editing and other downstream applications [9,
43, 47–49, 84]. 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [26, 69]
achieves real-time rendering by replacing the underlying
representation with 3D Gaussians and using fast differentiable rasterization. The substantial speed improvement of
3DGS is achieved without compromising the visual quality.
The success of NeRFs in view-synthesis has led to their
adoption in applications with event-based cameras [25, 31,
42, 59]. Conventional NeRF approaches struggle with challenges, such as 3D reconstruction in environments with
rapidly changing lighting conditions or high-speed objects
due to RGB camera limitations. The integration of NeRFs
with event-based cameras leverages their unique advantages
and incorporates them into the NeRF framework to address
the challenges that conventional NeRF approaches face.
However, one crucial area of research focuses on expediting the rendering processes to fully unlock the potential
of event-based NeRFs. Leveraging the advantages of 3D
Gaussian Splatting with events requires adapting the rasterization process to allow supervision with events or accumulated events rather than RGB images.
In summary, this paper contributes a method for 3D
Gaussian Splatting from event data by leveraging the following technical ideas:
1) An integration of event accumulation with the optimization process of 3DGS.
2) An event-to-video guided Structure from Motion (SfM)
approach for initializing the 3DGS optimization process.
3) Use of cubic spline trajectory interpolation to assign
camera poses to events at high rates.

