This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Florence-VL: Enhancing Vision-Language Models with Generative Vision
Encoder and Depth-Breadth Fusion
Jiuhai Chen1 *, Jianwei Yang2 , Haiping Wu2 , Dianqi Li, Jianfeng Gao2 , Tianyi Zhou1 , Bin Xiao2
1 University of Maryland
2 Microsoft Research

Abstract
We present Florence-VL, a new family of multimodal
large language models (MLLMs) with enriched visual representations produced by Florence-2 [45], a generative vision foundation model. Unlike the widely used CLIP-style
vision transformer [35] trained by contrastive learning,
Florence-2 can capture different levels and aspects of visual features, which are more versatile to be adapted to
diverse downstream tasks. We propose a novel featurefusion architecture and an innovative training recipe that
effectively integrates Florence-2’s visual features into pretrained LLMs, such as Phi 3.5 and LLama 3. In particular, we propose “depth-breath fusion (DBFusion)” to fuse
the visual features extracted from different depths and under multiple prompts. Our model training is composed
of end-to-end pretraining of the whole model followed
by finetuning of the projection layer and the LLM, on a
carefully designed recipe of diverse open-source datasets
that include high-quality image captions and instructiontuning pairs. Our quantitative analysis and visualization
of Florence-VL’s visual features show its advantages over
popular vision encoders on vision-language alignment,
where the enriched depth and breath play important roles.
Florence-VL achieves significant improvements over existing state-of-the-art MLLMs across various multi-modal and
vision-centric benchmarks covering general VQA, perception, hallucination, OCR, Chart, knowledge-intensive understanding, etc. To facilitate future research, our models and the complete training recipe are open-sourced.
https://github.com/JiuhaiChen/Florence-VL

1. Introduction
Recent progress in multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) are largely driven by progress in large language
* The work is done during Jiuhai Chen’s internship at Microsoft Research.

Feature Extraction in LLaVA

Feature Extraction in Florence-VL
Florence-2
Encoder

…

CLIP
Encoder
Generative Pre-training

Contrastive Pre-training

Yellow cat …

Decoder

Happy birthday !
The image describes…

…

Multimodality
Encoder

Text
Encoder

Two Cute
Cats Stand …

Image
Encoder

Image
Encoder

Text
Tokenizer

Locate the objects …
Provide the text …
Describe what is shown …

…

Figure 1. Comparison of LLaVA-style MLLMs with our FlorenceVL. LLaVA-style models use CLIP, pretrained with contrastive
learning, to generate a single high-level image feature. In contrast, Florence-VL leverages Florence-2, pretrained with generative modeling across various vision tasks such as image captioning, OCR, and grounding. This enables Florence-VL to flexibly
extract multiple task-specific image features using Florence-2 as
the image encoder.

models [26, 49]. However, when it comes to visual
encoders, transformer-based models like CLIP or SigLIP
remain the most commonly used choices. Despite CLIP
and SigLIP’s effectiveness, they come with limitations; for
instance, their last-layer features usually provide an imagelevel semantic representation that captures the overall
scene and context, but often overlook pixel or region-level
details and low-level features that are critical to various
downstream tasks. There is a much broader range of visual
representation, such as the self-supervised DINOv2 model
[34], diffusion model [37] and segmentation [20], [41]
shows these different visual encoders can benefit well in
some specific tasks.
In order to leverage distinctive representations of multiple vision encoders, some recent works such as [38, 41]

24928

