This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ResCLIP: Residual Attention for Training-free Dense Vision-language Inference
Yuhang Yang∗ Jinhong Deng∗ Wen Li† Lixin Duan
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{yvhyang, jhdengvision, liwenbnu, lxduan}@gmail.com

Abstract

Image

While vision-language models like CLIP have shown remarkable success in open-vocabulary tasks, their application is currently confined to image-level tasks, and they
still struggle with dense predictions. Recent works often
attribute such deficiency in dense predictions to the selfattention layers in the final block, and have achieved commendable results by modifying the original query-key attention to self-correlation attention, (e.g., query-query and keykey attention). However, these methods overlook the crosscorrelation attention (query-key) properties, which capture
the rich spatial correspondence. In this paper, we reveal
that the cross-correlation of self-attention in non-final layers of CLIP also exhibits localization properties. Therefore,
we propose the Residual Cross-correlation Self-attention
(RCS) module, which leverages the cross-correlation selfattention from intermediate layers to remold the attention
in the final block. The RCS module effectively reorganizes spatial information, unleashing the localization potential within CLIP for dense vision-language inference.
Furthermore, to enhance the focus on regions of the same
categories and local consistency, we propose the Semantic Feedback Refinement (SFR) module, which utilizes semantic segmentation maps to further adjust the attention
scores. By integrating these two strategies, our method,
termed ResCLIP, can be easily incorporated into existing approaches as a plug-and-play module, significantly
boosting their performance in dense vision-language inference. Extensive experiments across multiple standard
benchmarks demonstrate that our method surpasses stateof-the-art training-free methods, validating the effectiveness of the proposed approach. Code is available at
https://github.com/yvhangyang/ResCLIP.

1. Introduction
Recently, we have witnessed the unprecedented breakthrough of vision-language models (VLMs) [8, 13, 25, 36,
∗ Yuhang Yang and Jinhong Deng contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

Layer 3

Layer 5

Layer 11

Last Layer

Figure 1. The attention visualization from different layers of
CLIP [37] model. The images are sampled from PASCAL
VOC [16] dataset.

37], which are de facto foundation models across various
downstream tasks such as zero-shot classification [20, 37],
natural language processing [6, 14, 38] and visual question answering [2, 23, 55]. Especially, VLMs exhibit surprising open-vocabulary recognition capabilities because
they are trained on large-scale image-text pairs with contrastive learning. Despite impressive performance achieved
in image-level open-vocabulary tasks, they struggle with
dense prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation due
to the well-known limitation in localization ability [39, 45].
To this end, some previous works [9, 33, 40, 47, 49,
50, 57] make great efforts to address these limitations
by fine-tuning CLIP with pixel-level annotations. These
methods [33, 51, 61] not only consume expensive annotation costs but also are easily biased toward the training
data, eliminating the generalization ability within CLIP.
This has motivated a growing interest in training-free methods [18, 27, 28, 41, 45, 59] that aim to adapt pre-trained
representations of CLIP for semantic segmentation without
additional training and maximumly maintain the generalization ability of CLIP simultaneously. These approaches
typically attribute the inferior results of CLIP on dense prediction to the self-attention layer in the last block of CLIP
(last col. in Fig. 1), which presents spatial-invariant attention. For example, SCLIP proposes to replace orig-

29968

