This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Time of the Flight of the Gaussians:
Optimizing Depth Indirectly in Dynamic Radiance Fields
Runfeng Li Mikhail Okunev Zixuan Guo Anh Ha Duong
Christian Richardt∞ Matthew O’Toole* James Tompkin
Brown University

∞

Meta Reality Labs

*

Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
We present a method to reconstruct dynamic scenes from
monocular continuous-wave time-of-flight (C-ToF) cameras
using raw sensor samples that achieves similar or better accuracy than neural volumetric approaches and is 100× faster.
Quickly achieving high-fidelity dynamic 3D reconstruction
from a single viewpoint is a significant challenge in computer
vision. In C-ToF radiance field reconstruction, the property
of interest—depth—is not directly measured, causing an additional challenge. This problem has a large and underappreciated impact upon the optimization when using a fast
primitive-based scene representation like 3D Gaussian splatting, which is commonly used with multi-view data to produce
satisfactory results and is brittle in its optimization otherwise.
We incorporate two heuristics into the optimization to improve
the accuracy of scene geometry represented by Gaussians. Experimental results show that our approach produces accurate
reconstructions under constrained C-ToF sensing conditions,
including for fast motions like swinging baseball bats.
https://visual.cs.brown.edu/gftorf

1. Introduction
Active illumination sensing, like continuous-wave time-offlight (C-ToF), can help reconstruct dynamic scenes with a single camera thanks to their depth estimates. C-ToF cameras derive depth with simple reconstruction models that assume that
all surfaces are opaque and Lambertian, which is fast but can
lead to depth errors. Recent optimization-based approaches
[1, 26] attempt to resolve the scene with more sophisticated
physics that model the emitted light and its reflection from an
underlying transmissive 4D volume. While too slow to optimize for practical use, so-called neural ToF radiance fields [1]
are still promising because, in principle, they are better at modeling superposition effects from multi-path light transport.
Our work considers two inter-related problems in this setting: how to make these methods faster, and how to make their
optimizations more stable once we use faster—and brittler
[20]—reconstruction methods. By the end of this paper, we
will have accuracy comparable to or better than existing methods while increasing speed by 100×, so making single-camera
4D dynamic scene reconstruction more practical (Fig. 1).
First, we explain why such an optimization might be unstable. For a single camera, even with active illumination, the
All experiments were performed by university authors.

(a) C-ToF depth

(b) Our depth

(c) 3D Motion trajectories
Figure 1. Measuring the depth of a fast-moving object is challenging
for C-ToF cameras. By modeling raw C-ToF frames, our method
can reconstruct the geometry and motion of a fast swinging baseball
bat. It is 100× faster to optimize and render and achieves similar
or better accuracy than prior neural volumetric approaches.

accurate reconstruction of depth is not sufficiently constrained
by C-ToF sensor measurements under the transmissive image
formation model. As depth is only ever indirectly optimized,
the scene can have highly inaccurate depth but still produce
high-quality reconstructions of sensor measurements (Fig. 2).
Thus, as the problem is under-constrained, its optimization
is sensitive to its initialization and hyperparameters. Past
works have avoided this pernicious problem: TöRF [1] uses
additional constraints to localize the depth by both moving
the camera and by integrating RGB images. This reduces the
problem, but is not suitable for static cameras. F-TöRF [26]
provides a more challenging dataset with a static camera and
fast-moving objects. But, without the additional constraints,
its depth estimates can be worse than the simple C-ToF
derived depth even for opaque surfaces. Some works add
priors on depth, e.g., using learned single-image depth
[17, 38] or priors over scenes [3, 35]. While pragmatic, these
approaches are tangential to our goal of attempting to use
what sensing we have to accurately measure a scene.
Second, we explain how to speed up the optimization. One
way to speed up NeRFs is to use a fast Gaussian splatting (GS)
based approach [13, 21, 36]. When there are sufficient cameras to constrain the optimization, GS methods can generally
act as drop-in replacements for NeRFs. But, in our setting,
we have only a single camera with a dynamic scene, and our
desired property of depth is only indirectly optimized by the

21021

