This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SLVR: Super-Light Visual Reconstruction via Blueprint Controllable
Convolutions and Exploring Feature Diversity Representation
Ning Ni
Libao Zhang*
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China
ningni@mail.bnu.edu.cn

libaozhang@bnu.edu.cn

28.9

Abstract

SLVR* (Ours)
28.85

PSNR (dB) / Set14 x4

Recently, improving the residual structure and designing efficient convolutions have become important branches
of lightweight visual reconstruction model design. We have
observed that the feature addition mode (FAM) in existing
residual structure tends to lead to slow feature learning or
stagnation in feature evolution, a phenomenon we define as
network inertia. In addition, although blueprint separable
convolutions (BSConv) have proved the dominance of intrakernel correlation, BSConv forces the blueprint to perform
scale transformation on all channels, which may lead to
incorrect intra-kernel correlation and introduce useless or
disruptive features on some channels and hinder the effective propagation of features. Therefore, in this paper, we
rethink the FAM and BSConv for super-light visual reconstruction framework design. First, we design a novel linking
mode, called feature diversity evolution link (FDEL), which
aims to alleviate the phenomenon of network inertia by reducing the retention of previous low-level features, thereby
promoting the evolution of feature diversity. Second, we
propose blueprint controllable convolutions (B2Conv). The
B2Conv can adaptively pick accurate intra-kernel correlation in the depth-axis, effectively preventing the introduction of useless or disruptive features. Based on FDEL
and B2Conv, we develop a super-light super-resolution (SR)
framework SLVR for visual reconstruction. Both FDEL and
B2Conv can serve as efficient plugins. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
B2Conv, FDEL, and SLVR. Our code will be available at
https://github.com/chongningni/SLVR.

Mult-Adds
10G

SLVR-M* (Ours)

28.8

20G 40G

OSFFNet* (AAAI24)
BSRN* (CVPRW22)

28.75

28.6

100G

NGswin (CVPR23)

FMEN* (CVPRW22)

28.7
28.65

70G

SLVR (Ours)

HPUN-M (AAAI23)

SLVR-S* (Ours)

LAPAR-A* (NeurIPS20)

LatticeNet (ECCV20)
IMDN (ACMMM19)

28.55

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

Number of Parameters (K)

900

1000

1100

1200

Figure 1. Performance and model complexity comparison on
Set14 dataset for upscaling factor ×4. * denotes the model trained
on DF2K dataset and others trained on DIV2K.

a core task in visual reconstruction, which aims to reconstruct high-resolution details from a low-resolution image.
SR is an ill-posed problem because a low-resolution (LR)
image can be mapped to multiple high-resolution (HR)
spaces, which makes it challenging. Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) based on residual learning
[1, 9, 21, 22, 30, 56] have dominated the SR field because
they can constrain mapping space and reduce the difficulty
of SR learning, which creates conditions for lightweight SR
design. Furthermore, lightweight convolution has become
an important research branch of lightweight model design.
In this paper, we aim to rethink the residual structure and
blueprint separable convolutions (BSConv) to build a superlight SR reconstruction framework. The issues we discovered are as follows:
1) Existing feature addition mode easily causes network inertia: SR tasks require recovering detailed textures,
which require rich high-level features as support. The existing residual structure uses the feature addition mode (FAM)
of input and output (x + F(x)), retaining many previous
low-level features (x), which is not conducive to the diver-

1. Introduction
As an important direction in the field of computer vision,
visual reconstruction focuses on improving the visual quality of images or videos. Image super-resolution (SR) is
* Corresponding Author. This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62271060 and 61571050.

400

