This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReSpec: Relevance and Specificity Grounded Online Filtering for
Learning on Video-Text Data Streams
Chris Dongjoo Kim1,2 *, Jihwan Moon1 *, Sangwoo Moon1 , Heeseung Yun1 , Sihaeng Lee2 ,
Aniruddha Kembhavi3 , Soonyoung Lee2 , Gunhee Kim1 , Sangho Lee3†, Christopher Clark3†
1
Seoul National University, 2 LG AI Research, 3 Allen Institute for AI
{cdjkim, jihwan.moon, sangwoo.moon, heeseung.yun}@vision.snu.ac.kr
{soonyoung.lee, sihaeng.lee}@lgresearch.ai

{chrisc, sanghol, anik}@allenai.org

49.5

The rapid growth of video-text data presents challenges
in storage and computation during training. Online learning, which processes streaming data in real-time, offers a
promising solution to these issues while also allowing swift
adaptations in scenarios demanding real-time responsiveness. One strategy to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of learning involves identifying and prioritizing data
that enhances performance on target downstream tasks. We
propose Relevance and Specificity-based online filtering
framework (ReSpec) that selects data based on four criteria: (i) modality alignment for clean data, (ii) task relevance for target focused data, (iii) specificity for informative and detailed data, and (iv) efficiency for low-latency
processing. Relevance is determined by the probabilistic
alignment of incoming data with downstream tasks, while
specificity employs the distance to a root embedding representing the least specific data as an efficient proxy for informativeness. By establishing reference points from target
task data, ReSpec filters incoming data in real-time, eliminating the need for extensive storage and compute. Evaluating on large-scale datasets WebVid2M and VideoCC3M,
ReSpec attains state-of-the-art performance on five zeroshot video retrieval tasks, using as little as 5% of the data
while incurring minimal compute. The source code is available at https://github.com/cdjkim/ReSpec.

Avg. Performance (Recall)

Abstract

gunhee@snu.ac.kr

Ours

49.0

CiT [41]
CoLoR-Filter [7]
LB Threshold [46]
CLIP Threshold [13, 26]
Full

48.5
48.0
47.5
47.0
0.0M

0.5M

1.0M

1.5M

2.0M

Cumulative Number of Data Used to Train

2.5M

Figure 1. Online training with online filtering. Comparison
of average performance across various methods for online filtering, shown as a function of the cumulative data samples used for
training. Our proposed method consistently outperforms baseline approaches at any number of training iterations on WebVid2M [4], achieving the highest performance with minimal data
requirements.

1. Introduction

nature and high volume. This complexity necessitates an
online framework capable of learning and processing data
on-the-fly, without extensive storage requirements.
In this work, we argue that for a learning agent to perform effectively in an online environment, it must filter and
prioritize data that enhances its downstream task objectives.
Efficient data selection is crucial to streamline the online
learning process, improve model accuracy, and reduce unnecessary computational loads.
An effective online filtering method should consider
four essential criteria. (i) Modality-Aligned Data Selection (Noise Filtering): It must ensure that selected data is
correctly aligned across modalities (i.e., video paired accurately with text). (ii) Task-Relevant Data Prioritization: The

The world generates an immense volume of multimodal
data, with video-text data in particular presenting unique
challenges for the storage and training of machine learning agents. Video data requires substantial computational
resources for both storage and training, due to its dynamic
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Equal corresponding authors.

29040

