This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

POT: Prototypical Optimal Transport for Weakly Supervised Semantic
Segmentation
Jian Wang1,2
1

Tianhong Dai3

XJTLU

2

Bingfeng Zhang4

University of Liverpool

3

Siyue Yu1

Kashmir Intelligence

Abstract

Eng Gee Lim1,†
4

Jimin Xiao1,†

China University of Petroleum

Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) leverages Class Activation Maps (CAMs) to extract spatial information from image-level labels. However, CAMs primarily
highlight the most discriminative foreground regions, leading to incomplete results. Prototype-based methods attempt
to address this limitation by employing prototype CAMs instead of classifier CAMs. Nevertheless, existing prototypebased methods typically use a single prototype for each
class, which is insufficient to capture all attributes of the
foreground features due to the significant intra-class variations across different images. Consequently, these methods still struggle with incomplete CAM predictions. In
this paper, we propose a novel framework called Prototypical Optimal Transport (POT) for WSSS. POT enhances
CAM predictions by dividing features into multiple clusters and activating each cluster using its prototype. In
this process, a similarity-aware optimal transport is employed to assign features to the most probable clusters.
This similarity-aware strategy ensures the prioritization of
significant cluster prototypes, thereby improving the accuracy of feature assignment. Additionally, we introduce an
adaptive OT-based consistency loss to refine feature representations. This framework effectively overcomes the limitations of single-prototype methods, providing more complete and accurate CAM predictions. Extensive experimental results on standard WSSS benchmarks (PASCAL
VOC and MS COCO) demonstrate that our method significantly improves the quality of CAMs and achieves stateof-the-art performances. The source code will be released
https://github.com/jianwang91/POT.

localize objects and employed to generate pseudo-labels,
which are further utilized to train a segmentation model [8].
However, CAMs primarily highlight the most distinctive
foreground regions [36, 53], providing insufficient supervision for training the segmentation model [8].
To mitigate this limitation, prototype-based methods [9,
57, 58] are introduced. These methods first generate binary
masks for each class, either by feature similarity [9, 57] or
a pretrained segmentation model [58]. These binary masks
are then used to perform mask average pooling on the corresponding features to construct a prototype for each class
within an image. The resulting prototypes capture the essential characteristics of foreground classes and are leveraged to activate features using cosine similarity. Compared
to classifier CAMs, these prototype CAMs are more complete, thereby enhancing the overall performance.
However, prototype CAMs still fail to cover complete
regions of foreground objects in certain images. Feature
distribution of such images reveals that the foreground object features are often sparse and dispersed (see Fig. 1 (a)).
This issue is primarily attributed to the significant intraclass variations [37] in the dataset, which limits the ability of a single prototype to activate all relevant features.
Specifically, the classifier aims to capture global discriminative intra-class characteristics to accurately classify an
image. Features that encapsulate such characteristics (e.g.,
faces within the person class) can be effectively recognized
and grouped to form a compact primary cluster. Nevertheless, regions belonging to the same class may exhibit highly
diverse appearances, even within the same image (see Fig 1
(a), areas in the red and green boxes). These image-specific
features cannot be closely clustered into the previously described primary cluster due to their lack of global intra-class
characteristics. Instead, these feature clusters often appear
separately from the primary one. When constructing prototype CAMs with a single prototype, only features in close
proximity to the prototype are fully activated (red area in
Fig. 1 (a)), while other features are only partially activated
(green area in Fig. 1 (a)). This incomplete activation fails
to provide sufficient guidance for segmentation model training, leading to unsatisfactory performance.

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) with
image-level labels reduces the labor for pixel-level annotations, thereby receiving increasing attention. In this task,
Class Activation Maps (CAMs) [59] are widely used to
†: Corresponding authors

15055

