This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cubify Anything: Scaling Indoor 3D Object Detection
Justin Lazarow

David Griffiths†

Gefen Kohavi
Apple

Francisco Crespo

Afshin Dehghan

{jlazarow, d griffiths, gkohavi, f crespo, adehghan}@apple.com

Figure 1. The Cubify Anything 1M (CA-1M) dataset re-imagines ARKitScenes [2] by annotating 3D boxes for objects in a near-exhaustive,
class-agnostic manner for over 1K of the laser-scanned scenes which have been registered to over 3000 iPad Pro RGB-D captures. We
show the richness of these annotations from the perspective of a stationary FARO laser scanner in the panorama (top). The CA-1M dataset
subsequently uses the registration to render the annotations in an pixel-accurate manner to every frame in the capture as shown in the
selected frames of the second row to produce over 15 million frames capturing over 440K objects.

Abstract
We consider indoor 3D object detection with respect to a
single RGB(-D) frame acquired from a commodity handheld device. We seek to significantly advance the status quo
with respect to both data and modeling. First, we establish
that existing datasets have significant limitations to scale,
accuracy, and diversity of objects. As a result, we introduce
the Cubify-Anything 1M (CA-1M) dataset, which exhaustively labels over 400K 3D objects on over 1K highly accurate laser-scanned scenes with near-perfect registration
to over 3.5K handheld, egocentric captures. Next, we establish Cubify Transformer (CuTR), a fully Transformer
3D object detection baseline which rather than operating

in 3D on point or voxel-based representations, predicts 3D
boxes directly from 2D features derived from RGB(-D) inputs. While this approach lacks any 3D inductive biases,
we show that paired with CA-1M, CuTR outperforms pointbased methods — accurately recalling over 62% of objects in 3D, and is significantly more capable at handling
noise and uncertainty present in commodity LiDAR-derived
depth maps while also providing promising RGB only performance without architecture changes. Furthermore, by
pre-training on CA-1M, CuTR can outperform point-based
methods on a more diverse variant of SUN RGB-D — supporting the notion that while inductive biases in 3D are useful at the smaller sizes of existing datasets, they fail to scale
to the data-rich regime of CA-1M. Overall, this dataset and
baseline model provide strong evidence that we are moving
towards models which can effectively Cubify Anything.

† Project co-lead
https://github.com/apple/ml-cubifyanything

22225

