This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Adversarial Transferability through Augmentation in Hypothesis Space
Weiquan Liu1,3 * Qingshan Xu4 Shijun Zheng1,2 Shujun Huang1,2
Yu Zang1,2 Siqi Shen1,2 Chenglu Wen1,2 Cheng Wang1,2∗
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
3
College of Computer Engineering, Jimei University, China 4 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Yu Guo1,2

Augmentation

Overfitting

Transferability

Adversarial examples can mislead deep neural networks
with subtle perturbations, causing them to make incorrect
predictions. Notably, adversarial examples crafted for one
model can also deceive other models, a phenomenon known
as the transferability of adversarial examples. To improve
transferability, existing studies have designed increasingly
complex mechanisms, but the improvements achieved remain relatively limited and are often difficult to adapt to
other modalities, further restricting the scalability of these
methods. In this work, we observe a mirroring relationship between model generalization and adversarial example transferability. Motivated by this observation, we propose an augmentation-based attack, called OPS (OperatorPerturbation-based Stochastic optimization), which constructs a stochastic optimization problem by input transformation operators and random perturbations, and solves
this problem to generate adversarial examples with better transferability. Extensive experiments on both images
and 3D point clouds demonstrate that OPS significantly
outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods in terms of
both performance and cost, showcasing the universality
and superiority of our approach. The code is available at
https://github.com/the-full/OPS.

Generalization

Abstract

S

S

Legend

S Sample Space
Training Data
Test Data

Augmented Data
Generalizable Region

ℋ

ℋ

? ℋ Hypothesis Space
Surrogate Model
Target Model

Augmented Model
Transferable Region

Figure 1. The mirrored relationship between model generalization
and adversarial example transferability. The former refers to the
model’s overfitting to training data, with the research goal of expanding the model’s generalization region, while the latter refers
to an example’s overfitting to the surrogate model, with the goal of
expanding the example’s transferability region.

1. Introduction

researchers are increasingly focusing on adversarial attack
and defense strategies [4, 7, 10, 43, 59] related to DNNs.
Based on the information available to the attacker, adversarial attacks can be divided into two categories: (1)
White-box attacks, where the parameters of the target model
are fully accessible to the attacker. (2) Black-box attacks,
where the attacker has only limited access to the target
model. Research by Goodfellow et al. [10] found that
adversarial examples crafted for a specific model can also
mislead other models, indicating the transferability of adversarial examples. This means that an attacker can create
adversarial examples in a white-box setting using a surrogate model and then leverage transferability to conduct a
black-box attack. However, the adversarial examples generated in this way often overfit to the surrogate model, resulting in good performance in white-box attacks but relatively poor transferability [17, 59]. To enhance the trans-

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been integrated into
many real-world solutions, such as facial recognition [41,
42, 45], autonomous driving [9, 18, 21]. However, the existence of adversarial examples reveals the vulnerability of
these networks. These adversarial examples, generated by
adding small perturbations to the original data, can mislead
the model into making incorrect predictions. Therefore,
to ensure the reliability of DNNs in critical applications,
* Corresponding author

19175

