This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EchoMimicV2: Towards Striking, Simplified, and Semi-Body Human Animation
Rang Meng

Xingyu Zhang

Yuming Li* Chenguang Ma*

Terminal Technology Department, Alipay, Ant Group
{mengrang.mr, xingyuan.zxy, luoque.lym, chenguang.mcg}@antgroup.com

Source Code: https://github.com/antgroup/echomimic v2

Reference Image

Driving Audio

＋

Hand Pose
Figure 1. EchoMimicV2 utilizes a reference image, an audio clip, and a sequence of hand pose to generate a high-quality animation video,
ensuring coherence between audio content and half-body movements.

Abstract

ted during inference, providing a free lunch for animation. Furthermore, we design the Phase-specific Denoising Loss to guide motion, detail, and low-level quality for
animation in specific phases, respectively. Besides, we also
present a novel benchmark for evaluating the effectiveness
of half-body human animation. Extensive experiments and
analyses demonstrate that EchoMimicV2 surpasses existing
methods in both quantitative and qualitative evaluations.

Recent work on human animation usually involves audio,
pose, or movement maps conditions, thereby achieves vivid
animation quality. However, these methods often face practical challenges due to extra control conditions, cumbersome condition injection modules, or limitation to head region driving. Hence, we ask if it is possible to achieve striking half-body human animation while simplifying unnecessary conditions. To this end, we propose a half-body human animation method, dubbed EchoMimicV2, that leverages a novel Audio-Pose Dynamic Harmonization strategy, including Pose Sampling and Audio Diffusion, to
enhance half-body details, facial and gestural expressiveness, and meanwhile reduce conditions redundancy. To
compensate for the scarcity of half-body data, we utilize
Head Partial Attention to seamlessly accommodate headshot data into our training framework, which can be omit-

1. Introduction
Diffusion-based video generation has seen significant
advancements[1, 3, 5, 8, 8, 9, 11, 14, 14, 28, 28, 41],
prompting extensive research in human animation. Human animation, as a subset of video generation domain,
aims at synthesizing natural and realistic human-centric
video sequences from a reference character images. Current research on human animation commonly employs pretrained diffusion models as backbone, and involves corresponding condition injection modules to introduce control

* Corresponding author

5489

