This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding Fine-tuning CLIP for Open-vocabulary Semantic Segmentation in
Hyperbolic Space
Zelin Peng1 , Zhengqin Xu1 , Zhilin Zeng1 , Changsong Wen1 , Yu Huang1 ,
Menglin Yang2 , Feilong Tang3,4 , and Wei Shen1(B)
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 3 MBZUAI, 4 Monash University.
https://github.com/SJTU-DeepVisionLab/HyperCLIP

Pixel-level

Abstract
CLIP, a foundational vision-language model, has emerged as
a powerful tool for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation.
While freezing the text encoder preserves its powerful embeddings, recent studies show that fine-tuning both the text and
image encoders jointly significantly enhances segmentation
performance, especially for classes from open sets. In this
work, we explain this phenomenon from the perspective of
hierarchical alignment, since during fine-tuning, the hierarchy level of image embeddings shifts from image-level to
pixel-level. We achieve this by leveraging hyperbolic space,
which naturally encoders hierarchical structures. Our key
observation is that, during fine-tuning, the hyperbolic radius of CLIP’s text embeddings decreases, facilitating better
alignment with the pixel-level hierarchical structure of visual data. Building on this insight, we propose HyperCLIP, a
novel fine-tuning strategy that adjusts the hyperbolic radius
of the text embeddings through scaling transformations. By
doing so, HyperCLIP equips CLIP with segmentation capability while introducing only a small number of learnable
parameters. Our experiments demonstrate that HyperCLIP
achieves state-of-the-art performance on open-vocabulary
semantic segmentation tasks across three benchmarks, while
fine-tuning only approximately 4% of the total parameters
of CLIP. More importantly, we observe that after adjustment,
CLIP’s text embeddings exhibit a relatively fixed hyperbolic
radius across datasets, suggesting that the granularity required for this segmentation task might be quantified using
the hyperbolic radius.

Patch-level

“Cat”
Image-level

Radius

Center

Edge

Figure 1. Visualization of hyperbolic space by a Poincaré ball
model: The height of points reflects the hierarchical level of input
data. The black segments refer to the shortest path between the
points in the Poincaré ball model. The red arrow line denotes the
hyperbolic radius of text embeddings. Embeddings closer to the
center have a smaller radius, representing low-level visual information (e.g., pixels), while points farther from the center have a larger
radius, representing high-level visual information (e.g., images).
During fine-tuning, the hyperbolic radius of text embeddings is adjusted to match the radius associated with pixels, thereby endowing
CLIP with segmentation ability (Best viewed in color).

pixel in an image with categories that extend beyond a predefined closed set, based on textual descriptions. Visionlanguage foundation models [7, 12, 13, 15, 22, 23, 26, 28, 32–
35, 39, 43, 44, 46, 51, 52, 55, 63], particularly CLIP [46],
are frequently employed to provide open-vocabulary recognition capabilities. Consequently, open-vocabulary seman-

1. Introduction
The goal of open-vocabulary semantic segmentation is to
develop a segmentation model capable of labeling each
B Corresponding Author: wei.shen@sjtu.edu.cn

4562

