This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FSFM: A Generalizable Face Security Foundation Model via Self-Supervised
Facial Representation Learning
Gaojian Wang1,2 , Feng Lin1,2 *, Tong Wu1,2 , Zhenguang Liu1,2 , Zhongjie Ba1,2 , Kui Ren1,2
1
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
2
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
{wolo, flin, cocotwu, liuzhenguang, zhongjieba, kuiren}@zju.edu.cn

Project Page: https://fsfm-3c.github.io

Abstract
This work asks: with abundant, unlabeled real faces,
how to learn a robust and transferable facial representation that boosts various face security tasks with respect to
generalization performance? We make the first attempt and
propose a self-supervised pretraining framework to learn
fundamental representations of real face images, FSFM,
that leverages the synergy between masked image modeling
(MIM) and instance discrimination (ID). We explore various facial masking strategies for MIM and present a simple
yet powerful CRFR-P masking, which explicitly forces the
model to capture meaningful intra-region Consistency and
challenging inter-region Coherency. Furthermore, we devise an ID network that naturally couples with MIM to establish underlying local-to-global Correspondence through
tailored self-distillation. These three learning objectives,
namely 3C, empower encoding both local features and
global semantics of real faces. After pretraining, a vanilla
ViT serves as a universal vision Foundation Model for
downstream Face Security tasks: cross-dataset deepfake
detection, cross-domain face anti-spoofing, and unseen
diffusion facial forgery detection. Extensive experiments
on 10 public datasets demonstrate that our model transfers better than supervised pretraining, visual and facial
self-supervised learning arts, and even outperforms taskspecialized SOTA methods.

abuse of such technology, aka deepfakes, has led to severe
trust crises. Presentation attacks utilize physical media, e.g.,
printed photos, image/video replays, or 3D masks, to spoof
face recognition systems, risking real-life applications like
face unlocking and payment. Thus, both academia and industry have been devoted to combating face forgery and presentation attacks with dedicated tasks: Deepfake Detection
(DfD), Face Anti-Spoofing (FAS), and recently raised, Diffusion Facial Forgery detection (DiFF).

1. Introduction

Current DfD and FAS methods aim to improve generalization to unseen datasets within their respective tasks.
DfD methods mainly focus on digital forgery patterns, such
as spatiotemporal inconsistency [3, 20, 89], region artifacts [43, 64, 94], and forgery augmentations [3, 64, 74, 94].
FAS methods [44, 54, 76, 112, 113] incorporate domain
generalization techniques to discern physical spoof cues,
e.g., paper textures and screen moiré patterns. Given these
incompatible digital and physical features, most studies
treat DfD and FAS as separate face security tasks, i.e., taskspecific and hard-to-transfer. Besides, until now, most
DfD and FAS methods still follow fully supervised learning with diverse backbones [21, 26, 38, 78] that are initialized from scratch or supervised ImageNet (natural images) [23] pretraining. However, full supervision requires
large-scale annotations or generative augmentations, which
incur expensive costs and limit scalability. Moreover, initial weights that lack facial representations may impede capability and generality for face-related tasks [7, 109].

The human face plays a crucial role in daily life and computer vision. In parallel, the facial security landscape suffers from diverse digital and physical manipulations, notably face forgery and presentation attacks. Face forgery edits digital pixels while keeping realistic visual quality. With
significant advances in generative models [31, 42, 52], the

In contrast to supervised learning, self-supervised learning (SSL) takes pretext tasks for pretraining on unlabeled
data, where masked image modeling (MIM) [5, 40, 95] and
instance discrimination (ID, including contrastive learning [14, 16, 39] and distillation-based [11, 15, 32]) have
proven superior performance in various vision tasks. As
recent studies [67, 68, 114] suggest that MIM and ID are
complementary, SOTA SSL methods [2, 17, 41, 48, 79, 107]
combine them to enhance visual representations for natural

* Corresponding author

24364

