This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UIBDiffusion: Universal Imperceptible Backdoor Attack for Diffusion Models
Yuning Han1, * Bingyin Zhao2, * Rui Chu3 Feng Luo4
1

Columbia University

2

National University of Singapore

Abstract

3

Biplab Sikdar2
Tufts University

Yingjie Lao3,†
4

Clemson University

Recent studies show that diffusion models (DMs) are vulnerable to backdoor attacks. Existing backdoor attacks impose unconcealed triggers (e.g., a gray box and eyeglasses)
that contain evident patterns, rendering remarkable attack
effects yet easy detection upon human inspection and defensive algorithms. While it is possible to improve stealthiness by reducing the strength of the backdoor, doing so
can significantly compromise its generality and effectiveness. In this paper, we propose UIBDiffusion, the universal
imperceptible backdoor attack for diffusion models, which
allows us to achieve superior attack and generation performance while evading state-of-the-art defenses. We propose
a novel trigger generation approach based on universal adversarial perturbations (UAPs) and reveal that such perturbations, which are initially devised for fooling pre-trained
discriminative models, can be adapted as potent imperceptible backdoor triggers for DMs. We evaluate UIBDiffusion
on multiple types of DMs with different kinds of samplers
across various datasets and targets. Experimental results
demonstrate that UIBDiffusion brings three advantages: 1)
Universality, the imperceptible trigger is universal (i.e., image and model agnostic) where a single trigger is effective
to any images and all diffusion models with different samplers; 2) Utility, it achieves comparable generation quality
(e.g., FID) and even better attack success rate (i.e., ASR) at
low poison rates compared to the prior works; and 3) Undetectability, UIBDiffusion is plausible to human perception and can bypass Elijah and TERD, the SOTA defenses
against backdoors for DMs. Code is available at https:
//github.com/TheLaoLab/UIBDiffusion.

attributed to training the foundation model on large-scale
datasets [5]. Such a practice places DMs at risk of being
compromised by data poisoning attacks [18–22], where adversaries contaminate the clean training dataset with a small
fraction of malicious samples and undermine the model performance. This imposes a critical security concern on the
practical deployment of DMs.
Backdoor attacks are emerging threats to DMs. Recent
studies [23–25] show that DMs are vulnerable to such attacks, which implant backdoor into victim models by training them on poisoned datasets and manipulate their behavior through inputs stamped with predefined triggers. Existing backdoor attacks for DMs usually employ unconcealed
triggers such as a gray box, an image of Hello Kitty, and
eyeglasses in the forward and reversed (i.e., sampling) diffusion process, as shown in Fig. 1. While such trigger designs achieve superior attack performance and preserve the
decent generation ability of victim models, they are easy to
detect via human inspection and advanced defensive algorithms as they have obvious patterns that can be precisely
remodeled via reverse engineering [26, 27]. Motivated by
this observation, we aim to design a general, powerful yet
stealthy trigger. However, even for the traditional backdoor
attacks against discriminative models (e.g., image classifiers) [28–30], it is challenging to acquire such a trigger
since it either requires complex and carefully designed generators to generate image-specific or model-specific triggers [31–38] or suffers from a relatively low attack success
rate (ASR) [39, 40], or fails to evade modern defenses [41–
46]. This raises an interesting question in backdoor attacks
against DMs: Is there a trigger simultaneously possessing
generality, effectiveness, and stealthiness for backdoor attacks against DMs?
Driving by the question, in this work, we propose UIBDiffusion, the universal imperceptible backdoor triggers for
DMs that bring the following advantages: 1) Universality:
the trigger is image-agnostic and model-agnostic so that
it can be applied to arbitrary images and DMs; 2) Utility: the trigger can achieve high ASR while maintaining
the generation capability of DMs; 3) Undetectability: the
trigger is plausible to humans and capable of circumventing

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) [1–3] have emerged as the stateof-the-art generative paradigm in recent years and achieved
unprecedented success in image [4, 5], video [6–8] text [9–
11] and audio [12–17] synthesis. The success is highly
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

19186

