This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TaoAvatar: Real-Time Lifelike Full-Body Talking Avatars for
Augmented Reality via 3D Gaussian Splatting
Jianchuan Chen*, Jingchuan Hu*, Gaige Wang*, Zhonghua Jiang
Tiansong Zhou, Zhiwen Chen‡ , Chengfei Lv†
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
VisionPro App
Stereo, 2000x1800@90FPS, 0.18MB/frame

Training

Deploy

MacBook App
3024x1964@90FPS

Mesh

(a) Input: Multi-view Sequences

Gaussians

Normal

(b) Output: Drivable Full-Body Talking Avatar

Android App
1080x2400@60FPS

(c) Runnable on AR Devices

Figure 1. TaoAvatar generates photorealistic, topology-consistent 3D full-body avatars from multi-view sequences. It provides high-quality,
real-time rendering with low storage requirements, compatible across various mobile and AR devices like the Apple Vision Pro.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Creating lifelike 3D human avatars is a dynamic and rapidly
advancing research area in computer vision and graphics, essential for applications in AR/VR, 3D entertainment,
and virtual communication. Despite decades of research,
achieving realistic and immersive avatars on mobile devices—particularly AR—remains challenging due to computational limitations. Current industry solutions, such as
MetaHuman, often rely on high-precision scans and extensive manual effort by artists for 3D modeling, rigging, and
motion capture.
In recent years, academic researchers have adopted parametric models [37, 43] for human representation, which
are constructed from massive body scans and can capture a performer’s shape, expression, and pose from images or videos. These methods [4–6, 27] extend the naked
model [37, 43] by adding offsets to represent tailored clothing, but are still struggling with complex geometries and
high-frequency details, such as loose skirts and fine hair,
due to limitations of topology and texture resolution. With
the rise of neural radiance fields (NeRF) [40], many researchers tend to define implicit neural human representations in canonical space, animated by backward linear
blend skinning [44, 65] of these parametric models [37, 43].
While these methods can handle arbitrary topology and
deliver higher rendering quality, they are highly timeconsuming due to the large amount of sampling required

Realistic 3D full-body talking avatars hold great potential in AR, with applications ranging from e-commerce
live streaming to holographic communication. Despite advances in 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) for lifelike avatar
creation, existing methods struggle with fine-grained control of facial expressions and body movements in full-body
talking tasks. Additionally, they often lack sufficient details and cannot run in real-time on mobile devices. We
present TaoAvatar, a high-fidelity, lightweight, 3DGS-based
full-body talking avatar driven by various signals. Our
approach starts by creating a personalized clothed human
parametric template that binds Gaussians to represent appearances. We then pre-train a StyleUnet-based network
to handle complex pose-dependent non-rigid deformation,
which can capture high-frequency appearance details but is
too resource-intensive for mobile devices. To overcome this,
we ”bake” the non-rigid deformations into a lightweight
MLP-based network using a distillation technique and develop blend shapes to compensate for details. Extensive
experiments show that TaoAvatar achieves state-of-the-art
rendering quality while running in real-time across various
devices, maintaining 90 FPS on high-definition stereo devices such as the Apple Vision Pro.
* Equal contribution. ‡ Project Leader and † Corresponding author.
Project: https://PixelAI-Team.github.io/TaoAvatar

10723

