This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HomoGen: Enhanced Video Inpainting via Homography
Propagation and Diffusion
Ding Ding1 * Yueming Pan2 Ruoyu Feng3 Qi Dai4 Kai Qiu4 Jianmin Bao4
Chong Luo4† Zhenzhong Chen1
1
Wuhan University 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University 3 University of Science and Technology of China
4
Microsoft Research Asia
Stage 1: Pixel Propagation

Stage 2: Content Generation

The state-of-the-art method

Flow-based Warping

HomoGen

Flow Consistency Check

Pasting

Content Generation in VT

without consistency check or hand-crafted filtering operation

Input with Mask
Homography Registration

Content Generation in VDM

Figure 1. Two-stage pipelines of HomoGen and the state-of-the-art method. Previous flow-based propagation warps pixels across frames,
followed by a video transformer (VT) that generates remaining missing content. In contrast, HomoGen’s homography-based propagation
warps pixels as priors to control content generation in a video diffusion model (VDM) that filters out artifacts in the priors during denoising.

Abstract
In this paper, we present HomoGen, an enhanced video
inpainting method based on homography propagation and
diffusion models. HomoGen leverages homography registration to propagate contextual pixels as priors for generating missing content in corrupted videos. Unlike previous flow-based propagation methods, which introduce local
distortions due to point-to-point optical flows, homographyinduced artifacts are typically global structural distortions
that preserve semantic integrity. To effectively utilize these
priors for generation, we employ a video diffusion model
that inherently prioritizes semantic information within the
priors over pixel-level details. A content-adaptive control
mechanism is proposed to scale and inject the priors into
intermediate video latents during iterative denoising. In
contrast to existing transformer-based networks that often
suffer from artifacts within priors, leading to error accumulation and unrealistic results, our denoising diffusion net-

work can smooth out artifacts and ensure natural outputs.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction

* This work was done when Ding Ding was an intern at MSRA.
† Corresponding author.

Video inpainting aims to fill corrupted regions in a video
with realistic and spatiotemporally coherent content [2]. It
has diverse applications including object removal [7], video
restoration [43], autonomous driving [23], etc. Despite significant progress in image inpainting [29, 35, 57], video inpainting remains full of challenges due to the complexity
of video scenarios. The primary difficulty lies in identifying spatiotemporal guidance for generating content within
corrupted regions, particularly in videos with diverse camera movements and object motion. To tackle this, previous
work has explored various technologies, such as 3D convolutions [4, 13] and attentions [21, 24, 58], to leverage spatiotemporal context and preserve coherent across frames.
Recently, two-stage methods combining flow-based
propagation and generation networks have shown impres-

22953

