This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Test-Time Fine-Tuning of Image Compression Models
for Multi-Task Adaptability
Unki Park1,2
1

Seongmoon Jeong1

Youngchan Jang3

2

Gyeong-Moon Park4 * Jong Hwan Ko1 *

3

Sungkyunkwan University, Samsung Institute of Technology, Hanwha Systems Corporation, 4 Korea University

{unkipark@g., giftjsm@, jhko@}skku.edu, youngchan84.jang@hanwha.com, gm-park@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Human
Perception

The field of computer vision was initially inspired by the
human visual system and has progressively expanded to include a broader range of machine vision applications. Consequently, image compressors should be designed to effectively accommodate not only human visual perception but
also machine vision tasks, including closed-set scenarios
that enable pre-training and open-set scenarios that involve
previously unseen tasks at test time. Many recent studies effectively address both human visual perception and closedset machine vision tasks simultaneously but struggle to handle open-set machine vision tasks. To address this issue, this
paper proposes a fully instance-specific test time fine-tuning
(TTFT) for adapting learned image compression (LIC) to
both closed-set and open-set machine vision tasks effectively. With our method, a large-scale LIC model, originally
trained for human perception, is adapted to the target task
through TTFT using Singular Value Decomposition based
Low Rank Adaptation (SVD-LoRA). During TTFT, the decoder adopts a modified learning scheme that focuses exclusively on training the singular values, which helps prevent
excessive bitstream overhead. This enables fully instancespecific optimization for the target task, even for open-set
tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
method effectively adapts the backbone compressor to diverse machine vision tasks, outperforming competing methods. The code is available at project page.

(a) Human-target learned image compression model

Human
Perception
Object
Detection
Parameter update
at test time
SVD-LoRA

SVD-LoRA

Instance-specific Test Time Fine Tuning
(b) Ours

Instance
Segmentation
Frozen
To be tuned

Figure 1. An overview of our proposed method. Our method tunes
both the encoder and decoder of a backbone human-target LIC
model by fine-tuning SVD-LoRA weights optimized for each target task and image instance.

quently, the scope of computer vision has broadened to include machine vision applications [56, 58, 66]. In the field
of image compression as well, there is a growing need for
methods tailored to the requirements of machine vision, as
machines are expected to become the primary users of compressed image data [18, 65].
Accordingly, several research studies have shifted their
focus away from the traditional goal of visual signal reconstruction, instead prioritizing the enhancement of machine
vision task performance [9, 59]. These studies commonly
aim to effectively restore representations suitable for the targeted machine vision domain, while selectively sacrificing
visual quality to achieve this goal.
Taking it further, recent research has focused on developing learned image codecs (LICs) that can cater to
both human perception and various machine vision tasks
[10, 13, 37, 38, 41, 53, 60]. These studies can be categorized
into methods that generate either multi-task bitstreams or
single-task bitstreams. The multi-task bitstream approach
aims to generate a unified bitstream that can support vari-

1. Introduction
In the early stages of computer vision, image processing
technologies were primarily developed to align with human perception, as images were largely intended for human interpretation [3, 26, 51]. However, with advances
in deep learning and computer vision techniques enabling
more sophisticated data processing, machines have increasingly gained the ability to interpret visual data. Conse* Corresponding authors.

4430

