This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

g3D-LF: Generalizable 3D-Language Feature Fields for Embodied Tasks
Zihan Wang
Gim Hee Lee
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
zihan.wang@u.nus.edu

Abstract
We introduce Generalizable 3D-Language Feature Fields
(g3D-LF), a 3D representation model pre-trained on largescale 3D-language dataset for embodied tasks. Our g3DLF processes posed RGB-D images from agents to encode
feature fields for: 1) Novel view representation predictions
from any position in the 3D scene; 2) Generations of BEV
maps centered on the agent; 3) Querying targets using multigranularity language within the above-mentioned representations. Our representation can be generalized to unseen
environments, enabling real-time construction and online
updates. By volume rendering latent features along sampled rays and integrating semantic and spatial relationships
through multiscale encoders, our g3D-LF produces representations at different scales and perspectives, aligned with
multi-granularity language, via multi-level contrastive learning. Furthermore, we prepare a large-scale 3D-language
dataset to align the representations of the feature fields with
language. Extensive experiments on Vision-and-Language
Navigation under both Panorama and Monocular settings,
Zero-shot Object Navigation, and Situated Question Answering tasks highlight the significant advantages and effectiveness of our g3D-LF for embodied tasks. The code is available
at https://github.com/MrZihan/g3D-LF.

1. Introduction
Embodied agents seek to understand 3D environments, enabling interaction with environments and human by performing tasks such as Question Answering [4, 37, 39],
Navigation [3, 6, 27, 28, 38, 61], etc. To this end, various 3D scene representation models tailored for embodied
tasks have been proposed, including point cloud-based models [11, 22, 72], 3D occupancy [34], hybrid voxel [14], and
feature fields [43, 48, 56, 63].
For multimodal embodied tasks in large-scale scenes, 3D
representation models typically need: 1) generalization to
unseen scenes, 2) construct and update representations in
real time, and 3) open-vocabulary semantic space. The generalizable 3D feature fields provides the above advantages
and has been widely explored across various embodied tasks.

Zero-shot Object Navigation
Object Goal: Bed
Vision-and-Language Navigation
Instruction: Exit the living room 1 and go straight into the bedroom 2 ,
pass the bed into the bathroom 3, and turn on the bathtub faucet 4.
Situated Question Answering
Situation: Just looking for some food facing the TV in the living room.
Question: Where nearby can I sit while watching TV?
Answer: Couch
BEV Map Representation
Depth images

RGB images

Image Encoding
Spatial Encoding
Ray-BEV

Feature Fields Prediction
Ray-View-Panorama
Prediction

1

4

2
3

1
Volume
Rendering

Novel View
Representation

Panorama
Representation

Figure 1. Our g3D-LF uses posed RGB-D images from the agent
to predict novel view and BEV map representations at various
scales within the 3D scene, aligned with multi-granularity language
through 3D-language pre-training. The representation is applicable to embodied tasks like visual navigation and embodied question answering, facilitating scene representation, language-guided
querying, and navigation planning.

Unlike point cloud-based models that depend on complete
and low-noise point clouds which are less robust, the implicit
representations of the feature fields are derived from the 2D
foundation model, preserving semantic expressiveness even
with few-shot observations from 3D scenes. As shown in Figure 1, the feature fields model uses RGB-D images as input to
encode and update implicit scene representations, which are
then used to predict novel view, panorama and BEV map representations associated with language through volume rendering. These predicted representations can assist embodied
tasks such as navigation planning [43, 56, 57], etc. However,
several significant drawbacks remain in these feature fields
models: 1) The supervision for the predicted representations
comes from 2D foundation models, e.g., CLIP [44] and DINOv2 [41] greatly limits the understanding for 3D spatial
relationships; 2) These models are trained without language
supervision, resulting in a substantial gap with language semantics; 3) The large-scale representations, e.g., panorama

14191

