This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Infighting in the Dark: Multi-Label Backdoor Attack in Federated Learning
Ye Li1 , Yanchao Zhao1 ,* Chengcheng Zhu2 , Jiale Zhang2*
1
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics 2 Yangzhou University
{miles.li,yczhao}@nuaa.edu.cn
chengchengzhu2022@126.com, jialezhang@yzu.edu.cn

Abstract

𝒌-th round

Federated Learning (FL), a privacy-preserving decentralized machine learning framework, has been shown to
be vulnerable to backdoor attacks. Current research primarily focuses on the Single-Label Backdoor Attack (SBA),
wherein adversaries share a consistent target. However,
a critical fact is overlooked: adversaries may be noncooperative, have distinct targets, and operate independently, which exhibits a more practical scenario called
Multi-Label Backdoor Attack (MBA). Unfortunately, prior
works are ineffective in the MBA scenario since noncooperative attackers exclude each other. In this work, we
conduct an in-depth investigation to uncover the inherent
constraints of the exclusion: similar backdoor mappings
are constructed for different targets, resulting in conflicts
among backdoor functions. To address this limitation, we
propose Mirage, the first non-cooperative MBA strategy in
FL that allows attackers to inject effective and persistent
backdoors into the global model without collusion by constructing in-distribution (ID) backdoor mapping. Specifically, we introduce an adversarial adaptation method to
bridge the backdoor features and the target distribution in
an ID manner. Additionally, we further leverage a constrained optimization method to ensure the ID mapping survives in the global training dynamics. Extensive evaluations
demonstrate that Mirage outperforms various state-of-theart attacks and bypasses existing defenses, achieving an average ASR greater than 97% and maintaining over 90% after 900 rounds. This work aims to alert researchers to this
potential threat and inspire the design of effective defense
mechanisms. Code has been made open-source.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the flourishing of federated
learning, an advanced privacy-preserving distributed learning paradigm [24, 26]. FL allows participants to collab* Corresponding authors.

𝒕-th round

𝒕-th round

𝒌-th round

Feature Attributions (FA)

ASR Curve

t-SNE

Figure 1. “Blue” and “Red” construct similar OOD mappings (see
t-SNE), resulting in a conflict for the neuron weights. Only the
dominant attacker can induce the model to output high feature attributions for its backdoor samples (see FA of k-th round) and successfully perform the attack. Similar in t-th round.

oratively build a neural network model without leaking
their data. Following its paradigm, a wide range of FL
applications have emerged in various safety and privacycritical application domains, including medical image analysis [10, 15], face recognition [30], and others [1, 11].
Despite enhanced privacy, the distributed nature of FL
makes them more vulnerable to various adversarial attacks,
with backdoor attacks posing the greatest threat. For backdoor attacks in FL, an attacker injects a backdoor into the
local model, which is then submitted to the FL system, causing the global model to inherit the backdoor after aggregation. Consequently, the global model functions correctly
on clean data but misclassifies inputs stamped with the attacker’s chosen backdoor trigger as the target class. Numerous studies have been done to improve the persistence and
effectiveness of backdoors [2, 6, 43, 48], which pose significant threats to various applications, including computer
vision [40], IoT networks [28], and healthcare systems [16].
Recent advancements in backdoor attacks in FL, most,
if not all, assume that attackers in training are colluding
and sharing the same target class, which can be denoted
as Single-Label Backdoor Attacks (SBA). However, situations become more complex in real-world FL applications, especially in large-scale FL scenarios [18, 22], where
attackers engage in training individually and compromise

25770

