This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RAD: Region-Aware Diffusion Models for Image Inpainting
Sora Kim1 , Sungho Suh2,3 , Minsik Lee1,4 *
1
Hanyang University, 2 Korea University, 3 DFKI, 4 Hanyang University ERICA

Input

srk1995@hanyang.ac.kr, sungho suh@korea.ac.kr, mleepaper@hanyang.ac.kr

Generated samples

Phase 1 (within the mask)

Input

Phase 2 (outside the mask)

Figure 1. Region-aware diffusion models (RAD) in action.

Abstract

strated that RAD provides state-of-the-art results both qualitatively and quantitatively, on the FFHQ, LSUN Bedroom,
and ImageNet datasets.

Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in image generation, with applications broadening across various domains. Inpainting is one such application that can
benefit significantly from diffusion models. Existing methods either hijack the reverse process of a pretrained diffusion model or cast the problem into a larger framework,
i.e., conditioned generation. However, these approaches often require nested loops in the generation process or additional components for conditioning. In this paper, we
present region-aware diffusion models (RAD) for inpainting with a simple yet effective reformulation of the vanilla
diffusion models. RAD utilizes a different noise schedule
for each pixel, which allows local regions to be generated
asynchronously while considering the global image context. A plain reverse process requires no additional components, enabling RAD to achieve inference time up to 100
times faster than the state-of-the-art approaches. Moreover,
we employ low-rank adaptation (LoRA) to fine-tune RAD
based on other pretrained diffusion models, reducing computational burdens in training as well. Experiments demon-

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, deep generative models [9, 13, 18, 31]
have made significant advances in generative learning. Especially, generative adversarial networks (GANs) [9] and
diffusion models [13, 31] represent seminal breakthroughs
that have changed the paradigm of unsupervised image
synthesis. Recently, diffusion models have attracted considerable attention due to their outstanding performance
across various applications, such as text-to-image synthesis
[23, 28, 30], image editing [3, 22], video frame generation
[40], and text-to-3d generation [27, 41].
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPM) [13,
31], a cornerstone in diffusion models, approximate the distribution of real images by learning to reverse a pre-defined
diffusion process in which real images gradually become
pure Gaussian noise. Based on the learned reverse process,
synthetic images can be generated by iteratively denoising

2439

