This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Theoretical Insights in Model Inversion Robustness and Conditional Entropy
Maximization for Collaborative Inference Systems
Song Xia1 , Yi Yu1 , Wenhan Yang2 *, Meiwen Ding1 , Zhuo Chen2 ,
Ling-Yu Duan2,3 , Alex C. Kot1 , Xudong Jiang1
1
ROSE Lab, Nanyang Technological University, 2 Pengcheng Laboratory, 3 Peking University
{xias0002,yuyi0010,ding0159,eackot,exdjiang}@ntu.edu.sg, yangwh@pcl.ac.cn, lingyu@pku.edu.cn

CEM
Maximizing ξ

Ship

Bird

…

Protected
features

Decoder
ℱ𝑑

…

Encoder
ℱ𝑒

Preserving utility

Bird

…

Inputs

Unprotected
features

Decoder
ℱ𝑑

…

By locally encoding raw data into intermediate features,
collaborative inference enables end users to leverage powerful deep learning models without exposure of sensitive
raw data to cloud servers. However, recent studies have
revealed that these intermediate features may not sufficiently
preserve privacy, as information can be leaked and raw data
can be reconstructed via model inversion attacks (MIAs).
Obfuscation-based methods, such as noise corruption, adversarial representation learning, and information filters,
enhance the inversion robustness by obfuscating the taskirrelevant redundancy empirically. However, methods for
quantifying such redundancy remain elusive, and the explicit
mathematical relation between this redundancy minimization and inversion robustness enhancement has not yet been
established. To address that, this work first theoretically
proves that the conditional entropy of inputs given intermediate features provides a guaranteed lower bound on the
reconstruction mean square error (MSE) under any MIA.
Then, we derive a differentiable and solvable measure for
bounding this conditional entropy based on the Gaussian
mixture estimation and propose a conditional entropy maximization (CEM) algorithm to enhance the inversion robustness. Experimental results on four datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness and adaptability of our proposed CEM; without compromising feature utility and computing efficiency,
plugging the proposed CEM into obfuscation-based defense
mechanisms consistently boosts their inversion robustness,
achieving average gains ranging from 12.9% to 48.2%. Code
is available at https://github.com/xiasong0501/CEM.

Encoder
ℱ𝑒

Abstract

Ship

Local Encoder

Inputs

Cloud Server
…

…

MIAs
𝒜

Reconstruction

Stolen

Unprotected
Protected

𝛏 Minimal MSE
Protected Unprotected

Inversion Adversary

Backward training

Figure 1. Privacy protection for collaborative inference via CEM.

els on cloud platforms, such as ChatGPT-4 [2], introduces
significant privacy and security concerns, as users may upload data containing sensitive information to cloud servers.
Collaborative inference [48, 50, 52] offers a solution by partitioning the deep learning model across edge devices and
cloud servers, where computations on the initial shallow layers are performed locally on the user’s device, and only the
extracted intermediate features are transmitted to the cloud
for subsequent processing. This allows end users to utilize
powerful neural networks with minimal exposure of their raw
inputs, and hence enhances data privacy. However, recent
works [4, 5, 14, 15, 21, 24, 31, 39, 44, 47, 49, 59, 65, 68, 69]
have revealed that those seemingly minor signals in these
intermediate features still contain substantial sensitive information. As shown in Figure 1, the MIAs can steal those
unprotected features to accurately reconstruct the raw inputs.
Existing defense against MIAs can be broadly categorized into cryptography-based [23, 37, 42] and obfuscationbased methods [7, 11, 17, 19, 63]. Cryptography-based methods, such as homomorphic encryption [10, 20] and secure
multi-party computation [37, 54], provide robust theoretical guarantees against MIAs by computing over encrypted
data. However, the inherent computational overhead poses
substantial challenges for their scalability on large-scale
datasets [36]. Obfuscation-based defense aims to obfuscate the task-irrelevant redundancy by learning a privacypreserving feature encoder [3, 6, 18, 19, 27, 28, 35, 60].

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs), trained on extensive datasets,
have demonstrated outstanding performance across a growing spectrum of complex applications [22, 29, 41]. However,
the increasing reliance on deploying these powerful mod* Corresponding Author

8753

