This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mono-InternVL: Pushing the Boundaries of Monolithic Multimodal Large
Language Models with Endogenous Visual Pre-training
Gen Luo1∗ , Xue Yang1∗ , Wenhan Dou2∗ , Zhaokai Wang3,1∗ ,
Jiawen Liu4 , Jifeng Dai2,1 , Yu Qiao1 , Xizhou Zhu2,1†
1
OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 Tsinghua University
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Johns Hopkins University
Code: https://github.com/OpenGVLab/Mono-InternVL
Abstract
In this paper, we focus on monolithic Multimodal Large
Language Models (MLLMs) that integrate visual encoding
and language decoding into a single LLM. In particular, we
identify that existing pre-training strategies for monolithic
MLLMs often suffer from unstable optimization or catastrophic forgetting. To address this issue, our core idea is to
embed a new visual parameter space into a pre-trained LLM,
thereby stably learning visual knowledge from noisy data
while freezing the LLM. Based on this principle, we present
Mono-InternVL, a novel monolithic MLLM that seamlessly
integrates a set of visual experts via a multimodal mixtureof-experts structure. Moreover, we propose an innovative
pre-training strategy to maximize the visual capability of
Mono-InternVL, namely Endogenous Visual Pre-training
(EViP). In particular, EViP is designed as a progressive
learning process for visual experts, which aims to fully exploit the visual knowledge from noisy data to high-quality
data. To validate our approach, we conduct extensive experiments on 16 benchmarks. Experimental results confirm
the superior performance of Mono-InternVL than existing
monolithic MLLMs on 13 of 16 multimodal benchmarks,
e.g., +80 points over Emu3 on OCRBench. Compared to the
modular baseline, i.e., InternVL-1.5, Mono-InternVL still
retains comparable multimodal performance while reducing
up to 67% first token latency. Our project is available at
https://internvl.github.io/blog/2024-10-10Mono-InternVL/.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the rapid development of Large Language Models (LLMs) [2, 9, 55] has spurred increasing
efforts to extend their multimodal capabilities [13, 43].
As shown in Fig. 1 (a), most existing Multimodal Large
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Language Models (MLLMs) adopt a modular architecture,
where visual encoding and language decoding are processed separately. This is typically achieved by combining a pre-trained visual encoder like CLIP-ViT [57] with
an LLM [14, 38, 43]. Recent research has also started exploring monolithic MLLMs [5, 12, 21], as shown in Fig. 1
(b), which integrate visual perception and multimodal understanding directly into a single LLM. While modular MLLMs
achieve superior performance, monolithic MLLMs show better potential in terms of design simplicity and deployment
efficiency [12, 21].
Despite recent progress, training a monolithic MLLM
with promising performance still remains challenging. In particular, monolithic MLLMs struggle to replicate the successful usage of pre-trained visual encoders in modular MLLMs
for visual perception. Therefore, researchers often rely on
additional pre-training to compensate for the shortcomings in
visual perception in monolithic MLLMs [10, 21]. A straightforward approach is the native pre-training [10], which pretrains a monolithic MLLM from scratch using a mixture of
text-only and multimodal data. However, it requires prohibitively high training costs and often suffers from challenges of unstable optimization [10]. Another common solution is the continuous pre-training [21], which extends the
pre-trained LLM to multimodality via additional visual pretraining. Benefiting from the knowledge in the pre-trained
LLM, the cost of continuous pre-training becomes much
more affordable. Nevertheless, due to the catastrophic forgetting issue [86], the pre-trained language knowledge is inevitably undermined during continuous pre-training, thereby
weakening the multimodal capabilities.
In this paper, we aim to address the forgetting issue of continuous pre-training through delta tuning [22]. In particular,
we argue that such issue arises from the shared architecture
for joint vision and language modeling, where optimizations for vision can negatively impact language capabilities.
Therefore, it is a natural thought to introduce an independent

24960

