This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Optical-Flow Guided Prompt Optimization for Coherent Video Generation
Hyelin Nam∗,1,2 , Jaemin Kim∗,1 , Dohun Lee1 , Jong Chul Ye1
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST1 , EverEx2
∗ : Equal Contribution

hyelin.nam.028@gmail.com, {kjm981995, leedh7, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

Base

Ours

Base

Ours

"Close up video of japanese food."

"Person dancing in a dark room."

Base

Base

Ours

"Time lapse video of a farm during sunset."

Ours

"Video of a train tracks."

Figure 1. MotionPrompt enhances temporal consistency and motion smoothness in text-to-video diffusion models by combining optical
flow guidance with prompt optimization. It can be combined with a range of text-to-video diffusion models to produce visually coherent
video sequences that closely align with intended motion while preserving content fidelity. Best viewed with Acrobat Reader. Click each
image to play the video clip.

Abstract

guides the video generation process via optical flow. Specifically, we train a discriminator to distinguish optical flow
between random pairs of frames from real videos and generated ones. Given that prompts can influence the entire video,
we optimize learnable token embeddings during reverse sampling steps by using gradients from a trained discriminator
applied to random frame pairs. This approach allows our
method to generate visually coherent video sequences that
closely reflect natural motion dynamics, without compromising the fidelity of the generated content. We demonstrate the

While text-to-video diffusion models have made significant
strides, many still face challenges in generating videos with
temporal consistency. Within diffusion frameworks, guidance
techniques have proven effective in enhancing output quality
during inference; however, applying these methods to video
diffusion models introduces additional complexity of handling computations across entire sequences.To address this,
we propose a novel framework called MotionPrompt that

7837

