This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CorrBEV: Multi-View 3D Object Detection by Correlation Learning with
Multi-modal Prototypes
Ziteng Xue 1 * Mingzhe Guo 3 * Heng Fan 4 Shihui Zhang 1,5 B Zhipeng Zhang 2 B
School of Information Science and Engineering, Yanshan University 1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 , Beijing Jiaotong University 3
University of North Texas 4 , Hebei Key Laboratory of CVT & SI 5

Abstract
Camera-only multi-view 3D object detection in autonomous
driving has witnessed encouraging developments in recent
years, largely attributed to the revolution of fundamental architectures in modeling bird’s eye view (BEV). Despite the
growing overall average performance, we contend that the
exploration of more specific and challenging corner cases
hasn’t received adequate attention. In this work, we delve
into a specific yet critical issue for safe autonomous driving: occlusion. To alleviate this challenge, we draw inspiration from the human amodal perception system, which is
proven to have the capacity for mentally reconstructing the
complete semantic concept of occluded objects with prior
knowledge. More specifically, we introduce auxiliary visual
and language prototypes, akin to human prior knowledge,
to enhance the diminished object features caused by occlusion. Inspired by Siamese object tracking, we fuse the
information from these prototypes with the baseline model
through an efficient depth-wise correlation, thereby enhancing the quality of object-related features and guiding the
learning of 3D object queries, especially for partially occluded ones. Furthermore, we propose the random pixel
drop to mimic occlusion and the multi-modal contrastive
loss to align visual features of different occlusion levels to a
unified space during training. Our inspiration originates
from addressing occlusion, however, we are surprised to
find that the proposed framework also enhances robustness
in various challenging scenarios that diminish object representation, such as inclement weather conditions. By applying our model to different baselines, i.e., BEVFormer and
SparseBEV, we demonstrate consistent improvements.

Car?
Construction Vehicle!
Truck?

Complete diminished
representation

Inject to

Occluded target

Visual & Language
Prior Knowledge

Baseline

(a)

Ours

Occluded Target Missed continuously

Target Successfully Detected via Our Correlation Learning

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The motivation of our proposed CorrBEV: injecting
visual and language prior knowledge to complete dismissed representation in the real driving scene (taking the occluded target as
an example); (b) The comparison of one baseline model (SparseBEV [28] here) and our method in detecting the occluded object.

1. Introduction

of autonomous driving. 3D object detection from multiview images, typically the initial phase of the solution, has
witnessed significant progress in recent years. It is observed
that most research efforts in 3D object detection are devoted
to enhancing average performance. This inclination can be
traced back to the original intention and design of evaluation benchmarks, in which metrics like NDS and mAP
in nuScenes [2] are primarily proposed to average scores
across all scenes and categories rather than emphasizing
a special scenario. Consistent with this ethos, the foundational architectures of multi-view 3D object detection
frameworks have undergone a remarkable evolution, transitioning from depth-estimated [14, 24] to depth-free [25, 30,
44], from single-frame [44] to multi-frame [13, 33], from
dense-query [25] to sparse-query [26, 28].
However, the improvements in overall performance
sometimes fall short of meeting the demands of developers,
as critical agents often hold more significance for down-

The camera-only solution currently stands out as one of the
most captivating domains in both the industry and academia
* Equal Contribution. B: Corresponding author.

27413

