This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GenAssets: Generating in-the-wild 3D Assets in Latent Space
Ze Yang1,2 Jingkang Wang1,2 Haowei Zhang1
Sivabalan Manivasagam1,2 Yun Chen1,2 Raquel Urtasun1,2
1

Waabi

2

University of Toronto

{zyang, jwang, hzhang, siva, ychen, urtasun}@waabi.ai
360° Assets Reconstruction

Scalable Assets Generation

120°

Controllable Assets Generation
240°

Front-left camera

Front camera

Front-right camera

Bus

Large truck

Scalable Sensor Simulation (actor executes a U-turn)

Pedestrian

Bicycle

Motorcycle

Night

Figure 1. GenAssets takes in-the-wild camera image(s) and point cloud(s), and automatically reconstruct or generate 360° assets.
Our 3D assets are diverse and high-quality with complete geometry and appearance, allowing for realistic and scalable sensor simulation.

Abstract

1. Introduction

High-quality 3D assets for traffic participants are critical
for multi-sensor simulation, which is essential for the safe
end-to-end development of autonomy. Building assets from
in-the-wild data is key for diversity and realism, but existing
neural-rendering based reconstruction methods are slow
and generate assets that render well only from viewpoints
close to the original observations, limiting their usefulness
in simulation. Recent diffusion-based generative models
build complete and diverse assets, but perform poorly on inthe-wild driving scenes, where observed actors are captured
under sparse and limited fields of view, and are partially occluded. In this work, we propose a 3D latent diffusion model
that learns on in-the-wild LiDAR and camera data captured
by a sensor platform and generates high-quality 3D assets
with complete geometry and appearance. Key to our method
is a “reconstruct-then-generate” approach that first leverages occlusion-aware neural rendering trained over multiple scenes to build a high-quality latent space for objects,
and then trains a diffusion model that operates on the latent
space. We show our method outperforms existing reconstruction and generation based methods, unlocking diverse
and scalable content creation for simulation. Please visit
https://waabi.ai/genassets for more details.

22392

Simulation environments enable testing the performance of
autonomy systems in long-tail and safety critical scenarios
safely, efficiently, and scalably [41, 61, 77, 97]. To test the
complete autonomy stack, the virtual environments should
simulate the sensor data (e.g., LiDAR, camera) of the robot.
Realistic and consistent sensor simulation across multiple
modalities depends on the availability of high-quality 3D
assets that accurately represent the geometry and appearance of traffic participants such as cars and motorcycles.
Commoditized simulation environments rely on artists to
manually build such 3D assets [14, 59, 62]. This process is
slow, costly, and requires precise specification of attributes
such as geometry, UV mapping, and materials. As a consequence, existing methods utilize very limited content, failing to capture the full diversity of objects in the real world.
An alternative and much more appealing approach that
has gained traction is to reconstruct assets from real world
data captured by the sensor platform, which enables diversity and realism. Reconstruction-based neural rendering
methods have demonstrated impressive results by optimizing 3D representations that can render and match input sensor data for self-driving scenes [11, 15, 29, 70, 74, 86, 93,
94, 97, 103]. These approaches render high-quality data

