This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Anchor-Aware Similarity Cohesion in Target Frames Enables Predicting
Temporal Moment Boundaries in 2D
Jiawei Tan1 , Hongxing Wang1,2 ,* Junwu Weng3 , Jiaxin Li1 , Zhilong Ou1 , Kang Dang4
1
2

School of Big Data and Software Engineering, Chongqing University, China

Key Laboratory of Dependable Service Computing in Cyber Physical Society (Chongqing University), Ministry of Education, China
3

4

ByteDance Intelligent Creation

School of AI and Advanced Computing, XJTLU Entrepreneur College (Taicang), Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, Suzhou, China
{jwtan, ihxwang}@cqu.edu.cn, we0001wu@e.ntu.edu.sg, jiaxin li@cqu.edu.cn,
zlou@stu.edu.cn, Kang.Dang@xjtlu.edu.cn

Abstract
Video moment retrieval aims to locate speciﬁc moments
from a video according to the query text. This task presents
two main challenges: i) aligning the query and video frames
at the feature level, and ii) projecting the query-aligned
frame features to the start and end boundaries of the matching interval. Previous work commonly involves all frames in
feature alignment, easy to cause aligning irrelevant frames
with the query. Furthermore, they forcibly map visual features to interval boundaries but ignoring the information
gap between them, yielding suboptimal performance. In
this study, to reduce distraction from irrelevant frames,
we designate an anchor frame as that with the maximum
query-frame relevance measured by the established VisionLanguage Model. Via similarity comparison between the
anchor frame and the others, we produce a semantically
compact segment around the anchor frame, which serves as
a guide to align features of query and related frames. We
observe that such a feature alignment will make similarity
cohesive between target frames, which enables us to predict
the interval boundaries by a single point detection in the
2D semantic similarity space of frames, thus well bridging
the information gap between frame semantics and temporal
boundaries. Experimental results across various datasets
demonstrate that our approach signiﬁcantly improves the
alignment between queries and video frames while effectively predicting temporal moment boundaries. Especially,
on QVHighlights Test and ActivityNet Captions datasets,
our proposed approach achieves 3.8% and 7.4% respectively higher than current state-of-the-art R1@.7 performance. The code is available at https://github.
com/ExMorgan-Alter/AFAFSGD.
* Corresponding author: Hongxing Wang.

1. Introduction
Video moment retrieval (VMR) aims to locate the start and
end timestamps of the most semantically relevant segments
in a video based on natural language queries. It holds a
broad spectrum of applications, including video highlight
detection [24] and video summarization [12].
Due to the modality gap between video and text, VMR
requires aligning the two modalities in the shared feature
space. To this end, most existing methods [17, 25, 26] rely
on the vision-language model (VLM) to embed query text
features into frame features. However, they tend to inject text information into all video frames, easy to suffer
from irrelevant frames being aligned with the text. Alleviating irrelevant frames selection is challenging because we
do not know which frames are truly relevant to the query
text. In this study, we observe that the video frame that is
most relevant to the query can commonly stand out from
the others by the VLM based query-frame similarity ranking, as illustrated in Fig. 1, which was overlooked by previous VLM related methods [17, 18, 27, 35, 36]. To catch
more query-related frames, we anchor the top-ranked relevant frame to select a semantically compact segment where
each frame has strong visual-textual similarity with the anchor frame. The semantically compact segment provides
a rich semantic guidance, which enables us to have a focused attention for improved query-frame alignment in the
feature space. Along this line, we propose the anchor-aware
feature alignment (A2 FA) scheme (Figs. 3 and 4) to adapt
video frame representations to being better aligned with that
of the query.
As a video moment is determined by its time interval
from its start to end boundaries, query-frame alignment in
the feature space does not reach the goal of VMR until the
two temporal boundaries can be obtained. Previous methods either rely on frame features to estimate the probability

24180

