This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ART: Anonymous Region Transformer for
Variable Multi-Layer Transparent Image Generation
Yifan Pu† Yiming Zhao† Zhicong Tang Ruihong Yin Haoxing Ye Yuhui Yuan†‡ Dong Chen†‡ Jianmin Bao
Sirui Zhang

Yanbin Wang Lin Liang Lijuan Wang Ji Li
†

equal technical contribution

Xiu Li Zhouhui Lian Gao Huang
‡

Baining Guo

project lead

Microsoft Research Asia Tsinghua University Peking University USTC
https://art-msra.github.io

Abstract
Multi-layer image generation is a fundamental task that enables users to isolate, select, and edit specific image layers,
thereby revolutionizing interactions with generative models.
In this paper, we introduce the Anonymous Region Transformer (ART), which facilitates the direct generation of
variable multi-layer transparent images based on a global
text prompt and an anonymous region layout. Inspired by
Schema theory1 , this anonymous region layout allows the
generative model to autonomously determine which set of
visual tokens should align with which text tokens, which is
in contrast to the previously dominant semantic layout for
the image generation task. In addition, the layer-wise region crop mechanism, which only selects the visual tokens
belonging to each anonymous region, significantly reduces
attention computation costs and enables the efficient generation of images with numerous distinct layers (e.g., 50+).
When compared to the full attention approach, our method
is over 12 times faster and exhibits fewer layer conflicts.
Furthermore, we propose a high-quality multi-layer transparent image autoencoder that supports the direct encoding
and decoding of the transparency of variable multi-layer
images in a joint manner. By enabling precise control and
scalable layer generation, ART establishes a new paradigm
for interactive content creation.

Figure 1. Semantic Layout vs. Anonymous Region Layout. The conventional semantic layout requires specifying what objects to generate in
each given region, whereas our anonymous region layout only identifies
where the important regions are. People can leverage the prior knowledge,
activated by the global prompt, to intuitively infer the semantic label of
each anonymous region. The generative model also learns to harness this
capability and autonomously determine what to generate in each region.

where creators frequently rely on layer-by-layer control to
construct and refine complex compositions.
This paper presents Anonymous Region Transformer for
multi-layer transparent image generation. The key ingredient of the anonymous region transformer is the anonymous
region layout, which solely consists of a set of anonymous
rectangular regions without any region-wise prompt annotations, as shown in Figure 1. This is unlike the conventional
semantic layout for text-to-image generation [45, 78, 81],
which requires clearly specify both the global prompt for
the entire image and the location and region-wise prompts
for each region2 . The drawback of the conventional layout
is that it heavily relies on human labor for creating the layout and this process can be very labor intensive, especially
when handling tens or even hundreds of regions on a canvas, a common scenario in graphic design generation. The
anonymous region transformer significantly reduces the human labor by allowing the generative model to perform the
visual planning task of determining which objects to generate in each anonymous region based on the global prompt.
The core insight behind the anonymous region layout is to
enhance generative model control, while preserving user
flexibility over manipulating multi-layered outputs.

1. Introduction
Diffusion-based generative models have shown tremendous
success in producing high-quality images from given text
prompts [4, 16, 21, 52, 58]. These models are typically limited to producing entire images in a single, unified layer,
which restricts the ability to edit or manipulate specific
elements independently. This limitation presents significant challenges in fields like graphic design and digital art,
1 Schema theory [3, 57] suggests that knowledge is organized in frameworks (schemas) that enable people to interpret and learn from new information by linking it to prior knowledge.

2 We use ‘region’ and ‘layer’ interchangeably in this paper.

7952

