This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SmartCLIP: Modular Vision-language Alignment with Identification Guarantees
Shaoan Xie*1 , Lingjing*1 , Yujia Zheng1 , Yu Yao3 , Zeyu Tang1 ,
Eric P. Xing1,2 , Guangyi Chen2,1 , Kun Zhang1,2
1
2

Carnegie Mellon University

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3

University of Sydney
* Equal contribution

Abstract

COCO:

Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) [37] has
emerged as a pivotal model in computer vision and multimodal learning, achieving state-of-the-art performance at
aligning visual and textual representations through contrastive learning. However, CLIP struggles with potential
information misalignment in many image-text datasets and
suffers from entangled representation. On the one hand,
short captions for a single image in datasets like MSCOCO
may describe disjoint regions in the image, leaving the
model uncertain about which visual features to retain or
disregard. On the other hand, directly aligning long captions with images can lead to the retention of entangled
details, preventing the model from learning disentangled,
atomic concepts – ultimately limiting its generalization on
certain downstream tasks involving short prompts.
In this paper, we establish theoretical conditions that
enable flexible alignment between textual and visual representations across varying levels of granularity. Specifically, our framework ensures that a model can not only
preserve cross-modal semantic information in its entirety
but also disentangle visual representations to capture finegrained textual concepts. Building on this foundation, we
introduce SmartCLIP, a novel approach that identifies and
aligns the most relevant visual and textual representations
in a modular manner. Superior performance across various tasks demonstrates its capability to handle information misalignment and supports our identification theory.
The code is available at https://github.com/MidPush/SmartCLIP.

1. Introduction
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) [37] has
been the cornerstone for many computer vision and machine learning tasks, such as text-to-image retrieval [2], im-

A very cute teddy bear holding a pen.
A stuffed bear that is sitting in a chair.
A brown bear wearing a sweater next to a pen
and paper.
A brown teddy bear in a dark sweater sits on
a black striped chair while holding a pen.

ShareGPT4v:
In the center of the image, a light brown teddy bear is seated on a black
chair with white stripes. The teddy bear, dressed in a green sweater
adorned with a yellow flower , holds a blue pen in its paw, as if ready to
sign a document. The chair is positioned on a gray carpeted floor . To the
right of the chair, there's a stack of papers neatly arranged on the floor. The
scene creates an atmosphere of anticipation, as if the teddy bear is about to
make a significant decision.

Figure 1. Depiction of two primary challenges for CLIP. (1)
Information Misalignment: An image can be paired with multiple captions that describe disparate aspects - the first caption contains concepts “bear” and “pen” whereas the second only mentions
“bear” and “paper”. Aligning the image with both captions leads
to the loss of key concepts “pen” and “paper” not shared across
the captions. (2) Entangled Representations: Long, detailed captions involving multiple concepts (e.g., “chair”, “pen”, “flower”,
“floor”) encourage the model to form entangled representations,
hindering independent understanding of each individual concept.

age and video understanding [6, 16, 39, 42, 46, 58], and
generative models [28, 38, 40]. It aligns the representations from different modalities with a contrastive learning
loss [8, 35]. Specifically, each image-caption pair in the
dataset is treated as a positive pair, while negative pairs are
created by matching images with captions randomly drawn
from the dataset. The image and text encoders are trained
with a symmetric cross-entropy loss that draws the image
and text representations in each positive pair together while
pulling the negative pairs’ representations apart.
Training CLIP requires vast amounts of image-text pairs,
making it challenging to maintain dataset quality at such
a large scale. In particular, the quality of text captions
has been a key concern, prompting the development of
various methods to enhance both their diversity and accu-

29780

