This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Toward Generalized Image Quality Assessment:
Relaxing the Perfect Reference Quality Assumption

1

Du Chen1,3, *, Tianhe Wu2,3, *, Kede Ma2,†, and Lei Zhang1,3,†
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 City University of Hong Kong 3 OPPO Research Institute
csdud.chen@connet.polyu.hk, {tianhewu, kede.ma}@cityu.edu.hk, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk
Reference

Image A

PSNR

SSIM

VIF

LPIPS

DISTS

CKDN

A-FINE (Ours)

Reference

Image A

Image B

Human

PSNR

A>B

A>B

B>A

B>A

SSIM

VIF

LPIPS

DISTS

Image B

CKDN

A-FINE (Ours)

Human

(a) Human Preference: Reference > A > B

(b) Human Preference: B > Reference > A

Abstract

datasets and our newly created DiffIQA. To further validate
A-FINE, we additionally construct a super-resolution IQA
benchmark (SRIQA-Bench), encompassing test images derived from ten state-of-the-art SR methods with reliable human quality annotations. Tests on SRIQA-Bench re-affirm
the advantages of A-FINE. The code and dataset are available at https://tianhewu.github.io/A-FINEpage.github.io/.

Fig. 1. With the reference image in the middle, which image, A or B, has better perceived visual quality? The proposed A-FINE generalizes
and outperforms standard FR-IQA models under both perfect and imperfect reference conditions. Zoom in for better visibility.

Full-reference image quality assessment (FR-IQA) generally assumes that reference images are of perfect quality.
However, this assumption is flawed due to the sensor and
optical limitations of modern imaging systems. Moreover,
recent generative enhancement methods are capable of producing images of higher quality than their original. All of
these challenge the effectiveness and applicability of current FR-IQA models. To relax the assumption of perfect reference image quality, we build a large-scale IQA database,
namely DiffIQA, containing approximately 180, 000 images
generated by a diffusion-based image enhancer with adjustable hyper-parameters. Each image is annotated by
human subjects as either worse, similar, or better quality
compared to its reference. Building on this, we present
a generalized FR-IQA model, namely Adaptive FIdelityNaturalness Evaluator (A-FINE), to accurately assess and
adaptively combine the fidelity and naturalness of a test image. A-FINE aligns well with standard FR-IQA when the
reference image is much more natural than the test image.
We demonstrate by extensive experiments that A-FINE surpasses standard FR-IQA models on well-established IQA

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

Image Quality Assessment (IQA) plays an indispensable
role in the digital image lifecycle, from acquisition, transmission, and reproduction, to storage [42]. The objective of
IQA is to develop computational models that mimic the Human Visual System (HVS) in perceiving image quality [45],
which can be broadly classified into two categories based
on the availability of reference images: Full-Reference IQA
(FR-IQA) [5, 6, 44, 45, 55, 58] and No-Reference IQA (NRIQA) [25, 43, 48, 51, 60, 61]. FR-IQA evaluates a test image by comparing it to a reference image, which is assumed
to be of perfect quality, while NR-IQA assesses the test image quality without needing the reference.
Over the past two decades, FR-IQA has experienced significant progress, with the paradigm shifted from measuring

12742

