This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SoftShadow: Leveraging Soft Masks for Penumbra-Aware Shadow Removal
Xinrui Wang1 ,* Lanqing Guo2 ,* Xiyu Wang1 , Siyu Huang3 , Bihan Wen1†
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
The University of Texas at Austin, USA
3
Clemson University, USA
{xinrui.wang, bihan.wen}@ntu.edu.sg, xiyu004@e.ntu.edu.sg,
lanqing.guo@austin.utexas.edu, siyuh@clemson.edu

Abstract
Recent advancements in deep learning have yielded promising results for the image shadow removal task. However,
most existing methods rely on binary pre-generated shadow
masks. The binary nature of such masks could potentially
lead to artifacts near the boundary between shadow and
non-shadow areas. In view of this, inspired by the physical
model of shadow formation, we introduce novel soft shadow
masks specifically designed for shadow removal. To achieve
such soft masks, we propose a SoftShadow framework by
leveraging the prior knowledge of pretrained SAM and integrating physical constraints. Specifically, we jointly tune
the SAM and the subsequent shadow removal network using penumbra formation constraint loss, mask reconstruction loss, and shadow removal loss. This framework enables accurate predictions of penumbra (partially shaded)
and umbra (fully shaded) areas while simultaneously facilitating end-to-end shadow removal. Through extensive
experiments on popular datasets, we found that our SoftShadow framework, which generates soft masks, can better
restore boundary artifacts, achieve state-of-the-art performance, and demonstrate superior generalizability.

1. Introduction
Shadow removal aims to restore content obscured in shadow
regions and correct degraded illumination. Recently, deep
learning methods have shown excellent performance in
shadow removal tasks relying on large-scale training data.
However, one of the main challenges in shadow removal
arises in images with soft shadows, where the shadow edges
are blurred rather than sharp. This blurred area, known as
the penumbra area, occurs due to partial occlusion of light,
creating a transition zone where illumination varies signif* Equal contribution for both authors
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Illustration of soft shadow removal results using our
proposed SoftShadow with soft shadow mask compared to the recent competing methods BMNet [39], SG-ShadowNet [30] and
HomoFormer [34] using hard shadow masks. The second rows
are sharpened versions of results for better visualization.

icantly. Removing shadows in these regions is challenging
because the gradual light-to-shadow transition often leads to
boundary artifacts, compromising the quality of the shadow
removal results.
A few methods rely on hard shadow masks (binary
masks) to indicate the shadow regions [8, 9, 34, 39]. These
binary shadow masks are either manually annotated [23,
31], or predicted by off-the-shelf shadow detectors [3]. Obtaining such shadow masks can be costly and complicated,
and the choice of shadow detector can significantly impact
shadow removal performance. Moreover, hard masks fall
short of representing the penumbra area, causing boundary
artifacts in removal results, especially when the penumbra
areas are highly pronounced. As shown in Figure 1, when
the input image contains penumbra regions, the previous
state-of-the-art (SOTA) method [34] suffers from boundary
artifacts. Other approaches attempt shadow removal without explicitly extracting the shadow mask. Instead, they incorporate semantic parsing modules into shadow removal
networks. For instance, some approaches involve predict-

23217

