This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GarmentPile: Point-Level Visual Affordance Guided Retrieval and Adaptation
for Cluttered Garments Manipulation
Ruihai Wu*1 Ziyu Zhu*2,1 Yuran Wang*1 Yue Chen 1 Jiarui Wang 1 Hao Dong†1
1
CFCS, School of Computer Science, PKU 2 School of EECS, PKU

Abstract

Observation

Cluttered garments manipulation poses significant challenges due to the complex, deformable nature of garments
and intricate garment relations. Unlike single-garment manipulation, cluttered scenarios require managing complex
garment entanglements and interactions, while maintaining
garment cleanliness and manipulation stability. To address
these demands, we propose to learn point-level affordance,
the dense representation modeling the complex space and
multi-modal manipulation candidates, while being aware of
garment geometry, structure, and inter-object relations. Additionally, as it is difficult to directly retrieve a garment in
some extremely entangled clutters, we introduce an adaptation module, guided by learned affordance, to reorganize
highly-entangled garments into states plausible for manipulation. Our framework demonstrates effectiveness over environments featuring diverse garment types and pile configurations in both simulation and the real world. Project
page: https://garmentpile.github.io/.

1

Multi-modal manipulation candidates

0.75

Affordance

0.5

Affordance

Structure
(contact floor)

Relation
(tangle with others)

0.25

0

Observation

Affordance

tangle with others

Adapt trace

Adaptation

1. Introduction

Bad Affordance

Observation

Affordance

Good Affordance

Garments, such as shirts, dresses, and socks, are essential in daily life and pose significant challenges for humanassistive robots. Interacting with various types of garments
to perform everyday tasks is crucial yet complex. The
complexity of garments comes from their high-dimensional
state spaces, intricate kinematics, dynamics and diverse categories. Most studies focus on single-garment manipulation, such as unfolding [14], folding [1, 49], hanging [46],
and dressing up [42]. However, many real-life scenarios involve multiple cluttered garments, such as arranging clothes
on a bed or retrieving items from a washing machine. In
these cases, it is crucial to maintain cleanliness and avoid
disturbing adjacent garments (failure cases in Figure 1).
Manipulating cluttered garments presents greater challenges than single-garment or cluttered rigid object manipulation. The more complex states in the clutters and the
complicated interrelations between garments make it difficult to distinguish between different garments and infer

Figure 1. Point-Level Affordance for Cluttered Garments. A
higher score denotes the higher actionability for downstream retrieval. Row 1: per-point affordance simultaneously reveals 2 garments suitable for retrieval. Row 2: it is aware of garment structures (grasping edges leads other parts contacting floor) and relations (retrieving one garment while dragging nearby entangled
garments out), and thus avoids manipulating on points leading to
such failures. Row 3 and 4: highly tangled garments may not have
plausible manipulation points, affordance can guide reorganizing
the scene, and thus garments plausible for manipulation will exist.

their relations. Moreover, garment piles often involve multiple plausible retrieval garments (Figure 1, row 1), further
increasing the demands on the multi-modal representation
capability of the learned manipulation policy.
Point-level affordance, derived from 3D point cloud input and representing the per-point actionability on the ob-

6950

