This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FSboard: Over 3 million characters of ASL fingerspelling collected via
smartphones
Manfred Georg1∗, Garrett Tanzer1∗ , Esha Uboweja1 , Saad Hassan2‡ ,
Maximus Shengelia3‡ , Sam Sepah1 , Sean Forbes4† , Thad Starner1∗†
1
Google, 2 Tulane University, 3 Rochester Institute of Technology,
4
Deaf Professional Arts Network
{mgeorg, thadstarner}@google.com

Abstract
Progress in machine understanding of sign languages has
been slow and hampered by limited data. In this paper,
we present FSboard, an American Sign Language fingerspelling dataset situated in a mobile text entry use case,
collected from 147 paid and consenting Deaf signers using
Pixel 4A selfie cameras in a variety of environments. Fingerspelling recognition is an incomplete solution that comprises only a small part of sign language translation, but
it could provide some immediate benefit to Deaf/Hard of
Hearing signers while more broadly capable technology develops. At >3 million characters in length and >250 hours
in duration, FSboard is the largest fingerspelling recognition dataset to date by a factor of >10x. As a simple baseline, we finetune 30 Hz MediaPipe Holistic landmark inputs
into ByT5-Small and achieve 11.1% Character Error Rate
(CER) on a test set with unique phrases and signers. This
quality degrades gracefully when decreasing frame rate and
excluding face/body landmarks—plausible optimizations to
help with on-device performance—but falls short of human
performance measured at 2.2% CER.1

We focus on the intermediate goal of recognizing fingerspelling as an alternative to smartphone text entry. While
full signing for text entry (the proper analogue of speech
recognition) is ideal [24], fingerspelling may still be a valuable stopgap due to improved speed or convenience vs. typing on a keyboard. An analogy can be made to gesture keyboards [57], where the user swipes through the letters of a
word as opposed to touching and releasing each letter’s virtual key. Even though the system uses pattern recognition
to determine which word the typist intended and sometimes
returns an incorrect word, many smartphone users prefer
such gesture-based keyboards as they feel they can enter
text more quickly with the added benefit of requiring one
hand instead of two [46]. Similarly, there is evidence that
Deaf signers may find fingerspelling faster or more convenient than current smartphone text entry keyboards [24].

1. Introduction

In this paper we present FSboard (Fingerspelling-board,
as in “keyboard”), an ASL fingerspelling dataset situated in
a mobile text entry use case. We collect FSboard by creating a domain-appropriate phrase distribution, recruiting 147
paid and consenting Deaf signers through the Deaf Professional Arts Network (DPAN), and having them record onehanded fingerspelled renditions of the phrases using Pixel
4A selfie cameras in a variety of environments. The videos
were usually recorded at 1944x2592 pixels and 30 frames
per second, though sometimes the resolution varied due to
participants accidentally changing settings. At 3.2 million
characters in length and 266 hours in duration, FSboard is
the largest fingerspelling recognition dataset to date by a
factor of >10x.

The quality of sign language translation, particularly from
American Sign Language (ASL) to English, has been
steadily improving [14, 47, 53, 54], but it is still far from
being usable in practice. A body of work on participatory
methods for ML [9, 11] suggests dividing such an ambitious
goal into intermediate milestones that can provide concrete
and immediate benefit to the community (i.e., to Deaf/Hard
of Hearing signers). In this manner, the work starts addressing the community’s needs immediately, and the community can drive the direction of future technology.
∗ equal contribution † equal advising ‡ work conducted at Google
1 We publicly release FSboard at under CC BY 4.0.

13897

As a simple model baseline, we finetune 30 Hz MediaPipe Holistic landmark [18] inputs into ByT5-Small
(300M) [55] and achieve 11.1% Character Error Rate
(CER) on FSboard’s test set, which features 15 unique
signers and no train phrase overlap. We ablate our baseline across several factors like frame rate and exclusion
of face/body landmarks which could be used to optimize

