This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Class Prototypes for Unified Sparse-Supervised 3D Object Detection
Yun Zhu1 , Le Hui2 , Hang Yang1 , Jianjun Qian1 , Jin Xie3,4 ,* Jian Yang1
1
PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
3
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
4
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou, China
{zhu.yun, hangyang, csjqian, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn; csjxie@nju.edu.cn; huile@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Both indoor and outdoor scene perceptions are essential for
embodied intelligence. However, current sparse supervised
3D object detection methods focus solely on outdoor scenes
without considering indoor settings. To this end, we
propose a unified sparse supervised 3D object detection
method for both indoor and outdoor scenes through learning class prototypes to effectively utilize unlabeled objects.
Specifically, we first propose a prototype-based object mining module that converts the unlabeled object mining into a
matching problem between class prototypes and unlabeled
features. By using optimal transport matching results, we
assign prototype labels to high-confidence features, thereby
achieving the mining of unlabeled objects. We then present
a multi-label cooperative refinement module to effectively
recover missed detections through pseudo label quality
control and prototype label cooperation. Experiments
show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance
under the one object per scene sparse supervised setting
across indoor and outdoor datasets. With only one labeled
object per scene, our method achieves about 78%, 90%, and
96% performance compared to the fully supervised detector
on ScanNet V2, SUN RGB-D, and KITTI, respectively, highlighting the scalability of our method. Code is available at
https://github.com/zyrant/CPDet3D.

outdoor scene

indoor scene

outdoor scene

full category
coverage

limited category
coverage

full category
coverage

Limited solution for
outdoor scenes

Unified solution for
indoor and outdoor scenes

(a) previous methods

(b) ours

Figure 1. Comparison of sparse supervised 3D object detection
methods. Previous methods rely on the premise of full category
coverage within each scene, achieved through a GT sampling
strategy, as represented in (a).
This approach encounters
limitations in indoor scenes, which have scene-specific categories.
In contrast, we propose a unified sparse 3D object detection
scheme (b) applicable to both indoor and outdoor scenes, utilizing
nearest prototype retrieval for effective object mining.

important research topic in the field of 3D object detection.
Current 3D object detection methods designed for limited annotations can be roughly categorized into weakly
supervised [24, 44], semi supervised [7, 9, 34, 51], and
sparse supervised methods [20, 42]. Weakly supervised
methods use weaker supervision than box annotations as
constraints, such as point-level annotations (i.e., box centers). However, point-level annotations cannot provide
precise box attributes. These works require a small number
of precise annotations [24] or synthetic 3D shapes [44].
Semi supervised 3D object detection naturally involves
precise annotations in some scenes of the datasets, while
the rest remain unlabeled. These types of works achieve
better performance than point supervision. Nonetheless,
semi supervision faces two drawbacks. First, there is a
domain gap between labeled and unlabeled scenes, which
makes information transfer ineffective when the gap is
large. Second, annotating an entire scene is hindered by its
complexity and density, making the process labor-intensive.

1. Introduction
3D object detection attracts more and more attention, as it
is crucial for the vision tasks such as autonomous driving
and emboddied robotics [15, 41, 50]. Conventional 3D
object detection [25, 29, 35, 45, 55] relies on a large number
of precise annotations, which are labor-intensive and timeconsuming. How to achieve efficient and accurate 3D
object detection under limited annotations has become an
* Corresponding author

9911

