This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCFlow2: Plug-and-Play Object Pose Refiner with Shape-Constraint Scene Flow
Qingyuan Wang 1 ,
1

Rui Song 1 ,

Jiaojiao Li 1 ,

Kerui Cheng 2 ,
2

State Key Laboratory of ISN, Xidian University

David Ferstl 3 ,

Taiyuan University of Technology

Abstract

3

Yinlin Hu 3
MagicLeap

Retraining

We introduce SCFlow2, a plug-and-play refinement framework for 6D object pose estimation. Most recent 6D object pose methods rely on refinement to get accurate results. However, most existing refinement methods either
suffer from noises in establishing correspondences, or rely
on retraining for novel objects. SCFlow2 is based on the
SCFlow model designed for refinement with shape constraint, but formulates the additional depth as a regularization in the iteration via 3D scene flow for RGBD frames.
The key design of SCFlow2 is an introduction of geometry
constraints into the training of recurrent matching network,
by combining the rigid-motion embeddings in 3D scene flow
and 3D shape prior of the target. We train SCFlow2 on
a combination of dataset Objaverse, GSO and ShapeNet,
and evaluate on BOP datasets with novel objects. After using our method as a post-processing, most state-of-the-art
methods produce significantly better results, without any
retraining or fine-tuning. The source code is available at
https://scflow2.github.io.

Initialization

Network

Refinement

(a) Object pose refinement with retraining

Network
Initialization

Refinement

1. Introduction

(b) Plug-and-play SCFlow2
Figure 1. Object pose refinement is critical for accurate object
pose estimation. (a) Most existing object pose refinement methods, including SCFlow [11], rely on retraining for novel objects to
achieve high accuracy. (b) The proposed SCFlow2 achieves even
higher accuracy, and more importantly, generalizes well to novel
objects without any retraining or fine-tuning.

ing it usually has an unnecessarily large search space for
matching and is less effective for 6D object pose estimation [11]. Second, to address the matching issue, most
methods attempt to refine the pose starting from multiple
pose hypotheses based on the initialization [23, 32, 36].
While this paradigm is effective, it significantly slows down
the refinement process. Third, most methods formulate the
comparison after the rendering as a 2D matching procedure
only, and then use ICP or Kabsch [21] to consume additional depth input as a second stage, which is less effective in capturing 3D motions and local optimal within each
stage.

6D object pose estimation, which determines an object’s 3D
rotation and 3D translation relative to a camera, is crucial in
fields like robotics, augmented reality, and spatial computing [31, 48].
Most existing pose estimation methods rely on a refinement procedure to get accurate pose results [10, 12, 20,
23, 24, 48, 50], and most of the refinement methods are
based on render-and-compare strategies [10, 20, 23, 50]. A
group of refinement methods [24, 48] achieves highly accurate results based on retraining or fine-tuning the network
for novel objects, which, however, is cumbersome and unfriendly to real applications. Some recent refinement methods [23, 42, 50] have shown promising results without finetuning for novel objects. However, they still suffer from
several weaknesses.
First, most methods formulate the render-and-compare
framework as a general matching problem, but there is a
strong prior of the target’s 3D shape that is not used, mak-

22045

We introduce SCFlow2, a plug-and-play refinement
framework for 6D object pose estimation, as shown in
Fig. 1. SCFlow2 is based on SCFlow [11] which is a stateof-the-art refinement method embedding 3D shape constraints into the optimization for known objects. We build
on the basic shape-constraint structure of SCFlow but extend it in several novel ways.

