This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CDI: Copyrighted Data Identification in Diffusion Models
Jan Dubiński * †

Antoni Kowalczuk *

Warsaw University of Technology, IDEAS NCBR

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

jan.dubinski.dokt@pw.edu.pl

antoni.kowalczuk@cispa.de

Franziska Boenisch

Adam Dziedzic

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

boenisch@cispa.de

adam.dziedzic@cispa.de

Abstract
Diffusion Models (DMs) benefit from large and diverse
datasets for their training. Since this data is often scraped
from the Internet without permission from the data owners, this raises concerns about copyright and intellectual
property protections. While (illicit) use of data is easily detected for training samples perfectly re-created by a DM at
inference time, it is much harder for data owners to verify
if their data was used for training when the outputs from
the suspect DM are not close replicas. Conceptually, membership inference attacks (MIAs), which detect if a given
data point was used during training, present themselves
as a suitable tool to address this challenge. However, we
demonstrate that existing MIAs are not strong enough to
reliably determine the membership of individual images in
large, state-of-the-art DMs. To overcome this limitation,
we propose Copyrighted Data Identification
(CDI), a framework for data owners to identify whether
their dataset was used to train a given DM. CDI relies on
dataset inference techniques, i.e., instead of using the membership signal from a single data point, CDI leverages the
fact that most data owners, such as providers of stock photography, visual media companies, or even individual artists,
own datasets with multiple publicly exposed data points
which might all be included in the training of a given DM.
By selectively aggregating signals from existing MIAs and
using new handcrafted methods to extract features from these
datasets, feeding them to a scoring model, and applying rigorous statistical testing, CDI allows data owners with as
little as 70 data points to identify with a confidence of more
than 99% whether their data was used to train a given DM.
Thereby, CDI represents a valuable tool for data owners to
claim illegitimate use of their copyrighted data. We make our
code available at https://github.com/sprintml/
copyrighted_data_identification.
* Equal contribution.
† Work done while the author was at CISPA.

1. Introduction
In recent years, large diffusion models (DMs) [56] have
rapidly gained popularity as a new class of generative models,
surpassing the performance of prior approaches, such as
Generative Adversarial Networks [23]. DMs now power
several state-of-the-art image generators including Stable
Diffusion [47], Midjourney [60], Runway [47], Imagen [50],
and DALL-E 2 [41, 42].
To reach their powerful performance, DMs need to be
trained on large amounts of high-quality and diverse data.
This data is usually scraped from the Internet, often without
respecting the copyrights of the data owners. Especially
since it has been shown that DMs are capable of generating
verbatim copies of their training data at inference time [11],
this represents a violation of intellectual property rights. Recently, Getty Images, a leading visual media company, filed
a lawsuit against Stability AI, the creators of Stable Diffusion, alleging the unauthorized use of copyright-protected
images [5, 46]. This case has sparked a wave of additional lawsuits, with many more now addressing intellectual
property infringement by generative AI companies [44, 45].
Unfortunately, as it becomes obvious during the lawsuits—
particularly for training data points that are not output in a
verbatim form during inference time—verifying that these
data points have been illegitimately used for training the
DMs is a challenging task.
Membership inference attacks [55] that aim at identifying
whether a specific data point was used to train a given model,
in theory, present themselves as a solution to the problem.
Unfortunately, prior work [17] indicates that performing a realistic MIA on large DMs is a very challenging task. One of
the practical challenges lies in the prohibitive costs of training state-of-the-art DMs (e.g., $600.000 for Stable Diffusion)
which renders potent MIAs utilizing multiple shadow model
copies [10, 55] infeasible. To further explore the practicality
of MIAs for identifying copyrighted samples used to train
large DMs, we perform an extensive study, evaluating the

18674

