This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Timestep Embedding Tells: It’s Time to Cache for Video Diffusion Model
Feng Liu1 * Shiwei Zhang2† Xiaofeng Wang1,3 Yujie Wei4 Haonan Qiu5
Yuzhong Zhao1 Yingya Zhang2 Qixiang Ye1 Fang Wan1‡
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Alibaba Group
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Fudan University 5 Nanyang Technological University
Project Page: https://liewfeng.github.io/TeaCache

Figure 1. Quality-latency comparison of video diffusion models. Visual quality versus latency curves of the proposed TeaCache approach
and PAB [61] using Latte [31]. TeaCache significantly outperforms PAB in both visual quality and efficiency. Latency is evaluated on a
single A800 GPU for 16-frame video generation under 512 × 512 resolution.

Abstract

refine the estimated differences and utilizes them to indicate
output caching. Experiments show that TeaCache achieves
up to 4.41× acceleration over Open-Sora-Plan with negligible (-0.07% Vbench score) degradation of visual quality.

As a fundamental backbone for video generation, diffusion
models are challenged by low inference speed due to the sequential nature of denoising. Previous methods speed up the
models by caching and reusing model outputs at uniformly
selected timesteps. However, such a strategy neglects the
fact that differences among model outputs are not uniform
across timesteps, which hinders selecting the appropriate
model outputs to cache, leading to a poor balance between
inference efficiency and visual quality. In this study, we
introduce Timestep Embedding Aware Cache (TeaCache),
a training-free caching approach that estimates and leverages the fluctuating differences among model outputs across
timesteps. Rather than directly using the time-consuming
model outputs, TeaCache focuses on model inputs, which
have a strong correlation with the modeloutputs while incurring negligible computational cost. TeaCache first modulates the noisy inputs using the timestep embeddings to ensure their differences better approximating those of model
outputs. TeaCache then introduces a rescaling strategy to

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the emergence of diffusion
models [13, 16, 46, 48], as a fundamental backbone for visual generation. The model architecture has evolved from
U-Net [4, 35, 37] to diffusion transformers (DiT) [34],
which greatly increased model capacities. Empowered by
DiT, video generation models [1, 2, 22, 31, 58, 62] have
reached a groundbreaking level.
Despite of the substantial efficacy of these powerful
models, their inference speed remains a pivotal impediment
to wider adoption [25]. This core limitation arises from
the sequential denoising procedure inherent to their reverse
phase, which inhibits parallel decoding [42]. Moreover, as
model parameters scale up and the requirements for higher
resolution and longer durations of videos escalate [9, 58],
the inference process experiences a further decline in speed.
To accelerate the visual generation procedure, distilla-

* Work was done during internship at Alibaba Group.
† Project Leader. ‡ Corresponding author.

7353

