This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Geometry-guided Online 3D Video Synthesis
with Multi-View Temporal Consistency
Hyunho Ha1 * Lei Xiao2 Christian Richardt2 Thu Nguyen-Phuoc2
Changil Kim2 Min H. Kim1 Douglas Lanman2 Numair Khan2
1

2

KAIST

ENeRF

Ours

PSNR

GPS-Gaussian

Meta

y
t

x

Novel view renderings

t

x

Computation Time (ms)

Temporal plane slices show (in)consistency across time

Figure 1. Our method enables efficient rendering of high-quality, consistent 3D videos by addressing the challenges of view synthesis in both
spatial and temporal dimensions. In multi-camera setups, novel-view synthesis must manage continuous changes across view and time to
ensure smooth visualization. Existing methods process frames independently and often introduce flickering artifacts. We propose using
aggregated depth as geometric guidance to a blending network to maintain consistent color and detail across frames. This results in view and
temporally consistent 3D videos, achieving state-of-the-art quality while providing improved processing speed over prior methods.

Abstract
We introduce a novel geometry-guided online video view synthesis method with enhanced view and temporal consistency.
Traditional approaches achieve high-quality synthesis from
dense multi-view camera setups but require significant computational resources. In contrast, selective-input methods
reduce this cost but often compromise quality, leading to
multi-view and temporal inconsistencies such as flickering
artifacts. Our method addresses this challenge to deliver
efficient, high-quality novel-view synthesis with view and
temporal consistency. The key innovation of our approach
lies in using global geometry to guide an image-based rendering pipeline. To accomplish this, we progressively refine depth maps using color difference masks across time.
These depth maps are then accumulated through truncated
signed distance fields in the synthesized view’s image space.
This depth representation is view and temporally consistent,
and is used to guide a pre-trained blending network that
fuses multiple forward-rendered input-view images. Thus,
the network is encouraged to output geometrically consis* Work done during an internship at Meta Reality Labs.

Project page: https://nkhan2.github.io/projects/geometry-guided-2025

tent synthesis results across multiple views and time. Our
approach achieves consistent, high-quality video synthesis,
while running efficiently in an online manner.

1. Introduction
Recent strides in immersive 3D video are poised to revolutionize the way we experience education, video conferencing
[30, 63], and entertainment [26, 39, 75] with virtual reality
(VR), augmented reality (AR), and 3D videography [18, 66]
becoming increasingly accessible and affordable. As these
technologies continue to evolve, we can expect a future
where immersive video content seamlessly integrates into
our daily lives, transforming the way we learn, entertain, and
connect with each other.
Generating accurate scene-scale reconstructions for immersive 3D video introduces unique challenges due to
complex occlusions, large depth ranges, and diverse object appearances. While systems using large camera arrays
have demonstrated high-quality novel-view synthesis results
[68, 69], processing all inputs of a dense camera rig simultaneously imposes substantial computational costs. This makes
them impractical for real-time applications which require ef-

11275

