This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CASP: Compression of Large Multimodal Models Based on Attention Sparsity
Mohsen Gholami, Mohammad Akbari, Kevin Cannons, and Yong Zhang
Huawei Technologies Canada Co., Ltd.
{mohsen.gholami1, mohammad.akbari, kevin.cannons, yong.zhang3}@huawei.com

Abstract
In this work, we propose an extreme compression technique for Large Multimodal Models (LMMs). While previous studies have explored quantization as an efficient posttraining compression method for Large Language Models
(LLMs), low-bit compression for multimodal models remains under-explored. The redundant nature of inputs in
multimodal models results in a highly sparse attention matrix. We theoretically and experimentally demonstrate that
the attention matrix’s sparsity bounds the compression error of the Query and Key weight matrices. Based on this, we
introduce CASP, a model compression technique for LMMs.
Our approach performs a data-aware low-rank decomposition on the Query and Key weight matrix, followed by
quantization across all layers based on an optimal bit allocation process. CASP is compatible with any quantization technique and enhances state-of-the-art 2-bit quantization methods (AQLM and QuIP#) by an average of 21% on
image- and video-language benchmarks. The code is available here1 .

Figure 1. CASP considers the specific properties of LMMs and
offers significant improvement over state-of-the-art model quantization methods. PPL: perplexity.

sion remains less explored. Although LLM compression
techniques can be applied to LMMs, there are fundamental
differences between the two. Popular LMMs convert visual
modalities into hundreds to thousands of tokens, which are
then concatenated with text tokens and fed to an underlying
LLM. Unlike textual data, multimodal inputs are typically
highly redundant. This redundancy is reflected in the attention layers, which can effectively be considered during
LMMs compression.
Fig. 2 illustrates the attention maps of LLaVa-NextVideo-7B compared to Llama2-7B for the same layer (i.e.,
layer 15). Despite LLaVa-Next-Video-7B utilizing Llama27B as its underlying LLM, the attention of the two models differs significantly. This observation raises two underexplored questions: 1) How do the activations and attentions of LMMs differ from those of LLMs? 2) What insights
should be considered to optimize LMMs compression?
In LMMs, visual tokens typically receive much less attention compared to text tokens. For example, in LLaVa-1.5
[24], vision tokens approximately receive ten times less attention compared with text tokens. This disparity is even
more pronounced in LLaVa-Next-Video with greater number of visual tokens. The cumulative attention on text tokens
leads to a sparse attention map (Fig. 2). We hypothesize

1. Introduction
Large multimodal Models (LMMs) have garnered significant attention in recent years due to their impressive performance in image- and video-language comprehension.
Despite their substantial applications, LMMs are computationally expensive, which limits their broader use. For
instance, 70B models like LLaVa-Onevision [20] require
140GB of GPU memory to operate at 16-bit precision.
Moreover, the inference of LMMs requires significant electricity consumption, which raises concerns about environmentally friendly AI [40]. To address this problem, compression techniques such as knowledge distillation [12, 14],
quantization [7, 8, 22], and low-rank factorization [41, 47]
have been proposed.
Recent studies predominantly focus on compressing
large language models (LLMs), while the LMMs compres1 https://github.com/vbdi/casp

9372

