This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-modal Vision Pre-training for Medical Image Analysis
Shaohao Rui1,2∗ , Lingzhi Chen2∗ , Zhenyu Tang1,2 , Lilong Wang2 , Mianxin Liu2 , Shaoting Zhang2 , Xiaosong Wang2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
{ruishaohao, tang zhenyu}@sjtu.edu.cn
{chenlingzhi, wanglilong, liumianxin, zhangshaoting, wangxiaosong}@pjlab.org.cn

https://github.com/openmedlab/BrainMVP

Abstract
Self-supervised learning has greatly facilitated medical image analysis by suppressing the training data requirement
for real-world applications. Current paradigms predominantly rely on self-supervision within uni-modal image
data, thereby neglecting the inter-modal correlations essential for effective learning of cross-modal image representations. This limitation is particularly significant for naturally grouped multi-modal data, e.g., multi-parametric MRI
scans for a patient undergoing various functional imaging protocols in the same study. To bridge this gap, we
conduct a novel multi-modal image pre-training with three
proxy tasks to facilitate the learning of cross-modality representations and correlations using multi-modal brain MRI
scans (over 2.4 million images in 16,022 scans of 3,755
patients), i.e., cross-modal image reconstruction, modalityaware contrastive learning, and modality template distillation. To demonstrate the generalizability of our pre-trained
model, we conduct extensive experiments on various benchmarks with ten downstream tasks. The superior performance of our method is reported in comparison to state-ofthe-art pre-training methods, with Dice Score improvement
of 0.28%-14.47% across six segmentation benchmarks and
a consistent accuracy boost of 0.65%-18.07% in four individual image classification tasks.

Figure 1. (a) There are naturally grouped multi-modal data, e.g.,
multi-parametric MRI scans in the real world. (b) We propose
three proxy tasks to facilitate the learning of cross-modality representations and correlations. Blue cubes represent one modality in a study, green cubes represent another modality within the
same study, and gray cubes with flame symbols represent learnable modality templates. (c) We apply the pre-trained model and
distilled modality templates for downstream tasks.

ing [16, 21, 56], magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [33,
46, 48, 65], and X-rays [5, 17, 32, 47, 61], or mixed image
data (with each modality processed separately) [24, 53, 57].
These methods mainly focus on instance-level discrimination [16, 27, 39, 53, 56] or image reconstruction [33, 46,
48, 65] proxy tasks, failing to effectively model the relationships across modalities. In clinical practice, as shown in
Fig. 1(a), groups of multi-modal data are naturally acquired
as different imaging protocols are set to capture complementary pathological features for the same patient in one
examing study. In other words, these multi-modal data acquired on the same patient exhibit strong correspondences.
For example, multi-parametric MRI (mpMRI) data combining diverse modalities helps to comprehensively depict the
structural and pathological features of the brain [44], which
substantially enhances diagnostic accuracy and thorough-

1. Introduction
Medical image analysis is greatly enhanced via selfsupervised learning for its capability of extracting distinctive image representation and surprisingly robust generalization performance across various downstream applications. However, current self-supervised learning methods
in medical imaging are still confined to pre-training on unimodal image data, e.g., computed tomography (CT) imag∗ Equal contribution
Corresponding author (wangxiaosong@pjlab.org.cn)

5164

