This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shift the Lens: Environment-Aware Unsupervised
Camouflaged Object Detection
Ji Du1,2 , Fangwei Hao1 , Mingyang Yu1 , Desheng Kong1
Jiesheng Wu1 , Bin Wang1 , Jing Xu1,∗ , Ping Li2,3 *
1
College of Artificial Intelligence, Nankai University, China
2
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
3
School of Design, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong

Abstract

Feature Visualization

EASE
Environment Prototype

Camouflaged Object Detection (COD) seeks to distinguish
objects from their highly similar backgrounds. Existing
work has essentially focused on isolating camouflaged objects from the environment, demonstrating ever-improving
performance but at the cost of extensive annotations and
complex optimizations. In this paper, we diverge from
this paradigm and shift the lens to isolating the salient
environment from the camouflaged object. We introduce
EASE, an Environment-Aware unSupErvised COD framework that identifies the environment by referencing an environment prototype library and detects camouflaged objects
by inverting the retrieved environmental features. Specifically, our approach (DiffPro) uses large multimodal models, diffusion models, and vision-foundation models to
construct the environment prototype library. To retrieve
environments from the library and refrain from confusing foreground and background, we incorporate three retrieval schemes: Kernel Density Estimation-based Adaptive Threshold (KDE-AT), Global-to-Local pixel-level retrieval (G2L), and Self-Retrieval (SR). Our experiments
demonstrate significant improvements over current unsupervised methods, with EASE achieving an average gain
of over 10% on the COD10K dataset. When integrated
with SAM, EASE surpasses prompt-based segmentation approaches and performs competitively with state-of-the-art
fully-supervised methods. Code is available at https:
//github.com/xiaohainku/EASE.

1. Introduction
Camouflaged Object Detection (COD) [15] focuses on
identifying objects that blend in with their surroundings,
making them visually challenging to detect, as indicated by
* Corresponding authors: Jing Xu (xujing@nankai.edu.cn) and Ping Li
(p.li@polyu.edu.hk).

Retrieval

Similarity

Threshold
Cut

Figure 1. (Left) Feature visualization from DINOv2 [55] shows
that objects blend seamlessly with their surroundings, making it
extremely challenging to distinguish foreground solely based on
feature similarity due to a lack of clear boundaries. (Right) EASE
offers a solution by shifting focus from direct feature comparison.
Instead of relying on inter-feature similarity alone, EASE identifies background regions by comparing features against predefined
environment prototypes. Camouflaged objects are then isolated by
inverting this background detection.

the left part of Fig. 1. Existing COD methods focus on identifying hidden cues within the environment to detect the
concealed. Fully-supervised learning approaches in COD
tackle the challenge by designing architectures that capture
fine camouflage details in complex settings, using bottomup/top-down [15, 16, 53] or multi-stream [76, 82] structures to leverage dense annotations. In a similar vein, semisupervised learning [79] seeks to maximize the learning of
camouflage features with minimal annotation. To further reduce the reliance on extensive labeling, weakly-supervised
learning relies on sparse annotations, like points [8], scribbles [26], boxes [79] or pseudo-labels [23], to guide models in distinguishing camouflaged objects from their backgrounds.
Another line of research revolves around prompt-based
segmentation, devoid of reliance on annotations. A typical paradigm involves using Large Multimodal Mod-

19271

