This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Affine Correspondences by Integrating Geometric Constraints
Pengju Sun1, 2 Banglei Guan1, 2(B) Zhenbao Yu1, 2 Yang Shang1, 2 Qifeng Yu1, 2 Daniel Barath3, 4
1

College of Aerospace Science and Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, China.
2
Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Image Measurement and Vision Navigation, China.
3
ETH Zurich, Switzerland. 4 HUN-REN SZTAKI, Hungary.

Abstract
Affine correspondences have received significant attention due to their benefits in tasks like image matching and
pose estimation. Existing methods for extracting affine correspondences still have many limitations in terms of performance; thus, exploring a new paradigm is crucial. In
this paper, we present a new pipeline designed for extracting accurate affine correspondences by integrating dense
matching and geometric constraints. Specifically, a novel
extraction framework is introduced, with the aid of dense
matching and a novel keypoint scale and orientation estimator. For this purpose, we propose loss functions based
on geometric constraints, which can effectively improve accuracy by supervising neural networks to learn feature geometry. The experimental show that the accuracy and robustness of our method outperform the existing ones in
image matching tasks. To further demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, we applied it to relative
pose estimation. Affine correspondences extracted by our
method lead to more accurate poses than the baselines on
a range of real-world datasets. The code is available at
https://github.com/stilcrad/LearningACs.

(a) LoFTR

(b) DKM

(c) Ours

Figure 1. Image matching with large viewpoint change. Correct
matches are green, and incorrect ones red. Our method leads to
more correct matches than the LoFTR [56] and DKM [16].

1. Introduction

affine correspondences in tasks such as homography, epipolar geometry, and focal length estimation [7, 30, 50, 65].
Affine correspondences offer distinct advantages in addressing fundamental challenges in visual perception, particularly in image-matching and relative pose estimation
tasks, owing to its capacity to encode higher-order information about the scene geometry [8, 19, 24]. By locally
approximating the image deformation caused by changes in
camera pose through affine mapping, geometric information
about corresponding local regions are obtained [26, 45].
These approximations enhance the robustness of affine covariants for matching and recognition tasks [41]. It is a valuable property for matching planar surfaces in the presence
of extreme viewpoint changes, improving the reliability of
wide baseline image matching [47]. Moreover, affine correspondences are used to estimate complex geometric relationships between images, such as essential matrices, outperforming the results when relying solely on point correspondences [5, 8]. Benefiting from the smaller sample sizes
required, robust homography and relative pose estimation is
significantly faster than when using the point-based solvers
while leading to more accurate results [5, 8]. Through exploiting these informative affine correspondences, such algorithms can attain enhanced precision and reduced runtime
[8]. The reduction in the number of matches needed to estimate a model, e.g., homography, leads to advantages, like

In computer vision, image matching and geometric
estimation stand as fundamental problems, playing crucial roles in domains ranging from autonomous driving to
robotics [8, 24, 36]. Affine correspondences (ACs) have
attracted significant attention in recent years, due to their
ability to provide valuable insights into the underlying 3D
geometry of the surrounding environment [3, 5, 22]. Notably, previous research has demonstrated the efficacy of
B: Corresponding author.
Email: {sunpengju23, guanbanglei12,
shangyang1977, yuqifeng}@nudt.edu.cn
zhenbaoyu@whu.edu.cn dbarath@ethz.ch

27038

