This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

QuCOOP: A Versatile Framework for Solving Composite and
Binary-Parametrised Problems on Quantum Annealers
Natacha Kuete Meli1
1

Vladislav Golyanik2
University of Siegen

Marcel Seelbach Benkner1
2
MPI for Informatics, SIC

www.vsa.informatik.uni-siegen.de

Michael Moeller1

https://4dqv.mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
There is growing interest in solving computer vision problems such as mesh or point set alignment using Adiabatic Quantum Computing (AQC). Unfortunately, modern
experimental AQC devices such as D-Wave only support
Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimisation (QUBO)
problems, which severely limits their applicability. This
paper proposes a new way to overcome this limitation
and introduces QuCOOP, an optimisation framework extending the scope of AQC to composite and binaryparametrised, possibly non-quadratic problems. The key
idea of QuCOOP is to iteratively approximate the original objective function by a sequel of local (intermediate)
QUBO forms, whose binary parameters can be sampled on
AQC devices. We experiment with quadratic assignment
problems, shape matching and point set registration without
knowing the correspondences in advance. Our approach
achieves state-of-the-art results across multiple instances of
tested problems1 .

(a) Minimise 𝑓 (𝑔(𝑥))
Minimise 𝑓 (𝑔 𝑡 (𝑥) := 𝑔(𝑥 𝑡 ) + ⟨∇𝑔(𝑥 𝑡 ), 𝑥 − 𝑥 𝑡 ⟩)
𝑓 quadratic in 𝑔(𝑥): ✔,
𝑓 quadratic in 𝑔 𝑡 (𝑥): ✔,
𝑥 binary: ✔, 𝑔 linear in 𝑥: ✘
𝑥 binary: ✔, 𝑔 𝑡 linear in 𝑥: ✔
AQC:  Not a QUBO UUU
AQC: ✔ Iteratively solve QUBOs UUU

Initial

Result

(b) Rigid point sets registration.

Reference

Template

(c) Shape matching on FAUST.

Figure 1. (a) Our QuCOOP framework for solving composite and
binary-parametrised problems using Adiabatic Quantum Computing (AQC). Some qualitative results are shown for: (b) Point set
registration without known correspondences; (c) Mesh alignment
problems. Our general approach is competitive with specialised
existing quantum and classical methods; it is compatible with
quantum annealers and classical simulated annealing solvers.

quire non-quadratic objectives to obtain accurate solutions.
Motivated by the tangible implications for computer vision
of the restriction of the current AQC generation to QUBOs,
we develop a new AQC-based optimisation method that can
handle a certain type of non-quadratic objective functions.
We consider the general problem

1. Introduction
Adiabatic Quantum Computing (AQC) has become a
promising approach for solving combinatorial optimisation problems in different fields of science including computer vision [3, 46, 48, 70]. AQC leverages principles
of quantum mechanics to explore optimisation landscapes
in a way that classical methods cannot do, allowing them
to tunnel through energy barriers and escape local minima. Unfortunately, current AQC devices such as DWave’s machines, also referred to as Quantum Annealers,
are restricted to Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimisation (QUBO) problems. Any deviations from the QUBO
form—e.g., when the objective function is non-quadratic or
quadratic in a non-linear function of the binary variables—
makes the potential benefits of AQCs not directly accessible. At the same time, many computer vision problems re-

  \label {eq:original_problem} \argmin _{s \in \mcal S} \ f(s) 

(1)

of optimising a function f : S → R over a feasible set
S ⊊ Rn . Moreover, we assume S to be parameterizable by
elements of a set X ⊂ Rk via a smooth function g : X → S
allowing to rewrite Problem (1) in a composite form as
  \label {eq:parametrised_problem} \argmin _{x \in \mcal X} \ f(g(x)). 

(2)

1 project page: https://4dqv.mpi-inf.mpg.de/QuCOOP/

If X = Rk , Problem (2) describes an unconstrained problem and can be solved locally, or even globally (for f ◦ g

11395

