This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HSI-GPT: A General-Purpose Large Scene-Motion-Language Model for
Human Scene Interaction
Yuan Wang1,2 Yali Li1,2 Xiang Li1,2 Shengjin Wang1,2‡
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, China
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), China
‡
wy23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {liyali13, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Corresponding Author
1

(a) Text-Conditioned HSI Generation

walk to the chair

walk to the door

(b) Multiple-Modal Controlled HSI Generation

walk to the sink

(c) Text-based Motion Generation

A person uses right arm to arm wrestle whilst standing.

walk to the desk

walk to the refrigerator

(d) Motion Captioning

walk to the door

(e) Generalized Motion Completion

A person walks
forward and
then turns right
A man crawled
out of the ground
and then stood up

The man holds hand up and turns in a circle to the right.

A person moves
forward with
both arms raised
straight up.

Figure 1. Illustration of our HSI-GPT’s supported tasks. Given different instruction prompts, the proposed HSI-GPT not only accommodates
multiple control conditions but handles various HSI-related tasks as well as motion-centric understanding and generation tasks uniformly.

Abstract

scene affordances), but it seamlessly supports various HSIrelated tasks (e.g., multi-modal controlled HSI generation,
HSI understanding, and general motion completion in 3D
scenes). First, HSI-GPT quantizes textual descriptions and
human motions into discrete, LLM-interpretable tokens with
multi-modal tokenizers. Inspired by multi-modal learning,
we develop a recipe for aligning mixed-modality tokens into
the shared embedding space of LLMs. These interaction
tokens are then organized into uniﬁed instruction following prompts, allowing HSI-GPT to ﬁne-tune on questionand-answer tasks. Extensive experiments and visualizations
validate that our general-purpose HSI-GPT model delivers
exceptional performance across multiple HSI-related tasks.

While ﬂourishing developments have been witnessed in
text-to-motion generation, synthesizing physically realistic,
controllable, language-conditioned Human Scene Interactions (HSI) remains a relatively underexplored landscape.
Current HSI methods naively rely on conditional Variational
AutoEncoder (cVAE) and diffusion models. They are typically associated with limited modalities of control signals and task-speciﬁc frameworks design, leading to inﬂexible adaptation across various interaction scenarios and
descriptive-unfaithful motions in diverse 3D physical environments. In this paper, we propose HSI-GPT, a GeneralPurpose Large Scene-Motion-Language Model that applies “next-token prediction” paradigm of Large Language
Models to the HSI domain. HSI-GPT not only exhibits remarkable ﬂexibility to accommodate diverse control signals
(3D scenes, textual commands, key-frame poses, as well as

1. Introduction
The evolution of Generative Artiﬁcial Intelligence [38–
40, 59] has prompted extensive research into single-modality
conditioned human motion synthesis, where various control

7147

