This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G EN M ANIP: LLM-driven Simulation for Generalizable
Instruction-Following Manipulation
Ning Gao1,2∗ , Yilun Chen1∗‡ , Shuai Yang1,3∗ , Xinyi Chen1,4∗ , Yang Tian1 , Hao Li1 ,
Haifeng Huang1,3 , Hanqing Wang1 , Tai Wang1 , Jiangmiao Pang1†
1

Shanghai AI Laboratory, 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University,
3
Zhejiang University, 4 Nanjing University

Abstract
Robotic manipulation in real-world settings remains challenging, especially regarding robust generalization. Existing simulation platforms lack sufficient support for exploring how policies adapt to varied instructions and scenarios.
Thus, they lag behind the growing interest in instructionfollowing foundation models like LLMs, whose adaptability
is crucial yet remains underexplored in fair comparisons.
To bridge this gap, we introduce G EN M ANIP, a realistic
tabletop simulation platform tailored for policy generalization studies. It features an automatic pipeline via LLMdriven task-oriented scene graph to synthesize large-scale,
diverse tasks using 10K annotated 3D object assets. To systematically assess generalization, we present G EN M ANIP B ENCH, a benchmark of 200 scenarios refined via humanin-the-loop corrections. We evaluate two policy types: (1)
modular manipulation systems integrating foundation models for perception, reasoning, and planning, and (2) endto-end policies trained through scalable data collection.
Results show that while data scaling benefits end-to-end
methods, modular systems enhanced with foundation models generalize more effectively across diverse scenarios. We
anticipate this platform to facilitate critical insights for advancing policy generalization in realistic conditions. All
code will be available at project page.

2D foundation models [36, 49, 57, 59] for perception, reasoning, or task and motion planning. Another strategies
emphasizes end-to-end imitation learning, including recent
popular vision-language-action models (VLAs) pretrained
with large-scale vision-language models (VLMs). trained
on large-scale robotic datasets [53] and accomplish downstream tasks in a zero-shot or downstream fine-tuning manner. However, benchmarking both policy types for generalization in real-world environments remains challenging due
to the high cost and difficulty of replicating exact scenarios
consistently. Therefore, high-quality simulation platforms
are crucial for systematic policy evaluation.

1. Introduction

Previous robotic manipulation benchmarks [33, 35, 43,
48, 61] often evaluate robots in simplified or controlled
environments, emphasizing closed-loop training and evaluation, while sacrificing realism and scenario diversity.
Recent efforts have introduced more realistic, everyday,
and long-horizon tasks [39] and leveraged automatic task
generation via LLMs [50, 69] or generative models [45].
Nonetheless, these platforms either lack scalable frameworks for generating diverse tasks or comprehensive robotic
demonstration data. RoboCasa [50], one of the most relevant works, significantly advances realism and task diversity but lacks a standardized evaluation benchmark in diverse instructions and scenarios. The evaluation still primarily employs randomized layouts, limiting systematic
evaluation in realistic, everyday scenarios.

Policy generalization is a core challenge within the field of
robotic manipulation. Scholars have identified two popular
approaches to enhance the generalizability of models. One
streams [29, 30, 32, 44, 51] involves the hierarchical use of
established foundation models, which utilize multi-modal
large language models [3, 7, 23, 36, 54, 59] (MLLMs), and
∗ Equal contribution.
‡ Project lead.
† Corresponding author.

12187

To address these limitations, we introduce G EN M ANIP,
a realistic, large-scale tabletop simulation platform tailored
for evaluating generalist robots across diverse scenarios and
instructions. As illustrated in Fig. 1, G EN M ANIP features
a rich collection of diverse 3D object assets, a standardized paradigm called the task-oriented scene graph (ToSG),
and a LLM-driven automatic task generation pipeline. The
ToSG serves as a scalable and structured representation of
task-related objects, similar in spirit to the natural language
adaptation of PDDL [1], explicitly encoding both objectlevel and spatial relationships as nodes and edges in the

