This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sufficient Invariant Learning for Distribution Shift
Taero Kim1 , Subeen Park1 , Sungjun Lim1 , Yonghan Jung2 , Krikamol Muandet3 , Kyungwoo Song1
1
Yonsei University, 2 Purdue University, 3 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
taero.kim@yonsei.ac.kr, sallyna602@yonsei.ac.kr, lsj9862@yonsei.ac.kr,
jung222@purdue.edu, muandet@cispa.de, kyungwoo.song@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Learning robust models under distribution shifts between
training and test datasets is a fundamental challenge in machine learning. While learning invariant features across
environments is a popular approach, it often assumes that
these features are fully observed in both training and test
sets—a condition frequently violated in practice. When
models rely on invariant features absent in the test set, their
robustness in new environments can deteriorate. To tackle
this problem, we introduce a novel learning principle called
the Sufficient Invariant Learning (SIL) framework, which focuses on learning a sufficient subset of invariant features
rather than relying on a single feature. After demonstrating the limitation of existing invariant learning methods, we
propose a new algorithm, Adaptive Sharpness-aware Group
Distributionally Robust Optimization (ASGDRO), to learn
diverse invariant features by seeking common flat minima
across the environments. We theoretically demonstrate that
finding a common flat minima enables robust predictions
based on diverse invariant features. Empirical evaluations
on multiple datasets, including our new benchmark, confirm
ASGDRO’s robustness against distribution shifts, highlighting the limitations of existing methods. Code: https:
//github.com/MLAI-Yonsei/SIL-ASGDRO.

Figure 1. Left visualizes the images that contain a spurious feature, Z NI , and multiple invariant features, ZTail , ZBeak , and ZFeet in
training environment Etr . If the model focuses on the Z NI (green
background), then it fails to predict correctly in the test environment E\Etr (Right). Even if the model captures the invariant features in Etr , e.g., ZFeet , it still fails to predict correctly when the
invariant features are not present (Gray). However, it is possible to
predict correctly if we learn diverse invariant features sufficiently,
ZFeet , ZTail , and ZBeak . With SIL (Red), the model predicts the label using remaining invariant features, ZTail and ZBeak even though
ZFeet is not present in the test environment E\Etr .

rious features [3] – features that are not preserved across
changes in environments or groups1 . For example, in domain generalization tasks [14, 20], the goal is to learn invariant features that consistently predict labels across multiple environments. Assuming that the learned invariant features persist in all unseen environments, they guarantee the
model’s generalization performance on new environments
[23, 26]. Similarly, learning models robust to subpopulation shifts is essential in cases of severe imbalances between groups. In this scenario, invariant features play a
crucial role in addressing the challenges faced by underrepresented groups, which are disproportionately impacted by
strong spurious correlations [17, 35, 41].
However, learning all possible invariant features is challenging in practice because most existing invariant learning approaches focus on eliminating spurious correlations,
which can be achieved by leveraging only a subset of the invariant features present in the training environments. Moreover, invariant features identified by the model may not be
observable in unseen environments [15, 38]. This under-

1. Introduction
Machine learning models typically assume that training and
test data are drawn from the same distribution. However,
in real-world scenarios, this assumption is often violated
whenever the training and test distribution differ, known as
distribution shifts. In these cases, model performance tends
to degrade, highlighting the need to develop models that are
robust to distribution shifts for reliable outcomes.
To train models robust to distribution shift, invariant
learning focuses on identifying latent features that remain
constant across environments, referred to as invariant features. These features enable consistent predictions across
environments by discouraging models from relying on spu-

1 In this paper, the terms environment and domain are used interchangeably. A group refers to a subpopulation corresponding to a particular label
within a specific environment.

4958

