This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LAL: Enhancing 3D Human Motion Prediction with Latency-aware Auxiliary
Learning
Xiaoning Sun
Dong Wei
Huaijiang Sun
Shengxiang Hu
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
{sunxiaoning,csdwei,sunhuaijiang,hushengxiang}@njust.edu.cn

(a) under ideal setting

Abstract

Existing methods
Observed sequence

Making accurate prediction of human motions based on the
historical observation is a crucial technology for robots to
collaborate with humans. Existing human motion prediction methods are all built under an ideal assumption that
robots can instantaneously react, which ignores the time
delay introduced during data processing & analysis and
future reaction planning – jointly known as “response latency”. Consequently, the predictions made within this latency period become meaningless for practical use, as part
of the time has passed and the corresponding real motions
have already occurred before robot deliver its reaction. In
this paper, we argue that the seemingly meaningless prediction period, however, can be leveraged to enhance prediction accuracy significantly. We propose LAL, a Latencyaware Auxiliary Learning framework, which shifts the existing “reaction instantaneous” convention into a new motion
prediction paradigm with both latency compatibility and
utility. The framework consists of two branches handling
different tasks: the primary branch learns to directly predict
the valid target (excluding the beginning latency period)
based on observation; while the auxiliary branch learns the
same target, but based on the reformed observation with
additional latency data incorporated. A direct and effective
way of auxiliary feature sharing is forced by our tailored
consistency loss, to gradually integrate auxiliary latency insights into the primary prediction branch. Estimated feature
statistics-based alignment method is presented as optional
step for primary branch refinement. Experiments show that
LAL achieves significant improvement on prediction accuracy, without additional time consumption during testing.

Predicted sequence

···
time

(b) in practical scenarios
The time when
robot is supposed
to start reaction.

Latency
period

The time when robot
actually starts to react,
which is delayed.

Valid prediction

Observed sequence
meaningless

···
time

Our latency-aware approach

Figure 1. (a) Existing methods only focus on “what to predict”,
while ideally overlook the latency issue lies in its applications –
The reaction delivered by the robot is inevitably delayed, making it meaningless to predict motions within this period, because
time is passing and real motions have occurred, while robot is still
pending and have not decided its reaction yet. (b) We present
a new latency-aware prediction paradigm, which turns the seemingly meaningless period into valuable auxiliary insights, to help
improve prediction accuracy significantly.

collaboration [9, 19] where robots/machines are required to
closely collaborate with humans.
Over the past years, research has focused on exploring spatio-temporal information of the observed motion sequence with deep learning-based methods, where typical
architectures like RNNs [7, 11], GNNs [16] and GCNs
[6, 24, 26] are employed, achieving great progress in the
pursuit of prediction accuracy. Nevertheless, these methods
forget the ultimate goal of human motion prediction, that is
offering a foundation for robotic planning, to let robots generate proper reaction behaviors. Reaction often comes after
several embedded steps that inevitably cost tens to hundreds
of milliseconds [45]. Existing methods never consider such
demand, and implicitly assume an ideal condition where

1. Introduction
3D human motion prediction is aimed at forecasting a future
motion sequence based on historical observation, which has
been widely used in many fields like autonomous driving
[15, 36], motion tracking [8], and especially human-robot

7105

