This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Octopus: Alleviating Hallucination via Dynamic Contrastive Decoding
Wei Suo1,2,4 *, Lijun Zhang1,2,4 ,* Mengyang Sun2,3,4 , Lin Yuanbo Wu5 , Peng Wang1,2,4†, Yanning Zhang1,2,4
1
School of Computer Science, 2 Ningbo Institute, 3 School of Cybersecurity,
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China.
4
National Engineering Laboratory for Integrated Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean.
5
Department of Computer Science, Swansea University, United Kingdom.
{suowei1994,lijunzhang,sunmenmian}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn {peng.wang,ynzhang}@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract

High-quality Data

or
Human or Automatic
Annotation

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have obtained
impressive performance in visual content understanding
and multi-modal reasoning. Unfortunately, these large
models suffer from serious hallucination problems and tend
to generate fabricated responses. Recently, several Contrastive Decoding (CD) strategies have been proposed to
alleviate hallucination by introducing disturbed inputs. Although great progress has been made, these CD strategies
mostly apply a one-size-fits-all approach for all input conditions. In this paper, we revisit this process through extensive experiments. Related results show that hallucination causes are hybrid and each generative step faces a
unique hallucination challenge. Leveraging these meaningful insights, we introduce a simple yet effective Octopuslike framework that enables the model to adaptively identify hallucination types and create a dynamic CD workflow. Our Octopus framework not only outperforms existing
methods across four benchmarks but also demonstrates excellent deployability and expansibility. Code is available at
https://github.com/LijunZhang01/Octopus.

Training

Q: Please describe
this image in detail Label: The table is

Large VisionLanguage
Models

filled with …, corn,
meat, and vegetables

Data construction

Original Image 𝑣
Q: Please describe
this image in detail

(a) Retraining Method

Large VisionLanguage Models

logit(𝑦|𝑣, 𝑞)
—
−

logit(𝑦|𝑣 ∗ , 𝑞∗ )

logit 𝑦 𝑣, 𝑞 − logit(𝑦|𝑣 ∗ , 𝑞 ∗ )
Outputs: There are some breads…

(b) Contrastive Decoding Method
Large VisionLanguage Models

Q: Please describe
this image in detail

Back propagation

Output: There is a …

Shared Weight

Large VisionLanguage Models
Distorted Image 𝑣 ∗

The table is filled with
delicious food, including…
There are several people
sitting next to them.

Hidden
States
𝑒𝑦𝑒

—

Octopus
Recognizing
Hallucinations Types

−
Outputs: The table is
filled with delicious
food including some
breads …

logit 𝑦 𝑣, 𝑞 − logit(𝑦|𝑣 ∗ , 𝑞 ∗ )

Language
Priors

√ Strategy-1
(c) Our Model

Vision info
loss
Strategy-2

Attention
No action
bias
Strategy-3 … Strategy-k

Octopus Tentacles

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Paradigm comparison of different hallucination alleviation methods. (a) Retraining method. Constructing high-quality
data to retrain these LVLMs. (b) Contrastive Decoding. Comparing the output distributions from the original and distorted inputs.
(c) Octopus. Our method focuses on dynamically selecting suitable strategies to reduce hallucinations caused by various factors.

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have achieved
significant success over the past few years [4, 7, 25, 26, 61].
They have facilitated various Vision-and-Language (VL)
tasks [14, 22, 40, 41] by adapting to different input instructions. However, LVLMs are facing a grand challenge:
they often fail to accurately capture the visual content and
tend to generate fabricated responses (e.g., imaginary objects, incorrect attributes and inexistent relationship), which
is known as hallucination [13, 24]. The hallucination issue

seriously affects user trust and confidence, especially in applications that require trustworthy outcomes such as medical reports [10, 52] and automatic driving [8].
To alleviate the hallucination issue, existing approaches
can be roughly categorized into two research lines. As
shown in Fig. 1 (a), the first paradigm relies on constructing high-quality instruction tuning data and re-training the
models to suppress hallucinations [13, 24, 28, 44]. However, such a strategy requires a well-designed data construction process with complex verification and expensive costs.
In addition, additional training is strictly prohibited for deployed models.
In contrast, as shown in Fig. 1 (b), Contrastive Decod-

* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors.

29904

