This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TensoFlow: Tensorial Flow-based Sampler for Inverse Rendering
Chun Gu1,2 Xiaofei Wei1,2 Li Zhang1,2 * Xiatian Zhu3
1
School of Data Science, Fudan University 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute 3 University of Surrey
https://github.com/fudan-zvg/tensoflow

Abstract

ability to effectively disentangle geometry, material properties, and lighting, restricting their capacity to relight scenes.
To address this issue, recent works [10, 11, 14, 15, 20,
22, 23, 35, 36] have advanced appearance modeling by incorporating the physically-based rendering equation [16]
that simulates light-surface interactions. This however introduces a fundamental challenge – a need for accurately
evaluating the rendering equation using Monte Carlo sampling. One intuitive method is stratified sampling over the
hemisphere [15, 35], but this can be computationally inefficient due to the need for many samples. To improve efficiency, leading methods like NeRO [23] and TensoSDF
[20] employ importance sampling. These approaches utilize
pre-defined importance samplers (e.g., cosine-weighted and
GGX samplers [30] for diffuse and specular components,
respectively). However, these pre-defined importance samplers still result in high variance, as the integrand typically
varies in both space and direction, making it difficult for a
fixed sampler to effectively match the scene’s characteristics.
To address this challenge, we propose a novel perspective of learning spatially and directionally aware importance samplers, allowing us to manage the complexity of
any scene without the need for manual sampler selection,
while benefiting from greater flexibility and generality. As
a showcase, we formulate TensoFlow, a concrete approach
for importance sampler learning. Our sampler is parameterized by normalizing flows composed with piecewisequadratic coupling layers [25], functioning as a neural
distribution that enables both probability density function
(PDF) inference and directional sampling of incident light
in the rendering equation. To effectively capture the characteristics of the sampler spatially, we learn a tensorial representation of the scene space, imposing spatial conditions
on the rendering process, together with reflected direction,
resulting in spatially and directionally aware sampling distributions. This formulation can be optimized by minimizing the distributional difference between the integrand and
our normalizing flow.
We make these contributions: (i) We propose a novel
concept of learning the importance samplers of the render-

Inverse rendering aims to recover scene geometry, material properties, and lighting from multi-view images. Given
the complexity of light-surface interactions, importance
sampling is essential for the evaluation of the rendering
equation, as it reduces variance and enhances the efficiency of Monte Carlo sampling. Existing inverse rendering methods typically use pre-defined non-learnable importance samplers in prior manually, struggling to effectively
match the spatially and directionally varied integrand and
resulting in high variance and suboptimal performance. To
address this limitation, we propose the concept of learning
a spatially and directionally aware importance sampler for
the rendering equation to accurately and flexibly capture
the unconstrained complexity of a typical scene. We further formulate TensoFlow, a generic approach for sampler
learning in inverse rendering, enabling to closely match
the integrand of the rendering equation spatially and directionally. Concretely, our sampler is parameterized by normalizing flows, allowing both directional sampling of incident light and probability density function (PDF) inference.
To capture the characteristics of the sampler spatially, we
learn a tensorial representation of the scene space, which
imposes spatial conditions, together with reflected direction, leading to spatially and directionally aware sampling
distributions. Our model can be optimized by minimizing
the difference between the integrand and our normalizing
flow. Extensive experiments validate the superiority of TensoFlow over prior alternatives on both synthetic and realworld benchmarks.

1. Introduction
3D scene modeling has made significant strides, especially
with the emergence of powerful representation models like
neural radiance fields (NeRF) [2–4, 24] and efficient ones
like 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) [13, 17, 38]. However,
these methods struggle with inverse rendering due to the in* Corresponding author (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn).

495

