This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OVO-Bench: How Far is Your Video-LLMs from Real-World Online Video
Understanding?
Junbo Niu∗1,3† ,Yifei Li∗1,2† , Ziyang Miao3 , Chunjiang Ge2 , Yuanhang Zhou2 , Qihao He4 ,
Xiaoyi Dong1,5B , Haodong Duan1 , Shuangrui Ding1,5† , Rui Qian1,5† ,
Pan Zhang1 , Yuhang Zang1 , Yuhang Cao1 , Conghui He6 , Jiaqi Wang1,7B
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 2 Tsinghua University,
3
Beihang University, 4 Communication University of China,
5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 6 SenseTime Group,
7
Shanghai Innovation Institute

Figure 1. A demonstrative comparison between offline and online video understanding [5]. Offline video understanding focuses on
answering questions based on the entirety of a video. In contrast, online video understanding involves posing queries about the context of a
video at intermediate points, demanding the ability to trace back past information, perceive ongoing events, and adapt to continuous input.

Abstract
Temporal Awareness—the ability to reason dynamically
based on the timestamp when a question is raised—is the
key distinction between offline and online video LLMs. Unlike offline models, which rely on complete videos for static,
post hoc analysis, online models process video streams incrementally and dynamically adapt their responses based
on the timestamp at which the question is posed. Despite its

significance, temporal awareness has not been adequately
evaluated in existing benchmarks. To fill this gap, we
present OVO-Bench (Online-VideO-Benchmark), a novel
video benchmark that emphasizes the importance of timestamps for advanced online video understanding capability
benchmarking. OVO-Bench evaluates the ability of video
LLMs to reason and respond to events occurring at specific timestamps under three distinct scenarios: (1) Backward tracing: trace back to past events to answer the question. (2) Real-time understanding: understand and respond to events as they unfold at the current timestamp.

* indicates equal contribution. † indicates interns at IXCLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory

18902

