This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task Preference Optimization: Improving Multimodal Large Language Models
with Vision Task Alignment
Ziang Yan∗2,1 , Zhilin Li∗3,1 , Yinan He∗1
Chenting Wang4,1 , Kunchang Li5,1 , Xinhao Li6,1 , Xiangyu Zeng6,1
Zilei Wang3 , Yali Wang5,1 ,Yu Qiao1 , Limin Wang6,1 , Yi Wang†1,7
1

Shanghai AI Laboratory

5

2

Zhejiang University

3

University of Science and Technology of China

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

6

Nanjing University

4

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

7

Shanghai Innovation Institute

https://github.com/OpenGVLab/TPO

Which c

Abstract
Current multimodal large language models (MLLMs)
struggle with fine-grained or precise understanding of visuals although they give comprehensive perception and reasoning in a spectrum of vision applications. Recent studies either develop tool-using or unify specific visual tasks
into the autoregressive framework, often at the expense
of overall multimodal performance. To address this issue and enhance MLLMs with visual tasks in a scalable
fashion, we propose Task Preference Optimization (TPO),
a novel method that utilizes differentiable task preferences
derived from typical fine-grained visual tasks. TPO introduces learnable task tokens that establish connections
between multiple task-specific heads and the MLLM. By
leveraging rich visual labels during training, TPO significantly enhances the MLLM’s multimodal capabilities and
task-specific performance. Through multi-task co-training
within TPO, we observe synergistic benefits that elevate
individual task performance beyond what is achievable
through single-task training methodologies. Our instantiation of this approach with VideoChat and LLaVA demonstrates an overall 14.6% improvement in multimodal performance compared to baseline models. Additionally, MLLMTPO demonstrates robust zero-shot capabilities across various tasks, performing comparably to state-of-the-art supervised models.

1. Introduction
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) show impressive visual perception and reasoning capabilities, with
applications in personal assistants [68], embodied systems [17], and scientific discovery [6]. Considering the
*Equal contribution. †Corresponding author.

Show the tracking trajectory of cup with
candy in middle. Which cup is the candy
under, left one, middle one or right one?
The cups are shuffled in the video, and the candy is
under the middle cup.

The candy is under
the left cup.

TPO

The candy is under the
first cup on the left.

Figure 1. TPO uses differentiable task preferences from dense visual supervisions via task-specific heads to enhance MLLMs in
fine-grained understanding.

growing expectations of users in more accurate and detailed
perception, taking the shell game as an example, further
improving the generality of MLLM requires fine-grained
knowledge representation beyond words, e.g. MLLM implicitly embeds how to track keys indicated by users.
Existing studies address the enhancement of perceptual granularity in MLLMs by focusing on specific visual
tasks (e.g. temporal grounding, segmentation, tracking) via
MLLMs. They usually fine-tune MLLMs on more task
data in text format or enable MLLMs to activate the corresponding task heads. Shikra [7] applies MLLM to localization tasks, transforms object coordinates into dialogue
formats, and learns them autoregressively. Meanwhile,
TimeChat [63] and VideoChat-T [96] treat event timestamps as text for autoregressive prediction, thereby endowing MLLMs with temporal grounding. They do improve
specific task performance significantly, while at the cost of
multimodal performance more or less. This is counterintuitive as seminal research proves different visual tasks are
correlated and training them together often yields mutual
gains [29, 47, 66]. We conjecture that the presentation of
different tasks influences this training and that the conflict

29880

