This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C O -S PY: Combining Semantic and Pixel Features to
Detect Synthetic Images by AI
Siyuan Cheng˚ , Lingjuan Lyu:‹ , Zhenting Wang; , Xiangyu Zhang, Vikash Sehwag:
Purdue University, : Sony AI, ; Rutgers University
{cheng535, xyzhang}@purdue.edu
:

{Vikash.Sehwag, Lingjuan.Lv}@sony.com
;

zhenting.wang@rutgers.edu

Abstract
With the rapid advancement of generative AI, it is now possible to synthesize high-quality images in a few seconds.
Despite the power of these technologies, they raise significant concerns regarding misuse. Current efforts to distinguish between real and AI-generated images may lack
generalization, being effective for only certain types of generative models and susceptible to post-processing techniques
like JPEG compression. To overcome these limitations, we
propose a novel framework, C O -S PY, that first enhances
existing semantic features (e.g., the number of fingers in a
hand) and artifact features (e.g., pixel value differences),
and then adaptively integrates them to achieve more general
and robust synthetic image detection. Additionally, we create
C O -S PY B ENCH, a comprehensive dataset comprising 5 real
image datasets and 22 state-of-the-art generative models,
including the latest models like FLUX. We also collect 50k
synthetic images in the wild from the Internet to enable evaluation in a more practical setting. Our extensive evaluations
demonstrate that our detector outperforms existing methods
under identical training conditions, achieving an average
accuracy improvement of approximately 11% to 34%. The
code is available at https://github.com/Megum1/Co-Spy.

increasingly prominent as the growth of image generation
technologies. There is hence an urgent need to develop effective detection methods for AI-generated images that can
mitigate misuse and enhance the trustworthiness of these
technologies.
Existing detection methods of AI-generated images, or
synthetic images for brevity, can be largely classified into
two categories: (1) detectors based on semantic features
and (2) detectors based on texture-level artifacts. Semantic detectors [5, 29, 43, 59] distinguish synthetic images
primarily based on semantic features, such as human hand
outlines. Typically, these methods collect a large amount of
real and synthetic data across a wide range of objects and
then train a deep neural network to identify synthetic images.
In contrast, artifact detectors [18, 37, 54, 55] focus on identifying texture-level features arising from the up-sampling
processes commonly used in image generation models. Intuitively, these features are distinct pixel-level signatures, such
as similar values between adjacent pixels.

1. Introduction

While existing techniques have shown effectiveness on
specific datasets, these datasets often rely on images generated from a limited range of models from several years
ago, such as ProGAN [19]. Since then, generated models
have seen significant advancements in resolution and realism. Moreover, many of these images are in raw formats
like PNG, without undergoing lossy compression or transformation, e.g., JPEG compression. To more accurately assess
the effectiveness of existing techniques on the latest models, diverse transformations, and a wider range of generated
content, we created a new dataset C O -S PY B ENCH, which
comprises over one million images generated by 22 of the
latest generative models. Compared to widely-used datasets
such as CNNDet [59], DiffusionForensics [60], and the stateof-the-art DRCT-2M [5], C O -S PY B ENCH includes 10 additional cutting-edge models, e.g., FLUX [2]. Furthermore,
our dataset is significantly more diverse. For instance, it
incorporates caption descriptions from five different datasets,

Despite the tremendous benefits brought by generative AI,
the misuse of generation technologies is a growing concern.
They could be employed to create fake news, potentially
causing false alarms and spreading widespread misinformation online. For example, in the vision domain, it is
disturbingly straightforward to generate realistic images that
fabricate sensational stories, such as falsely depicting public figures in controversial situations. These issues become
˚Work done during Siyuan Cheng’s internship at Sony AI.
‹ Corresponding Author

13455

