This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Are Images Indistinguishable to Humans Also Indistinguishable to Classifiers?
Zebin You1,2 ,* Xinyu Zhang3 , Hanzhong Guo1,2 , Jingdong Wang4 , Chongxuan Li1,2†
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
3
The University of Adelaide 4 Baidu VIS
{zebin, guohanzhong, chongxuanli}@ruc.edu.cn;
xyzhang0717@gmail.com; wangjingdong@baidu.com

Abstract
The ultimate goal of generative models is to perfectly capture
the data distribution. For image generation, common metrics
of visual quality (e.g., FID) and the perceived truthfulness of
generated images seem to suggest that we are nearing this
goal. However, through distribution classification tasks, we
reveal that, from the perspective of neural network-based
classifiers, even advanced diffusion models are still far from
this goal. Specifically, classifiers are able to consistently
and effortlessly distinguish real images from generated ones
across various settings. Moreover, we uncover an intriguing discrepancy: classifiers can easily differentiate between
diffusion models with comparable performance (e.g., U-ViTH vs. DiT-XL), but struggle to distinguish between models
within the same family but of different scales (e.g., EDM2-XS
vs. EDM2-XXL). Our methodology carries several important
implications. First, it naturally serves as a diagnostic tool
for diffusion models by analyzing specific features of generated data. Second, it sheds light on the model autophagy
disorder and offers insights into the use of generated data:
augmenting real data with generated data is more effective
than replacing it. Third, classifier guidance can significantly
enhance the realism of generated images.

1. Introduction
Diffusion probabilistic models [26, 52, 53] have emerged as
leading generative models for image [17, 45], video [4, 5, 69]
and 3D content generation [44], surpassing previous generative models such as generative adversarial networks [21],
variational autoencoders [29], and normalizing flows [46].
In particular, focusing on image generation, diffusion models are capable of producing realistic images that are often indistinguishable from real ones to the human eye (see

Figure 1. Four-way distribution classification tasks: Which one
is real in each row?1 The samples are from real images or generated from state-of-the-art diffusion models. Notably, classifiers
consistently and effortlessly distinguish between real and generated
images in all settings.

Fig. 1). Furthermore, common metrics such as FID [25]
suggest that the distribution generated by state-of-the-art
diffusion models closely approximates the ImageNet validation set [27, 28, 55]. Therefore some works [62, 65], have
utilized generated data to augment training datasets. However, to the best of our knowledge, few studies have been
conducted to analyze the differences between the generated
and real distributions.
This raises a fundamental question: How far is the generated distribution from the real distribution? Drawing inspiration from methodologies in dataset bias [34, 57, 58],
we propose distribution classification tasks (see Sec. 2 for
details) that predict whether an image belongs to the real
1 From left to right, the first two rows show images from U-ViT, ImageNet (real), DiT, and EDM2-XXL. The bottom row shows images from
Pixart-α, Playground-v2.5, COCO (real), and SDXL.

* Work done during an internship at Baidu VIS.
† Correspondence to Chongxuan Li.

28790

