This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LongVALE: Vision-Audio-Language-Event Benchmark Towards
Time-Aware Omni-Modal Perception of Long Videos
Tiantian Geng1,2 , Jinrui Zhang1 , Qingni Wang3 , Teng Wang1,4 , Jinming Duan2,5∗ , Feng Zheng1∗
1
Southern University of Science and Technology 2 University of Birmingham
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
The University of Hong Kong 5 University of Manchester
gengtiantian97@gmail.com zhangjr2018@mail.sustech.edu.cn

Figure 1. We introduce LongVALE, the first-ever omni-modality long video benchmark, offering precise temporal boundaries and captions
for omni-modal events integrating visual, audio, and speech information. The captions feature audio-visual correlations to enhance crossmodal learning. Besides, we extend three fine-grained video tasks to the omni-modality domain, enabling omni-perception of long videos.

Abstract
Despite impressive advancements in video understanding,
most efforts remain limited to coarse-grained or visualonly video tasks. However, real-world videos encompass
omni-modal information (vision, audio, and speech) with
a series of events forming a cohesive storyline. The lack
of multi-modal video data with fine-grained event annotations and the high cost of manual labeling are major obstacles to comprehensive omni-modality video perception. To address this gap, we propose an automatic
pipeline consisting of high-quality multi-modal video filtering, semantically coherent omni-modal event boundary
detection, and cross-modal correlation-aware event captioning. In this way, we present LongVALE, the first-

ever Vision-Audio-Language Event understanding benchmark comprising 105K omni-modal events with precise
temporal boundaries and detailed relation-aware captions
within 8.4K high-quality long videos. Further, we build a
baseline that leverages LongVALE to enable video large
language models (LLMs) for omni-modality fine-grained
temporal video understanding for the first time. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and great potential of LongVALE in advancing comprehensive multi-modal
video understanding. The dataset and code are available at
https://ttgeng233.github.io/LongVALE/.

1. Introduction

∗ Corresponding co-authors

As the volume of videos on social media platforms grows
exponentially, video understanding [11, 20, 50, 57] has
emerged as a vital research area in artificial intelligence.

18959

