This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlipSketch: Flipping Static Drawings to Text-Guided Sketch Animations
Hmrishav Bandyopadhyay Yi-Zhe Song
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey.
{h.bandyopadhyay, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

Figure 1. We animate raster sketches using motion priors from pre-trained text-to-video diffusion models. Our generated animations
are dynamic, with scene-level interaction that is not possible with stroke-constrained vector animation algorithms [22, 69]. We control
animations with input sketches, where generated videos closely preserve sketch identity without losing range of motion (GIFs in Suppl.)

Abstract
Sketch animations offer a powerful medium for visual
storytelling, from simple flip-book doodles to professional
studio productions. While traditional animation requires
teams of skilled artists to draw key frames and in-between
frames, existing automation attempts still demand significant artistic effort through precise motion paths or keyframe
specification. We present FlipSketch, a system that brings
back the magic of flip-book animation – just draw your idea
and describe how you want it to move! Our approach harnesses motion priors from text-to-video diffusion models,
adapting them to generate sketch animations through three
key innovations: (i) fine-tuning for sketch-style frame generation, (ii) a reference frame mechanism that preserves visual integrity of input sketch through noise refinement, and
(iii) a dual-attention composition that enables fluid motion
without losing visual consistency. Unlike constrained vector animations, our raster frames support dynamic sketch
transformations, capturing the expressive freedom of traditional animation. The result is an intuitive system that

makes sketch animation as simple as doodling and describing, while maintaining the artistic essence of hand-drawn
animation.

1. Introduction

28394

Remember those tiny stick figures dancing in the corners of
your textbook pages? That simple flip-book magic captured
something fundamental – our desire to breathe life into our
drawings! We present a system that brings back that flipbook magic – just doodle your idea and describe how you
want it to move.
From these playful beginnings, traditional animation studios like Disney perfected the art of bringing drawings
to life through a process where lead animators draw key
frames and skilled artists fill in the intermediate frames
– a technique known as in-betweening. This workflow
remains the industry standard today, requiring teams of
skilled artists to manually craft each frame. Existing attempts at automating this process [11] still demand significant artistic effort – requiring users to specify precise mo-

