This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Sparse MoE in GANs for Text-conditioned Image Synthesis
Jiapeng Zhu1,2
1

Ceyuan Yang3
Yifei Zhang1,4

Ant Group

A black and white photo of a dog with big eyes.

2

HKUST

Kecheng Zheng1 Yinghao Xu1,3
Qifeng Chen 2 Yujun Shen1
3

CUHK

4

Zifan Shi1,2

Shanghai Jiao Tong Univeristy

A photo of a colorful sports car,
with mountain background.

A steaming plate of classic
fried rice with vegetables, eggs.

Oil painting of a flower garden,
distant cottage, soft sunlight.

Sunrise over the clouds in the
mountains.

A coral reef with starfish, sea
anemones and fish.

A pencil sketch of a woman with
deep, almond-shaped eyes in.

Figure 1. Example results at 512×512 resolution synthesized by our proposed Aurora, a large-scale GAN-based text-to-image generator.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Due to the difficulty in scaling up, generative adversarial
networks (GANs) seem to be falling out of grace with the
task of text-conditioned image synthesis. Sparsely activated
mixture-of-experts (MoE) has recently been demonstrated
as a valid solution to training large-scale models with
limited resources. Inspired by this, we present Aurora,
a GAN-based text-to-image generator that employs a collection of experts to learn feature processing, together with
a sparse router to adaptively select the most suitable expert
for each feature point. We adopt a two-stage training strategy, which first learns a base model at 64 × 64 resolution
followed by an upsampler to produce 512 × 512 images.
Trained with only public data, our approach encouragingly
closes the performance gap between GANs and industrylevel diffusion models, maintaining a fast inference speed.
We release the code and checkpoints here to facilitate the
community for further development.

18411

As one of the most popular tasks in the field of content
generation, text-conditioned image synthesis [3, 12, 19, 34,
60, 61, 65, 67, 100, 108] allows users to customize a picture
with natural language instructions. Among diverse types
of generative models, such as variational autoencoders
(VAEs) [42], autoregressive models (ARs) [97, 98], and
generative adversarial networks (GANs) [23], diffusion
models [15, 28, 87] have blossomed into a dominant solution with a thriving community (e.g., stable diffusion [65]),
leaving few efforts on improving other frameworks.
In this work, we put our focus on GANs, which are
usually criticized for training instability [1, 53] and limited
mode coverage [70]. However, we argue that the task
of text-to-image (T2I) generation is more like a translation task (i.e., shifting an informative data distribution to
another) instead of a pure generation task (i.e., modeling
the observed distribution with random noise as the input),
and accordingly that the introduction of the text condition

