This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VisionArena: 230K Real World User-VLM Conversations with Preference Labels
Christopher Chou*
Stanford

Lisa Dunlap*
UC Berkeley

Koki Mashita
UC Berkeley

Krishna Mandal
UC Berkeley

Trevor Darrell
UC Berkeley

Ion Stoica
UC Berkeley

Joseph E. Gonzalez
UC Berkeley

Wei-Lin Chiang
UC Berkeley

Solve.

Tell me the
backstory of this.

In statistics, how do we
interpret this distribution?

Extract all text.

Who is this?

Homework

Creative Writing

Diagram

OCR

Entity Recognition

Figure 1. Samples from VisionArena Conversations. VisionArena contains conversations from real users covering a variety of domains.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Visual language models (VLMs) [2, 3, 33, 37] are being
increasingly used in a wide range of real-world applications including image captioning and story telling, document understanding, web development, and embodied systems. While these models have made remarkable progress
on a wide range of benchmarks [4, 14, 18, 19, 44, 47], existing VLM benchmarks focus largely on static, single-turn
tasks with predetermined correct answers, overlooking the
open-ended, evolving nature of real-world user interactions.
They also rarely capture multi-turn dialogue, incorporate diverse context, or reflect the fluidity of user intent. As such,
they provide a simplified snapshot of VLM capabilities.
Understanding these real-world interactions across a variety of tasks is essential for developing models that align
with human expectations and perform effectively. To address this, previous works such as Chatbot Arena [9] and
WildVision [25, 26] crowdsource evaluation by hosting
platforms where users can freely interact with pairs of
VLMs and provide preference votes. Building off of these
works, we introduce VisionArena, a dataset of 230K realworld conversations between users and 38 VLMs in 135
languages, collected through the Chatbot Arena platform.
VisionArena consists of:
• VisionArena-Chat: 200,000 single and multi-turn chat
logs between users and VLMs, spanning 138 languages,
73k users, and 45 open source and proprietary VLMs.

With the growing adoption and capabilities of visionlanguage models (VLMs) comes the need for benchmarks
that capture authentic user-VLM interactions. In response,
we create VisionArena, a dataset of 230K real-world conversations between users and VLMs. Collected from Chatbot Arena — an open-source platform where users interact with VLMs and submit preference votes — VisionArena
spans 73K unique users, 45 VLMs, and 138 languages.
Our dataset contains three subsets: VisionArena-Chat,
200k single and multi-turn conversations between a user
and a VLM; VisionArena-Battle, 30K conversations comparing two anonymous VLMs with user preference votes;
and VisionArena-Bench, an automatic benchmark of 500
diverse user prompts that efficiently approximate the live
Chatbot Arena model rankings. Additionally, we highlight
the types of question asked by users, the influence of response style on preference, and areas where models often
fail. We find open-ended tasks like captioning and humor
are highly style-dependent, and current VLMs struggle with
spatial reasoning and planning tasks. Lastly, we show finetuning the same base model on VisionArena-Chat outperforms Llava-Instruct-158K, with a 17-point gain on MMMU
and a 46-point gain on the WildVision benchmark. Dataset
at https://huggingface.co/lmarena-ai.
* Equal contribution.

3877

