This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Maintaining Consistent Inter-Class Topology in Continual Test-Time Adaptation
Chenggong Ni1,2,3 ∗ Fan Lyu4 * Jiayao Tan1,2,3 Fuyuan Hu1,2,3 † Rui Yao5 Tao Zhou6
1
School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Suzhou University of Science and Technology
2
Jiangsu Industrial Intelligent and Low-carbon Technology Engineering Center
3
Suzhou Key Laboratory of Intelligent and Low-carbon Technology Application
4
New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
China University of Mining and Technology, 6 North Minzu University
{cgn, jiayaotan}@post.usts.edu.cn, fuyuanhu@mail.usts.edu.cn
fan.lyu@cripac.ia.ac.cn, ruiyao.contact@gmail.com, zhoutaonxmu@126.com

Domain 1

Abstract
This paper introduces Topological Consistency Adaptation
(TCA), a novel approach to Continual Test-time Adaptation (CTTA) that addresses the challenges of domain shifts
and error accumulation in testing scenarios. TCA ensures the stability of inter-class relationships by enforcing a class topological consistency constraint, which minimizes the distortion of class centroids and preserves the
topological structure during continuous adaptation. Additionally, we propose an intra-class compactness loss to
maintain compactness within classes, indirectly supporting inter-class stability. To further enhance model adaptation, we introduce a batch imbalance topology weighting
mechanism that accounts for class distribution imbalances
within each batch, optimizing centroid distances and stabilizing the inter-class topology. Experiments show that
our method demonstrates improvements in handling continuous domain shifts, ensuring stable feature distributions
and boosting predictive performance. Our code is available
at: https://github.com/Successybbdwm/TCA.

Domain N

···
Others

Source Domain

···
TCA

Figure 1. Feature distribution in CTTA. In other methods, as domain shifts occur continuously, the latent inter-class topological
relationships learned by the model in the source domain are progressively distorted. Throughout the adaptation process, Topological Consistency Adaptation (TCA) maintains a stable inter-class
topological structure.

1. Introduction

data. A key challenge in the CTTA method within the selftraining framework is the accumulation of errors, which
arises from pseudo-labels generated by the model’s predictions on unlabeled data. To solve the problem, existing
methods such as [8, 21, 35, 42] focus on optimizing the selftraining framework to prevent error accumulation.
However, the existing methods cannot maintain stable
inter-class topological structures in the feature space. As
shown in Fig. 1, unsupervised self-training can lead to an
accumulation of errors due to unstable feature representations. This instability causes the model to produce erroneous pseudo-labels [6, 9, 32, 39], which, in turn, misguide the model into biased updates. This cycle perpetuates,
progressively impairing model performance and resulting
in error accumulation. There are two primary causes for
this phenomenon. On one hand, the balance of inter-class

Test-time adaptation (TTA) [1, 16, 40] aims to adapt a
source pre-trained model by learning from the unlabeled
test (target) data during inference time, where the training
data cannot be disclosed due to data privacy concerns. Recently, considering that the data distribution may change
continuously, Continual Test-Time Adaptation (CTTA) [35]
is proposed as an online continuous form of TTA. CTTA
aims to continuously adapt models to the evolving data
distribution of target domains without relying on source
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

15319

