This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language-Assisted Debiasing and Smoothing for Foundation Model-Based
Semi-Supervised Learning

Abstract
Recent studies have focused on introducing pre-trained
foundation models into semi-supervised learning (SSL)
tasks. Nevertheless, these foundation models can exhibit
biases toward different classes and tend to generate imbalanced pseudo-labels for SSL. Thus, efforts have been made
to introduce the logit adjustment offset to reduce the inherent bias in foundation models for SSL tasks. Despite their
success, existing foundation model-based SSL methods face
challenges: 1) unreliability in the estimated logit adjustment offset, 2) overlooking the potential of linguistic knowledge in capturing model biases and 3) fail to fully exploit
the unlabeled samples. To address these issues, we propose Language-Assisted Debiasing and Smoothing framework, namely LADaS, for foundation model-based SSL. It
consists of two components: 1) Language-assisted PseudoLabel Debiasing (LPLD) to reduce biases in foundation
models, and 2) Language-aware Pseudo-Label Smoothing
(LPLS) to fully exploit low-confidence samples to facilitate SSL training. In particular, LPLD introduces a reliability score to dynamically assess the reliability of the
logit adjustment. Additionally, it incorporates a languageoriented preference to reduce model biases using linguistic
knowledge derived from pre-trained language models. Finally, LPLS introduces language-aware soft pseudo-labels
and devises language-aware pseudo-label smoothing loss
to guide the learning of unlabeled samples with low-quality
pseudo-labels. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our proposed LADaS.

1. Introduction
Deep learning [23, 33, 41–43] has witnessed great success
in various fields using large-scale labeled datasets. However, obtaining such large labeled datasets through manual annotation is both time-consuming and labor-intensive,

30

FixMatch

20

10

0

0

2

4

6

Sorted Class Index

(a)

8

Sample Utilization Ratio (%)

Pseudo-Label Distribution(%)

Na Zheng1 , Xuemeng Song2 , Xue Dong3 , Aashish Nikhil Ghosh1 , Liqiang Nie4 , Roger Zimmermann1
1
National University of Singapore 2 City University of Hong Kong
3
Tsinghua University 4 Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
{zhengnagrape, sxmustc, dongxue.sdu, nieliqiang}@gmail.com
aa.ghosh@nus.edu.sg
rogerz@comp.nus.edu.sg

100
80
60
40

DebiasPL
0

10

20

30

Epoch

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The pseudo-label distribution and (b) sample utilization ratio, where pseudo-labels exceed a fixed threshold of 0.7,
using DebiasPL on CIFAR-100 with 4 labeled samples per class.

limiting its application. In contrast, unlabeled data is typically much more abundant and easily accessible. Therefore,
semi-supervised learning (SSL) [9, 22, 35], which trains
models with a small amount of labeled data and massive
unlabeled data has attracted significant attention.
Over the past decade, there has been extensive study of
SSL regarding image classification [1, 2, 14, 15, 17, 31, 37].
Mainstream methods [22, 31] first apply weak and strong
augmentations on unlabeled images, respectively, and pass
them through a visual feature extractor and a classifier to
predict their corresponding classes. Then they introduce a
cross-entropy loss-based consistency regularization, which
leverages the predicted classes of weakly-augmented images with prediction probabilities exceeding a certain confidence threshold as pseudo-labels to supervise the classification of strongly-augmented images. Early studies following
the above paradigm train their visual feature extractors from
scratch, and hence require a significant amount of training
steps. Inspired by the great universality and generalization
of pre-trained foundation models in vision tasks [20, 25],
recent studies [9, 29, 30] replace the original vision extractor with the more powerful foundation models to enhance
training efficiency and improve model performance.
Nevertheless, directly adapting foundation models to

25708

