This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving the Transferability of Adversarial Attacks on Face Recognition with
Diverse Parameters Augmentation

1

Fengfan Zhou1 , Bangjie Yin2 , Hefei Ling1 *, Qianyu Zhou3 , Wenxuan Wang4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology;
2
Shanghai Shizhuang Information Technology Co., Ltd;
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University;
4
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University.
1
{ffzhou, lhefei}@hust.edu.cn, 2 jamesyin10@gmail.com,
3
zhouqianyu@sjtu.edu.cn, 4 wxwang@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Face Recognition (FR) models are vulnerable to adversarial
examples that subtly manipulate benign face images, underscoring the urgent need to improve the transferability of
adversarial attacks in order to expose the blind spots of these
systems. Existing adversarial attack methods often overlook
the potential benefits of augmenting the surrogate model
with diverse initializations, which limits the transferability
of the generated adversarial examples. To address this gap,
we propose a novel method called Diverse Parameters Augmentation (DPA) attack method, which enhances surrogate
models by incorporating diverse parameter initializations,
resulting in a broader and more diverse set of surrogate models. Specifically, DPA consists of two key stages: Diverse Parameters Optimization (DPO) and Hard Model Aggregation
(HMA). In the DPO stage, we initialize the parameters of the
surrogate model using both pre-trained and random parameters. Subsequently, we save the models in the intermediate
training process to obtain a diverse set of surrogate models. During the HMA stage, we enhance the feature maps of
the diversified surrogate models by incorporating beneficial
perturbations, thereby further improving the transferability.
Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed attack
method can effectively enhance the transferability of the
crafted adversarial face examples.

Figure 1. Top: comparison between traditional augmentation-based
adversarial attack methods and our proposed method. The black
pattern filling on the left and right sides of the blue line represents
input-based and parameter-based augmentation, respectively. The
orange pattern filling indicates feature-based augmentation. Bottom: comparison of performance among 4 types of augmentations.

of the critical concerns. Therefore, there is an urgent need to
bolster the resilience of FR models against adversarial face
examples to reveal and address the vulnerabilities.
As a result, numerous research efforts have been focused
on this area. Several adversarial attacks have been developed to create adversarial face examples with features like
stealthiness [6, 15, 33, 35, 61], transferability [22, 69–71],
and the capacity for physical attacks [21, 62, 63]. These
initiatives are aimed at improving the effectiveness of adversarial attacks on FR. Nevertheless, the transferability of these
adversarial attacks remains limited. To enhance the transferability of adversarial attacks, augmentation emerges as
one of the most effective methods. As illustrated in Figure 1,
augmentation-based adversarial attack consists of three aug-

1. Introduction
Owing to the relentless progress in deep learning, Face
Recognition (FR) has achieved substantial advancements
[1, 2, 8, 20, 34, 44]. However, the inherent vulnerabilities in existing FR models pose significant security risks
[7, 31, 53, 74–77], with adversarial attacks emerging as one
* Corresponding author.

3516

