This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STINR: Deciphering Spatial Transcriptomics via Implicit Neural Representation
Yisi Luo1

Xile Zhao2
Kai Ye1
Deyu Meng1,3,4
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
3
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
Macau University of Science and Technology, Macao, China
yisiluo1221@foxmail.com, xlzhao122003@163.com, kaiye@xjtu.edu.cn, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn *

Abstract
Spatial transcriptomics (ST) are emerging technologies that
reveal spatial distributions of gene expressions within tissues, serving as important ways to uncover biological insights. However, the irregular spatial profiles and variability of genes make it challenging to integrate spatial information with gene expression under a computational framework. Current algorithms mostly utilize spatial graph neural networks to encode spatial information, which may incur increased computational costs and may not be flexible enough to depict complex spatial configurations. In
this study, we introduce a concise yet effective representation framework, STINR, for deciphering ST data. STINR
leverages an implicit neural representation (INR) to continuously represent ST data, which efficiently characterizes
spatial and slice-wise correlations of ST data by inheriting the implicit smoothness of INR. STINR allows easier
integration of multiple slices and multi-omics without any
alignment, and serves as a potent tool for various biological tasks including gene imputation, gene denoising, spatial
domain detection, and cell-type deconvolution stemed from
ST data. In particular, STINR identifies the thinnest cortex
layer in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex which previous
methods were unable to achieve, and more accurately identifies tumor regions in the human squamous cell carcinoma,
showcasing its practical value for biological discoveries.
Code at https://github.com/YisiLuo/STINR.

MERFISH [34]) and sequencing-based technologies (such
as 10x Visium [6] and Stereo-seq [1]), where the latter one
often provides expression with more comprehensive gene
types. Compared to traditional bulk and single-cell gene expression data, ST data offers new potential for discovering
deeper insights into cellular and tissue properties by integrating spatial information [3, 20, 32]. Consequently, ST
analysis has garnered significant attention in the fields of
biology and bioinformatics, emerging as a rapidly growing
research direction [7, 24, 29, 33].
The emergence of ST technologies induces new biometric identification problems. For example, gene expressions
sometimes are sparse and noisy owing to the inherent technical constraints associated with tissue section preparation,
RNA capture, and fixation. Hence, gene imputation and denoising of ST data are often necessary pre-processing steps
before downstream analysis [26, 28]. On the other hand,
heterogenous gene expressions across the spatial domain inherently represent different biological regions, which leads
to the problem of detecting different spatial domains of tissue organizations from ST data [4, 16]. Furthermore, most
ST technologies only measure mixed gene expressions in
each spot stemed from multiple cells. Hence, it is needed to
perform the cell-type deconvolution by identifying the proportion of each cell-type in a measured spot, thereby achieving single-cell resolution for ST data [15].
To tackle the aforementioned biological challenges, a
vast number of statistical and machine learning techniques
have been introduced. The critical part in these methods
is to incorporate spatial correlations between spots into the
model by leveraging the provided spatial locations of measured spots. For example, Zhao et al. [36] developed a
Bayesian statistical approach to harness information from
spatial neighborhoods for spatial domain detection. Shang
and Zhou [23] introduced a factor analysis model along with
a distance kernel to integrate spatial information for celltype deconvolution. Wang et al. [31] proposed a spatial
region-based low-rank approximation algorithm to estimate

1. Introduction
Spatial transcriptomics (ST) [17] are recently developed
technologies that profile spatial distributions of gene expressions within tissues. ST data typically consists of gene
expressions recorded at measured spots, along with their
spatial coordinates as side information. Advanced ST technologies include imaging-based (such as seqFISH [5] and
* Corresponding authors: Xile Zhao and Deyu Meng.

25930

