This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Six-CD: Benchmarking Concept Removals for Text-to-image Diffusion Models
Jie Ren1 , Kangrui Chen1 , Yingqian Cui1 , Shenglai Zeng1 , Hui Liu1 , Yue Xing1 ,
Jiliang Tang1 , Lingjuan Lyu2
1
2
Michigan State University
Sony AI
{renjie3,chenkan4,cuiyingq,zengshe1,liuhui7,xingyue1,tangjili}@msu.edu
lingjuan.lv@sony.com

Abstract
Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models have shown exceptional capabilities in generating images that closely correspond to textual prompts. However, the advancement of T2I
diffusion models presents significant risks, as the models
could be exploited for malicious purposes, such as generating images with violence or nudity, or creating unauthorized portraits of public figures in inappropriate contexts.
To mitigate these risks, concept removal methods have been
proposed. These methods aim to modify diffusion models
to prevent the generation of malicious and unwanted concepts. Despite these efforts, existing research faces several challenges: (1) a lack of consistent comparisons on
a comprehensive dataset, (2) ineffective prompts in harmful and nudity concepts, (3) overlooked evaluation of the
ability to generate the benign part within prompts containing malicious concepts. To address these gaps, we propose
to benchmark the concept removal methods by introducing
a new dataset, Six-CD, along with a novel evaluation metric. In this benchmark, we conduct a thorough evaluation of
concept removals, with the experimental observations and
discussions offering valuable insights in the field.

generation. For example, in the data collection stage, Stable Diffusion (SD) [32] and Adobe [31] filter out the NotSafe-For-Work (NSFW) contents in training data. After image generation, SD uses a detector to ensure the images
are benign, removing unwanted ones. However, training
data filtering requires retraining and will be inefficient if the
model has already been trained on various data. For opensourced models like SD [32], the detector can be easily disabled by modifying the source code. Therefore, concept
removal techniques have been proposed to edit a trained
model’s parameters to prevent generating malicious concepts [7, 18, 19, 34, 44]. For instance, methods are proposed to fine-tune the models to replace unwanted concepts
with benign alternatives [7, 18, 44]. Besides, to accelerate
fine-tuning, some methods fine-tune the linear components
(e.g. the weight matrix of cross attention) using the closedform optimal solution [8, 22, 42]. Alternatively, there are
methods modifying the output during inference to bypass
fine-tuning [3, 36].
While there is rich literature improving concept removal
methods, we observe three potential issues:
1. Lack of consistent and comprehensive comparisons.
Current concept removal methods, as shown in Table 1,
typically analyze limited categories, lacking consistent
and comprehensive comparisons. This gap prevents a
thorough understanding of the methods’ behavior.
2. Ineffective prompts. In existing datasets [36], some
categories, such as nudity, contain a large portion of
“ineffective prompts”, which only trigger the model to
generate malicious contents with a low probability (see
Fig. 1). This can result in inefficient evaluation since
the ineffective prompts will generate many benign images, and evaluating concept removal on them is meaningless. Meanwhile, in other categories of unwanted
concepts like celebrities, the prompts are more effective
than the nudity concept (see Fig. 1 and Fig. 4). When
the builder has to remove both nudity and celebrity concepts, the ineffective prompts may cause unfair comparisons. The effective prompts in celebrity can generate

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in image generation [6, 11, 12, 40, 41], particularly textto-image (T2I) diffusion models [4, 29, 32]. These models have gained widespread popularity and deployment due
to their ability to generate images that precisely align with
textual prompts. However, T2I diffusion models can be exploited for malicious purposes, such as creating images depicting violence, nudity, or fake celebrity images in undesirable contexts like jail [14, 20, 26, 30, 33, 38, 39]. To ensure
the integrity of the model developers, it is crucial to design
benign models that censor malicious concepts and produce
only safe and appropriate content.
Strategies have been proposed to mitigate the malicious

28769

