This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating 3D-Consistent Videos from Unposed Internet Photos
Gene Chou1 Kai Zhang2 Sai Bi2 Hao Tan2 Zexiang Xu2
Fujun Luan2 Bharath Hariharan1 Noah Snavely1
1

Cornell University 2 Adobe Research

Figure 1. Given n unposed input keyframes, the goal is to generate a video of the scene with a realistic camera trajectory and consistent
geometry. From top to bottom: Ours, Luma Dream Machine [41] (a commercial video generation model), FILM [50] (a frame interpolation
method). Luma hallucinates new buildings (left scene) and statues (right scene) without understanding the scene layout. FILM is unable to
handle wide-baseline inputs and produces blurry transitions. See our supplement for video playback.

Abstract
We address the problem of generating videos from unposed internet photos. A handful of input images serve as
keyframes, and our model interpolates between them to simulate a path moving between the cameras. Given random
images, a model’s ability to capture underlying geometry,
recognize scene identity, and relate frames in terms of camera position and orientation reflects a fundamental understanding of 3D structure and scene layout. However, existing
video models such as Luma Dream Machine fail at this task.
We design a self-supervised method that takes advantage
of the consistency of videos and variability of multiview internet photos to train a scalable, 3D-aware video model
without any 3D annotations such as camera parameters. We
validate that our method outperforms all baselines in terms
of geometric and appearance consistency. We also show our

model benefits applications that enable camera control, such
as 3D Gaussian Splatting. Our results suggest that we can
scale up scene-level 3D learning using only 2D data such as
videos and multiview internet photos.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in video foundation models [6, 18, 24, 30,
82] learn rich spatio-temporal representations that capture
the underlying structure and dynamics of the visual world. It
is not surprising that these models contain strong 3D priors
that can be used for a variety of downstream applications
through finetuning, such as 3D object generation [10, 19]
and novel view synthesis [17, 87].
In this paper, we further investigate the capabilities of
video models to understand 3D structure of real-world scenes.
To this end, we propose the task of generating videos from a

27934

