This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Matrix-Free Shared Intrinsics Bundle Adjustment
Daniel Safari
Sony Semiconductor Solutions
depend on aforementioned property to function at all.
Most SfM use cases do not involve photo collections.
Capturing hundreds to thousands of images from just
a few cameras is ubiquitous in practice. Refining SfM
models stemming from the common case configuration
calls for shared intrinsics bundle adjustment (SI-BA) –
a BA variant seldom addressed by the literature.
This work seeks to remedy the current disparity between academic focus and practical application
through the following contributions:
■ Detailing a method of representing the SI-BA system suitable for exploiting its inherent structure
(Secs. 4 and 5).
■ Demonstrating that SI-BA facilitates matrix-free
methods outperforming conventional approaches
(Secs. 6 and 8).
■ Examining numerical issues arising when performing BA in single-precision and proposing mitigations
(Sec. 7).
■ Sharing our solvers with the community.

Abstract
Research on accelerating bundle adjustment has focused
on photo collections where each image is accompanied
by its own set of camera parameters. However, realworld applications overwhelmingly call for shared intrinsics bundle adjustment (SI-BA) where camera parameters are shared across multiple images. Utilizing overlooked optimization opportunities specific to SIBA, most notably matrix-free computation, we present
a solver that is eight times faster than alternatives while
consuming a tenth of the memory. Additionally, we
examine factors contributing to BA instability under
single-precision computation and propose mitigations.

1. Introduction
Structure from Motion (SfM)[37] is a cornerstone of
modern 3D reconstruction and view synthesis methods.
Novel downstream work such as Multi-View Stereo[34],
Neural Radiance Fields[19] and Gaussian Splatting[15]
has been facilitated by the existence of SfM pipelines.
Bundle Adjustment (BA) – the joint refinement of
image poses, landmark positions and camera intrinsics – is a core aspect of SfM. While ideally applied
frequently, the associated computational cost unfortunately leads SfM pipelines to employ it conservatively.
Yet despite the existence of a large body of work
dedicated exclusively to accelerating BA [7, 27, 38–41],
major open-source SfM software such as COLMAP[33],
TheiaSfM[35], OpenMVG[20] and GLOMAP[23] all
use the same general-purpose non-linear least-squares
solver, Ceres[2], as their BA backend.
A contributing factor to this curious development is
the prominent status of the BAL[1] collection of SfM
models as the de facto standard for BA benchmarking.
Its models are generated from internet photo collections and thus share the distinctive property of every
image having its own set of camera parameters. As
a consequence, nearly all open-source BA implementations from academia – regardless of whether the underlying algorithms theoretically necessitate it or not –

2. Related Work

27017

Background and basic building blocks of modern BA
methods, such as the Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient (PCG) method and the Reduced Camera System
(RCS), are detailed in the seminal work of [36].
Data structures and parallelization strategies for
large-scale bundle adjustment are discussed in depth by
[39]. To ease parallelization they bypass the augmented
Hessian by implementing relevant matrix-vector products through the Jacobian instead. Matrix-free methods are introduced but degrade performance on CPUs.
Our work is similar in theme yet takes the opposite approach. We circumvent the system Jacobian and focus
instead on the augmented Hessian.
A method of efficiently constructing the angular BA
normal equations by means of a compact linearization is presented by [40]. Notably, they discuss cache
hit rates when constructing the RCS. Our work covers instead cache utilization when fetching image poses
and landmark positions in the context of matrix-free
matrix-vector products by the normal equations.

