This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LookingGlass: Generative Anamorphoses via Laplacian Pyramid Warping
Pascal Chang1,2

Sergio Sancho1,2
1

É a satellite
view of the Earth

Jingwei Tang2
2

ETH Zürich

É a turtle

an expressionist art ofÉ

É a botanical garden

Markus Gross1,2

Vinicius Azevedo2

DisneyResearch|Studios

É a bunny

É a garden gnome

a watercolor painting ofÉ

É a snowy
mountain village

É an old man

an oil painting ofÉ

Figure 1. We propose a method to generate ambiguous anamorphoses—images that reveal a hidden image when viewed through a mirror
or lens. In the examples above, a conic mirror viewed from the top reveals a turtle hidden in an Earth image; a garden, seen through a lens,
shows a bunny, and rotating the lens slightly reveals a gnome; a cylindrical mirror reflects a village painting into the face of an old man.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Anamorphosis, derived from the Greek ana (“back” or
“again”) and morphe (“form”), refers to a category of images that are deliberately distorted, rendering them unrecognizable when viewed directly. These optical illusions
reveal their true form only when observed from a precise
vantage point or through reflective or refractive surfaces,
such as mirrors or lenses—objects collectively known as
anamorphoscopes [23]. These mathematical curiosities became more popular since the 17th century, when the pioneering treatise by the French mathematician J.-F. Nicéron,
La Perspective Curieuse, laid the foundation for their rigorous construction [28]. However, these images are typically
interpretable only from specific angles, losing their meaning when viewed normally.

Anamorphosis refers to a category of images that are intentionally distorted, making them unrecognizable when
viewed directly. Their true form only reveals itself when
seen from a specific viewpoint, which can be through some
catadioptric device like a mirror or a lens. While the construction of these mathematical devices can be traced back
to as early as the 17th century [28], they are only interpretable when viewed from a specific vantage point and tend
to lose meaning when seen normally. In this paper, we revisit these famous optical illusions with a generative twist.
With the help of latent rectified flow models, we propose a
method to create anamorphic images that still retain a valid
interpretation when viewed directly. To this end, we introduce Laplacian Pyramid Warping, a frequency-aware image warping technique key to generating high-quality visuals. Our work extends Visual Anagrams [17] to latent space
models and to a wider range of spatial transforms, enabling
the creation of novel generative perceptual illusions.

In this paper, we propose a method for creating anamorphic images using latent text-to-image models. We focus on
setups in which the image has a valid interpretation when
viewed as-is without distortions. Our work is similar to the
recent framework of Visual Anagrams proposed by Geng et

24

