This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Knowledge Memorization and Rumination for Pre-trained Model-based
Class-Incremental Learning
Zijian Gao1,2 †, Wangwang Jia1,2 †, Xingxing Zhang3 , Dulan Zhou1,2 ,
Kele Xu1,2 ,* Feng Dawei1,2 , Yong Dou1 , Xinjun Mao1,2 , Huaimin Wang1,2
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology
2
State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment
3
School of Computer Science, Tsinghua University
{gaozijian19, wangwangjia, dulan zhou, xukelele, yongdou, xjmao, hmwang}@nudt.edu.cn,
xxzhang1993@gmail.com, davyfeng.c@qq.com

Abstract
Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) enables models to continuously learn new classes while mitigating catastrophic
forgetting. Recently, Pre-Trained Models (PTMs) have
greatly enhanced CIL performance, even when fine-tuning
is limited to the first task. This advantage is particularly
beneficial for CIL methods that freeze the feature extractor
after first-task fine-tuning, such as analytic learning-based
approaches using a least squares solution-based classification head to acquire knowledge recursively. In this
work, we revisit the analytical learning approach combined
with PTMs and identify its limitations in adapting to new
classes, leading to sub-optimal performance. To address
this, we propose the Momentum-based Analytical Learning
(MoAL) approach. MoAL achieves robust knowledge memorization via an analytical classification head and improves
adaptivity to new classes through momentum-based adapter
weight interpolation, leading to forgetting outdated knowledge. Importantly, we introduce a knowledge rumination
mechanism that leverages refined adaptivity, allowing the
model to revisit and reinforce old knowledge, thereby improving performance on old classes. MoAL facilitates the
acquisition of new knowledge and consolidates old knowledge, achieving a win-win outcome between plasticity and
stability. Extensive experiments on various incremental settings show MoAL’s state-of-the-art performance1 .

real-world scenarios often involve data arriving sequentially
with new classes, necessitating a continual learning process—referred to as Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) [20].
The primary objective of CIL is to address catastrophic
forgetting [9, 21, 22]—a sharp decline in performance on
earlier tasks following sequential learning—thus preserving
stability. CIL demands that models balance stability and
plasticity to retain prior knowledge while continuously integrating new information [40].
Recently, Pre-Trained Models (PTMs) have shown stateof-the-art results across a broad range of applications [24].
Their strong generalization capability also has led to significant advancements in CIL, outperforming methods that
do not leverage PTMs [6, 19, 34, 42, 43, 52, 53]. Empirical evidence from existing works [52, 54] suggests that
PTMs’ inherent representations can remain fixed throughout incremental learning, with prototype-based classification heads often surpassing the performance of promptbased approaches [32, 34, 42, 43]. As a result, many methods either limit PTM fine-tuning to the first task [52] or design careful continual fine-tuning strategies [6, 53], balancing the pre-trained representations’ generalization with the
adaptivity required for learning new classes.

1. Introduction

Naturally, traditional CIL approaches, especially those
leveraging frozen feature extractors [26, 59, 60, 62], can
benefit significantly from the strong generalizability of
PTMs. Among these, analytical learning-based methods
stand out, utilizing a fixed feature extractor after first-task
fine-tuning and relying on the classification head to recursively acquire knowledge of each sample [59]. While they
effectively mitigate representation drift and accommodate
new classes through updates of the classification head alone,
we find that they often show inadequate adaptivity to novel
classes (see Section 3.3.2), resulting in sub-optimal performance. Achieving a balance between stability and plasticity

In conventional deep learning, models are trained on a fixed
dataset where all data is available upfront. In contrast,
* Corresponding author. † Equal Contribution.
1 Link to code-https://github.com/Zi-Jian-Gao/Moal.

20523

