This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Handling Spatial-Temporal Data Heterogeneity for Federated Continual
Learning via Tail Anchor
Hao Yu
Southwestern University of
Finance and Economics

Xin Yang*
Southwestern University of
Finance and Economics

Le Zhang
University of Electronic Science
and Technology of China

yuhao2033@163.com

yangxin@swufe.edu.cn

lezhang@uestc.edu.cn

Hanlin Gu
WeBank

Tianrui Li
Southwest Jiaotong University

Lixin Fan
WeBank

allengu@webank.com

trli@swjtu.edu.cn

lixinfan@webank.com

Qiang Yang
Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology
qyang@cse.ust.hk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Data heterogeneity across different clients (Non-IID) is one
of the most important challenges in traditional Federated
Learning (FL), which greatly hinders the integration of
knowledge, leading to the aggregated global model underperforming on local tasks. Many studies have attempted to
address this issue and have made some progress [6, 37, 45].
However, they are based on an unrealistic static assumption
that the training data of all clients will remain unchanged.
Federated Continual Learning (FCL) breaks the static limits by allowing clients to continually accumulate knowledge
from task sequences [1, 7, 19, 38]. While FCL expands
the applicability of FL in real-world scenarios, it also introduces a more challenging issue, i.e., spatial-temporal data
heterogeneity. Not only is the data heterogeneous across
different clients (spatial), but also the data within different tasks of the same client is heterogeneous (temporal), as
shown on the left side of Fig. 1.
The most direct negative impact of spatial-temporal data
heterogeneity is spatial-temporal catastrophic forgetting
(ST-CF) [36], as illustrated on the middle side of Fig. 1.
Catastrophic Forgetting (CF) is a term from Continual
Learning (CL), used to describe the phenomenon where a
deep model, after learning multiple tasks, tends to forget the
knowledge of previous tasks, resulting in a decrease in accuracy [8, 13, 23]. In FCL, clients face temporal catastrophic
forgetting as local models would continually learn different
tasks over time. Additionally, Non-IID data would lead the
aggregated global model to spatial catastrophic forgetting

Federated continual learning (FCL) allows each client to
continually update its knowledge from task streams, enhancing the applicability of federated learning in realworld scenarios. However, FCL needs to address not only
spatial data heterogeneity between clients but also temporal data heterogeneity between tasks. In this paper, empirical experiments demonstrate that such input-level heterogeneity significantly affects the model’s internal parameters and outputs, leading to severe spatial-temporal catastrophic forgetting of local and previous knowledge. To this
end, we propose Federated Tail Anchor (FedTA) to mix
trainable Tail Anchor with the frozen output features to adjust their position in the feature space, thereby overcoming parameter-forgetting and output-forgetting. Three novel
components are also included: Input Enhancement for improving the performance of pre-trained models on downstream tasks; Selective Input Knowledge Fusion for fusion of heterogeneous local knowledge on the server; and
Best Global Prototype Selection for finding the best anchor point for each class in the feature space. Extensive experiments demonstrate that FedTA not only outperforms existing FCL methods but also effectively preserves
the relative positions of features. Code is available at:
https://github.com/SkyOfBeginning/FedTA CVPR2025.

* Xin Yang is the corresponding author.

4874

