This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PSHuman: Photorealistic Single-image 3D Human Reconstruction using
Cross-Scale Multiview Diffusion and Explicit Remeshing
Peng Li1 , Wangguandong Zheng2 , Yuan Liu1†, Tao Yu3 , Yangguang Li4 , Xingqun Qi1
Xiaowei Chi1 , Siyu Xia2 , Yan-Pei Cao4 , Wei Xue1 , Wenhan Luo1†, Yike Guo1
1

HKUST

2

3

Southeast University

Tsinghua University

4

VAST

Figure 1. We introduce PSHuman, a diffusion-based full-body human reconstruction model. Given a single image of a clothed person, our
method facilitates detailed geometry and realistic 3D human appearance across various poses within one minute.

Abstract

THuman2.1 demonstrate PSHuman’s superiority in geometry details, texture fidelity, and generalization capability.

Photorealistic 3D human modeling is essential for various
applications and has seen tremendous progress. However,
existing methods for monocular full-body reconstruction,
typically relying on front and/or predicted back view, still
struggle with satisfactory performance due to the ill-posed
nature of the problem and sophisticated self-occlusions. In
this paper, we propose PSHuman, a novel framework that
explicitly reconstructs human meshes utilizing priors from
the multiview diffusion model. It is found that directly applying multiview diffusion on single-view human images
leads to severe geometric distortions, especially on generated faces. To address it, we propose a cross-scale diffusion that models the joint probability distribution of global
full-body shape and local facial characteristics, enabling
identity-preserved novel-view generation without geometric distortion. Moreover, to enhance cross-view body shape
consistency of varied human poses, we condition the generative model on parametric models (SMPL-X), which provide body priors and prevent unnatural views inconsistent
with human anatomy. Leveraging the generated multiview
normal and color images, we present SMPLX-initialized explicit human carving to recover realistic textured human
meshes efficiently. Extensive experiments on CAPE and

1. Introduction

16008

Photorealistic 3D reconstruction of clothed humans is a
promising and widely investigated research domain with
significant applications across several industries, including
gaming, movies, fashion, and AR/VR [26, 29]. Traditional methods, which perform multiview stereo and nonrigid registration using multi-camera setups or incorporate
additional depth signals, have achieved accurate modeling.
However, reconstruction from an in-the-wild RGB image
remains an open problem due to sophisticated body poses
and complex clothing topology.
Early studies [35, 36, 42] utilize implicit functions [27,
31] to recover textured human mesh from a single color or
normal image. Despite improvements in monocular ambiguity and postural intricacy, this regression paradigm still
falls short in detail loss and novel view artifacts. Recent
efforts [13, 51] incorporate generative information, such as
predicting a back view, to mitigate these issues. On the one
hand, the reconstruction pipelines still follow implicit functions, which exhibit limitations in capturing high-fidelity
geometry and texture details. On the other hand, the in-

