This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Design2GarmentCode:
Turning Design Concepts to Tangible Garments Through Program Synthesis
Feng Zhou1,2 *
1

Ruiyang Liu2,4† Chen Liu2,4

Zhejiang Sci-Tech University

2

Style3D Research

3

Gaofeng He2

Yong-Lu Li3
4

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract

Text

Xiaogang Jin4

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

A black, A-line dress with a
fitted bodice and flaring skirt.

(a) Traditional Approaches
Uni-Modal Generators

Sketch

Sewing patterns, the essential blueprints for fabric cutting and tailoring, act as a crucial bridge between design concepts and producible garments. However, existing uni-modal sewing pattern generation models struggle
to effectively encode complex design concepts with a multimodal nature and correlate them with vectorized sewing
patterns that possess precise geometric structures and intricate sewing relations. In this work, we propose a novel
sewing pattern generation approach Design2GarmentCode
based on Large Multimodal Models (LMMs), to generate parametric pattern-making programs from multi-modal
design concepts. LMM offers an intuitive interface for
interpreting diverse design inputs, while pattern-making
programs could serve as well-structured and semantically
meaningful representations of sewing patterns, and act as a
robust bridge connecting the cross-domain pattern-making
knowledge embedded in LMMs with vectorized sewing patterns. Experimental results demonstrate that our method
can flexibly handle various complex design expressions
such as images, textual descriptions, designer sketches,
or their combinations, and convert them into size-precise
sewing patterns with correct stitches. Compared to previous
methods, our approach significantly enhances training efficiency, generation quality, and authoring flexibility. Project
page: https://style3d.github.io/design2garmentcode.

Huamin Wang2

Text2Sewing
Image2Sewing
Sketch2Sewing

Images
Parametric
Pattern-Making Programs
Large
Multi-Modal
Models

Oversimplified
Sewing Patterns with
Wrong Stitches

Generate
Training Data

GarmentCode
Execution
Engine

Design Configs

Dedicate Sewing Patterns
with Correct Stitches

(b) Design2GarmentCode

Figure 1. Traditional sewing pattern generation approaches (top)
use uni-modal models trained on synthetic datasets generated by
parametric pattern-making programs (red arrow) to convert text
or image prompts into vector-quantized patterns. These methods
are resource-intensive and often yield oversimplified patterns with
stitching errors. Our approach (bottom) utilizes large pre-trained
LMMs to directly translate design concepts into parametric programs and configuration files (blue arrow), enabling dedicated,
structurally correct pattern generation from multi-modal design inputs within a unified framework.

1. Introduction

Traditionally, sewing patterns are drafted manually by
professional pattern-makers with years of practice, making the process inefficient, error-prone, and unable to meet
the growing demands for refinement and personalization in
the fashion market. To this end, parametric pattern-making
researches [8, 29, 31] and industrial solutions [1–4] have
emerged. These methods formalize the pattern-making process as geometric functions governed by parameters such
as body measurements and design features, thereby accelerating the process by enabling pattern makers to generate sewing patterns through parameter adjustments instead
of starting from scratch. However, creating these function templates is still complex, requiring not only advanced
pattern-making skills but also geometric intuition, mathematical modeling knowledge, and coding abilities to trans-

While generative AI has significantly propelled creativity
in fashion design, turning those design ideas into wearable
realities remains a formidable challenge. Sewing patterns
are the key components to bridge the gap between abstract
design ideas and wearable realities. They are foundational
blueprints that dictate the precise shapes and dimensions of
fabric pieces, essential for assembling garments in both the
physical and virtual fashion realms.
* Works done during the internship at Style3D Research.
† Corresponding author.

23712

