This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SF2 T: Self-supervised Fragment Finetuning of Video-LLMs for Fine-Grained
Understanding
Yangliu Hu1 , Zikai Song1† , Na Feng1 , Yawei Luo2 , Junqing Yu1 , Yi-Ping Phoebe Chen3 , Wei Yang1†
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Zhejiang University 3 La Trobe University
{huyangliu,skyesong,fengna,yjqing,weiyangcs}@hust.edu.cn
yaweiluo@zju.edu.cn

phoebe.chen@latrobe.edu.au

Abstract

2

2

Video-based Large Language Models (Video-LLMs)
have witnessed substantial advancements in recent years,
propelled by the advancement in multi-modal LLMs. Although these models have demonstrated proﬁciency in providing the overall description of videos, they struggle with
ﬁne-grained understanding, particularly in aspects such
as visual dynamics and video details inquiries. To tackle
these shortcomings, we ﬁnd that ﬁne-tuning Video-LLMs on
self-supervised fragment tasks, greatly improve their ﬁnegrained video understanding abilities. Hence we propose
two key contributions: (1) Self-Supervised Fragment FineTuning (SF2 T), a novel effortless ﬁne-tuning method, employs the rich inherent characteristics of videos for training, while unlocking more ﬁne-grained understanding ability of Video-LLMs. Moreover, it relieves researchers from
labor-intensive annotations and smartly circumvents the
limitations of natural language, which often fails to capture the complex spatiotemporal variations in videos; (2) A
novel benchmark dataset, namely FineVidBench, for rigorously assessing Video-LLMs’ performance at both the scene
and fragment levels, offering a comprehensive evaluation of
their capabilities. We assessed multiple models and validated the effectiveness of SF2 T on them. Experimental results reveal that our approach improves their ability to capture and interpret spatiotemporal details.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have showcased signiﬁcant emergent capabilities, such as in-context learning [19],
instruction-following [23], and chain-of-thought reasoning [30], driven by expansive datasets and advanced model
architectures. Extending these advancements, Video-LLMs
through mechanisms like pooling or query aggregation
† Corresponding authors

LL

-N
aVA

eXT

-Vid

eo
iC
Min

PM

-V 2

.6
eo
Vid

LLa

MA

2.1
Qw

en 2

-VL

Figure 1. Performance w/ and w/o SF2 T. We evaluated four advanced Video-LLMs w/ and w/o SF2 T on our proposed FineVidBench with two baselines: (1) Base: performance without any
ﬁne-tuning (blue dashed), and (2) Base (SFT): performance with
supervised ﬁne-tuning (red dashed). After applying SF2 T, all models showed signiﬁcant improvements (solid blue and red), underscoring its broad effectiveness.

across numerous visual tokens, have broadened the scope of
LLMs to encompass video information processing [11, 14,
35]. This evolution markedly advances their potential for
in-depth real-world comprehension, opening applications
in intelligent surveillance, virtual reality, and autonomous
driving, further enriching the landscape of video analytics
and interpretation.
Various Video-LLMs, exempliﬁed by GPT4-V, VideoLLaMA 2 [4], MiniCPM-V [34], and Qwen2-VL [28], have
been crafted by leading corporations and research institutions, demonstrating proﬁciency in capturing the overarching content of videos. When adapting to new videos
and tasks, they predominantly rely on Supervised FineTuning (SFT) [26] or Reinforcement Learning from Hu-

29108

