This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Science-T2I: Addressing Scientific Illusions in Image Synthesis
Jialuo Li 1
1

Wenhao Chai 2

New York University

Xingyu Fu 3

Haiyang Xu 4

Saining Xie 1

2

University of Washington 3 University of Pennsylvania
4
University of California, San Diego

Abstract

Inception Distance (FID) scores [1, 3, 43, 58], these models often produce superficial imitations rather than authentic
representations of the real visual world [4, 16, 39, 40]. This
limitation often arises from an inadequate understanding of
the underlying scientific principles of realism, as demonstrated in the lower row of FLUX [1] generated images in
Figure 1. Consequently, the images generated tend to mirror imaginative constructs, resulting in a noticeable gap between these creations and the tangible reality we inhabit.
This paper integrates scientific knowledge into image
synthesis to bridge the gap between imagination and realism. We introduce Science-T2I, a comprehensive and
expert-annotated dataset comprising over 20k image pairs
and 9k prompts that span diverse fields such as physics,
chemistry, and biology, and cover 16 unique scientific phenomena. Each data pair is collected in an adversarial setup,
consisting of one image that accurately aligns with reality
and another that does not, thereby facilitating preference
modeling. To ensure quality and accuracy, all data were reviewed by human experts whose assessments were based on
their professional expertise and consultation of an extensive
knowledge base.
Leveraging Science-T2I, we further present SciScore,
an end-to-end reward model infused with diverse expertlevel scientific knowledge, designed to evaluate generated
images as a science teacher would. Our results demonstrate
that SciScore outperforms complex, prompt-engineeringreliant large multimodal models (LMMs) such as GPT-4o.
Compared to GPT-4o, SciScore excels in capturing finegrained visual details that LMMs often neglect as in Figure 1, and functions as a comprehensive end-to-end reward
model – eliminating the dependence on language-guided inference processes, which can may fail due to hallucinations.
Utilizing SciScore, we introduce a two-stage training methodology to develop an enhanced image synthesis
model that conform to the realist with world knowledge.
Specifically, we begin with supervised fine-tuning (SFT)
on FLUX.1[dev][1] using Science-T2I. This initial phase is
subsequently followed by an additional stage of online finetuning, where SciScore functions as the reward model and
employs a masking strategy to improve the performance.

We present a novel approach to integrating scientific
knowledge into generative models, enhancing their realism and consistency in image synthesis. First, we introduce Science-T2I, an expert-annotated adversarial dataset
comprising adversarial 20k image pairs with 9k prompts,
covering wide distinct scientific knowledge categories.
Leveraging Science-T2I, we present SciScore, an end-toend reward model that refines the assessment of generated
images based on scientific knowledge, which is achieved
by augmenting both the scientific comprehension and visual capabilities of pre-trained CLIP model. Additionally,
based on Science-T2I, we propose a two-stage training
framework, comprising a supervised fine-tuning phase and
a masked online fine-tuning phase, to incorporate scientific
knowledge into existing generative models. Through comprehensive experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness
of our framework in establishing new standards for evaluating the scientific realism of generated content. Specifically, SciScore attains performance comparable to humanlevel, demonstrating a 5% improvement similar to evaluations conducted by experienced human evaluators. Furthermore, by applying our proposed fine-tuning method to
FLUX, we achieve a performance enhancement exceeding
50% on SciScore.

1. Introduction
The quest to conceptualize the visual world and construct
real world simulators has been a longstanding endeavor in
the computer vision community [7, 15, 17, 26, 60, 61]. As
articulated by [9], “The goal of image synthesis is to create, using the computer, a visual experience that is identical to what a viewer would experience when viewing a
real environment.” In alignment with this vision, recent advances in generative modeling have notably improved the
performance of image synthesis [43, 47, 49]. While these
advancements enable the generation of higher resolution,
more aesthetically pleasing images with superior Frechet

2734

