This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Focused Human Body Model for
Accurate Anthropometric Measurements Extraction
Xianliang Huang1 ∗
Zhizhou Zhong1
Shuhang Chen1 *
2 †
Juhong Guan
Shuigeng Zhou1 †
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
1

School of Computer Science Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China

{chensh22,huangxl21,zzzhong22}@m.fudan.edu.cn 2 jhguan@tongji.edu.cn 1 sgzhou@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
3D anthropometric measurements have a variety of applications in industrial design and architecture (e.g. vehicle
seating and cockpits), Clothing (e.g. military uniforms), Ergonomics (e.g. seating) and Medicine (e.g. nutrition and
diabetes) etc. Therefore, there is a need for systems that
can accurately extract human body measurements. Current methods estimate human body measurements from 3D
scans, incurring a heavy data collection burden. Moreover,
slight variations in camera angle, distance, and body postures may significantly affect measurement results. In response to these challenges, this paper introduces a focused
human body model for accurately extracting anthropometric measurements. Concretely, we design a Bypass Network via CNN and ResNet architectures, which augments
the frozen backbone SMPLer-X with additional feature extraction capabilities. Furthermore, to boost model effectiveness, we propose a dynamical loss function that automatically recalibrates the weights to make the network focus on targeted anthropometric parts. In addition, we construct a multimodal body measurement benchmark dataset
consisting of depth, point clouds, meshes and corresponding body measurements to support model evaluation and
future anthropometric measurement research. Extensive experiments on both open-source and proposed human body
datasets demonstrate the superiority of our approach over
existing counterparts, including current mainstream commercial body measurement software.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, more and more consumers go shopping online
for perfectly-fitted apparel, driving the demand for mass
* Contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

personalization and custom-fitted clothing. Accurate body
measurements are essential to meet this demand. The growing popularity of reconstructing 3D human body shapes
from images has expanded the applications of anthropometric measurements across various fields, including medicine
science [25], industrial design [13, 26, 44], fashion industry (clothing design) [8], ergonomics [28], fitness [35], and
entertainment [5, 10, 12].
Most existing anthropometric measurement methods can
be roughly divided into two types: one-stage framework [2,
22, 33], and two-stage framework [14, 36, 41]. The former
calculates body measurements directly from input images
or landmarks in an end-to-end manner. However, imagebased methods often struggle with scale ambiguity, making
them sensitive to noise and hard to obtain accurate measurements. In contrast, two-stage methods overcome these
issues by taking body measurements from a deformed template model (e.g. SMPL [21] and SMPL-X [27]), which
corresponds to a complete reconstruction of input data.
Therefore, they rely heavily on the accuracy of the reconstructed parametric human body model.
Some other methods [22, 29, 40] require capturing point
clouds as input and extracting measurement factors from 3D
scans. As point cloud representations rely on accurate 3D
data acquired via expensive 3D sensors, consequently, several studies turn to utilize statistical models [6], linear regression [2], and convolutional neural networks [14, 36] for
body shape measurements. However, these methods have
limitations in being generalized to complex and variable
scenarios. Factors such as gender, camera angle, distance,
and challenging postures impede them to obtain accurate
measurements. Recently, Vision Transformer (ViT) models have achieved great success in several 2D and 3D tasks.
Although researchers have tried to employ deep learning
techniques for anthropometric measurements, there is no
ViT-based model for extracting human body measurements

22658

