This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DOF-GS: Adjustable Depth-of-Field 3D Gaussian Splatting for
Post-Capture Refocusing, Defocus Rendering and Blur Removal
Yujie Wang1,2,3
1

Praneeth Chakravarthula3†

Baoquan Chen1,2†

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Post-Capture
Control

Novel View Synthesis

Input Images with Defocus Blur

Mip-Splatting

Ours

Aperture
Focal Distance

Ours (DOF Rendering)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Our method enhances 3DGS with a finite-aperture camera model and differentiable depth-of-field (DOF) rendering, enabling
post-capture DOF control after training and capturing natural defocus cues from multi-view defocused images. Differentiable DOF rendering
also mitigates reconstruction artifacts caused by multi-view inconsistent defocus blur. Insets (a)-(d), with in-focus areas in pink, show images
rendered under various settings: (a)-(c) share aperture but differ in focal distance; (d) matches (b)’s focal distance but has a larger aperture.

Abstract

1. Introduction

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) techniques have recently
enabled high-quality 3D scene reconstruction and real-time
novel view synthesis. These approaches, however, are limited
by the pinhole camera model and lack effective modeling
of defocus effects. Departing from this, we introduce DOFGS — a new 3DGS-based framework with a finite-aperture
camera model and explicit, differentiable defocus rendering,
enabling it to function as a post-capture control tool. By
training with multi-view images with moderate defocus blur,
DOF-GS learns inherent camera characteristics and reconstructs sharp details of the underlying scene, particularly, enabling rendering of varying DOF effects through on-demand
aperture and focal distance control, post-capture and optimization. Additionally, our framework extracts circle-ofconfusion cues during optimization to identify in-focus regions in input views, enhancing the reconstructed 3D scene
details. Experimental results demonstrate that DOF-GS
supports post-capture refocusing, adjustable defocus and
high-quality all-in-focus rendering, from multi-view images
with uncalibrated defocus blur.
†: Denotes joint advising, co-corresponding authors.

Despite the advancements made in digital photography, the
need to set parameters like focus, aperture and exposure
at capture-time remains a limitation, particularly for casual
photographers facing dynamic conditions. Although methods such as light-field [6, 19, 27] and multi-/coded-aperture
photography [4, 5, 7] offer some post-capture control, they
typically require specialized hardware, limiting their accessibility, especially on mobile devices. Recent advancements
in neural 3D reconstruction techniques, such as neural radiance fields (NeRF) [1, 17, 18] and 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [2, 9, 29] enable high-quality view synthesis from
multi-view captures. Specifically, 3DGS allows for realistic
post-capture viewpoint control in real-time, making it attractive for a wide range of applications, including immersive,
interactive experiences like augmented and virtual reality
(AR/VR). Beyond viewpoint control, however, adjusting parameters like focus and aperture post capture, and rendering
their associated defocus and depth-of-field (DOF) effects,
remain challenging in these approaches due to their inherent
pinhole camera model assumption.
Some recent variants of these methods although model defocus blur, they are insufficient to support post-capture control of focal and aperture parameters due to their black-box

21297

