This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AnyEdit: Mastering Unified High-Quality Image Editing for Any Idea
Qifan Yu1 * Wei Chow1 * Zhongqi Yue2 Kaihang Pan1 Yang Wu3 Xiaoyang Wan1
Juncheng Li1† Siliang Tang1 Hanwang Zhang2 Yueting Zhuang1†
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Nanyang Technological University, 3 Ant Group

{yuqifan, 3210103790, kaihangpan, junchengli, siliang, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn
nickyuezhongqi@gmail.com, wy306396@antgroup.com

https://dcd-anyedit.github.io/

Abstract
Instruction-based image editing aims to modify specific image elements with natural language instructions. However,
current models in this domain often struggle to execute
complex user instructions accurately, as they are trained
on low-quality data with limited editing types. We present
AnyEdit, a comprehensive multi-modal instruction editing
dataset, comprising 2.5 million high-quality editing pairs
spanning over 20 editing types and five domains. We ensure
the diversity and quality of the AnyEdit collection through
three aspects: initial data diversity, adaptive editing process, and automated selection of editing results. Using the
dataset, we further train a novel AnyEdit Stable Diffusion
with task-aware routing and learnable task embedding for
unified image editing. Comprehensive experiments on three
benchmark datasets show that AnyEdit consistently boosts
the performance of diffusion-based editing models. This
presents prospects for developing instruction-driven image
editing models that support human creativity.

1. Introduction
With the development of multi-modal datasets [26, 40] and
generative frameworks [11, 17], recent text-to-image generation (T2I) models [2, 3, 32, 37–39, 48, 51] have shown
promising results in generating high-fidelity photo-realistic
images. To enhance the controllability of generated images,
image editing [7, 10, 19, 27, 42, 61] aims to modify desired
target elements and retain unrelated contents, which has
achieved significant improvements for T2I models. More
recently, instruction-based image editing [5, 6, 10, 19, 48]
pave the way to conveniently edit images using natural language instructions without complex descriptions or region* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

specific masks. However, the scarcity of high-quality instruction editing datasets makes it difficult to develop powerful instruction-guided image editing models.
Despite several prior works [5, 14, 15, 41, 49, 54,
57] showcasing promising instruction-following editing
datasets and achieving effective results, they still struggle
with drawbacks due to limited editing types and low data
quality. These methods lack support for editing instructions based on complex multi-modal perception (e.g., spatial composition [59], viewpoint [53], commonsense understanding [4]) and reference-based editing instructions (e.g.,
customization [8, 47], image transfer [55]), limiting the
model’s ability to understand interleaved editing instructions and robustly execute a wide variety of editing tasks.
To address the above limitations, this work, AnyEdit, first
provides a comprehensive catalog of editing instructions
and systematically introduces a unified editing framework
for various editing tasks. As shown in figure 1, AnyEdit
is divided into five classes based on editing capabilities,
with each class containing multiple task types. Regarding
the general editing scenarios in previous work [15, 54, 57],
AnyEdit categorizes them into Local Editing and Global
Editing based on their granularity to construct more precise instructions. To accommodate the editing intentions
for spatial perception, we further include Camera Movement Editing. For commonsense understanding, we introduce Implicit Editing, which replaces direct intentions
with more complex instructions that require imaginative
thinking. In addition, to accommodate reference inputs
from the visual modality, we incorporate Visual Editing to
construct multi-modal editing instructions.
Although AnyEdit has enriched editing types, there exist three principal challenges for high-quality dataset collection: (1) First, we observe that current editing datasets
overlook inherent data biases when preparing initial imagetext pairs [13, 31, 50], leading to an imbalance of concepts
within the dataset. For instance, “change the tree in the

26125

