This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlexiDiT: Your Diffusion Transformer Can Easily Generate High-Quality
Samples with Less Compute
Sotiris Anagnostidis†,§,∗

Gregor Bachmann†,§

Yeongmin Kim†,‡

Markos Georgopoulos†

Artsiom Sanakoyeu†

Yuming Du†

Ali Thabet†
100.0 % FLOPs

84.3 % FLOPs

Jonas Kohler†
Albert Pumarola†

Edgar Schönfeld†
68.6 % FLOPs

52.9 % FLOPs

37.2 % FLOPs

Figure 1. We ﬂexify DiTs and adjust the compute per diffusion step, generating high-quality samples with signiﬁcantly less compute.

agnostic to input and conditioning modalities. We show
how our approach can be readily extended for video generation, where FlexiDiT models generate samples with up
to 75% less compute without compromising performance.

Abstract
Despite their remarkable performance, modern Diffusion
Transformers (DiTs) are hindered by substantial resource
requirements during inference, stemming from the ﬁxed and
large amount of compute needed for each denoising step. In
this work, we revisit the conventional static paradigm that
allocates a ﬁxed compute budget per denoising iteration
and propose a dynamic strategy instead. Our simple and
sample-efﬁcient framework enables pre-trained DiT models to be converted into ﬂexible ones — dubbed FlexiDiT—
allowing them to process inputs at varying compute budgets. We demonstrate how a single ﬂexible model can generate images without any drop in quality, while reducing
the required FLOPs by more than 40% compared to their
static counterparts, for both class-conditioned and textconditioned image generation. Our method is general and
∗ Work done during an internship at Meta GenAI. † Meta GenAI.

§ ETH Zürich, Department of Computer Science, Institute for Machine

Learning.‡KAIST. Correspondence to: sanagnos@ethz.ch

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [47] have recently become the core
building block of major improvements in image generation [8, 9, 16, 48, 55]. These models gradually denoise a
random sample xt , drawn typically from pnoise = N (0, I),
by iteratively calling a neural network trained to reverse
a pre-deﬁned noise corruption process pθ (xt−1 |xt ). This
process enables the generation of samples from the desired distribution pdata .The remarkable performance of these
models is closely tied to the amount of computational resources invested in them, as evidenced by established scaling laws [33]. The Transformer architecture [50] has proven
to be highly scalable across various modalities, leading to
its adoption in diffusion models, in the form of the recent
Diffusion Transformer [43]. In DiTs, the denoising process pθ (xt−1 |xt ) is parametrized using Transformer blocks

28316

