This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Transfer Learning for Video-language Foundation Models
Haoxing Chen1 , Zizheng Huang1,2,3 , Yan Hong1 , Yanshuo Wang1,4 , Zhongcai Lyu1 ,
Zhuoer Xu1 , Jun Lan1 , Zhangxuan Gu1 *
1 Tiansuan Lab, Ant Group, 2 Nanjing Univeristy
3 Shanghai Innovation Institute, 4 Australian National University
hx.chen@hotmail.com

Abstract
Pre-trained vision-language models provide a robust foundation for efficient transfer learning across various downstream tasks. In the field of video action recognition, mainstream approaches often introduce additional modules to
capture temporal information. Although the additional modules increase the capacity of model, enabling it to better
capture video-specific inductive biases, existing methods typically introduce a substantial number of new parameters
and are prone to catastrophic forgetting of previously acquired generalizable knowledge. In this paper, we propose a
parameter-efficient Multi-modal Spatio-Temporal Adapter
(MSTA) to enhance the alignment between textual and visual
representations, achieving a balance between generalizable
knowledge and task-specific adaptation. Furthermore, to mitigate over-fitting and enhance generalizability, we introduce
a spatio-temporal description-guided consistency constraint.
This constraint involves providing template inputs (e.g., ”a
video of {cls}”) to the trainable language branch and LLMgenerated spatio-temporal descriptions to the pre-trained
language branch, enforcing output consistency between the
branches. This approach reduces overfitting to downstream
tasks and enhances the distinguishability of the trainable
branch within the spatio-temporal semantic space. We evaluate the effectiveness of our approach across four tasks:
zero-shot transfer, few-shot learning, base-to-novel generalization, and fully-supervised learning. Compared to many
state-of-the-art methods, our MSTA achieves outstanding
performance across all evaluations, while using only 2-7%
of the trainable parameters in the original model.

Figure 1. We compared the number of trainable parameters of our
method with other state-of-the-art methods, as well as the average
Harmonic Mean Performance on the base-to-novel generalization
task across four datasets. It can be observed that our method uses
fewer parameters while achieving state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction

modal datasets, have demonstrated exceptional generalization capabilities. The semantic visual concepts enabled by
extensive multi-modal alignment can be effectively transferred to various downstream tasks, such as few-shot image/video classification [3, 19, 29, 43], open-vocabulary detection [12, 39], and segmentation [23]. In this paper, we
focus on transferring the pre-trained multi-modal foundation
models model (i.e., CLIP [28] and ViCLIP [36]) to video action recognition tasks, highlighting their significant potential
to advance research in this domain.
The key to the adaptation process of foundational multimodal models lies in injecting domain-specific expertise.
In video action recognition, this need is particularly evident due to the dynamic and temporal nature of video data,
requiring models to effectively capture context and temporal relationships. Consequently, existing methods typically
enhance pre-trained CLIP models by integrating carefully

Multi-modal foundation models (e.g., CLIP [28], ViCLIP [36], BLIP2 [21]), trained on large-scale paired multi* Corresponding author. Code will be avaliable at https://github.
com/chenhaoxing/ETL4Video.

29129

