This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DINOv2 Meets Text: A Uniﬁed Framework for Image- and Pixel-Level
Vision-Language Alignment
Cijo Jose1
Théo Moutakanni1,2
Dahyun Kang1,3,∗
Federico Baldassarre1
Timothée Darcet1,4
Hu Xu1
Daniel Li1
Marc Szafraniec1
Michaël Ramamonjisoa1
1
1
1
Maxime Oquab
Oriane Siméoni
Huy V. Vo
Patrick Labatut1
Piotr Bojanowski1
1

Meta FAIR
3
POSTECH

2
4

Université Paris-Saclay, CentraleSupélec, MICS
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP

Abstract
Self-supervised visual foundation models produce powerful embeddings that achieve remarkable performance on a
wide range of downstream tasks. However, unlike visionlanguage models such as CLIP [67], self-supervised visual features are not readily aligned with language, hindering their adoption in open-vocabulary tasks. Our
method, named dino.txt, unlocks this new ability for DINOv2 [63], a widely used self-supervised visual encoder.
We build upon the LiT training strategy [97], which trains
a text encoder to align with a frozen vision model but leads
to unsatisfactory results on dense tasks. We propose several key ingredients to improve performance on both global
and dense tasks, such as concatenating the [CLS] token
with the patch average to train the alignment and curating
data using both text and image modalities. With these, we
successfully train a CLIP-like model with only a fraction of
the computational cost compared to CLIP while achieving
state-of-the-art results in zero-shot classiﬁcation and openvocabulary semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
The advent of modern vision foundation models trained in
a Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) fashion [5, 12, 15, 38, 63]
has resulted in robust, generic features that achieve impressive performance on downstream tasks. These features are
typically used as is, plugged into a light-weight adapter
such as a linear classiﬁer, and deliver strong results without
requiring a costly ﬁne-tuning process. As a result, a single strong vision backbone can be used simultaneously for
different tasks. DINOv2 [63], in particular, has been popular for its versatility. This self-supervised model, trained to
capture both the global context and local information of the
∗ : work done during an internship at Meta.

24905

image, has led to state-of-the-art performance in tasks that
require an overall understanding of the image such as classiﬁcation and those that necessitate more ﬁne-grained details
such as segmentation [51], canopy height prediction [79],
object matching [28, 64], object discovery [25] and tracking [82, 96]. However, self-supervised vision models do
not provide an interface with language, limiting their use
in open-vocabulary scenarios in which multi-modal models [18, 78] that come with built-in language-vision alignment excel. This is a notable weakness in the era of complex and promptable machine learning systems. We aim
in this work to equip DINOv2 with a language interface
by aligning its feature space with language, which allows
us to leverage the strengths of this powerful self-supervised
model to tackle open-vocabulary recognition tasks.
Most advanced text-aligned vision foundation models
learn with a variation of the CLIP algorithm [67], which
trains the visual and textual encoders to align their modality
representation in a shared space by exploiting a large-scale,
often noisy, paired image-text dataset. They are typically
trained from scratch, leading to heavy computational cost.
Locked-image text tuning (LiT) [97] is a variant of CLIP
that uses a frozen pre-trained vision model as the vision encoder and only train the text encoder to align to the vision
encoder’s embedding space. This leads to a lower computational cost while retaining desirable properties of the vision
encoder. In this work, we argue that given readily available
strong vision encoders, we could, and should achieve better vision-language alignment than CLIP at a much smaller
cost. To this end, we explore the application of LiT training
with DINOv2 as the vision encoder.
As shown in Table 1, 3, applying LiT on strong DINOv2
encoder is not straightforward as it leads to unsatisfying
performance on tasks that require ﬁne-grained details such
as semantic segmentation or image-text retrieval. First, it
is not trivial to obtain good dense features from a model

