This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SyncVP: Joint Diffusion for Synchronous Multi-Modal Video Prediction
Enrico Pallotta, Sina Mokhtarzadeh Azar, Shuai Li, Olga Zatsarynna, Juergen Gall
University of Bonn, Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence
{pallotta,mokhtarzadeh,lishuai,zatsarynna,gall}@iai.uni-bonn.de

Figure 1. SyncVP is a diffusion model for synchronized multi-modal video prediction. It generates multi-modal future frames like RGB
and depth for a given observation that can consist of both modalities (left) or only one modality (right).

Abstract
Predicting future video frames is essential for decisionmaking systems, yet RGB frames alone often lack the information needed to fully capture the underlying complexities of the real world. To address this limitation, we
propose a multi-modal framework for Synchronous Video
Prediction (SyncVP) that incorporates complementary data
modalities, enhancing the richness and accuracy of future predictions. SyncVP builds on pre-trained modalityspecific diffusion models and introduces an efficient spatiotemporal cross-attention module to enable effective information sharing across modalities. We evaluate SyncVP
on standard benchmark datasets, such as Cityscapes and
BAIR, using depth as an additional modality. We furthermore demonstrate its generalization to other modalities on
SYNTHIA with semantic information and ERA5-Land with
climate data. Notably, SyncVP achieves state-of-the-art
performance, even in scenarios where only one modality
is present, demonstrating its robustness and potential for
a wide range of applications.

ing, healthcare and human-machine interaction are just a
few examples of scenarios in which the ability to anticipate future events is critical. In these contexts, accurate video prediction enables systems to react and adapt
in real-time, enhancing both safety and efficiency or providing valuable information for decision-making processes.
While traditional video prediction focuses on generating
future frames of RGB videos, many real-world applications involve multiple sensory inputs and require a deep understanding of the underlying real world dynamics. This
leads to a natural extension of the task to the multi-modal
domain, where additional data such as depth or semantic information are used alongside RGB frames. Several
works have thus investigated how to exploit other modalities for conditioning the generation of images or videos,
like text [5, 14, 28, 36, 48, 58], depth [13, 21, 24, 49, 57],
pose [29, 57], flow [32], sketches [43] and audio [35, 50].
Although significant progresses have been made in guiding
video generation through the use of auxiliary modalities,
few studies have focused on developing models capable of
leveraging multiple modalities while simultaneously generating each of them.
In this paper, we thus propose an approach for multimodal video prediction as shown in Fig. 1. Given a set
of observed frames, the model predicts future frames of
two modalities like RGB and depth in a consistent manner. While our approach is based on a latent diffusion
model [56], we demonstrate that a naive concatenation of

1. Introduction
Video prediction, the task of forecasting future video frames
based on past video frames, has gained significant attention in recent years [3, 39, 42, 44] due to its broad range
of applications. Autonomous driving, weather forecast-

13787

