This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Two is Better than One:
Efficient Ensemble Defense for Robust and Compact Models
Yoojin Jung Byung Cheol Song
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Inha University
Incheon, Republic of Korea
yooon0505@gmail.com, bcsong@inha.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep learning-based computer vision systems adopt complex and large architectures to improve performance, yet
they face challenges in deployment on resource-constrained
mobile and edge devices. To address this issue, model compression techniques such as pruning, quantization, and matrix factorization have been proposed; however, these compressed models are often highly vulnerable to adversarial attacks. We introduce the Efficient Ensemble Defense
(EED) technique, which diversifies the compression of a
single base model based on different pruning importance
scores and enhances ensemble diversity to achieve high adversarial robustness and resource efficiency. EED dynamically determines the number of necessary sub-models during the inference stage, minimizing unnecessary computations while maintaining high robustness. On the CIFAR10 and SVHN datasets, EED demonstrated state-of-the-art
robustness performance compared to existing adversarial
pruning techniques, along with an inference speed improvement of up to 1.86 times. This proves that EED is a powerful
defense solution in resource-constrained environments.

Figure 1. Challenges in AP and the potential of ensemble methods: AP weakens the network by removing critical parameters,
reducing robustness and increasing vulnerability to adversarial attacks. An ensemble approach mitigates pruning effects by combining pruned models, enhancing robustness through their collective
strength (illustrated in green).

without compromising accuracy.
Meanwhile, deep learning models are highly vulnerable
to adversarial attacks that induce false predictions by disturbing the input image with small perturbations[11, 37].
This vulnerability is particularly pronounced in sparsely
compressed models, which are even more sensitive to adversarial attacks than standard models[35, 44]. Consequently,
common adversarial defense techniques such as adversarial
training (AT) [20, 27], label smoothing [41, 51], and defensive distillation[31], while generally effective, often experience a degradation in performance when applied to compressed models. This indicates that existing compression
techniques may compromise adversarial robustness even if
they maintain accuracy on clean test sets. In response, adversarial pruning (AP), a model compression technique that
considers adversarial robustness[34, 48, 52], has emerged;

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have shown remarkable performance across various computer vision
tasks, such as image classification, object detection, and
semantic segmentation[18, 33, 36]. However, CNNs have
become increasingly wider and deeper to achieve higher
performance, leading to complex architectures with vast
numbers of parameters. This complexity inherently results
in significant computational costs and storage demands,
making deployment on resource-constrained edge devices
challenging[4, 42]. To address this challenge, a number of
model compression techniques, including pruning[14, 24],
quantization[3], and matrix decomposition[8], have been
proposed to minimize model size and computational load

9696

