This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-driven Image Fusion with Learnable Fusion Loss
Haowen Bai1 Jiangshe Zhang1 * Zixiang Zhao2 * Yichen Wu3
Lilun Deng1 Yukun Cui1 Tao Feng4 Shuang Xu5
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 ETH Zürich 3 City University of Hong Kong
4
Tsinghua University 5 Northwestern Polytechnical University
hwbaii@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

ages enhance downstream tasks through improved information density and robustness [18, 41, 45, 62, 63, 70, 71],
outperforming single-modal inputs in semantic segmentation [13, 28, 34, 56], object detection [8, 32], and other
related applications [1, 3, 20, 27]. Conventional methods
typically treat fusion as image restoration using unsupervised loss [76, 83, 87–89] or perceptual loss [21, 23, 77].
These approaches prioritize visual-level fusion through predefined aggregation objectives, often neglecting semantic
feature extraction. This limitation hinders scene interpretation and task performance [14, 24, 52, 64]. Recent advances
explore the mutual enhancement between fusion and downstream tasks [37]. By cascading the fusion network with
downstream task network [39, 49], the task loss constrains
the fusion learning, ensuring the fused images meet the task
requirements [32, 56]. Alternatively, some methods incorporate high-level visual task features [34, 76, 78] or focus
on learning optimal initializations [40] to enhance fusion.
While integrating downstream tasks, existing frameworks still rely on predefined fusion loss terms lacking
dynamic adaptation. The impact of downstream tasks remains limited due to specific combinations. Manually defined losses preserve predefined guidance, frequently overlooking task-specific requirements. This guidance imposes
manually designed prior constraints on the fusion process, limiting the dynamic and adaptive influence of downstream tasks on specific image pairs. These approaches,
whether incorporating task features [34, 78] or employing task losses [32, 56], still face the limitations of fixed
fusion loss terms. Task-specialized networks [76] create
fusion-task dependencies, restricting flexibility and limiting their applicability to various high-level vision tasks. We
address these limitations through a task-driven framework
with learnable loss. The fusion loss contains learnable parameters, generated by a loss generation module, and is designed to retain the intensity information of the source images for specific downstream tasks. The purpose of updating the fusion loss is to guide the fusion network in generating fused images that minimize downstream task loss,

Multi-modal image fusion aggregates information from
multiple sensor sources, achieving superior visual quality
and perceptual features compared to single-source images,
often improving downstream tasks. However, current fusion
methods for downstream tasks still use predefined fusion
objectives that potentially mismatch the downstream tasks,
limiting adaptive guidance and reducing model flexibility.
To address this, we propose Task-driven Image Fusion (TDFusion), a fusion framework incorporating a learnable fusion loss guided by task loss. Specifically, our fusion loss includes learnable parameters modeled by a neural network
called the loss generation module. This module is supervised by the downstream task loss in a meta-learning manner. The learning objective is to minimize the task loss of
fused images after optimizing the fusion module with the fusion loss. Iterative updates between the fusion module and
the loss module ensure that the fusion network evolves toward minimizing task loss, guiding the fusion process toward the task objectives. TDFusion’s training relies entirely on the downstream task loss, making it adaptable to
any specific task. It can be applied to any architecture of
fusion and task networks. Experiments demonstrate TDFusion’s performance through fusion experiments conducted
on four different datasets, in addition to evaluations on semantic segmentation and object detection tasks. The code
is available at https://github.com/HaowenBai/
TDFusion.

1. Introduction
Multi-modal image fusion [25, 31, 51, 59, 72, 79, 82] combines information from multiple sensors to produce a more
holistic and detailed representation. Infrared images capture
thermal radiation regardless of lighting conditions, while
visible images provide richer texture details. Fused im* Corresponding authors.

7457

