This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SVFR: A Unified Framework for Generalized Video Face Restoration
Zhiyao Wang1,2* , Xu Chen2* , Chengming Xu2 , Junwei Zhu2†✧ , Xiaobin Hu2 ,
Jiangning Zhang2 , Chengjie Wang2 , Yuqi Liu1 , Yiyi Zhou1† , Rongrong Ji1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,

Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.

Youtu Lab, Tencent, P.R. China.

BFR
PGTFormer

Abstract

2

Inpainting
CodeFormer

Colorization
GPEN

Face Restoration (FR) is a crucial area within image and
video processing, focusing on reconstructing high-quality
portraits from degraded inputs. Despite advancements in
image FR, video FR remains relatively under-explored, primarily due to challenges related to temporal consistency,
motion artifacts, and the limited availability of high-quality
video data. Moreover, traditional face restoration typically prioritizes enhancing resolution and may not give
as much consideration to related tasks such as facial colorization and inpainting. In this paper, we propose a
novel approach for the Generalized Video Face Restoration (GVFR) task, which integrates video blind face restoration (BFR), inpainting, and colorization tasks that we empirically show to benefit each other. We present a unified
framework, termed as stable video face restoration (SVFR),
which leverages the generative and motion priors of Stable Video Diffusion (SVD) and incorporates task-specific
information through a unified face restoration framework.
A learnable task embedding is introduced to enhance task
identification. Meanwhile, a novel Unified Latent Regularization (ULR) is employed to encourage the shared feature
representation learning among different subtasks. To further enhance the restoration quality and temporal stability,
we introduce the facial prior learning and the self-referred
refinement as auxiliary strategies. The proposed framework
effectively combines the complementary strengths of these
tasks, enhancing temporal coherence and achieving superior restoration quality. This work advances the state-ofthe-art in video FR and establishes a new paradigm for generalized video face restoration. Code and video demo are
available at https://github.com/wangzhiyaoo/
SVFR.git.

SVFR

1

Figure 1. Face restoration results of SOTA single task methods
and SVFR. Our unified SVFR model outperforms SOTA single
task methods by avoiding facial structure abnormalities, temporal
color inconsistencies, and texture distortions.

This task has significant applications for both images and
videos. For example, effective image FR methods can help
on personal photo enhancement, historical photo restoration, and forensic analysis, while video FR can well serve
the goal of film restoration and surveillance.
While abundant works have been proposed to solve image FR with acceptable results, the video FR, which targets high-quality and realistic face recovery with appropriate identity consistency together with temporal stability,
has hardly been explored. Few efforts dedicated to this
area such as BasicVSR++ [4] and KEEP [42] still significantly lack behind their image-based counterparts, suffering from problems such as low generation quality, temporal
jitter and discontinuity, due to the multifaceted challenges.
The main problem lies in the fact that video FR is intrinsically more complex than image FR in that the temporal
dimension introduces additional complexity, requiring the
model to maintain consistency across frames while dealing
with motion artifacts, occlusions, and varying lighting conditions. However, the high-quality training data for video
FR is hard to collect, making it more difficult for existing
models to effectively learn accurate feature representations.
Moreover, the limited architectural capacity of previous approaches, particularly those based on GANs, contributes to

1. Introduction
Face Restoration (FR) is a critical area of research within
the broader field of image and video processing, aiming to
recover high-quality facial images from degraded inputs.

*Equal Contribution. †Corresponding Author. ✧Project Lead.

7406

