This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Relation-Rich Visual Document Generator for Visual Information Extraction
Zi-Han Jiang1 , Chien-Wei Lin1 , Wei-Hua Li1 , Hsuan-Tung Liu2 , Yi-Ren Yeh3 , Chu-Song Chen1
1
National Taiwan University, 2 E.SUN Financial Holding Co., Ltd., 3 National Kaohsiung Normal University
{r12922082,r11922212,d12922009,chusong}@csie.ntu.edu.tw,
ahare-18342@esunbank.com.tw, yryeh@nknu.edu.tw

Abstract
Despite advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) and
Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) for visual document understanding (VDU), visual information extraction (VIE) from
relation-rich documents remains challenging due to the layout diversity and limited training data. While existing synthetic document generators attempt to address data scarcity,
they either rely on manually designed layouts and templates, or adopt rule-based approaches that limit layout
diversity. Besides, current layout generation methods focus solely on topological patterns without considering textual content, making them impractical for generating documents with complex associations between the contents and
layouts. In this paper, we propose a Relation-rIch visual
Document GEnerator (RIDGE) that addresses these limitations through a two-stage approach: (1) Content Generation, which leverages LLMs to generate document content
using a carefully designed Hierarchical Structure Text format which captures entity categories and relationships, and
(2) Content-driven Layout Generation, which learns to create diverse, plausible document layouts solely from easily
available Optical Character Recognition (OCR) results, requiring no human labeling or annotations efforts. Experimental results have demonstrated that our method significantly enhances the performance of document understanding models on various VIE benchmarks.

(links between entities) and Entity Category (attributes or
semantic classification labels of entities) are the two main
types of information that are critical to VIE. To learn a
document-analysis model, a major difficulty is the lack of
labeled training data, where the labels can be of unary relation (containing n entities) or binary relation (containing
O(n2 ) links between entity pairs). However, the effort for
labeling O(n2 ) labels is huge, which hinders the development of learning effective models for a comprehensive understanding of the diverse forms of visual documents.
LLMs and MLLMs possess generalization capability
and emergent properties resulting from training on extensive corpora, allowing them to perform effectively on
document-related tasks. Recent models have shown promising results in document-oriented visual question answering, such as Qwen2-VL [44] approaching human-level performance on DocVQA [34]. However, significant challenges persist in extracting information from relation-rich
(e.g., forms of various formats) or semi-structured documents (e.g., invoices and receipts). The variability complicates the process of accurately identifying and linking keyvalue pairs. A general extraction rule cannot be easily established, affecting model accuracy and requiring extensive
training data to enhance the generalization capabilities.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we introduce a method to synthesize
relation-rich visual documents. The generated documents
exhibit highly diverse layouts, arise not only from the document’s content but also from the variability across different
document sources. Our content-rich generative approach
leverages LLMs in two steps. First, we use ChatGPT [38] to
generate text with entity-category and entity-link information in a hierarchy. Second, we adopt self-supervised learning to build a model that can place the generated text into
appropriate bounding box locations with reasonable layouts. Unlike traditional layout generation solutions focusing mainly on producing bounding boxes without relationally meaningful textual content [19, 23, 28, 40], our generated content-and-relation-rich documents can boost the performance of VDU. We demonstrate an overview of existing
datasets and our approach as follows.

VDU has attracted significant attention in knowledgecentric applications. While conventional document pretrained models [13, 16, 37, 41, 46, 47] have demonstrated outstanding performance on specific downstream
tasks, their practical applicability is often constrained by
the necessity of task- or dataset-specific fine-tuning. This
has prompted a shift in research focus towards the utilization of LLMs and MLLMs.
To perform document analysis, segmented text entities
are the basic elements in a visual document. Entity Linking

14449

