This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RORem: Training a Robust Object Remover with Human-in-the-Loop
Ruibin Li1,2 , Tao Yang3 , Song Guo4 , Lei Zhang1,2 *
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2 OPPO Research Institute, 3 ByteDance
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Abstract
Despite the signiﬁcant advancements, existing object removal methods struggle with incomplete removal, incorrect
content synthesis and blurry synthesized regions, resulting
in low success rates. Such issues are mainly caused by the
lack of high-quality paired training data, as well as the selfsupervised training paradigm adopted in these methods,
which forces the model to in-paint the masked regions, leading to ambiguity between synthesizing the masked objects
and restoring the background. To address these issues, we
propose a semi-supervised learning strategy with human-inthe-loop to create high-quality paired training data, aiming to train a Robust Object Remover (RORem). We ﬁrst
collect 60K training pairs from open-source datasets to
train an initial object removal model for generating removal samples, and then utilize human feedback to select a set of high-quality object removal pairs, with which
we train a discriminator to automate the following training data generation process. By iterating this process for
several rounds, we ﬁnally obtain a substantial object removal dataset with over 200K pairs. Fine-tuning the pretrained stable diffusion model with this dataset, we obtain
our RORem, which demonstrates state-of-the-art object removal performance in terms of both reliability and image
quality. Particularly, RORem improves the object removal
success rate over previous methods by more than 18%. The
dataset, source code and trained model are available at
https://github.com/leeruibin/RORem.

1. Introduction
Object removal aims to inpaint user-speciﬁed masked objects with realistic background, which is an important task
in the ﬁelds of photography, advertising and ﬁlm industry [6, 43, 68]. Various CNN-based [31, 37, 41, 54] and
transformer-based [7, 19, 26, 50] networks have been developed, aiming to understand the image global content and
thereby enhance the coherence of the inpainting process.
* Corresponding author. This work is supported by the PolyU-OPPO
Joint Innovative Research Centre.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Given an input image and a mask (see (a)), existing
object removal methods such as PowerPaint [72] may inpaint the
masked regions with other objects (see (b)), while our method can
successfully remove the masked objects (see (c)).

GAN-based approaches [21, 32, 41, 57] have demonstrated
their efﬁcacy in object removal by employing adversarial
loss in the training process. Recent advancements have further leveraged the generative priors from large-scale pretrained diffusion models [12, 22, 24, 35, 48, 59, 60, 64] to
facilitate the inpainting of masked regions.
Despite the commendable results, previous methods frequently encounter challenges such as incomplete removal,
erroneous content synthesis and blurry synthesized regions,
culminating in a low success rate. The primary reason
for these shortcomings lies in the prevalent reliance on
a self-supervised training paradigm using random masks
[42, 54, 59], which compels the model to inpaint the masked
regions using the original content, thereby inducing ambiguities during testing. As shown in Fig. 1(b), for example, when the bird or cat is masked, the training paradigm
obliges the model to reconstruct the bird/cat based on the
unmasked contents, whereas our objective is to remove the
object and restore the background. To mitigate this ambiguity, high-quality paired training data containing images
before and after the object’s presence are essential. Recent
efforts have sought to construct such paired datasets, either
by capturing images [47, 59] in real-world scenarios or by
synthesizing realistic data [56, 64]. Nonetheless, the size,
diversity and quality of these datasets remain constrained,
limiting the object removal performance.

14024

