This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enduring, Efficient and Robust Trajectory Prediction Attack in Autonomous
Driving via Optimization-Driven Multi-Frame Perturbation Framework

1

Yi Yu1 , Weizhen Han2 , Libing Wu1† , Bingyi Liu2† , Enshu Wang1 , Zhuangzhuang Zhang3
Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of Education,
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University
2
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{yui1212, wu, wanges17}@whu.edu.cn
{hanweizhen, byliu}@whut.edu.cn

{zhuangzhuang.zhang}@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Trajectory prediction plays a crucial role in autonomous
driving systems, and exploring its vulnerability has garnered widespread attention. However, existing trajectory
prediction attack methods often rely on single-point attacks
to make efficient perturbations. This limits their applications in real-world scenarios due to the transient nature of
single-point attacks, their susceptibility to filtration, and the
uncertainty regarding the deployment environment. To address these challenges, this paper proposes a novel LiDARinduced attack framework to impose multi-frame attacks
by optimization-driven adversarial location search, achieving endurance, efficiency, and robustness. This framework
strategically places objects near the adversarial vehicle to
implement an attack and introduces three key innovations.
First, successive state perturbations are generated using a
multi-frame single-point attack strategy, effectively misleading trajectory predictions over extended time horizons. Second, we efficiently optimize adversarial objects’ locations
through three specialized loss functions to achieve desired
perturbations. Lastly, we improve robustness by treating the
adversarial object as a point without size constraints during the location search phase and reduce dependence on
both the specific attack point and the adversarial object’s
properties. Extensive experiments confirm the superior performance and robustness of our framework.

1. Introduction
Autonomous Driving (AD) systems [1, 2] typically consist
of perception, prediction, and planning modules. Among
† Corresponding authors.
https://github.com/y1y5/OMP-ATTACK

these, the prediction module plays a critical role, as an autonomous vehicle (AV) relies on the predicted trajectories
of nearby vehicles for decision-making. Errors in trajectory
prediction can compromise AV safety. Therefore, exploring
the vulnerability of the prediction module is vital to improving the safety of the AD system, and research on attacks
targeting trajectory prediction [6, 8, 16, 26, 32, 34] also has
received increasing attention.
Existing trajectory prediction attacks typically compromise the victim AV’s prediction module by manipulating
the historical trajectory of an adversarial vehicle [6, 26,
32, 34]. These methods directly inject erroneous trajectory
states (including coordinates and heading at each frame)
into the victim AV’s prediction module, which effectively
distorts trajectory predictions. However, in real-world scenarios, physical constraints such as coordinate precision
and road variability make it difficult to manipulate an adversarial vehicle precisely along a pre-calculated trajectory.
Furthermore, the prediction module integrates both historical normal trajectory segments and precomputed adversarial trajectories. As the input window extends backward, the
growing dominance of normal trajectories dilutes adversarial impact on earlier time steps, causing direct attacks to
decay over time and preventing sustained influence [34].
In contrast, Lou et al. [16] introduced an indirect trajectory prediction attack method, termed the SinglePoint
Attack (SP-Attack). It involves strategically placing physical objects near a parked adversarial vehicle to deceive
the LiDAR perception module, producing perturbed bounding box attributes for the adversarial vehicle. These perturbed attributes are then passed through the tracking module, which generates incorrect trajectory states that propagate through the prediction module. The resulting prediction errors can lead to unsafe reactions from the victim AV.
The SP-Attack consists of two phases: an attack phase to

17229

