This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Keyframe Sampling for Long Video Understanding
Xi Tang1 ,* Jihao Qiu1 *, Lingxi Xie, Yunjie Tian2 , Jianbin Jiao1 , Qixiang Ye1
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University at Buffalo, SUNY
{tangxi19,qiujihao19}@mails.ucas.ac.cn

{jiaojb,qxye}@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have enabled
open-world visual understanding by injecting visual input
as extra tokens into large language models (LLMs) as contexts. However, when the visual input changes from a single image to a long video, the above paradigm encounters difﬁculty because the vast amount of video tokens has
signiﬁcantly exceeded the maximal capacity of MLLMs.
Therefore, existing video-based MLLMs are mostly established upon sampling a small portion of tokens from input data, which can cause key information to be lost and
thus produce incorrect answers. This paper presents a
simple yet effective algorithm named Adaptive Keyframe
Sampling (AKS). It inserts a plug-and-play module known
as keyframe selection, which aims to maximize the useful information with a ﬁxed number of video tokens. We
formulate keyframe selection as an optimization involving
(1) the relevance between the keyframes and the prompt,
and (2) the coverage of the keyframes over the video,
and present an adaptive algorithm to approximate the best
solution. Experiments on two long video understanding
benchmarks validate that AKS improves video QA accuracy (beyond strong baselines) upon selecting informative
keyframes. Our study reveals the importance of information
pre-ﬁltering in video-based MLLMs. Our codes are available at https://github.com/ncTimTang/AKS

1. Introduction
“You can’t manage what you can’t measure.”
— Peter Drucker
Recent years have witnessed a rapid development of multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [14, 22, 41, 60]
for open-world visual understanding. Among the large corpus of research in MLLMs, a straightforward and important
direction is to generalize them to video data. Compared to
still images, videos contain richer and more complex visual
* Equal contribution.

Q: What does the panda do in the video?
Uniform Sampling

Adaptive Keyframe
Sampling

MLLM

MLLM

A: The panda is eating food.

A: The panda is rolling down.

Figure 1. The accuracy of video-based MLLMs heavily relies
on the quality of keyframes. The above example shows a long
video from VideoMME [9] where keyframes are marked with
green stars. The same MLLM (i.e., LLaVA-Video [62]) is used
for answering the question. Uniform sampling (the default setting in [62]) ﬁnds irrelevant frames (the MLLM mostly performs
a random guess), while our algorithm (AKS) ﬁnds keyframes and
produces the correct answer.

content, thus raising serious challenges to MLLMs including key information retrieval, summarization, logical inference, etc. Many benchmarks [9, 48] have been established
to evaluate MLLMs for video understanding.
A typical framework of image-based MLLMs involves
encoding the input image into a set of visual tokens and
feeding them as the context of LLMs. When this framework was transplanted to videos, especially long videos, a
difﬁculty arose from the limited capacity of MLLMs, i.e.,
the maximal number of visual tokens that MLLMs can process is much fewer than that of an entire video; in other
words, not all video tokens can be perceived by MLLMs.
To bridge the gap, recent approaches [20, 49] often sam-

29118

