This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G RAPH GPT- O: Synergistic Multimodal Comprehension and Generation on
Graphs
Yi Fang*
New York University Shanghai

Bowen Jin*
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

yf2722@nyu.edu

bowenj4@illinois.edu

Jiacheng Shen*
New York University Shanghai

Sirui Ding
University of California San Francisco

js12556@nyu.edu

sirui.ding@ucsf.edu

Qiaoyu Tan
New York University Shanghai

Jiawei Han
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

qiaoyu.tan@nyu.edu

hanj@illinois.edu

Abstract
The rapid development of Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) has enabled the integration of multiple
modalities, including texts and images, within the large language model (LLM) framework. However, texts and images are usually interconnected, forming a multimodal attributed graph (MMAG). It is underexplored how MLLMs
can incorporate the relational information (i.e., graph
structure) and semantic information (i.e., texts and images) on such graphs for multimodal comprehension and
generation. In this paper, we propose G RAPH GPT- O,
which supports omni-multimodal understanding and creation on MMAGs. We first comprehensively study linearization variants to transform semantic and structural
information as input for MLLMs. Then, we propose a
hierarchical aligner that enables deep graph encoding,
bridging the gap between MMAGs and MLLMs. Finally, we explore the inference choices, adapting MLLM
to interleaved text and image generation in graph scenarios. Extensive experiments on three datasets from different domains demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method. Datasets and codes will be publicly available at
https://github.com/YiFang99/GraphGPT-O.

ities including text and images. However, in real-world
scenarios, there exists a pervasive graph-structured relationships between texts and images. Such graph-structured
relationship can be described as “Multimodal Attributed
Graphs” (MMAGs) [16, 31, 44], where nodes are associated with image and text information. For example, the artwork graph [29] is composed of nodes that include images
(pictures) and text (titles), with edges representing shared
genres and authorship. This structure uniquely represents
each artwork in relation to thousands of others within the
graph, providing a context that extends beyond simple language descriptions or image references. While MLLMs
have demonstrated outstanding comprehension and generation capability for text and image data, it is questionable how they could utilize the structural information on
MMAGs.
In this context, we formulate the problem of multimodal
content generation on MMAGs which tasks MLLMs with
producing both a textual description and an accompanying
image for a new node based on the graph connectivity and
node attributes. This task focuses on generating text-image
pairs for a node from MMAGs, reflecting a wide range of
practical applications. For example, generating an image
and a text for a product node linked to others through copurchase edges in an e-commerce MMAG is equivalent to
recommending [6, 28] potential future products to users.
Likewise, creating an image and a title for a virtual artwork
node in the art MMAG is comparable to creating virtual artwork [8, 15] that reflects the subtle styles of various artists
and genres.
However, directly adopting MLLMs on MMAGs for
multimodal content generation presents several challenges:

1. Introduction
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [7, 21, 26,
35] have made significant progress in recent years, allowing
the comprehension and generation of diverse data modal* Equal contribution.

19467

