This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Your Scale Factors are My Weapon: Targeted Bit-Flip Attacks on
Vision Transformers via Scale Factor Manipulation
Jialai Wang1,2 *, Yuxiao Wu3 , Weiye Xu4 , Yating Huang3 , Chao Zhang2 ,
Zongpeng Li2†, Mingwei Xu2 , and Zhenkai Liang1
1
National University of Singapore, 2 Tsinghua University,
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 4 China Mobile Research Institute

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have experienced significant
progress and are quantized for deployment in resourceconstrained applications. Quantized models are vulnerable to targeted bit-flip attacks (BFAs). A targeted BFA
prepares a trigger and a corresponding Trojan/backdoor,
inserting the latter (with RowHammer bit flipping) into a
victim model, to mislead its classification on samples containing the trigger. Existing targeted BFAs on quantized
ViTs are limited in that: (1) they require numerous bitflips, and (2) the separation between flipped bits is below
4 KB, making attacks infeasible with RowHammer in realworld scenarios. We propose a new and practical targeted
attack Flip-S against quantized ViTs. The core insight
is that in quantized models, a scale factor change ripples
through a batch of model weights. Consequently, flipping
bits in scale factors, rather than solely in model weights, enables more cost-effective attacks. We design a Scale-FactorSearch (SFS) algorithm to identify critical bits in scale factors for flipping, and adopt a mutual exclusion strategy to
guarantee a 4 KB separation between flips. We evaluate
Flip-S on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets across five
ViT architectures and two quantization levels. Results show
that Flip-S achieves attack success rate (ASR) exceeding 90.0% on all models with 50 bits flipped, outperforming
baselines with ASR typically below 80.0%. Furthermore,
compared to the SOTA, Flip-S reduces the number of required bit-flips by 8×-20× while reaching equal or higher
ASR. Our source code is publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Recent developments in Vision Transformers (ViTs) have
shown promise in and beyond vision-related tasks [12, 22].
* The main work was conducted when the author studied at Tsinghua.
† Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/wjl123wjl/Flip-S

To enable ViTs in resource-constrained applications, model
quantization is customarily adopted [9, 10, 14, 43], converting model weights from high- to low-precision (e.g.
float32 to int8), reducing memory usage and computational
cost [3, 10, 17, 40]. Recent literature reveals that bit-flip attacks (BFAs) [44, 45] pose threats to quantized ViTs. BFAs
tamper with model parameters [7, 27–29, 31, 39] for malicious attempts. They typically use RowHammer [19, 23] to
exploit the hardware layer to introduce errors in memory regions that store a model’s weight parameters, compromising
the model’s integrity and performance [24]. For instance,
flipping a few critical bits of off-the-shelf DNN model parameters can mislead the inference to a target class.
Current BFAs can be categorized into untargeted and targeted attacks. Untargeted BFAs aim to compromise model
accuracy to random guess level [27, 29, 39], e.g., degrading
accuracy from 80.4% to 0.2%. In contrast, targeted BFAs
are more stealthy [4, 5, 7, 28, 44]. They mislead models to a
target class on specific samples, e.g., samples with a specific
trigger. This work focuses on the widely discussed targeted
BFAs. Such attacks typically contain two steps: first, generating a trigger, and then inserting a Trojan into the victim
model by flipping specific bits. Once the Trojan is inserted,
the victim model will misclassify any input containing the
trigger as the target class.
We identify two main challenges in attacking quantized
ViTs. First, existing attacks require flipping numerous bits,
and are hence cost prohibitive. Our experiments reveal that
targeted BFAs typically require flipping hundreds of bits
to achieve a successful targeted attack on ViTs. Flipping
such large number of bits is time-consuming. BFAs rely on
RowHammer to conduct bit-flips in memory pages, which
is not a trivial task. Previous literature [18, 36] shows that
flipping as few as 24 bits can take several hours. Second,
existing BFAs commonly flip bits whose separation is below 4 KB, limiting the practicality of these attacks. Prior
work [33] suggests that RowHammer generally flips only a
single bit within a 4 KB memory page. Since most BFAs

20103

