This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-World Objectness Modeling Unifies Novel Object Detection
Shan Zhang1,6 , Yao Ni2,6 , Jinhao Du3 , Yuan Xue4 , Philip Torr5 , Piotr Koniusz6,2, ,* Anton van den Hengel1,∗
1
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, 2 Australian National University, 3 Peking University
4
Ohio State University, 5 University of Oxford, 6 Data61 CSIRO
1

firstname.lastname@adelaide.edu.au, 6 piotr.koniusz@data61.csiro.au

Abstract

GT labels

Proposals

RPN

Classifier

OR
DETR

…

(𝝁, 𝝈𝟐 )
-4

-1.6

(a)

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

Known Objects
Unknown Objects
Background

Frequency

0.4

Frequency

The challenge in open-world object detection, similarly
to few- and zero-shot learning, is to generalize beyond the
class distribution of the training data. In this paper, we propose a general class-agnostic objectness measure to limit
bias toward labeled samples. One issue in open-world detection is that previously unseen objects are often misclassified as known categories or filtered as background by classifiers. To prevent this, we explicitly model the joint distribution of objectness and category labels using variational
approximation. However, without sufficient labeled data,
minimizing the KL divergence between the estimated posterior and a static normal prior fails to converge. Our
theoretical analysis identifies the root cause of this failure
and motivates adopting a Gaussian prior with variance dynamically adapted to the estimated posterior as a surrogate. To further reduce misclassification, we introduce an
energy-based margin loss that encourages unknown objects
to move toward high-density regions of the distribution, thus
reducing the uncertainty of unknown detections. Our OpenWorld OBJectness modeling (OWOBJ) boosts novel object
detection, especially in low-data regimes. OWOBJ is a flexible plugin that outperforms baselines in Open-World, FewShot, and zero-shot Open-Vocabulary Object Detection.

Obj. labels

Queries

10

8

6

4

2

Energy Value
(b)

0

2

10

8

6

4

2

Energy Value

0

2

(c)

Figure 1. Fig. 1a: The objectness distribution parameters (µ,σ 2 )
are estimated across class-agnostic latent embeddings (‘Queries’
in DETR [69] or ‘Proposals’ in RPN [39]). Our Z + 1-dim. classifier includes Z known classes and one additional class for unknown/background detection. The objectness probabilities serve
as labels for unlabeled objects ■ and background ■, alongside
ground-truth labels for known objects ■, during classifier training.
The rightmost plot shows their energies in the classier. Specifically, the energy of known classes is the negative sum of the logits
across all Z classes, while the Z + 1-th logit is used to compute
the energy of unknowns/background. Fig. 1b demonstrates the effectiveness of objectness modeling, showing that random soft unknown labels fail to distinguish unknowns from knowns and background. Fig. 1c illustrates that without regularization in the energy
space, known energies are spread across low values (high classification confidence), leading to significant misclassifications.

1. Introduction
The ability to recognize general objects as being distinct
from the background in images is important for vision systems as they have to deal with the inherently open-set nature of the real world. Deep learning, large datasets and
large compute have enabled significant progress towards
this goal [4, 7, 8, 16, 50]. However, existing object detectors, e.g., Faster R-CNN [39] and D-DETR [69], remain
biased toward training on a fixed set of objects, often misclassifying unknown objects as background. This limita* Corresponding authors.
AI4Math-ShanZhang/OWOBJ.

Code: https://github.com/

tion reduces their value in real-world applications, e.g., autonomous vehicles and robotics [19, 32, 66–68] that must
handle unknown objects to ensure good results and safety.
To address this limitation, objectness modeling helps
detect objects irrespective of their class labels, facilitating recognition beyond a closed set of categories. Detectors trained on large datasets implicitly learn objectness
distributions, enabling generalization in zero-shot scenarios [5, 34, 55, 65]. In situations where large representative datasets are not available, models remain biased toward
the known classes [39, 69], limiting their effectiveness for
open-world tasks. Older methods [1, 70] relied on hand-

30332

