This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FLAIR: VLM with Fine-grained Language-informed Image Representations
Rui Xiao1,2 , Sanghwan Kim1,2,3,4 , Mariana-Iuliana Georgescu1,2,3,4 , Zeynep Akata1,2,3,4 , Stephan Alaniz1,2,3,4
1

Technical University of Munich 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
3
Helmholtz Munich 4 Munich Data Science Institute (MDSI)
Abstract

Ground-truth

CLIP has shown impressive results in aligning images and
texts at scale. However, its ability to capture detailed visual features remains limited because CLIP matches images and texts at a global level. To address this issue, we propose FLAIR, Fine-grained Language-informed
Image Representations, an approach that utilizes long
and detailed image descriptions to learn localized image
embeddings. By sampling diverse sub-captions that describe fine-grained details about an image, we train our
vision-language model to produce not only global embeddings but also text-specific image representations. Our
model introduces text-conditioned attention pooling on top
of local image tokens to produce fine-grained image representations that excel at retrieving detailed image content. We achieve state-of-the-art performance on both, existing multimodal retrieval benchmarks, as well as, our
newly introduced fine-grained retrieval task which evaluates vision-language models’ ability to retrieve partial
image content. Furthermore, our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of FLAIR trained on 30M imagetext pairs in capturing fine-grained visual information, including zero-shot semantic segmentation, outperforming
models trained on billions of pairs. Code is available at
https://github.com/ExplainableML/flair.

DreamLIP-30M

OpenCLIP-1B

FLAIR-3M

The background, though blurred, reveals a parking lot filled with cars

Despite the background, the frappuccino remains the star of the image

Figure 1. Visualization of the similarity scores between local image tokens and different text queries. While previous
works [41, 60] lack fine-grained alignment, FLAIR matches text
and image semantics at the token level.

1. Introduction

as image-text retrieval or semantic segmentation.
Previous works [14, 60] propose to generate detailed descriptions for images to achieve more localized image-text
alignment in CLIP models. However, these methods are restricted by the conventional learning mechanism of CLIP,
since the detailed text descriptions enhance visual representations indirectly by matching them through the contrastive
loss. Although DreamLIP [60] proposed to supervise local
image tokens with textual information, we find that, without a careful selection of the negative pairs in the contrastive
loss, the VLM does not learn to align the image tokens with
semantically matching text, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
To address these issues, we propose FLAIR, to learn
Fine-grained Language-informed Image Representations,
where image embeddings are generated by conditioning on
a relevant text embedding for a more targeted alignment,
instead of an indirect alignment through a global loss function. To obtain image descriptions with maximum semantic
richness, our method leverages long-caption datasets generated by Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs).

By encoding images and texts into global embeddings,
CLIP [41] achieves coarse-grained semantic understanding.
However, it loses track of the local image details, e.g., CLIP
is not able to perceive the difference between “background”
and “frappucino”, resulting in the inability to highlight the
relevant regions specified in the text prompt, as illustrated
in Fig. 1. Recently, it has been shown that CLIP models
and other Vision Language Models (VLMs) often lack visual details [47, 48]. Thus, our goal is to improve the finegrained visual understanding of CLIP models, which is essential for a wide range of downstream applications, such

24884

