This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PBR-NeRF: Inverse Rendering with Physics-Based Neural Fields
Sean Wu1 , Shamik Basu2 , Tim Brödermann1 , Luc Van Gool1,3 , and Christos Sakaridis1
1

ETH Zürich, 2 University Of Bologna, 3 INSAIT, Sofia University St. Kliment Ohridski

Abstract
We tackle the ill-posed inverse rendering problem in 3D
reconstruction with a Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) approach informed by Physics-Based Rendering (PBR) theory, named PBR-NeRF. Our method addresses a key limitation in most NeRF and 3D Gaussian Splatting approaches:
they estimate view-dependent appearance without modeling scene materials and illumination. To address this
limitation, we present an inverse rendering (IR) model
capable of jointly estimating scene geometry, materials,
and illumination. Our model builds upon recent NeRFbased IR approaches, but crucially introduces two novel
physics-based priors that better constrain the IR estimation. Our priors are rigorously formulated as intuitive
loss terms and achieve state-of-the-art material estimation
without compromising novel view synthesis quality. Our
method is easily adaptable to other inverse rendering and
3D reconstruction frameworks that require material estimation. We demonstrate the importance of extending current neural rendering approaches to fully model scene properties beyond geometry and view-dependent appearance.
Code is publicly available at: https://github.com/
s3anwu/pbrnerf.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in neural rendering and 3D reconstruction
using Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [23] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [18] have driven massive research
interest. However, reconstructing accurate scene properties
from posed multi-view images remains a challenging, open
problem due to inherent ambiguities. The material-lighting
ambiguity makes the inverse rendering problem fundamentally ill-posed, with identical images being explainable by
infinitely many tuples of scene materials, illumination, and
geometry. Addressing this ill-posed inverse problem requires strong priors to narrow the possible solution space.
To overcome this issue, we leverage Physics-Based Rendering (PBR) theory [17, 26] from computer graphics. PBR

Figure 1. Improving inverse rendering with physics-based
priors. The proposed PBR-NeRF significantly outperforms the
NeILF++ [51] baseline simply by using our novel Conservation of
Energy and NDF-weighted Specular Losses. Our physics-based
losses correct “baked-in” specular highlights misrepresented in the
diffuse lobe (highlighted areas) by (1) enforcing energy conservation and (2) accurately separating specular and diffuse reflections.
The result is a more realistic, physically consistent material and
lighting estimation.

provides a framework for generating physically accurate
images given known scene materials, illumination, and geometry. By reversing this process, we derive physics-based
priors to better constrain neural forward and inverse rendering and enhance estimation robustness. More specifically, while NeRF, 3DGS, and their neural field derivatives
achieve state-of-the-art performance in modeling scene geometry and view-dependent appearance, they do so by treating scenes as “black boxes” that ignore the underlying
physics of light transport. These methods represent light
by volume-rendering millions of translucent particles, conditioning each particle’s emitted radiance on its position and
viewing direction. This formulation significantly improves
expressiveness over traditional methods [1, 32], but it does
not guarantee physically accurate results. For example, reflective surfaces may be improperly modeled, causing artifacts such as “baked-in” specular highlights, where particles
emit more light in outgoing directions than physically possible. Ultimately, the performance of NeRF and 3DGS in
3D reconstruction is inherently limited by their inability to
accurately and consistently model diverse light interactions.

10974

In this paper, we solve the complete inverse rendering problem by jointly estimating the geometry, illumina-

