This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sea-ing in Low-light
Nisha Varghese
A. N. Rajagopalan
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India
nishavarghese15@gmail.com

raju@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
Underwater (UW) robotics applications require depth and
restored images simultaneously in real-time, irrespective
of whether the UW images are captured in good lighting
conditions or not. Most of the UW image restoration and
depth estimation methods have been devised for images under normal lighting. Consequently, they struggle to perform on poorly lit images. Even though artificial illumination can be used when there is insufficient ambient light,
it can introduce non-uniform lighting artifacts in the restored images. Hence, the recovery of depth and restored
images directly from Low-Light UW (LLUW) images is a
critical requirement in marine applications. While a few
works have attempted LLUW image restoration, there are
no reported works on joint recovery of depth and clean
image from LLUW images. We propose a Self-supervised
Low-light Underwater Image and Depth recovery network
(SelfLUID-Net) for joint estimation of depth and restored
image in real-time from a single LLUW image. We have collected an Underwater Low-light Stereo Video (ULVStereo)
dataset which is the first-ever UW dataset with stereo pairs
of low-light and normally-lit UW images. For the dual tasks
of image and depth recovery from a LLUW image, we effectively utilize the stereo data from ULVStereo that provides
cues for both depth and illumination-independent clean image. We harness a combination of the UW image formation
process, the Retinex model, and constraints enforced by the
scene geometry for our self-supervised training. To handle occlusions, we additionally utilize monocular frames
from our video dataset and propose a masking scheme to
prevent dynamic transients, that do not respect the underlying scene geometry, from misguiding the learning process. Evaluations on five LLUW datasets demonstrate
the superiority and generalization ability of our proposed
SelfLUID-Net over existing state-of-the-art methods. The
dataset ULVStereo is available at https://github.
com/nishavarghese15/ULVStereo.

scattering of light in water. The problem is compounded
when these images are captured in dim ambient light influenced by factors such as cloudiness, time of the season,
higher depths, etc. UW exploration [53, 58, 90] requires
restoration of images and depth maps from the captured UW
observations, regardless of whether they are well-lit or not.
Existing methods for UW depth [25, 62, 72] and restoration
[5, 15, 47, 71] that work in adequately illuminated UW images are not well-suited for dimly-lit scenarios. Although
low-light enhancement methods [23, 36, 45, 55] for terrestrial images have shown significant advancements, they cannot be directly applied to low-light UW (LLUW) images
due to the presence of haze and color-cast. Our work enables ‘sea-ing’ in low-light by real-time recovery of images
and depth maps from dimly lit underwater observations.
There exist a few works for LLUW image enhancement
[29, 34, 56, 84]. However, to the best of our knowledge,
there has been no attempt to jointly recover both depth and
clean image from a LLUW image. Another fundamental challenge in LLUW research is the need for a proper
dataset. The works [84, 95] propose paired UW low-light
datasets where low-illumination is added synthetically to
existing UW dataset [43]. But this does not characterize
a real UW low-illumination scenario. [57] proposes a real
low-light UW dataset. But it is quite small with only 183
images and the scenes are not diverse. [29] proposes a
dataset NUID by collecting real low-light UW images from
several existing UW datasets [31, 43, 57] and from the internet. But these datasets [29, 57] contain only LLUW images,
which are better-suited for inference.

1. Introduction

Down-stream tasks such as UW object classification, target recognition, and tracking require restored images and
depth maps in real-time. Although traditional methods
[5, 62, 63] based on the UW image formation model perform both UW image restoration and depth map estimation, their processing time is very high. Deep-learning (DL)
methods are better-suited to meet the real-time requirements
of these tasks since they need only a single pass during inference. Due to the unavailability of real paired datasets
with Ground Truth (GT) in UW scenario, supervised networks [43, 44, 79, 84], trained on synthetic or paired dataset

Underwater (UW) image and depth recovery pose difficulties due to color cast and haziness caused by absorption and

16629

