This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Foley-Flow: Coordinated Video-to-Audio Generation with
Masked Audio-Visual Alignment and Dynamic Conditional Flows
Shentong Mo
CMU / MBZUAI
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group

Yibing Song*
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Hupan Laboratory

shentongmo@gmail.com

songyibing.syb@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Coordinated audio generation based on video inputs typically requires a strict audio-visual (AV) alignment, where
both semantics and rhythmics of the generated audio segments shall correspond to those in the video frames. Previous studies leverage a two-stage design where the AV encoders are firstly aligned via contrastive learning, then the
encoded video representations guide the audio generation
process. We observe that both contrastive learning and
global video guidance are effective in aligning overall AV
semantics while limiting temporally rhythmic synchronization. In this work, we propose Foley-Flow to first align
unimodal AV encoders via masked modeling training, where
the masked audio segments are recovered under the guidance of the corresponding video segments. After training,
the AV encoders which are separately pretrained using only
unimodal data are aligned with semantic and rhythmic consistency. Then, we develop a dynamic conditional flow for
the final audio generation. Built upon the efficient velocity
flow generation framework, our dynamic conditional flow
utilizes temporally varying video features as the dynamic
condition to guide corresponding audio segment generations. To this end, we extract coherent semantic and rhythmic representations during masked AV alignment, and use
this representation of video segments to guide audio generation temporally. Our audio results are evaluated on the
standard benchmarks and largely surpass existing results
under several metrics. The superior performance indicates
that Foley-Flow is effective in generating coordinated audios that are both semantically and rhythmically coherent
to various video sequences.

Figure 1. Comparison with state-of-the-art approaches. We
achieve the best results regarding semantical (Align Acc) and
rhythmical (KLD, FAD) metrics.

1. Introduction

* Y. Song is the corresponding author.

Video sequences are naturally captured with audio signal
accompaniment. The audio reflects the sound of the object
types and motions in the video. For one video where the accompanied audio is missing, coordinated audio generation
supplements the video stream to formulate complete human
perception. Generating coordinated audio from video inputs
is typically from two perspectives. First, the audio should
reflect the unique semantics of the video content (e.g., the
sound of a bird chirping is different from the sound of a
dog barking). Second, the sound in one audio should be coherent with the object motions in the video sequence (e.g.,
the clip-clop of the horse’s hooves corresponds to the horse
walking on the road. The clip-clop happens only when the
hooves hit the ground). As such, the semantics and rhythmics of the generated audio segments should correspond to
the video contents.
Existing methods [10, 15, 17, 25] on video-to-audio generation can be summarized as a two-step design. In the first
step, a visual encoder (e.g., a ViT) is aligned to an audio
encoder (i.e., a ViT takes audio spectrograms). The visual/audio encoder is pretrained using unimodal data only,
with a self-supervised or supervised pretraining scheme.

28912

