This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DFM: Differentiable Feature Matching for Anomaly Detection
Sheng Wu2,∗ Yimi Wang2,∗ Xudong Liu2,∗ Yuguang Yang3,† Runqi Wang1,†
Guodong Guo4 David Doermann5 Baochang Zhang2,6,7,8
1
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Beihang University
3
School of Electronic Information Engineering, Beihang University
4
West Virginia University 5 State University of New York at Buffalo
6
Hangzhou Research Institute, Beihang University
7
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing 8 Nanchang Institute of Technology, Nanchang
Abstract
Feature matching methods for unsupervised anomaly detection have demonstrated impressive performance. Existing methods primarily rely on self-supervised training and
handcrafted matching schemes for task adaptation. However, they can only achieve an inferior feature representation for anomaly detection because the feature extraction
and matching modules are separately trained. To address
these issues, we propose a Differentiable Feature Matching (DFM) framework for joint optimization of the feature extractor and the matching head. DFM transforms
nearest-neighbor matching into a pooling-based module
and embeds it within a Feature Matching Network (FMN).
This design enables end-to-end feature extraction and feature matching module training, thus providing better feature representation for anomaly detection tasks. DFM
is generic and can be incorporated into existing featurematching methods. We implement DFM with various backbones and conduct extensive experiments across various
tasks and datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness. Notably,
we achieve state-of-the-art results in the continual anomaly
detection task with instance-AUROC improvement of up to
3.9% and pixel-AP improvement of up to 5.5%.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection is critical for various industrial applications, where identifying deviations from normal patterns can prevent failures and ensure quality control. Feature matching-based methods like SPADE [11] and PatchCore [37] have emerged as signiﬁcant advancements in this
∗:Co-First Authors. {shengwu, wyatt xuanyang, tlxd}@buaa.edu.cn
†:Corresponding Authors.
rqwang@bjtu.edu.cn,
guangbuaa@buaa.edu.cn (Assist Corresponding)

15224

ﬁeld, notably achieving excellent results on multiple key
metrics on unsupervised anomaly detection settings. However, several practical limitations hinder their widespread
application in some real scenes: Reliance on pre-trained
backbones without adaptation for downstream tasks, especially failing to utilize available real anomalous samples. This issue also hampers the model’s performance in
the continual setting, where adaptation to new classes over
time is essential; Inefﬁciency in few-shot scenarios due to
the frozen backbone and oversimpliﬁed nearest neighbor
matching, which necessitate the construction of a memory
bank with abundant samples to maintain performance; The
feature extraction and matching modules are optimized separately, resulting in incompatibility.
These shortcomings cause two main issues: feature
adaptation and feature matching. Various methods have
been proposed to address these problems [4, 21, 22, 49].
However, as shown in Fig. 1(a), the adaptation strategies of
mainstream methods involve training the feature extractor
with proxy tasks using the self-supervised framework but
fail to supervise the encoder aiming for anomaly detection
directly. Furthermore, the improvements in feature matching are handcrafted and static, hindering their ﬂexibility to
the extracted features as shown in Fig. 1(b). This leads to a
discrepancy between feature extraction and feature matching for anomaly detection. In other words, feature matching
should involve the feature learning process and, at the same
time, should also be tailored to the extracted features.
To build a direct connection between feature adaptation
and feature matching, we introduce the Differentiable Feature Matching (DFM) method shown in Fig. 1(c), which integrates feature extraction and feature matching in the same
framework for anomaly detection and segmentation. This
design allows for an end-to-end feature extractor and matching head training. Speciﬁcally, we transform the widely

