This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CMMLoc: Advancing Text-to-PointCloud Localization with
Cauchy-Mixture-Model Based Framework

1

Yanlong Xu1 Haoxuan Qu2 Jun Liu2 Wenxiao Zhang3† Xun Yang1†
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Lancaster University 3 Hohai University

kc30@mail.ustc.edu.cn,{h.qu5,j.liu81}@lancaster.ac.uk,wenxxiao.zhang@gmail.com,xyang21@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

I am waiting on a gray road,
southwest of a black terrain,
east of a bright-gray sidewalk...

The goal of point cloud localization based on linguistic description is to identify a 3D position using textual description in large urban environments, which has potential applications in various fields, such as determining the location for vehicle pickup or goods delivery. Ideally, for a
textual description and its corresponding 3D location, the
objects around the 3D location should be fully described
in the text description. However, in practical scenarios,
e.g., vehicle pickup, passengers usually describe only the
part of the most significant and nearby surroundings instead of the entire environment. In response to this partially
relevant challenge, we propose CMMLoc, an uncertaintyaware Cauchy-Mixture-Model (CMM) based framework
for text-to-point-cloud Localization. To model the uncertain
semantic relations between text and point cloud, we integrate CMM constraints as a prior during the interaction between the two modalities. We further design a spatial consolidation scheme to enable adaptive aggregation of different 3D objects with varying receptive fields. To achieve precise localization, we propose a cardinal direction integration module alongside a modality pre-alignment strategy,
helping capture the spatial relationships among objects and
bringing the 3D objects closer to the text modality. Comprehensive experiments validate that CMMLoc outperforms
existing methods, achieving state-of-the-art results on the
KITTI360Pose dataset. Codes are available in this GitHub
repository https://github.com/kevin301342/
CMMLoc.

Got it! I am searching the
possible area of this city and
will pick you up soon.

（a）
gray road black terrain

bright-gray sidewalk
irrelevant objects
target Position

Target Submap

（b）

City Map

Figure 1. Given a text description of a location in (a), CMMLoc
searches the 3D city and identifies the most likely target location
of the described position within a submap in (b). Notably, text
descriptions do not correspond to all objects within the submap,
where the irrelevant objects are shown in gray color.

canyons [6, 42]. Conversely, language-based point cloud
localization can help under these conditions. Furthermore,
this technology offers significant convenience for humans,
as it eliminates the need to provide an exact address, freeing us from the limitations of GPS tags and enabling more
user-friendly human-machine interactions.
3D point cloud localization based on text descriptions is
a challenging task due to the gap between linguistic descriptions and large-scale point clouds. To simplify this difficult
task, the pioneering work Text2Pos [18] proposes a coarseto-fine pipeline that divides the city map into submaps,
first retrieving candidate submaps based on global descriptor matching, followed by fine localization through hintto-instance correspondence. However, it does not account
for the relationships within text queries or between point
clouds. RET [43] improves cross-modal collaboration by
introducing a Relation-Enhanced Transformer. Text2Loc
[48] adopts a frozen pre-trained T5 [33] model and a hierarchical transformer to analyze the relationships between
text descriptions with a matching-free regression method
for fine localization.
While these approaches make significant progress on this

1. Introduction
3D point cloud localization according to the given natural language descriptions, is promising in the future with
the development of autonomous driving [13] and embodied
agents [21], especially in large-scale urban environments.
In practical scenarios, GPS performance often suffers due
to signal blockage in certain environments, such as in urban
† Corresponding authors.

6637

