This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Generation: A Diffusion-based Low-level Feature Extractor for
Detecting AI-generated Images
Nan Zhong1 , Haoyu Chen1 , Yiran Xu2 , Zhenxing Qian2 *, and Xinpeng Zhang2
1
City University of Hong Kong, 2 Fudan University
{nzhong20,yrxu23,zxqian,zhangxinpeng}@fudan.edu.cn,{haoychen3-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

by commercial APIs like Midjourney [1], which utilizes
diffusion-based techniques. Although the advancement of
image generation offers significant benefits for productivity,
its widespread application raises concerns about malicious
usages like misinformation dissemination. Therefore, it is
imperative to develop methods for detecting AI-generated
images to ensure a trustworthy cyberspace environment.
Recently, a flurry of detection methods [2, 27, 28, 51, 52,
56] have developed to identify AI-generated images. Existing methods frame the AI-generated image detection as a
binary classification. The training set usually consists of
real photographic images and one generative model (e.g.,
ProGAN [16]). Then, they evaluate their performance on
various unseen generative models. Since the types of generative models and their variants are too vast to be encompassed in a finite training set, generalization is the primary
requirement for detectors. Most studies aim to extract a
universal artifact, which is absent from real photographic
images, across different generative models to achieve generalization. For instance, LGrad [46] employs the gradient maps of images produced by a pre-trained classification model as the universal fingerprint of generative models.
Then, they conduct binary classification for gradient maps
instead of spatial images. However, the generative artifacts
significantly vary with the development of generation models. In the diffusion era, most detectors [46, 51] fail to identify those high-quality AI-generated images. As a result,
many studies [2, 28, 52] delve into the inner mechanism of
diffusion models and extract generative artifacts specialized
for diffusion-generated images.
In this paper, we frame the AI-generated image detection
as a one-class classification [3, 4] (also known as anomaly
detection) instead of a binary classification paradigm. Since
generative models will evolve with the development of image generation, it is not suitable to identify AI-generated
images from generative artifacts. Specifically, we focus
on extracting the low-level intrinsic features of real photographic images through a novel elaborated low-level image
feature extractor. Images whose features deviate from the
distribution of real images can be regarded as AI-generated.

The prevalence of AI-generated images has evoked concerns regarding the potential misuse of image generation
technologies. In response, numerous detection methods aim
to identify AI-generated images by analyzing generative artifacts. Unfortunately, most detectors quickly become obsolete with the development of generative models. In this
paper, we first design a low-level feature extractor that
transforms spatial images into feature space, where different source images exhibit distinct distributions. The pretext
task for the feature extractor is to distinguish between images that differ only at the pixel level. This image set comprises the original image as well as versions that have been
subjected to varying levels of noise and subsequently denoised using a pre-trained diffusion model. We employ the
diffusion model as a denoising tool rather than an image
generation tool. Then, we frame the AI-generated image
detection task as a one-class classification. We estimate the
low-level intrinsic feature distribution of real photographic
images and identify features that deviate from this distribution as indicators of AI-generated images. We evaluate our
method against over 20 different generative models, including those in GenImage and DRCT-2M datasets. Extensive
experiments demonstrate its effectiveness on AI-generated
images produced not only by diffusion models but also by
GANs, flow-based models, and their variants.

1. Introduction
Image generation has rapidly evolved over the past
years. Numerous generative models such as autoregressive models [20], variational autoencoders [19], normalizing flows [18], generative adversarial networks (GANs) [12,
16], and diffusion models [8, 13, 14] have been proposed.
Especially, diffusion-based models bring image generation
into a new era. Users without expertise can easily access high-quality AI-generated images and content editing
* Corresponding author.

8258

