This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Consistent Multi-Task Learning:
Unlocking the Potential of Task-Specific Parameters
Xiaohan Qin Xiaoxing Wang‡ Junchi Yan‡
School of Computer Science & School of Artificial Intelligience, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{galaxy-1,figure1 wxx,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
https://github.com/jianke0604/MTLlib

Abstract
Multi-task learning (MTL) has gained widespread application for its ability to transfer knowledge across tasks,
improving resource efficiency and generalization. However, gradient conflicts from different tasks remain a major challenge in MTL. Previous gradient-based and lossbased methods primarily focus on gradient optimization in
shared parameters, often overlooking the potential of taskspecific parameters. This work points out that task-specific
parameters not only capture task-specific information but
also influence the gradients propagated to shared parameters, which in turn affects gradient conflicts. Motivated by
this insight, we propose ConsMTL, which models MTL as a
bi-level optimization problem: in the upper-level optimization, we perform gradient aggregation on shared parameters to find a joint update vector that minimizes gradient
conflicts; in the lower-level optimization, we introduce an
additional loss for task-specific parameters guiding the k
gradients of shared parameters to gradually converge towards the joint update vector. Our design enables the optimization of both shared and task-specific parameters to
consistently mitigate gradient conflicts. Extensive experiments show that ConsMTL achieves state-of-the-art performance across various benchmarks with task numbers ranging from 2 to 40, demonstrating its superior performance.

mance [4, 28, 35]. This approach is particularly advantageous in contexts with limited computational resources, as
it mitigates the need for separate models per task. Its applications span a variety of domains, including computer
vision [1, 25, 41], natural language processing [7, 24, 30],
and robotics [12, 37]. Despite its advantages, MTL faces a
significant challenge: gradient conflicts in shared parameters [21, 32, 36, 38]. Gradients from different tasks exhibit
varying directions and magnitudes, making it essential to
determine a final update that mitigates these conflicts effectively while ensuring fair optimization across tasks.
To address this challenge, previous works have concentrated on two main approaches: gradient-based [3, 21, 29,
38] and loss-based [18, 19, 22] methods. Gradient-based
methods perform k rounds of backpropagation to obtain the
gradients ∇θs ℓ1 , ∇θs ℓ2 , . . . , ∇θs ℓk corresponding to the k
tasks for the shared parameters θs . These methods carefully design aggregation algorithms A to compute a final
joint gradient gshare = A(∇θs ℓ1 , ∇θs ℓ2 , . . . , ∇θs ℓk ). Benefiting from access to precise gradients from all tasks in each
update, gradient-based approaches often exhibit impressive
results. In contrast, loss-based methods do not directly obtain the gradients of shared parameters; instead, they assign weights (ω1 , ω2 , . . . , ωk ) to each task based on the current task losses (ℓ1 , ℓ2 , . . . , ℓk ), creating an aggregated loss.
Backpropagation is then performed on this aggregated loss,
allowing these methods to preserve training-time efficiency
as they require only a single backpropagation per update.
However, both approaches primarily focus on gradient aggregation within shared parameters, while overlooking gradient optimization in task-specific parameters, and
some works [29, 33] even assume that task-specific parameters do not contribute to the gradient aggregation
for shared parameters. Specifically, previous methods
directly retain the gradients computed from the corresponding losses for task-specific parameters, as shown in
Fig. 1. In gradient-based methods, the joint gradient for
shared parameters is obtained by aggregating gshare =
A(∇θs ℓ1 , ∇θs ℓ2 , . . . , ∇θs ℓk ), while the gradient for each

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) [6, 31, 40] is a framework in
which a unified model is designed to address multiple tasks
concurrently. By sharing representations and leveraging
cross-task information, MTL can boost the generalization
capabilities of the model and enhance overall task perfor‡ Corresponding author. This work was partly supported by NSFC
(62222607) and Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major
Project under Grant 2021SHZDZX0102.

10067

