This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DynPose: Largely Improving the Efficiency of Human Pose Estimation by a
Simple Dynamic Framework

1

Yalong Xu1 , Lin Zhao1 *, Chen Gong1 , Guangyu Li1 , Di Wang2 , Nannan Wang2
PCA Lab, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University
{yalongxu, linzhao, chen.gong, guangyu.li2017}@njust.edu.cn, {wangdi, nnwang}@xidian.edu.cn

COCO AP (%)

Abstract
Top-down approaches for human pose estimation (HPE)
have reached a high level of sophistication, exemplified
by models such as HRNet and ViTPose. Nonetheless, the
low efficiency of top-down methods is a recognized issue that has not been sufficiently explored in current research. Our analysis suggests that the primary cause of
inefficiency stems from the substantial diversity found in
pose samples. On one hand, simple poses can be accurately estimated without requiring the computational resources of larger models. On the other hand, a more
prominent issue arises from the abundance of bounding
boxes, which remain excessive even after NMS. In this
paper, we present a straightforward yet effective dynamic
framework called DynPose, designed to match diverse pose
samples with the most appropriate models, thereby ensuring optimal performance and high efficiency. Specifically, the framework contains a lightweight router and two
pre-trained HPE models: one small and one large. The
router is optimized to classify samples and dynamically
determine the appropriate inference paths. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the framework.
For example, using ResNet-50 and HRNet-W32 as the pretrained models, our DynPose achieves an almost 50% increase in speed over HRNet-W32 while maintaining the
same-level accuracy. More importantly, the framework can
be generalized to other pre-trained models and datasets
without re-training or fine-tuning. Code is available at
https://github.com/Aritoria/DynPose.

ViTPose-L

77
HRNet-W32

75
73

ResNet-152
ResNet-50

DynPose
Pre-trained

3
4
5
10
15
20
Average inference time per image on one NVIDIA 3090 GPU(ms)

Figure 1. Comparison of DynPose and other classic methods on
COCO dataset. The red line on the left shows the trade-off between speed and accuracy of our framework, while the red line on
the right illustrates the generalization results.

Net, which uses multi-scale convolution, provides a significant boost over the baseline [36]. Subsequently, methods
like ViTPose introduce attention mechanisms [36], reaching state-of-the-art accuracy. Notably, ViTPose-L achieves
an impressive 78.2% AP on the COCO dataset [24].
While current methods excel in accuracy, they often
struggle with efficiency [13, 42]. On one hand, top-down
approaches are inherently composed of two processes, requiring the cropping of samples from images by object detectors [8] before making pose estimation. The computational cost increases linearly with the number of detection
boxes. On the other hand, the increasing complexity of topdown model designs leads to higher inference time.
Recent advances such as lightweight networks [31, 41]
and sparse attention methods [1, 5, 16] focus on improving efficiency through innovative designs of the model itself. From another perspective, we discover that the true
bottleneck for the slowness of top-down HPE methods may
stem from the diversity of pose samples. The diversity
arises from two aspects: Pose Diversity and Box Diversity, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Pose Diversity is influenced
by whether a pose is common or not, as well as by factors such as occlusion, background clutter and the resolu-

1. Introduction
Top-down approaches for human pose estimation (HPE)
have reached a remarkable level of maturity, with significant improvements in accuracy. Modern architectures like
HRNet [32] and ViTPose [37] exemplify this progress. HR* Corresponding author.

1160

