This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Modeling Thousands of Human Annotators for Generalizable Text-to-Image
Person Re-identification
Jiayu Jiang1

Junhong Wang1
Jin Tao1
Xiangmin Xu1
Changxing Ding1,2 * Wentao Tan1
1
2
South China University of Technology
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou
202320111494@mail.scut.edu.cn, chxding@scut.edu.cn
{ftwentaotan,eewjh}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {arjtao,xmxu}@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Text-to-image person re-identification (ReID) aims to retrieve the images of an interested person based on textual
descriptions. One main challenge for this task is the high
cost in manually annotating large-scale databases, which
affects the generalization ability of ReID models. Recent
works handle this problem by leveraging Multi-modal Large
Language Models (MLLMs) to describe pedestrian images
automatically. However, the captions produced by MLLMs
lack diversity in description styles. To address this issue,
we propose a Human Annotator Modeling (HAM) approach
to enable MLLMs to mimic the description styles of thousands of human annotators. Specifically, we first extract
style features from human textual descriptions and perform
clustering on them. This allows us to group textual descriptions with similar styles into the same cluster. Then, we employ a prompt to represent each of these clusters and apply
prompt learning to mimic the description styles of different
human annotators. Furthermore, we define a style feature
space and perform uniform sampling in this space to obtain
more diverse clustering prototypes, which further enriches
the diversity of the MLLM-generated captions. Finally,
we adopt HAM to automatically annotate a massive-scale
database for text-to-image ReID. Extensive experiments on
this database demonstrate that it significantly improves the
generalization ability of ReID models. Code is available at
https://github.com/sssaury/HAM .

Figure 1. Illustration of different schemes for enhancing the style
diversity for MLLM-generated textual descriptions. (Top) Existing works typically rely on manually designed description templates to instruct MLLM to generate style-diverse captions. (Bottom) Our approach models the description styles of thousands of
human annotators, and enables the MLLM to capture these styles
in a learning-based approach.

of the generalizability of existing models. This is primarily due to the high cost in textual annotation, which significantly affects the size of existing manually-labeled datasets.
To address this issue, recent works proposed various
methods to automatically generate captions for massivescale pedestrian images [41, 45, 61, 68]. These works can
be categorized into two groups. One category of methods recognize each pedestrian image’s attributes and fills
them into manually designed description templates [41, 68].
The other category of methods employ off-the-shelf Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) to produce textual descriptions for each pedestrian image [61]. They also
rely on manually designed description templates to enhance
the diversity of the obtained textual descriptions [45].
However, as illustrated in Figure 1, these templates are

1. Introduction
Text-to-image person re-identification (ReID) [11, 14, 20,
40, 41, 53, 58, 58] aims to retrieve a person of interest from
a large image gallery based on textual descriptions. It plays
an important role in intelligent video surveillance [4], public security [4], and social media analysis [15]. However,
text-to-image ReID remains challenging especially in terms
* Corresponding author

9220

