This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust 3D Shape Reconstruction in Zero-Shot from a Single Image in the Wild
Junhyeong Cho1

Kim Youwang2

Hunmin Yang1,3

Tae-Hyun Oh2,4

1

ADD 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, POSTECH
3
Department of Mechanical Engineering, KAIST 4 School of Computing, KAIST
https://ZeroShape-W.github.io

Abstract
Recent monocular 3D shape reconstruction methods have
shown promising zero-shot results on object-segmented images without any occlusions. However, their effectiveness is
significantly compromised in real-world conditions, due to
imperfect object segmentation by off-the-shelf models and
the prevalence of occlusions. To effectively address these issues, we propose a unified regression model that integrates
segmentation and reconstruction, specifically designed for
occlusion-aware 3D shape reconstruction. To facilitate its
reconstruction in the wild, we also introduce a scalable data
synthesis pipeline that simulates a wide range of variations
in objects, occluders, and backgrounds. Training on our
synthetic data enables the proposed model to achieve stateof-the-art zero-shot results on real-world images, using significantly fewer parameters than competing approaches.

Image

LRM w/ SAM

Ours

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Single-view 3D shape reconstruction on real-world images [65]. Compared with LRM [25] that requires an off-the-shelf
segmentation model (e.g., SAM [32]), our approach not only eliminates the need for such an additional model but also achieves
greater robustness to occlusions.

in real-world conditions. However, a significant challenge
remains: how can we train our model for robust zero-shot
reconstruction in the wild? To achieve this goal, we need
large-scale diverse data that can cover various real environments. Unfortunately, the availability of real-world images
annotated with precise 3D shapes is limited. An alternative
approach is to generate realistic renderings from 3D object
collections [4, 7, 9, 10, 16], but this is also limited by the
availability of high-quality synthetic assets.
In this paper, we introduce a scalable data synthesis
pipeline (Fig. 2b) that simulates a wide range of variations
using generative models, thereby removing the reliance on
limited real-world data or high-quality synthetic assets. Our
pipeline first synthesizes foreground object images using
a conditional generative model [86], with spatial conditions obtained by rendering 3D shapes available from extensive object collections [4, 9, 10]. Then, their backgrounds
are generated by an object-aware background outpainting
model [13]. For these synthesized images, we apply CopyPaste augmentation [19] to simulate occluders on-the-fly
during model training.

The abundance of large-scale 3D shapes [4, 7, 9, 10, 16, 33]
has enabled the development of reconstruction models with
strong generalization capabilities, even allowing for zeroshot monocular 3D shape reconstruction [25, 29, 41, 66,
68, 74]. However, these models are not deployable in realworld settings, as they assume object images that have no
backgrounds and occlusions. Thus, they utilize off-the-shelf
segmentation models [32, 60] to handle in-the-wild images.
This dependency introduces two main challenges: (i) error
accumulation by off-the-shelf models, and (ii) removal of
occluded object parts by segmentation. Both issues hinder
precise shape reconstruction, as shown in Figure 1.
To tackle the challenges, we propose ZeroShape-W, an
occlusion-aware 3D shape reconstruction model (Fig. 2a).
Our model jointly regresses the silhouettes of a salient object and its occluders, along with a depth map and camera
intrinsics to estimate the object’s visible 3D shape. Then, its
full 3D shape is reconstructed by using the visible 3D shape
and the silhouette of occluders. This approach enables the
reconstruction of occluded object parts, making it effective

22786

