This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Patient-Level Anatomy Meets Scanning-Level Physics: Personalized Federated
Low-Dose CT Denoising Empowered by Large Language Model
Ziyuan Yang1,5 , Yingyu Chen1,5 , Zhiwen Wang2 , Hongming Shan3 , Yang Chen4 , Yi Zhang1,5,∗
1
Sichuan University 2 Southwest Petroleum University 3 Fudan University
4
Southeast University 5 Tianfu Jiangxi Laboratory
{cziyuanyang,cyy262511,zwwang1228}@gmail.com, hmshan@fudan.edu.cn
chenyang.list@seu.edu.cn, yzhang@scu.edu.cn

lic datasets1 .

Abstract
1. Introduction
Reducing radiation doses benefits patients, but the resultant low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) images
often suffer from clinically unacceptable noise and artifacts. While deep learning (DL) has shown promise in
LDCT reconstruction, it requires large-scale data collection from multiple clients, raising privacy concerns. Federated learning (FL) has been introduced to mitigate these
privacy concerns; however, current methods are typically
tailored to specific scanning protocols, which limits their
generalizability and makes them less effective for unseen
protocols. To address these issues, we propose SCANPhysFed, a novel SCanning- and ANatomy-level personalized Physics-Driven Federated learning paradigm for
LDCT reconstruction. Since the noise distribution in LDCT
data is closely tied to scanning protocols and anatomical
structures, we propose a dual-level physics-informed way to
address these challenges. Specifically, we incorporate physical and anatomical prompts into our physics-informed hypernetworks to capture scanning- and anatomy-specific information, enabling dual-level physics-driven personalization of imaging features. These prompts are derived from
the scanning protocol and the radiology report generated
by a medical large language model (MLLM). Subsequently,
client-specific decoders project these dual-level personalized imaging features back into the image domain. Besides, to tackle the challenge of unseen data, we introduce a
novel protocol vector-quantization strategy (PVQS), which
ensures consistent performance across new clients by quantifying unseen scanning codes to the closest match in the
scanning codebook. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superior performance of SCAN-PhysFed on pub-

Computed tomography (CT) is a key diagnostic tool that
non-invasively visualizes anatomical structures within the
human body. Despite its clinical benefits, CT scans pose
radiation concerns, which potentially lead to genetic, cancerous, and other health diseases. Lowering CT radiation dose—either by decreasing incident photons or limiting
sampling views—has emerged as a promising solution to reduce radiation risks and accelerate scanning. However, reconstructed images under these conditions suffer from significant quality degradation, compromising clinical applicability [27].
Recently, deep learning (DL)-based methods have shown
great promise for low-dose CT (LDCT) imaging [28]. However, most DL-based LDCT reconstruction methods are
condition-specific and overlook privacy concerns. Recently, researchers have attempted to introduce federated
learning (FL), a privacy-preserving distributed learning
paradigm, for LDCT reconstruction to alleviate privacy
concerns. Although these methods aim to enhance generalization, they still face significant challenges arising from
data heterogeneity, caused by diverse noise distributions in
CT imaging across different protocols and anatomical structures. We believe that the further advancement of FL in
LDCT reconstruction urgently requires a new framework
capable of leveraging comprehensive physical information
from the scanning process, thereby breaking through current bottlenecks to achieve better results.
To tackle this issue, we aim to leverage physical principles of the imaging process. During the projection process,
the measurement is influenced by the anatomical structures
the X-ray passed through, such as fat, bone, and fluid, each
1

∗ Corresponding author.

5154

Our code has been released at https://github.com/ZiYuanYang/SCAN-PhysFed.

