This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Convex Relaxation for Robust Vanishing Point Estimation in Manhattan World
Bangyan Liao1,2⋆ , Zhenjun Zhao3⋆ , Haoang Li4 , Yi Zhou5 , Yingping Zeng5 , Hao Li2 , Peidong Liu2B
1

Zhejiang University 2 Westlake University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
5
Hunan University

Abstract
Determining the vanishing points (VPs) in a Manhattan
world, as a fundamental task in many 3D vision applications, consists of jointly inferring the line-VP association
and locating each VP. Existing methods are, however, either
sub-optimal solvers or pursuing global optimality at a significant cost of computing time. In contrast to prior works,
we introduce convex relaxation techniques to solve this task
for the first time. Specifically, we employ a “soft” association scheme, realized via a truncated multi-selection error,
that allows for joint estimation of VPs’ locations and lineVP associations. This approach leads to a primal problem
that can be reformulated into a quadratically constrained
quadratic programming (QCQP) problem, which is then relaxed into a convex semidefinite programming (SDP) problem. To solve this SDP problem efficiently, we present a
globally optimal outlier-robust iterative solver (called GlobustVP), which independently searches for one VP and its
associated lines in each iteration, treating other lines as
outliers. After each independent update of all VPs, the
mutual orthogonality between the three VPs in a Manhattan world is reinforced via local refinement. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world data demonstrate that GlobustVP achieves a favorable balance between efficiency, robustness, and global optimality compared to previous works. The code is publicly available at
github.com/wu-cvgl/GlobustVP.

1. Introduction
Multiple parallel 3D lines project onto the camera image
plane, converging at a specific point known as the vanishing point (VP). Vanishing point estimation is a fundamental task in Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
⋆ Equal contribution.
B Corresponding author: Peidong Liu (liupeidong@westlake.edu.cn).

Ground Truth

GlobustVP (Ours)

3 VPs
38 lines

100%, 100%
0.23 pix., 50 ms

Figure 1. Representative results of our method (GlobustVP) on the
York Urban Database [10] for estimating three vanishing points
(VPs) in the Manhattan world. Different line-VP associations are
shown in respective colors. Below each image, we report the
widely-used evaluation metrics, precision ↑, recall ↑, consistency
error ↓ (defined in Sec. 5.1.1), and runtime ↓. GlobustVP achieves
high precision and fast runtime, demonstrating an excellent balance between accuracy and efficiency.

(SLAM) [20, 22], camera calibration [19, 23], and structural understanding [12]. In this paper, we focus on vanishing point estimation in the Manhattan world [36], which
assumes only three mutually orthogonal line directions and
represents the most common structural pattern in man-made
environments. The challenge lies in the coupling relationship between line association and vanishing point estimation, which leads to numerous local minima. This characteristic makes an algorithm with a global optimality guarantee
particularly valuable.
Previous methods for accurate and efficient vanishing point estimation rely on local, global, or learningbased approaches. Local methods (e.g., ExpectationMaximization [10], Hough voting [40], and RANSAC [11])
require either a good VP initialization or exhaustive sampling to achieve the desired accuracy. Due to the stochastic nature of local solvers, they cannot guarantee global
optimality. In contrast, global methods (e.g., Branch-andBound [6, 24]) always guarantee the globally optimal solu-

15823

