This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

L AYOUT VLM: Differentiable Optimization of 3D Layout
via Vision-Language Models
Fan-Yun Sun*1 , Weiyu Liu*1 , Siyi Gu1 , Dylan Lim1 ,
Goutam Bhat2 , Federico Tombari2 , Manling Li1 , Nick Haber1 , Jiajun Wu1
1

Stanford University, 2 Google Research

https://ai.stanford.edu/~sunfanyun/layoutvlm/

LayoutGPT ✗ Physical ✓Semantic

Holodeck

✓Physical ✗ Semantic

out of boundary

LayoutVLM ✓Physical ✓ Semantic

no Òcentral reading areaÓ

overlapping bookshelves

assets that fail to satisfy constraints

Layout Instruction: Airy and inviting space; create a central reading area surrounded by the bookcases

Figure 1. From unlabeled 3D assets and language instruction, L AYOUT VLM generates scene layouts that are physically plausible and
semantically coherent—two criteria that existing methods often struggle to meet. Our approach addresses this by using a VLM to generate a
scene layout representation that defines both an initial layout and spatial relations between assets for differentiable optimization.

Abstract
Spatial reasoning is a fundamental aspect of human cognition, enabling intuitive understanding and manipulation of
objects in three-dimensional space. While foundation models
demonstrate remarkable performance on some benchmarks,
they still struggle with 3D reasoning tasks like arranging
objects in space according to open-ended language instructions, particularly in dense and physically constrained
environments. We introduce L AYOUT VLM, a framework
and scene layout representation that exploits the semantic
knowledge of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) and supports
differentiable optimization to ensure physical plausibility.
L AYOUT VLM employs VLMs to generate two mutually reinforcing representations from visually marked images, and
a self-consistent decoding process to improve VLMs spatial

planning. Our experiments show that L AYOUT VLM addresses the limitations of existing LLM and constraint-based
approaches, producing physically plausible 3D layouts better aligned with the semantic intent of input language instructions. We also demonstrate that fine-tuning VLMs with the
proposed scene layout representation extracted from existing
scene datasets can improve their reasoning performance.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution.

Spatial reasoning and planning involve understanding, arranging, and manipulating objects in 3D space within the
constraints of the physical world. These skills are essential
for autonomous agents to navigate, plan tasks, and physically interact with objects in complex environments. Automatically generating diverse, realistic scenes in simulation
has become crucial for scaling up data to train autonomous

29469

