This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perceptually Accurate 3D Talking Head Generation:
New Definitions, Speech-Mesh Representation, and Evaluation Metrics
Lee Chae-Yeon1∗ Oh Hyun-Bin2∗ Han EunGi1 Kim Sung-Bin2 Suekyeong Nam3 Tae-Hyun Oh1,2,4
1

Grad. School of AI, POSTECH

Temporal
Synchronization

2

Dept. of Electrical Engineering, POSTECH

Lip Readability

[ɑ ]

[p ]

Expressiveness

-

+

-

3

KRAFTON

Out of Sync

4

School of Computing, KAIST

[i]
[ɑ]

+

[m]
-

(a) Essential Criteria for Perceptually Accurate 3D Talking Head

+

(b) Conceptual Diagram of Desired Representation Space

Figure 1. What defines perceptually accurate lip movement for a speech signal? In this work, we define three criteria to assess perceptual
alignment between speech and lip movements of 3D talking heads: Temporal Synchronization, Lip Readability, and Expressiveness (a). The
motivational hypothesis is the existence of a desirable representation space that models and complies well with the three criteria between
diverse speech characteristics and 3D facial movements, as illustrated in (b); where representations with the same phonemes are clustered,
are sensitive to temporal synchronization, and follow a certain pattern as the speech intensity increases. Consequently, we build a rich
speech-mesh synchronized representation space that exhibits the desirable properties.

Abstract
Recent advancements in speech-driven 3D talking head generation have made significant progress in lip synchronization.
However, existing models still struggle to capture the perceptual alignment between varying speech characteristics and
corresponding lip movements. In this work, we claim that
three criteria—Temporal Synchronization, Lip Readability,
and Expressiveness—are crucial for achieving perceptually
accurate lip movements. Motivated by our hypothesis that a
desirable representation space exists to meet these three criteria, we introduce a speech-mesh synchronized representation that captures intricate correspondences between speech
signals and 3D face meshes. We found that our learned representation exhibits desirable characteristics, and we plug
it into existing models as a perceptual loss to better align
lip movements to the given speech. In addition, we utilize
this representation as a perceptual metric and introduce
two other physically grounded lip synchronization metrics
to assess how well the generated 3D talking heads align
with these three criteria. Experiments show that training
3D talking head generation models with our perceptual loss
* These authors contributed equally.

significantly improve all three aspects of perceptually accurate lip synchronization. Codes and datasets are available
at https://perceptual-3d-talking-head.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Speech-driven 3D talking head generation focuses on generating 3D facial movements synchronized with input speech
signals. This plays a key role in enhancing communication
within multimedia applications, such as virtual reality, entertainment, and education [39]. To provide users with a more
realistic and immersive experience, it is crucial that the facial
and lip movements of 3D avatars are synchronized with the
various aspects of speech. This synchronization should be
perceptually accurate from a human perspective, ensuring
that the avatars’ expressions are both natural and convincing.
While recent works in learning-based 3D talking head
generation [8, 9, 21, 27, 33, 46] aim to enhance the lip synchronization capabilities, they commonly rely on minimizing
the Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss between generated 3D
facial motion and ground truth motion as a learning objective. This approach is practical, as it directly contributes to
minimizing the Lip Vertex Error (LVE), a commonly used

21065

