This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RaCFormer: Towards High-Quality 3D Object Detection via Query-based
Radar-Camera Fusion
Xiaomeng Chu1 , Jiajun Deng2∗ , Guoliang You1 , Yifan Duan1 , Houqiang Li1 , Yanyong Zhang1,3 *
1

3

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 The University of Adelaide,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center

Abstract

Radar BEV Feature

We propose Radar-Camera fusion transformer (RaCFormer) to boost the accuracy of 3D object detection by
the following insight. The Radar-Camera fusion in outdoor 3D scene perception is capped by the image-to-BEV
transformation–if the depth of pixels is not accurately estimated, the naive combination of BEV features actually integrates unaligned visual content. To avoid this problem,
we propose a query-based framework that enables adaptive sampling of instance-relevant features from both the
bird’s-eye view (BEV) and the original image view. Furthermore, we enhance system performance by two key designs: optimizing query initialization and strengthening the
representational capacity of BEV. For the former, we introduce an adaptive circular distribution in polar coordinates to refine the initialization of object queries, allowing for a distance-based adjustment of query density. For
the latter, we initially incorporate a radar-guided depth
head to refine the transformation from image view to BEV.
Subsequently, we focus on leveraging the Doppler effect of
radar and introduce an implicit dynamic catcher to capture the temporal elements within the BEV. Extensive experiments on nuScenes and View-of-Delft (VoD) datasets validate the merits of our design. Remarkably, our method
achieves superior results of 64.9% mAP and 70.2% NDS
on nuScenes. RaCFormer also secures the state-of-theart performance on the VoD dataset. Code is available at
https://github.com/cxmomo/RaCFormer.

Fusion by
Concat. / Cross-Attn.

Radar BEV Feature

enhance

Queries
update

sample

Fusion by
Sampling

sample

sample

transform

Camera BEV Feature
(a) BEV-based Fusion

Image Feature

Camera BEV Feature

(b) Query-based Dual-view Fusion

Figure 1. Motivation of RaCFormer. (a) Previous methods typically fuse BEV features from image-view transformation and radar
point cloud encoding, by concatenation or cross-attention. (b) Instead, RaCFormer uses a query-based fusion framework by simultaneously sampling radar-enhanced image-view features, cameratransformed BEV features, and radar-encoded BEV features.

1. Introduction

to the dramatically reduced cost, thus attracting a surge of
research interests in the community [40, 50].
Despite impressive advancement, it is still a non-trivial
problem in approaching the detection accuracy of LiDARbased methods by the combination of camera and radar
data. Current top-performing radar-camera fusion approaches [18, 29, 53, 54] typically adopt the BEV-based
fusion framework [34] which unifies the representation in
BEV space to facilitate fusion. In this paradigm, image
and radar features are independently extracted, unified into
a BEV representation, and subsequently fused by concatenation or cross-attention, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). However,
the inherent disparity between the two modalities poses a
significant challenge when relying solely on BEV features
for fusion. Due to radars’ hardware constraints, e.g., bandwidth and array design, their limited spatial resolution results in sparse radar BEV features. On the other hand, camera BEV features are generated from dense image features,
but have the issue of feature distortion due to the inaccurate
depth estimation in view transformation [43]. In contrast,
the original perspective image features offer a semantically
rich representation free from distortions, which has the po-

Precise 3D object detection plays a vital role in promoting
the safety and efficiency of autonomous vehicles and intelligent robotic systems [1, 38, 39, 44]. Compared to adopting
the expensive LiDAR sensor, the solution with multi-view
cameras and millimeter-wave radar is more applicable due
* Corresponding authors.

17081

