This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoGSplat: Learning Robust Generalizable Human Gaussian Splatting
from Sparse Multi-View Images
Junjin Xiao1
1
2

Qing Zhang1,4∗

Lei Zhu3

Wei-Shi Zheng1,4

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China

South China University of Technology
4

Yonewei Nie2
3

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)

Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China

Sparse input views

Fitted SMPL

Vanilla 3DGS

TransHuman

GPS-Gaussian

Ours

GT

Figure 1. High-fidelity human novel view synthesis. Given very sparse-view input images (e.g., 4 views) that do not enable accurate human
template estimation due to the limited overlappings, our method can robustly synthesize high-fidelity novel views in a generalizable manner,
without requiring any further fine-tuning or subject-specific optimization. Compared to both NeRF-based method, e.g., TransHuman [55],
and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) based methods, e.g., vanilla 3DGS [30] and GPS-Gaussian [90], our approach produces better result.

Abstract
This paper presents RoGSplat, a novel approach for synthesizing high-fidelity novel views of unseen human from
sparse multi-view images, while requiring no cumbersome
per-subject optimization. Unlike previous methods that typically struggle with sparse views with few overlappings and
are less effective in reconstructing complex human geometry,
the proposed method enables robust reconstruction in such
challenging conditions. Our key idea is to lift SMPL vertices
to dense and reliable 3D prior points representing accurate
human body geometry, and then regress human Gaussian
parameters based on the points. To account for possible
misalignment between SMPL model and images, we propose to predict image-aligned 3D prior points by leveraging
both pixel-level features and voxel-level features, from which
we regress the coarse Gaussians. To enhance the ability
∗ Corresponding author (zhangq93@mail.sysu.edu.cn).

to capture high-frequency details, we further render depth
maps from the coarse 3D Gaussians to help regress finegrained pixel-wise Gaussians. Experiments on several benchmark datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in novel view synthesis and crossdataset generalization. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/iSEE-Laboratory/RoGSplat.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis is a widely discussed topic with
various applications in video games, telepresence, sports
broadcasting, and the metaverse [59]. The past few years
have witnessed remarkable progress in this domain, primarily due to the emergence of neural radiance fields (NeRF)
[49] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [30]. However, human novel view synthesis still faces many challenges. First,
a tedious per-subject optimization is typically required by

5980

