This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VISCO: Benchmarking Fine-Grained Critique and Correction Towards
Self-Improvement in Visual Reasoning
Xueqing Wu∗1 , Yuheng Ding∗1 , Bingxuan Li1 , Pan Lu2 , Da Yin1 , Kai-Wei Chang1 , Nanyun Peng1
1
University of California, Los-Angeles 2 Stanford
https://visco-benchmark.github.io/

Abstract
The ability of large vision-language models (LVLMs) to
critique and correct their reasoning is an essential building
block towards their self-improvement. However, a systematic analysis of such capabilities in LVLMs is still lacking.
We propose VISCO, the first benchmark to extensively analyze the fine-grained critique and correction capabilities
of LVLMs. Compared to existing work that uses a single
scalar value to critique the entire reasoning [4], VISCO features dense and fine-grained critique, requiring LVLMs to
evaluate the correctness of each step in the chain-of-thought
and provide natural language explanations to support their
judgments. Extensive evaluation of 24 LVLMs demonstrates
that human-written critiques significantly enhance the performance after correction, showcasing the potential of the
self-improvement strategy. However, the model-generated
critiques are less helpful and sometimes detrimental to the
performance, suggesting that critique is the crucial bottleneck. We identified three common patterns in critique
failures: failure to critique visual perception, reluctance
to “say no”, and exaggerated assumption of error propagation. To address these issues, we propose an effective
L OOK BACK strategy that revisits the image to verify each
piece of information in the initial reasoning. L OOK BACK
significantly improves critique and correction performance
by up to 13.5%.

1. Introduction
With recent advances, large vision-language models
(LVLMs) have unlocked strong reasoning capabilities [2,
43], enabling them to solve complex problems in math
[27, 38] and science [18, 47]. Typically, LVLMs adopt the
chain-of-thought (CoT) approach [41], where the model
generates intermediate reasoning steps before reaching the
final answer. However, even with the CoT approach,
LVLMs remain prone to hallucination [11, 12, 17] and reasoning errors [3], especially when dealing with compositional concepts like counting [1, 32] and identifying spatial
∗ Equal contribution. Contact: xueqing.wu@cs.ucla.edu

Figure 1. Evaluation settings of VISCO. We evaluate the selfimprovement setting where LVLMs correct their own answers
based on self-generated critique, and a human-assisted setting
where correction is based on human-written critique.

relationship [10, 14, 22]. Such issues raise concern about
the trustworthiness of visual reasoning and highlights the
need for more reliable visual reasoning.
Given the difficulty of generating completely accurate
reasoning in a single pass, an alternative strategy is selfimprovement, where LVLMs critique their initial reasoning and make corrections accordingly to enhance performance. Application to text-only tasks like code generation
[5, 29] and multi-hop question answering [34] has demonstrated the effectiveness of self-improvement. For visionlanguage tasks, the self-improvement strategy has also been
applied to areas including video understanding [30] and
region-of-interests identification [46]. However, a comprehensive study of LVLMs’ self-improvement is still lacking.
While some work evaluates the critique capability and enhances it through specialized training, they use LVLMs as
evaluators [15] or reward models [42] merely to assess the
output quality, rather than for further self-correction and
self-improvement.
To conduct a systematic analysis of the critique and
correction capabilities of LVLMs, we present VISCO, the
first benchmark for VIsual Self-Critique and cOrrection.

9527

