This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MASH-VLM: Mitigating Action-Scene Hallucination in Video-LLMs
through Disentangled Spatial-Temporal Representations
Kyungho Bae1,2* , Jinhyung Kim2 , Sihaeng Lee2 , Soonyoung Lee2 , Gunhee Lee2† , Jinwoo Choi1†
1 Kyung Hee University
2 LG AI Research
{kyungho.bae, jinwoochoi}@khu.ac.kr
{jinhyung.kim, sihaelng.lee, soonyoung.lee, gunhee.lee}@lgresearch.ai
UNSCENE: UNusual context & SCENE only benchmark
Unusual context video

VCG_DO
4.4

Scene only video

VCG_CI
4.8

VCG_CU
4.7
UNSCENE Open-ended
3.3
𝑡

𝑡

Question: Is the background in the video a boxing ring?
VideoChat2

ST-LLM

MASH-VLM

Yes, the background in the video is a boxing ring

Question: Describe the video in detail.
VideoChat2

ST-LLM

Yes, two men are throwing punches in a boxing ring

No, the background in the video is not a boxing ring. It is a
room with books and shelves.

MASH-VLM

VCG_TU
4.7
UNSCENE Binary
57.9

The video shows a person skiing on a mountain.
The person is wearing skis and is riding on a slope.
The video starts with a white title screen. We then see a skier
who is snowboarding on a steep mountain slope covered in
snow

VCG_CO
3.8

The video shows a snow-covered mountain slope with no
one in sight. Sunlight casts a warm glow over the serene
landscape, and immersive experience.

3.4
ActivityNet

MVBench
57.6
4.0
MSVD

3.6
MSRVTT

(b)

(a)

Figure 1. Action-scene hallucination. To evaluate action-scene hallucination in Video-LLMs, we introduce UNSCENE, an UNusual
context & SCENE-only benchmark. (a) When given an unusual context video of people boxing in a library, existing Video-LLMs incorrectly predict the scene as a ‘boxing ring’. When shown a scene-only video of a snow-covered mountain with no one present, these
models incorrectly identify the action as ‘a person skiing’ or ‘snowboarding on a mountain’. Existing models frequently hallucinate actions
based on the scene context or incorrectly predict scenes based on the observed actions. (b) The proposed method, MASH-VLM, achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the UNSCENE benchmark, as well as on existing video understanding benchmarks.

Abstract
In this work, we tackle action-scene hallucination in
Video Large Language Models (Video-LLMs), where models incorrectly predict actions based on the scene context
or scenes based on observed actions. We observe that existing Video-LLMs often suffer from action-scene hallucination due to two main factors. First, existing Video-LLMs
intermingle spatial and temporal features by applying an
attention operation across all tokens. Second, they use standard Rotary Position Embedding (RoPE), which causes the
text tokens to overemphasize certain types of tokens depending on their sequential orders. To address these issues, we
introduce MASH-VLM, Mitigating Action-Scene Hallucination in Video-LLMs through disentangled spatial-temporal
representations. Our approach includes two key innovations: (1) DST-attention, a novel attention mechanism that
disentangles spatial and temporal tokens within the LLM
by using masked attention to restrict direct interactions be-

tween spatial and temporal tokens; (2) Harmonic-RoPE,
which extends the dimensionality of the positional IDs, allowing spatial and temporal tokens to maintain balanced
positions relative to the text tokens. To evaluate the actionscene hallucination in Video-LLMs, we introduce the UNSCENE benchmark with 1,320 videos and 4,078 QA pairs.
MASH-VLM achieves state-of-the-art performance on the
UNSCENE benchmark, as well as on existing video understanding benchmarks.

1. Introduction

* Work done during internship at LG AI Research.
† Corresponding authors.

Recent advances in natural language processing, such as incontext learning [6] and chain-of-thought reasoning [43],
have enabled Large Language Models (LLMs) like GPT [1]
and LLaMA [41] to achieve impressive performance across
various tasks. By building on these pre-trained LLMs and
applying instruction tuning [40], Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have become effective in integrating language with images [21, 29, 30, 53] and videos [22,
23, 27, 32, 34, 51]. Despite this progress, MLLMs still
face issues with hallucination, where the generated predictions are inconsistent with the visual content [5, 15, 25].

13744

