This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-shot Personalized Scanpath Prediction
Ruoyu Xue1 , Jingyi Xu1 , Sounak Mondal1 , Hieu Le2 ,
Gregory Zelinsky1 , Minh Hoai3 , Dimitris Samaras1
1
Stony Brook University, USA 2 EPFL, Switzerland 3 The University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract

Subject A

A’s scanpath

SE-Net

A personalized model for scanpath prediction provides
insights into the visual preferences and attention patterns
of individual subjects. However, existing methods for training scanpath prediction models are data-intensive and cannot be effectively personalized to new individuals with only
a few available examples. In this paper, we propose fewshot personalized scanpath prediction task (FS-PSP) and
a novel method to address it, which aims to predict scanpaths for an unseen subject using minimal support data of
that subject’s scanpath behavior. The key to our method’s
adaptability is the Subject-Embedding Network (SE-Net),
specifically designed to capture unique, individualized representations for each subject’s scanpaths. SE-Net generates subject embeddings that effectively distinguish between
subjects while minimizing variability among scanpaths from
the same individual. The personalized scanpath prediction model is then conditioned on these subject embeddings to produce accurate, personalized results. Experiments on multiple eye-tracking datasets demonstrate that
our method excels in FS-PSP settings and does not require
any fine-tuning steps at test time. Code is available at:
https://github.com/cvlab-stonybrook/few-shot-scanpath

Query image
Support Set (𝑛 ≤ 10)
Scanpath
model
Subject B

SE-Net

B’s scanpath

Figure 1. Few-shot Personalized Scanpath Prediction (FSPSP). Given a new subject with only a few support examples of
their gaze behavior, can we adapt a base scanpath prediction model
to this subject? We propose a subject-embedding extracting network, SE-Net, to achieve this personalized adaption.

1. Introduction

larly useful for applications such as recommendation systems [7, 37, 39] and advertisements [35] because it allows
subject personality to be decoded from an individual’s attention.
A limitation of existing PSP models is that they require
extensive data to accurately capture individual attention patterns. For example, to train models to predict the scanpaths made by people as they are searching for objects [51],
it was necessary to collect the COCO-Search18 dataset of
269,760 search fixations [9], an effort requiring 10 subjects
to each come to a laboratory and have their eye movements
recorded for 10–12 hours. To be useful in practice, PSP
models must be trainable on orders of magnitude less data.
We therefore introduce the task of few-shot personalized
scanpath prediction (FS-PSP) where an individual’s attention must be predicted using fixations from only a few behavioral observations, defined here as the scanpaths of people viewing ≤ 10 images. We refer to the image-scanpath
pairs collected for each subject as support samples.
FS-PSP is challenging because individuals’ patterns of
attention must be captured in just a few support samples.
Existing PSP methods [10, 20, 56] often overfit to limited
image content due to their reliance on large training datasets

Recent models of scanpath prediction have excelled at predicting human attention [9, 10, 12, 30, 31, 51, 52, 54], which
is important for applications such as autonomous driving [13, 32], virtual and augmented reality [22, 42], healthcare diagnostics [5, 40], and information visualization [45].
However, these methods are trained using attention data
from multiple subjects and therefore learn population-level
“average” attention patterns that will fail to reflect individual differences shaped by culture, memory, and experience
[21]. To capture these individualized attention patterns, and
to avoid biases that can result from group averaging, models of personalized scanpath prediction (PSP) attempt to
learn individual subject embeddings that are used to predict an individual’s scanpath [10, 20, 56]. PSP is particu-

13497

