This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IAAO: Interactive Affordance Learning for Articulated Objects in 3D
Environments
Can Zhang
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
can.zhang@u.nus.edu

gimhee.lee@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
This work presents IAAO, a novel framework that builds
an explicit 3D model for intelligent agents to gain understanding of articulated objects in their environment through
interaction. Unlike prior methods that rely on task-specific
networks and assumptions about movable parts, our IAAO
leverages large foundation models to estimate interactive
affordances and part articulations in three stages. We first
build hierarchical features and label fields for each object state using 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) by distilling
mask features and view-consistent labels from multi-view
images. We then perform object- and part-level queries
on the 3D Gaussian primitives to identify static and articulated elements, estimating global transformations and local articulation parameters along with affordances. Finally,
scenes from different states are merged and refined based on
the estimated transformations, enabling robust affordancebased interaction and manipulation of objects. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Our
source code is available at: https://lulusindazc.
github.io/IAAOproject/.

Figure 1. Our IAAO requires multi-view images of the object or
indoor scene from two different joint states (Left). The output
is a 3D interactive field which supports interactions with multiple
movable parts for fine-grained segmentation (e.g. Case 2: handles)
and articulation reconstruction (e.g. Case 1: two articulated doors).

1. Introduction

understand the specific physical interactions each object affords—known as affordance [10]. The small size of these
elements further intensifies the challenge, making them difficult to detect. In this work, we aim to reconstruct the 3D
complex scene and interact with both objects with static geometry and objects with articulations and fine-grained affordances as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Early approaches [21, 46] to understanding articulated
objects rely on supervised learning with costly 3D annotations and category-specific models, which limit generalization to novel objects. Recent methods [16, 22] such
as Ditto [16] and PARIS [22] have advanced this field by
creating digital twins of objects based on observations in
two joint configurations. Since Ditto is trained on multiview point clouds from specific categories, it struggles with
objects that differ significantly from its training data. In
contrast, PARIS [22] uses multi-view posed images to directly optimize an implicit representation without pretraining, allowing for improved generalization. However, it remains sensitive to initialization and may experience stability issues. Further developments [42, 47] have expanded
scalability to objects with multiple moving parts based
on implicit neural radiance fields (NeRFs). Nonetheless,
several challenges remain unexplored, including generaliz-

The real world contains various dynamic objects that continuously interact and move through time. Understanding
and reconstructing the shapes, poses, and articulations of
dynamic objects is crucial for many applications such as
robotics, augmented reality and virtual reality (AR/VR),
etc. While humans naturally develop an intuitive understanding of how objects move and interact, teaching this
skill to an intelligent agent remains a complex challenge
due to the diverse and intricate nature of articulated objects. Furthermore, a key capability still missing in intelligent agents is effective interaction with their environment,
particularly with functional elements like door handles and
light switches. For intelligent agents to interact with functional objects, in addition to object detection, they must also

12132

