This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Locally Orderless Images for Optimization in Differentiable Rendering
Ishit Mehta

Manmohan Chandraker

Ravi Ramamoorthi

University of California San Diego

Abstract

Initial

Problems in differentiable rendering often involve optimizing
scene parameters that cause motion in image space. The gradients for such parameters tend to be sparse, leading to poor
convergence. While existing methods address this sparsity
through proxy gradients such as topological derivatives or
lagrangian derivatives, they make simplifying assumptions
about rendering. Multi-resolution image pyramids offer an
alternative approach but prove unreliable in practice. We introduce a method that uses locally orderless images — where
each pixel maps to a histogram of intensities that preserves
local variations in appearance. Using an inverse rendering
objective that minimizes histogram distance, our method
extends support for sparsely defined image gradients and
recovers optimal parameters. We validate our method on
various inverse problems using both synthetic and real data.

Lagrangian [44]

1

Variational [7]

2

Target

Ours

3
∂I
∂θ

0.1

Sparse
4

5

−0.1

6

Figure 1. Image gradients are sparse with respect to optimization
⃝. We show an
parameters that induce motion in the image space 6
inverse problem with the goal of recovering the position (θ) of a
distant light source from a synthetic image of a shiny ball, i.e. ⃝
1 to
⃝. Existing methods compute proxy gradients such as: Lagrangian
5
derivatives [44], which track only primary-ray intersections, or
variational derivatives [7], which can be prone to local minima. Our
method uses standard RGB gradients and uses an inverse rendering
objective that matches locally orderless images.

1. Introduction
Much of the recent work addresses inverse rendering with
analysis-by-synthesis — start with an initial guess of scene
parameters, render an image using a differentiable renderer [12, 16, 18, 21, 30], compare it with a given photograph, estimate gradients, and update the parameters iteratively. While the success of gradient-based optimization in
machine learning validates this approach, significant challenges remain. Despite having algorithms that accurately
estimate gradients for the physics of image formation, optimization hurdles such as local minima, noisy loss landscapes,
and the search for good initialization and parameterization
all still persist [23].
For many inverse problems, the ideal optimization trajectory requires long-range motion of pixels and image features.
Consider the example shown in Fig. 1, where a shiny ball is
lit by an unknown light source that we wish to recover from
a given image. A primary effect of optimizing the light position here is on the motion of the specular highlight on the
⃝) for such
ball. Since image gradients are sparse (Fig. 1 6
parameters, the optimization landscape is rife with local min-

ima and plateau regions [7, 22]. Existing methods address
the gradient-sparsity problem with proxy gradients such as
topological derivatives [22], lagrangian derivatives [44], and
variational derivatives [7] — all of which are either expensive
to compute [7, 44], only work with implicit geometry [22], or
are restricted to primary light-transport effects [22, 44]. We
propose a complementary approach that is compatible with
RGB gradients from a differentiable renderer [12, 16, 19] —
which we demonstrate to be expressive for a variety of inverse problems that have multiple locally-optimal solutions
(as in Fig. 1).
Our method builds on scale-space matching [42], where
signals are matched at multiple resolutions to measure similarity. In differentiable rendering, multi-scale matching has
received limited attention, with a few works [7, 44] noting its
unreliability. In this work, we observe that this unreliability

5763

