This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gaussian Splatting for Efficient Satellite Image Photogrammetry
Luca Savant Aira1

Gabriele Facciolo2

Thibaud Ehret3

https://mezzelfo.github.io/EOGS/
1
2

Politecnico di Torino, Corso Duca degli Abruzzi, 24, 10129 Torino TO, Italia

Universite Paris-Saclay, CNRS, ENS Paris-Saclay, Centre Borelli, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
3

AMIAD, Pôle Recherche, France

Abstract
Recently, Gaussian splatting has emerged as a strong alternative to NeRF, demonstrating impressive 3D modeling
capabilities while requiring only a fraction of the training
and rendering time. In this paper, we show how the standard Gaussian splatting framework can be adapted for remote sensing, retaining its high efficiency. This enables us
to achieve state-of-the-art performance in just a few minutes, compared to the day-long optimization required by
the best-performing NeRF-based Earth observation methods. The proposed framework incorporates remote-sensing
improvements from EO-NeRF, such as radiometric correction and shadow modeling, while introducing novel components, including sparsity, view consistency, and opacity
regularizations.

EOGS altitude

EO-NeRF altitude

Pansharpened image

Ground-truth altitude

1. Introduction
Since the mid-20th century, the number of active satellites
in orbit has increased exponentially. Today, hundreds of
satellites are dedicated to Earth observation, and this number is expected to continue growing [9]. These satellites
frequently acquire optical images of the same areas at regular intervals. As a result, the availability of these datasets
will continue to grow in the near future, requiring efficient
algorithms to handle this expansion.
One common task for these image datasets is photogrammetry [13, 19, 27], which aims to recover the 3D geometry (e.g. Digital Surface Model - DSM), and the appearance
(e.g. an albedo map) of the Earth’s surface for this area using only the available 2D satellite images. Specifically, we
focus on performing digital surface modeling from remote
sensing images.
Historically, binocular stereovision and tri-stereo methods have been used for this purpose. However, these methods rely on image acquisitions being nearly simultaneous
and with specific relative positions, which is often impractical, with limited acquisition opportunities, and/or costly.

Figure 1. Using a limited number of satellite images of a given
scene, the proposed EOGS method estimates the appearance and
geometry of the scene. It achieves the same level of detail as EONeRF [32], such as the group of fans or the thin structures on top
of the tall building on the left. However, EOGS requires only a
few minutes of optimization, compared to the day-long training
time required by EO-NeRF [32].

Therefore, our goal is to develop a method capable of handling multi-date images captured from arbitrary satellite positions.
More recently, multi-view stereo methods tailored for
novel-view synthesis (NVS) have been used to solve this
task as they naturally handle diverse camera positions. Indeed, as the NVS task also requires understanding the geometry of the scene, these methods can be used to recover a
digital elevation model. These methods are usually based

5959

