This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoMM: On Geodesic Perspective for Multi-modal Learning
Shibin Mei1
Hang Wang1
Bingbing Ni1,2 *
1
Huawei 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{shibin.mei1027, francis970625}@gmail.com nibingbing@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

I'm going to
work at the bank.

Geodesic distance serves as a reliable means of measuring distance in nonlinear spaces, and such nonlinear manifolds are prevalent in the current multimodal learning. In
these scenarios, some samples may exhibit high similarity,
yet they convey different semantics, making traditional distance metrics inadequate for distinguishing between positive and negative samples. This paper introduces geodesic
distance as a novel distance metric in multi-modal learning for the first time, to mine correlations between samples,
aiming to address the limitations of common distance metric. Our approach incorporates a comprehensive series of
strategies to adapt geodesic distance for the current multimodal learning. Specifically, we construct a graph structure to represent the adjacency relationships among samples by thresholding distances between them and then apply the shortest-path algorithm to obtain geodesic distance
within this graph. To facilitate efficient computation, we further propose a hierarchical graph structure through clustering and combined with incremental update strategies for dynamic status updates. Extensive experiments across various
downstream tasks validate the effectiveness of our proposed
method, demonstrating its capability to capture complex relationships between samples and improve the performance
of multimodal learning models.

Cosine: 0.87
Geodesic: 0.24

I'm going to
sit on the bank.
Cosine: 0.93
Geodesic: 0.91

I'm going to
sit on the shore.

Figure 1. The motivation of leveraging geodesic metric. Based
on the topological structures, geodesic distance can depict sample
similarity more accurately.

extracting features from different modalities, encouraging
proximity between matching features and dispersity between mismatched ones by contrastive supervision [46],
such as InfoNCE loss [16]. This paradigm inherently relies
on distance computation between multi-modality features
to mine positive and negative samples. CLIP [46] computes cosine similarity between cross-modal samples within
a large batch, while ALBEF [26], maintains a momentum
feature queue and calculates distances between batch features and queue features, thus avoiding large batch size.
Recent works, such as TCL [58] and MAFA [4], adopt a
similar paradigm but pay more attention to negatives. However, these works assume that samples are distributed in a
spherical space [16], overlooking the possibility of distributions in more complex non-Euclidean spaces. For example, some sentences similar at the word level may possess
close distances with trivial metrics but convey vastly different semantics, as shown in Fig.1. We propose that geodesic
distance [21] can serve as an effective distance metric for
multimodal learning, aiding in considering the data topology structure and thus more accurately depicting distances
between samples.
In this paper, we introduce geodesic distance to multimodal learning for the first time. Such distance metric enhances the characterization of relationships between sam-

1. 1 Introduction
Recent years have witnessed remarkable progress on multimodal learning [3, 26, 28, 37, 46], driven by the rapid development of large transformer models [55]. In multimodal
learning, image-text pairs are encoded into a unified representation space through carefully designed pre-training
tasks [9, 29, 62]. The consistency of cross-modal representations facilitates the model with strong generalization abilities [56, 60], achieving satisfactory performance on various
downstream tasks.
A prevalent paradigm in multimodal learning includes
* Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.

4776

