This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sound Bridge: Associating Egocentric and Exocentric Videos via Audio Cues
Sihong Huang1,5,* , Jiaxin Wu2,* , Xiaoyong Wei3, 2, 5,† , Yi Cai1,† , Dongmei Jiang5 , Yaowei Wang4,5
1
South China University of Technology, 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
3
Sichuan University, 4 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{fthuangsh, ycai}@mail.scut.edu.cn, jiaxwu@polyu.edu.hk, cswei@scu.edu.cn
jiangdm@pcl.ac.cn, wangyaowei@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Understanding human behavior and environmental information in egocentric videos is very challenging due to
the invisibility of some actions (e.g., laughing and sneezing) and the local nature of the ﬁrst-person view. Leveraging the corresponding exocentric video to provide global
context has shown promising results. However, existing
visual-to-visual and visual-to-textual Ego-Exo video alignment methods struggle with the issue that some activities
may have non-visual overlap. To address this, we propose
using sound as a bridge, as audio is often consistent across
Ego-Exo videos. However, direct audio-to-audio alignment lacks context. Thus, we introduce two context-aware
sound modules: one aligns audio with vision via a visualaudio cross-attention module, and another aligns text with
sound closed caption generated by LLM. Experimental results on two Ego-Exo video association benchmarks show
that each of the proposed modules enhances the state-ofthe-art methods. Moreover, the proposed sound-aware egocentric or exocentric representation boosts the performance
of downstream tasks, such as action recognition of exocentric videos and scene recognition of egocentric videos. The
code and models can be accessed at https://github.
com/shhuangcoder/SoundBridge.

1. Introduction
Egocentric video analysis has been receiving extensive attention recently [10, 12, 34] due to its potential applications in robotic vision analysis, embedded AI, etc. Compared to the large-scale and in-depth studies on exocentric video analysis tasks, research on egocentric videos is
still underexplored. Moreover, there are signiﬁcant differences between egocentric and exocentric videos; thus, many
ﬁndings and methodologies derived from an exocentric perspective are not directly applicable to egocentric video analysis.
* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Authors.

Video
Script

A person is eating a snack in the bedroom, setting their dishes on the floor by the bed when
they are finished. Then, laughing, they stand up and walk over to the doorway, turning to
switch off the light before leaving the room.

Activity

Eating a snack

Laughing

Switch off the light

Leaving the room

Sound

Large
Vsiual
Variances

Audio
Consistency

Figure 1. Given a video shooting script, egocentric and exocentric
views can exhibit signiﬁcant visual variances for the same activity,
while their audio signals remain relatively consistent.

The main difference between egocentric and exocentric
videos is that they capture events from different perspectives. First-person view videos focus on local and detailed
information about the current activity, whereas third-person
view videos emphasize global and environmental context.
An example is shown in Figure 1. Although egocentric and
exocentric videos follow the same video shooting script,
they exhibit signiﬁcant visual variations. For example, in
the case of the same activity, such as eating a snack, the
egocentric view primarily captures hand-object interactions,
such as a hand picking up a raisin, while the location remains unknown. In contrast, the exocentric view captures
the overall scene of the event but lacks ﬁner details—for example, it may show a person lying on a bed eating food, but
the speciﬁc type of food remains unclear. Moreover, certain
activities, such as laughing and sneezing, do not produce
distinct visual cues in egocentric videos apart from camera shaking. Consequently, when attempting to align visual
representations from exocentric to egocentric videos, there
is often no overlapping visual content to match.
However, recent studies [12, 34] have shown that exocentric videos can supplement the understanding of their
semantically aligned egocentric counterparts. In this paper,
we also focus on constructing an Ego-Exo alignment space
to facilitate egocentric video analysis. Previous studies on

28942

