This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MMAR: Towards Lossless Multi-Modal Auto-Regressive Probabilistic Modeling
Jian Yang1, 2, *, § Dacheng Yin2, * Yizhou Zhou2,† Fengyun Rao2
Wei Zhai1 Yang Cao1 , Zheng-Jun Zha1,‡
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
WeChat Vision, Tencent Inc.
{yangjian12138@mail., wzhai056@, forrest@, zhazj@}ustc.edu.cn
{dachengyin, fengyunrao}@tencent.com

Abstract

zyz0205@hotmail.com

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, extensive research in the field
of multimodal intelligence has catalyzed the accelerated
advancement of foundational models for both image understanding and image generation. Within the realm of
image understanding, multimodal large language models (MLLM), exemplified by LLaVA [33], have exhibited
human-like capabilities in open-domain image comprehension. In the domain of image generation, techniques rooted
in generative probabilistic models, such as Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) [21] and auto-regressive
(AR) models [6], have also garnered significant success. Essentially, these two lines of research correspond to modeling the conditional probability, i.e., P (T |I) and P (I|T ),
where T and I corresponds to text and image, respectively.
It’s evident that both types of conditional probabilistic models are subsets of a joint probabilistic model, P (T, I). This
brings us to an intriguing question: Could a joint probabilistic model serve as a natural unifying framework for both
image understanding and image generation tasks?

Recent advancements in multi-modal large language models have propelled the development of joint probabilistic
models capable of both image understanding and generation. However, we have identified that recent methods
suffer from loss of image information during understanding task, due to either image discretization or diffusion denoising steps. To address this issue, we propose a novel
Multi-Modal Auto-Regressive (MMAR) probabilistic modeling framework. Unlike discretization line of method,
MMAR takes in continuous-valued image tokens to avoid information loss in an efficient way. Differing from diffusionbased approaches, we disentangle the diffusion process
from auto-regressive backbone model by employing a lightweight diffusion head on top each auto-regressed image
patch embedding. In this way, when the model transits from
image generation to understanding through text generation,
the backbone model’s hidden representation of the image
is not limited to the last denoising step. To successfully
train our method, we also propose a theoretically proven
technique that addresses the numerical stability issue and a
training strategy that balances the generation and understanding task goals. Extensive evaluations on 18 image
understanding benchmarks show that MMAR significantly
outperforms most of the existing joint multi-modal models,
surpassing the method that employs pre-trained CLIP vision encoder. Meanwhile, MMAR is able to generate high
quality images. We also show that our method is scalable
with larger data and model size.

Given that the most advanced image understanding [8]
and generation [14] models rely on the language priors p(T )
of pre-trained large language models (LLMs), the most
straight-forward approach for joint image-text probabilistic modeling is to convert images into discrete tokens similar to text. This way, images are treated as a form of language and integrated into the auto-regressive modeling of
text, as seen in models like MARS [19], LlamaGen [53],
and Chameleon [57]. This method leverages the powerful text modeling capabilities of various open-source pretrained LLMs, along with their highly optimized training
and inference frameworks. However, the code-book size
strictly restricts the information capacity per token, leading
to a loss of image details and reducing the model’s information capacity when the image token number is small. This
limitation is quantitatively evident in the image understand-

* Co-first Author
† Project Leader
‡ Corresponding Author
§ Work done during an internship at WeChat Vision, Tencent Inc.

7974

