This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GS-2DGS: Geometrically Supervised 2DGS for Reflective Object Reconstruction
Jinguang Tong1,2 , Xuesong Li1,2 , Fahira Afzal Maken2 , Sundaram Muthu2,3
Lars Petersson2 , Chuong Nguyen1,2 , Hongdong Li1
1

Australian National University

2

CSIRO

3

Abstract
3D modeling of highly reflective objects remains challenging due to strong view-dependent appearances. While
previous SDF-based methods can recover high-quality
meshes, they are often time-consuming and tend to produce
over-smoothed surfaces. In contrast, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) offers the advantage of high speed and detailed real-time rendering, but extracting surfaces from the
Gaussians can be noisy due to the lack of geometric constraints. To bridge the gap between these approaches, we
propose a novel reconstruction method called GS-2DGS for
reflective objects based on 2D Gaussian Splatting (2DGS).
Our approach combines the rapid rendering capabilities of
Gaussian Splatting with additional geometric information
from foundation models. Experimental results on synthetic
and real datasets demonstrate that our method significantly
outperforms Gaussian-based techniques in terms of reconstruction and relighting and achieves performance comparable to SDF-based methods while being an order of magnitude faster. Code is available at https://github.
com/hirotong/GS2DGS

1. Introduction
Modeling 3D assets of specular objects from multi-view
images has been a long-standing and challenging task in
computer graphics and vision, since specular reflections are
view-dependent and thus violate the multi-view consistency
assumption adopted by most reconstruction methods. Previous works [28, 32] achieve promising results by using a neural radiance field (NeRF) and a signed distance field (SDF).
However, these methods require a significant computing effort to train, sometimes hours for a single scene.
The difficulty of reconstructing reflective objects lies in
the ill-posed nature of the problem. The appearance of a
reflective surface is determined by a combination of the
surface properties (material and geometry) and the lighting
condition of the environment [23], while previous methods
[28, 32] consider only one of these factors.
Since 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [26] achieves sig-

21547

Indian Institute of Technology Madras

nificantly higher rendering speed with greater detail and
photo consistency, it has been widely used in 3D scene modeling. However, the surface reconstruction of 3DGS needs
further improvement. On the one hand, several Gaussianbased methods [10, 20, 50] attempt to improve reconstruction quality by imposing additional constraints on the surface geometry by flattening the Gaussians or incorporating
SDF for additional smoothness. Such approaches achieve
superior reconstruction quality on common multi-view images with a much improved computational efficiency. On
the other hand, some other works [18, 22, 31] address the
rendering performance and enable relighting of Gaussianbased methods by introducing physical-based rendering and
inverse rendering (IR) techniques. It should be noted, however, that these methods still have limitations in reconstructing reflective objects as they only consider one aspect of the
problem.
A naive approach of simply combining these two aspects
is not enough to address the issue of reflective object reconstruction, because of the ill-posed nature of the problem.
To this end, a straightforward approach is to include additional constraints either on the properties of the surface or
the lighting condition. Recent works [3, 16, 25, 34] based
on transformer or diffusion models and trained with a large
amount of real and synthetic data have shown impressive
performance on monocular geometry (depth and normal)
estimation. Unlike multiview stereo methods, which infer geometry information from multiview consistency, these
methods directly predict geometry from a single view based
on the knowledge of massive training data, thus making
them insusceptible to the reflective surface problem.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for modeling reflective object reconstruction by leveraging foundation models in physical-based Gaussian splatting. By
incorporating additional information on the surface, our
method can simultaneously address the issues arising from
both surface-related properties (geometry and material) and
lighting conditions. Our method is achieving state-of-theart results by some margin with respect to Gaussian Splatting based methods, and it is achieving results on par with
NeRF-based methods while being an order of magnitude

