This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SEAL: SEmantic Attention Learning for Long Video Representation
Lan Wang1,2∗

Yujia Chen2
Du Tran2
Vishnu Naresh Boddeti1
Wen-Sheng Chu2
1
2
Michigan State University
Google

{wanglan3, vishnu}@msu.edu

{yujiachen, tranldu, wschu}@google.com

Abstract
Long video understanding presents challenges due to
the inherent high computational complexity and redundant
temporal information. An effective representation for long
videos must efficiently process such redundancy while preserving essential contents for downstream tasks. This paper
introduces SEmantic Attention Learning (SEAL), a novel
unified representation for long videos. To reduce computational complexity, long videos are decomposed into three
distinct types of semantic entities: scenes, objects, and actions, allowing models to operate on a compact set of entities rather than a large number of frames or pixels. To further address redundancy, we propose an attention learning
module that balances token relevance with diversity, formulated as a subset selection optimization problem. Our representation is versatile and applicable across various long
video understanding tasks. Extensive experiments demonstrate that SEAL significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
methods in video question answering and temporal grounding tasks across diverse benchmarks, including LVBench,
MovieChat-1K, and Ego4D.

sentation must adapt to various tasks, from fine-grained fact
retrieval to high-level reasoning. These challenges, which
appear trivial for a child, remain challenging for AI models.
How does the human brain process long videos, particularly in addressing the above-mentioned challenges? First,
rather than processing every pixel or frame, the brain selectively attends to new information to efficiently manage temporal redundancy [4, 22]. Second, humans process videos in
an online fashion, continuously updating their understanding and memories as they watch, rather than deferring reasoning until the end. This continuous knowledge update,
combined with selective attention, allows the brain to efficiently handle the complexity of long videos. Finally, attention dynamically shifts based on context. Without specific
guidance, a child may focus on naturally engaging or memorable moments. However, when given specific questions
in advance, attention becomes goal-oriented to seek relevant details while maintaining a broad understanding. This
suggests effective representations should balance between
task-specific focus and holistic understanding of the video
to enable cross-task generalization.
Inspired by how humans process long videos, we introduce SEmantic Attention Learning (SEAL), a novel unified
representation designed to tackle the three key challenges
in long video understanding. SEAL consists of two main
steps: Semantic Decomposition and Attention Learning. In
Semantic Decomposition, long videos are decomposed into
three semantic entities such as scenes, objects, and actions,
which are then treated as tokens. While the scene and object tokens represent static content assumed not to change
rapidly, the action tokens are designed to capture the dynamic, fast-changing moments of the video. We note that
these semantic tokens efficiently encode the essential information needed to answer “where”, “what”, or “how” questions about the videos. This decomposition significantly reduces complexity by allowing AI models to operate on a
compact set of tokens instead of raw pixels or frames. Figure 1(a) illustrates a conventional uniformly sampled video
V, where redundant frames create cluttered visual information that hinders effective analysis for both models and
humans. Figure 1(b) shows our semantic decomposition,

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art video understanding models excell at short
video tasks such as video classification [7, 13], temporal
grounding [38] and action detection [10, 12], which involve
videos lasting from a few seconds to minutes. However,
their performance declines on hour-long videos [40, 41].
In contrast, a 10-year-old child can watch a full-length
movie (one to two hours) and effortlessly answer questions
at various levels of detail. This disparity between humans
and machines emphasizes the foundamental challenges in
long video understanding for AI models, including: (1) Increased complexity: Long videos require more computation and memory than current hardware can support for
training or inference, (2) Temporal redundancy: Slowchanging scenes and objects introduce significant redundancy, and (3) Cross-task generalization: A robust repre∗ This work was done as Lan Wang’s internship project at Google.

26192

