This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Camera resection from known line pencils and a radially distorted scanline
Juan C. Dibene Enrique Dunn
Stevens Institute of Technology

Abstract
We present a marker-based geometric estimation framework for the absolute pose of a camera by analyzing the
1D observations in a single radially distorted pixel scanline. We leverage a pair of known co-planar pencils of lines,
along with lens distortion parameters, to propose an ensemble of solvers exploring the space of estimation strategies
applicable to our setup. First, we present a minimal algebraic solver requiring only six measurements and yielding
eight solutions, which relies on the intersection of two conics defined by one of the pencils of lines. Then, we present
a unique closed-form geometric solver from seven measurements. Finally, we present an homography-based formulation amenable to linear least-squares from eight or more
measurements. Our geometric framework constitutes a theoretical analysis on the minimum geometric context necessary to solve in closed form for the absolute pose of a single
camera from a single radially distorted scanline.

1. Introduction
Pose estimation aims to find the position and orientation of
a camera w.r.t. a known geometric reference. It is an important component of many computer vision applications,
such as structure from motion, visual odometry, simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), object localization,
autonomous navigation, and augmented reality.
The pose of a camera can be determined from n 2D-3D
point correspondences, which is known as the Perspectiven-Point (PnP) problem. Terzakis and Lourakis [26] present
a consistently fast and globally optimal solution to the PnP
problem. Barring degenerate configurations, the minimum
number of point correspondences required to obtain a finite
number of solutions is three (P3P). P3P can be formulated
as a system of three polynomial equations in three variables,
derived from the law of cosines, and then reduced to a quartic polynomial in a single variable with up to four solutions.
Gao et al. [27] present a complete solution classification for
P3P and describe the criteria under which P3P has one, two,
three or four solutions. Kneip et al. [10] presented a P3P
formulation without using the law of cosines and the camera

pose is estimated without computing the distances between
the observed features to achieve superior numerical stability and robustness. Ke and Roumeliotis [9] present an algebraic solution for P3P, based on a system of trigonometric
equations derived from geometric constraints, which avoids
computing unnecessary intermediate results and achieves
higher numerical accuracy and speed. Persson and Nordberg [20] introduce a P3P solver that exploits the underlying
elliptic equations and never computes geometrically invalid
or duplicate solutions, in contrast to the quartic solvers.
However, these pose estimation methods assume a camera model that is only valid for global shutter cameras,
in which the entire image is captured at once. Most of
the modern consumer cameras deploy rolling shutter (RS)
hardware for cost reasons. In a RS camera, the rows (or
columns) of pixels of the image are captured sequentially
at different times. Thus, if a RS camera moves or the
scene changes during image acquisition then the image will
appear distorted and these pose estimation methods may
perform poorly or outright fail. Motivated by these facts,
pose estimation methods that consider the particular capture
characteristics of RS cameras have been proposed. Albl et
al. [1] present a minimal non-iterative solution for the RS
absolute pose problem from six point correspondences, using a double linearized camera model where a standard P3P
solver is used for an initial approximation. Saurer et al. [23]
present a minimal solution for RS pose estimation from five
point correspondences by modeling the motion of the RS
camera with linear velocity. Lao et al. [13] consider the
RS distortions due to camera ego-motion as virtual deformations of a known template and estimate the camera pose
by registering the deformed scene on the original template.
Kukelova et al. [12] present a minimal solution for RS absolute pose with unknown focal length and radial distortion
from seven correspondences assuming constant velocity.
Most of the works presented so far treat the RS effect as
a source of error or as a defect that must be adjusted for. In
contrast, Bapat et al. [2] leveraged the RS effect to develop
a 6-DOF markerless head pose tracker capable of high frequency operation using a cluster of ten RS cameras. Their
key insight is to consider the RS camera as a high frequency
1D sensor that allows them to track the 6-DOF head pose

15843

