This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-aware Cross-modal Feature Reﬁnement Transformer with Large Language
Models for Visual Grounding

1

Wenbo Chen1 *, Zhen Xu1,2 *, Ruotao Xu2 , Si Wu1,2†, Hau-San Wong3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Institute for Super Robotics (Huangpu)
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong

{cscwb106, csxuzhen}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {xrt, cswusi}@scut.edu.cn, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk

TCRT w/o LLM

Abstract
The goal of visual grounding is to establish connections between target objects and textual descriptions. Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong comprehension abilities across a variety of visual tasks. To establish precise associations between the text and the corresponding visual region, we propose a Task-aware Crossmodal feature Reﬁnement Transformer with LLMs for visual
grounding, and our model is referred to as TCRT. To enable the LLM trained solely on text to understand images,
we introduce an LLM adaptation module that extracts textrelated visual features to bridge the domain discrepancy between the textual and visual modalities. We feed the text
and visual features into the LLM to obtain task-aware priors. To enable the priors to guide the feature fusion process,
we further incorporate a cross-modal feature fusion module, which allows task-aware embeddings to reﬁne visual
features and facilitate information interaction between the
Referring Expression Comprehension (REC) and Referring
Expression Segmentation (RES) tasks. We have performed
extensive experiments to verify the effectiveness of the main
components and demonstrate the superior performance of
the proposed TCRT over state-of-the-art end-to-end visual
grounding methods on RefCOCO, RefCOCOg, RefCOCO+
and ReferItGame.

TCRT

“bride throwing bouquet”

“guy front in gray suit left”

“man in right front with blue tie next to older woman”

predicted box

ground truth

Figure 1. The visualization of the reﬁned visual features from the
cross-modal feature fusion module. In challenging environments,
the introduction of LLMs can facilitate a better association between visual features and text.

derstand intra-modality information and accurately establish inter-modality correspondences.
Existing visual grounding methods can be categorized
into two main types: two-stage and end-to-end methods.
The two-stage methods [45] ﬁrst generate region proposals
[36] that may match the text, and then rank the candidate regions according to their relevance to the text. When the proposals generated in the ﬁrst stage do not contain the target
object, the second stage will be unable to correct these proposals. On the other hand, end-to-end grounding methods
perform the integration of visual and textual features within
an object detector, producing the box coordinates of the target object. The end-to-end methods are typically faster than
the two-stage ones. With the advancement of transformer in
the vision domain, TransVG [9, 10] and SeqTR [59] employ
self-attention or cross-attention mechanisms to fuse textual
and visual features. Recently, LLaVA [25] has integrated
visual understanding capabilities into large language mod-

1. Introduction
Visual grounding aims to predict the locations of the objects speciﬁed by textual prompts in images, and is widely
applied in the ﬁeld of human-computer interaction. This
task typically involves referring expression comprehension
[10, 17, 49, 59] and referring expression segmentation
[22, 38]. The main challenge is to comprehensively un* Joint ﬁrst authors.
† Corresponding author.

3931

