This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GenVDM: Generating Vector Displacement Maps From a Single Image
Yuezhi Yang1 * Qimin Chen2 Vladimir G. Kim3 Siddhartha Chaudhuri3
Qixing Huang1 Zhiqin Chen3
1
The University of Texas at Austin 2 Simon Fraser University 3 Adobe Research
Abstract
We introduce the ﬁrst method for generating Vector Displacement Maps (VDMs): parameterized, detailed geometric stamps commonly used in 3D modeling. Given a
single input image, our method ﬁrst generates multi-view
normal maps and then reconstructs a VDM from the normals via a novel reconstruction pipeline. We also propose
an efﬁcient algorithm for extracting VDMs from 3D objects, and present the ﬁrst academic VDM dataset. Compared to existing 3D generative models focusing on complete shapes, we focus on generating parts that can be
seamlessly attached to shape surfaces. The method gives
artists rich control over adding geometric details to a 3D
shape. Experiments demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing baselines. Generating VDMs offers additional beneﬁts, such as using 2D image editing to customize and reﬁne 3D details. Code and data are available
at https://yyuezhi.github.io/GenVDM/.

1. Introduction
Generative neural models for 3D shape synthesis is a
rapidly advancing research area [61]. However, they are
still not widely adopted in artistic workﬂows for two main
reasons. First, synthesizing ﬁne geometric details is challenging due to the heterogeneity of 3D representations and
the lack of detailed 3D training data. Second, existing neural tools lack the precise spatial and compositional controls
needed by 3D artists. To address these limitations, instead
of reinventing the 3D modeling stack to accommodate generative AI, we draw inspiration from an existing workﬂow
in which an artist starts with a base mesh and “stamps” the
desired details onto the 3D surface (see Figure 1). These
smaller stamps are easier to generate than full-scale 3D
models, ﬁt seamlessly into existing workﬂows, eliminate
artists’ dependence on expensive and limited third-party
stamp libraries, and provide full artistic control over spatial
arrangement and composition.
We chose the vector displacement map or VDM as our
* work partially done when interning at Adobe.

26618

Base mesh

Figure 1. We introduce GenVDM, a method that can generate
a highly detailed Vector Displacement Map (VDM) from a single
input image. The generated VDMs can be directly applied to mesh
surfaces to create intricate geometric details. Note that the thumbnails represent plain 2D RGB image sources.

stamp representation. A VDM assigns an arbitrary 3D displacement to every point in a 2D rectangle, warping the
sheet to form a curved surface with complex geometric features, such as overhangs and cavities. It is widely supported
in 3D software [1–4] and compactly stored as a vector ﬁeld
over a UV image domain. While using VDMs is commonplace, authoring them is extremely challenging, and artists
usually depend on packs of VDMs created by third parties
(analogous to brushes in digital painting tools), with limited customization or generality. Image or text-driven stamp
generation could drastically expand the scope of VDM usage by providing artists with custom stamps on demand.
In this paper, we propose the ﬁrst neural pipeline to generate a VDM from a single RGB image. To achieve this,
we address two main technical challenges. The ﬁrst challenge is that existing generative models are not suitable for
VDM generation: generating a 3D object usually does not
also produce a parametric 2D domain for stamp application, and predicting a depth map from a single image does
not capture complex high-amplitude variations, overhangs,

