This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Poses to Identity: Training-Free Person Re-Identification
via Feature Centralization
Chao Yuan1,∗ , Guiwei Zhang1,∗ , Changxiao Ma1 , Tianyi Zhang2 , Guanglin Niu2,†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
yuanc3666@gmail.com, {zhangguiwei,cxma124,zy2442222,beihangngl}@buaa.edu.cn

Market1501

SYSU-MM01

Occluded-ReID

Figure 1. Visualization of our Identity-Guided Pedestrian Generation model with 8 representative poses on three datasets.

Abstract
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to extract accurate
identity representation features. However, during feature extraction, individual samples are inevitably affected
by noise (background, occlusions, and model limitations).
Considering that features from the same identity follow a
normal distribution around identity centers after training,
we propose a Training-Free Feature Centralization ReID
framework (Pose2ID) by aggregating the same identity features to reduce individual noise and enhance the stability of
identity representation, which preserves the feature’s original distribution for following strategies such as re-ranking.
Specifically, to obtain samples of the same identity, we introduce two components: ➀Identity-Guided Pedestrian Generation: by leveraging identity features to guide the generation process, we obtain high-quality images with diverse
poses, ensuring identity consistency even in complex scenarios such as infrared, and occlusion. ➁Neighbor Feature
Centralization: it explores each sample’s potential posi-

tive samples from its neighborhood. Experiments demonstrate that our generative model exhibits strong generalization capabilities and maintains high identity consistency.
With the Feature Centralization framework, we achieve impressive performance even with an ImageNet pre-trained
model without ReID training, reaching mAP/Rank-1 of
52.81/78.92 on Market1501. Moreover, our method sets
new state-of-the-art results across standard, cross-modality,
and occluded ReID tasks, showcasing strong adaptability.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author. * Equal contribution.
Codes: https://github.com/yuanc3/Pose2ID

Person re-identification (ReID) is a critical task in video
surveillance and security, aiming to match pedestrian images captured from different cameras. Despite significant
progress made in recent years through designing more complex models with increased parameters and feature dimensions, inevitable noise arises due to poor image quality or
inherent limitations of the models, reducing the accuracy of
identity recognition and affecting retrieval performance.
To address this challenge, we propose a training-free

24409

