This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ATP-LLaVA: Adaptive Token Pruning for Large Vision Language Models
Xubing Ye1 , Yukang Gan2† , Yixiao Ge2* , Xiao-Ping Zhang1 , Yansong Tang1
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, 2 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG

a) Previous methods.

Abstract

LLM Decoder Layer

𝒊+𝟏

Pre-define and fix
60% ratio for this layer.
80% Pruning Ratio

Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) have achieved significant success across multi-modal tasks. However, the
computational cost of processing long visual tokens can be
prohibitively expensive on resource-limited devices. Previous methods have identified redundancy in visual tokens
within the Large Language Model (LLM) decoder layers
and have mitigated this by pruning tokens using a predefined or fixed ratio, thereby reducing computational overhead. Nonetheless, we observe that the impact of pruning ratio varies across different LLM layers and instances
(image-prompt pairs). Therefore, it is essential to develop
a layer-wise and instance-wise vision token pruning strategy to balance computational cost and model performance
effectively. We propose ATP-LLaVA, a novel approach that
adaptively determines instance-specific token pruning ratios for each LLM layer. Specifically, we introduce an Adaptive Token Pruning (ATP) module, which computes the importance score and pruning threshold based on input instance adaptively. The ATP module can be seamlessly integrated between any two LLM layers with negligible computational overhead. Additionally, we develop a Spatial Augmented Pruning (SAP) strategy that prunes visual tokens
with both token redundancy and spatial modeling perspectives. Our approach reduces the average token count by
75% while maintaining performance, with only a minimal
1.9% degradation across seven widely used benchmarks.

Pruning Module

60% Pruning Ratio
40% Pruning Ratio

𝒊

LLM Decoder Layer

20% Pruning Ratio

b) ATP-LLaVA.
LLM Decoder Layer

𝒊+𝟏

Adaptive
Token Pruning

Adaptively determine
token pruning ratio
instance-wise & layer-wise.
40% Pruning Ratio

LLM Decoder Layer
Vision

Text

𝒊
Correct answer

Incorrect answer

Figure 1. (a) Previous methods employ a fixed, pre-defined token
pruning ratio. (b) Illustration of ATP-LLaVA, which dynamically
selects the adaptive pruning ratio for each layer of the LLM decoder based on the instance-specific characteristics.

1. Introduction

costs when processing large number of visual tokens, especially in resource-constrained environments.
To address this issue, previous methods [8, 9, 47, 56]
have focused on compressing visual tokens by pruning redundant ones, as visual information tends to be sparser compared to natural language information. While these methods can mitigate the loss of model’s understanding capabilities caused by token pruning, they share a common limitation: requiring a fixed pruning ratio (i.e., a fixed number
of retained tokens or a non-learnable threshold) to be predefined for the model, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). Recently,
some methods [7, 15] have explored training a single model
that can handle varying visual token counts. However, it
remains necessary to manually specify a pruning ratio for
each individual sample. Due to the varying complexity of
different tasks and the differing levels of content within images, a pre-defined pruning ratio may result in either information loss or excessive information retention, consequently impacting the model’s efficiency and effectiveness.
To further validate this, we conducted a preliminary ex-

The emergence of Large Vision Language Models
(LVLMs) [2, 4, 12, 24, 32–34, 50, 59, 61] has significantly
advanced visual understanding. These approaches leverage visual encoders to extract visual features, which are
then processed jointly with text in Large Language Models (LLMs). Despite their impressive multi-modal understanding capabilities, the deployment of these models is often hindered by the substantial memory and computational
† Project lead. ∗ Corresponding author.

24972

