This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D2SP: Dynamic Dual-Stage Purification Framework for Dual Noise Mitigation in
Vision-based Affective Recognition.
Haoran Wang1 , Xinji Mai1 , Zeng Tao1 , Xuan Tong1 , Junxiong Lin1 , Yan Wang1*
Jiawen Yu1 , Shaoqi Yan1 , Ziheng Zhou1 , Wenqiang Zhang1,2,3 *
1
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of AI & Robotics, Academy for Engineering
& Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Engineering Research Center of AI & Robotics, Ministry of Education,Academy for
Engineering & Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
3
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of
Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
hrwang23@m.fudan.edu.cn {yanwang19, wqzhang}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
The current advancements in Dynamic Facial Expression
Recognition (DFER) methods mainly focus on better capturing the spatial and temporal features of facial expressions.
However, DFER datasets contain a substantial amount of
noisy samples, and few have addressed the issue of handling this noise. We identified two types of noise: one is
caused by low-quality data resulting from factors such as
occlusion, dim lighting, and blurriness; the other arises
from mislabeled data due to annotation bias by annotators.
Addressing the two types of noise, we have meticulously
crafted a Dynamic Dual-Stage Purification (D2SP) Framework. This initiative aims to dynamically purify the DFER
datasets of these two types of noise, ensuring that only highquality and correctly labeled data is used in the training
process. To mitigate low-quality samples, we introduce the
Coarse-Grained Pruning (CGP) stage, which computes sample weights and prunes those low-weight samples. After CGP,
the Fine-Grained Correction (FGC) stage evaluates prediction stability to correct mislabeled data. Moreover, D2SP is
conceived as a general, plug-and-play framework, tailored
to integrate seamlessly with prevailing DFER methods. Extensive experiments covering prevalent DFER datasets and
deploying multiple benchmark methods have substantiated
D2SP’s ability to enhance performance metrics.

1. Introduction
Facial Expression Recognition (FER) is essential in sectors
like Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) [1–7] and healthcare,
* Corresponding Author

with Dynamic Facial Expression Recognition (DFER) emphasizing temporal information to improve accuracy. Recent
DFER advancements have been driven by powerful models,
enhancing feature detection capabilities [8, 9]. Techniques
like Freq-HD [10] and NR-DFERNet [11] stress selecting expressive frames to capture facial transitions more accurately.
However, these advancements often overlook the inherent
challenges presented by DFER datasets [12, 13]. Recent research has shifted from controlled laboratory environments
[14, 15] to more naturalistic, in-the-wild datasets [16–18],
which introduce greater complexity due to variability in expression intensity and significant intra-class variation. This
shift exacerbating noise issues in DFER datasets, further
increases the difficulty of DFER tasks.
It is important to emphasize that past research [19–21]
on noise issues typically treated noise as a single category
for processing. While through detailed scrutiny of prevailing
DFER datasets, we discovered and defined two types of
noise: low quality and wrong annotation. In Figure 1, we
illustrate these two types of noise. The first type of noise
samples results from low-quality, rendered unusable due to
issues like occlusion, dim lighting, blurriness, etc. This noise
arises from the objective issue of low-quality samples, which
still need to be labeled for annotators rather than discarded.
The second type of noisy samples stems from annotation
bias, which originates from factors such as: confirmation
bias leading to mislabelling and samples with emotional
expressions being labeled as ’Neutral’ due to low intensity of
emotion. Thus, this type of noise is caused by the subjective
factors of the annotators.
Here, we further introduce the concept of confirmation
bias. Confirmation bias, derived from cognitive psychology,
denotes the inclination of individuals to favor and recall in-

19218

