This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PGC: Physics-Based Gaussian Cloth from a Single Pose
Michelle Guo∗1 Matt Jen-Yuan Chiang2 Igor Santesteban2 Nikolaos Sarafianos2
Hsiao-yu Chen2 Oshri Halimi2 Aljaž Božič2 Shunsuke Saito2 Jiajun Wu1 C. Karen Liu1
Tuur Stuyck2 Egor Larionov2
1

Stanford University

2

Meta Reality Labs

Figure 1. We present a method to recover photorealistic, simulation-ready garments from a multi-view capture of a single static pose. The
recovered garments consist of simulatable geometry and fine-detail appearance. Moreover, our results generalize to novel motion as they
can be simulated on human motion sequences, and our garments are relightable.

Abstract
We introduce a novel approach to reconstruct simulationready garments with intricate appearance. Despite recent
advancements, existing methods often struggle to balance
the need for accurate garment reconstruction with the ability to generalize to new poses and body shapes or require
large amounts of data to achieve this. In contrast, our
method only requires a multi-view capture of a single static
frame. We represent garments as hybrid mesh-embedded
3D Gaussian splats, where the Gaussians capture near-field
shading and high-frequency details, while the mesh encodes
far-field albedo and optimized reflectance parameters. We
achieve novel pose generalization by exploiting the mesh
from our hybrid approach, enabling physics-based simulation and surface rendering techniques, while also capturing
fine details with Gaussians that accurately reconstruct garment details. Our optimized garments can be used for simulating garments on novel poses, and garment relighting.
Project page: phys-gaussian-cloth.github.io.

resent a person’s attire when creating virtual avatars. The
automatic reconstruction of animatable garments is a vital
research area, and it’s no wonder that the field has witnessed a surge in interest in garment reconstruction techniques. Over the years, many advances have been made to
automatically recreate them from scans [23, 29, 71], textguidance [16, 48], monocular videos [27, 42], RGB-D sensors [63], or even images [25, 26, 45, 62].

1. Introduction

Traditionally, garment reconstruction methods have focused on mesh-based representations [2, 29, 58] due to
their natural fit for simulation purposes [49]. Physics-based
simulation models allow one to generate natural and physically plausible motions under a variety of body movements. However, mesh-based representations are limited
to the mesh resolution and often struggle to capture geometric details such as belts, pockets, and zippers or fabrics with significant thickness and fuzziness such as knits or
furs. On the other hand, recent development of 3D Gaussian splat (3DGS) reconstruction [21] applied to clothed
avatars [30, 31, 44] have shown that they are capable of
capturing such detailed features resulting in an appearance
that is true to the real clothing. Despite significant progress
in point-based simulation models for point-based representations of volumetric objects [8, 19, 59, 70], point-based
cloth simulation is considered computationally expensive
[64] but largely under-explored. In addition, existing works
tend to require multi-frame tracking [44, 71]. A concurrent

Clothing plays a vital role in how we present ourselves to
the world, and it is essential to accurately recreate and rep*This work was conducted during an internship at Meta Reality Labs

21215

