This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProtoDepth: Unsupervised Continual Depth Completion with Prototypes
Patrick Rim Hyoungseob Park S. Gangopadhyay Ziyao Zeng Younjoon Chung Alex Wong
Yale Vision Lab

Abstract

KITTI

MAE (mm)

We present ProtoDepth, a novel prototype-based approach
for continual learning of unsupervised depth completion,
the multimodal 3D reconstruction task of predicting dense
depth maps from RGB images and sparse point clouds. The
unsupervised learning paradigm is well-suited for continual
learning, as ground truth is not needed. However, when
training on new non-stationary distributions, depth completion models will catastrophically forget previously learned
information. We address forgetting by learning prototype
sets that adapt the latent features of a frozen pretrained
model to new domains. Since the original weights are not
modified, ProtoDepth does not forget when test-time domain
identity is known. To extend ProtoDepth to the challenging
setting where the test-time domain identity is withheld, we
propose to learn domain descriptors that enable the model
to select the appropriate prototype set for inference. We evaluate ProtoDepth on benchmark dataset sequences, where
we reduce forgetting compared to baselines by 52.2% for
indoor and 53.2% for outdoor to achieve the state of the art.
Project Page: https://protodepth.github.io/.

330

Predicted Depth

310

Error Map

à

Waymo

à

VKITTI

Error Map

290

Error Map

270

250

Best Baseline

ProtoDepth-A
(ours)
Continual Training

ProtoDepth (ours)

Figure 1. Results on KITTI validation set during continual training
on outdoor dataset sequence (KITTI → Waymo → VKITTI).

paradigm, which enables one to learn without human intervention. While this suggests the potential to continuously learn, existing models are trained and evaluated on
single datasets under the assumption of a stationary data
distribution. However, sequences of multiple datasets exhibit non-stationary distributions and are captured by sensors with varying calibrations. Hence, fitting to new data
samples inevitably causes the model to “catastrophically forget” [19, 54, 63, 82] previously learned information, where
the model performance degrades significantly on data from
distributions that it had already observed.
To enable pretrained models to adapt to new environments or domains in an unsupervised manner, we consider
continual learning, where training strategies aim to mitigate catastrophic forgetting of previously observed training
distributions when learning from a continuous stream of
non-stationary data. One school of thought is to constrain
updates to parameters deemed “important” for previous domains based on a regularization term controlled by a weight
chosen as a hyperparameter. Another is to incur memory
costs by storing previously observed training data and incorporating them during learning of new domains, akin to
rehearsals. The trade-off is in the sensitivity of optimization (and forgetting) to the choice of hyperparameter and in
the size of storage and data privacy. Both schools perform
updates to the full set of model parameters, which is computationally expensive. Unlike them, we opt to freeze the
pretrained model to ensure zero forgetting and learn a small
set of parameters, which we term “prototypes,” that modulate

1. Introduction
Reconstructing three-dimensional (3D) environments facilitates spatial applications such as autonomous navigation,
robotic manipulation, and AR/VR. These applications typically utilize platforms equipped with heterogeneous sensors,
such as cameras and sparse range sensors (e.g., LiDAR, ToF)
which yield RGB images and point clouds. To reconstruct
3D scenes from an ego-centric point of view in the form of
depth maps, the point clouds are typically projected onto the
image plane. However, their projections tend to be sparse,
which is unlike RGB images that comprise irradiance measured at each pixel. These complementary modalities can
be used to predict dense depth maps; this multimodal 3D
reconstruction task is called depth completion.
Depth completion models can be trained in a supervised
(using ground truth) or unsupervised (using Structure-fromMotion) manner. As ground truth is prohibitively expensive to acquire, we subscribe to the unsupervised learning

6304

