This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DropGaussian: Structural Regularization for Sparse-view Gaussian Splatting
Hyunwoo Park Gun Ryu Wonjun Kim*
Konkuk University
{pzls, fbrjs15, wonjkim}@konkuk.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) has gained considerable attentions in the field of novel view synthesis due
to its fast performance while yielding the excellent image
quality. However, 3DGS in sparse-view settings (e.g., threeview inputs) often faces with the problem of overfitting to
training views, which significantly drops the visual quality of novel view images. Many existing approaches have
tackled this issue by using strong priors, such as 2D generative contextual information and external depth signals.
In contrast, this paper introduces a prior-free method, socalled DropGaussian, with simple changes in 3D Gaussian
splatting. Specifically, we randomly remove Gaussians during the training process in a similar way of dropout, which
allows non-excluded Gaussians to have larger gradients
while improving their visibility. This makes the remaining
Gaussians to contribute more to the optimization process
for rendering with sparse input views. Such simple operation effectively alleviates the overfitting problem and enhances the quality of novel view synthesis. By simply applying DropGaussian to the original 3DGS framework, we can
achieve the competitive performance with existing priorbased 3DGS methods in sparse-view settings of benchmark
datasets without any additional complexity. The code and
model are publicly available at: https://github.co
m/DCVL-3D/DropGaussian release.

②

②

②

①

①

①

①

②
(a)

(b)
: 3D Gaussians

(c)

: Gaussians dropped randomly

Figure 1. (a) Traditional settings of 3DGS. (b) Sparse-view set
tings of 3DGS. (c) Effect of DropGaussian in sparse-view settings.
The rendered outputs at each viewpoint are visualized in (a), (b),
and (c), respectively.

1. Introduction

called 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) [8], has emerged in
2023 and is becoming a mainstream in the field of NVS.
3DGS is a method that generates an explicit radiance field,
composed of a set of 3D Gaussians positioned in 3D space.
Based on the property of point-based explicit representations, 3DGS demonstrates real-time operations for rendering while maintaining the rendering quality for novel view
inputs. However, with sparse input views, 3DGS is still
prone to overfitting due to insufficient cues for visual appearance and geometric layout in understanding a given 3D
scene.
Despite substantial efforts in the field of 3DGS, the optimization of 3D Gaussians only with sparse input views still
remains challenging. To address this challenge, several approaches have begun to leverage the prior information of a
given scene. For example, there have been meaningful attempts to adopt the result of monocular depth estimation as
an external supervisory signal for imposing Gaussians on
appropriate positions [5, 11, 36]. However, without considering the world coordinate, estimated depth scales vary
across different views, which makes consistent regularization difficult. Even though the 2D generative contextual in-

As the demand for realistic renderings and their applications increases rapidly, novel view synthesis (NVS) has
become an essential technique. Recently, the neural radiance field (NeRF) [14] has been introduced in literature,
which has a good ability to encode a given 3D scene into
the implicit radiance field through learnable parameters of
the neural network. Even though NeRF and its diverse variants have shown the remarkable performance, most previous methods require time-consuming processes for rendering as well as training. Meanwhile, a new technique, so* Corresponding author

21600

