This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Volume Tells: Dual Cycle-Consistent Diffusion for 3D Fluorescence Microscopy
De-noising and Super-Resolution
Zelin Li1,2, * ,

Chenwei Wang2, * ,

Zhaoke Huang1,2,† ,

Zhongying Zhao3 ,

Yiming Ma3 ,

Cunming Zhao3 ,

Hong Yan1,2

Figure 1. Problem statement and results of our method. Top-Left: The fluorescence microscopy can observe long-time live-cell life
processing, but face problems like spatially varying noise and anisotropic resolution. Top-Right: The raw slice (above) and our results
(bottom). Bottom: The comparisons among our methods and other SOTA methods.

Abstract
3D fluorescence microscopy is essential for understanding fundamental life processes through long-term live-cell
imaging. However, due to inherent issues in imaging principles, it faces significant challenges including spatially varying noise and anisotropic resolution, where the axial resolution lags behind the lateral resolution up to 4.5 times.
Meanwhile, laser power is kept low to maintain cell viability, leading to inaccessible low-noise and high-resolution
paired ground truth (GT). To tackle these limitations, a
dual Cycle-consistent Diffusion is proposed to effectively
mine intra-volume imaging priors within 3D cell volumes
1 Department of Electrical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong (SAR China)
2 Centre for Intelligent Multidimensional Data Analysis, Hong Kong
Science Park, Hong Kong (SAR China)
3 Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
(SAR China)
* Equal contributions
† Correspondence: rogerhzk@gmail.com

in an unsupervised manner, i.e., Volume Tells (VTCD),
achieving de-noising and super-resolution (SR) simultaneously. Specifically, a spatially iso-distributed denoiser is
designed to exploit the noise distribution consistency between adjacent low-noise and high-noise regions within the
3D cell volume, suppressing the spatially varying noise.
Then, in light of the structural consistency of the cell volume, a cross-plane global-propagation SR module propagates high-resolution details from the XY plane into adjacent regions in the XZ and YZ planes, progressively enhancing resolution across the entire 3D cell volume. Experimental results on 10 in vivo cellular dataset demonstrate high
improvements in both de-noising and super-resolution, with
axial resolution enhanced from ∼ 430 nm to ∼ 90 nm.

1. Introduction
3D fluorescence confocal (FC) microscopy is crucial to
reveal detailed volumetric structures within biological samples, which is often inaccessible in traditional 2D imaging.

16091

