This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FSHNet: Fully Sparse Hybrid Network for 3D Object Detection
Shuai Liu1 , Mingyue Cui1 , Boyang Li1,2, *, Quanmin Liang1 , Tinghe Hong1 , Kai Huang1
Yunxiao Shan3 , Kai Huang1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Sun Yat-sen University
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Sun Yat-sen University
{liush376@mail2, liby83@mail}.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract

when performing long-range detection [10]. Therefore, developing fully sparse 3D detectors (abbreviated as sparse
detectors) that extract sparse features directly from sparse
inputs without dense operations is urgently needed.
Sparse detectors are still emerging compared to their
dense counterparts. Some methods [31, 43, 48] utilize
the PointNet series [27, 28] to extract sparse features from
raw point clouds. Point R-CNN [31] generates proposals for foreground points, 3DSSD [43] improves speed by
eliminating the upsampling layer in PointNet, and IA-SSD
[48] trims background points to further enhance efficiency.
Other methods [4, 10, 46] convert points into voxels for feature extraction and prediction. FSD [10] employs instancelevel optimization to preserve essential features, VoxelNeXt
[4] predicts on the nearest voxels to object centers, and
SAFDNet [46] mitigates the center feature missing through
adaptive feature diffusion. Currently, there is no standardized solution to build sparse detectors with robust feature
extraction capability and superior optimization.
Constructing a robust and highly optimized sparse detector presents two key challenges. First, establishing longrange interactions is difficult. Sparse detectors [4, 10, 46]
typically operate only on non-empty voxels for efficiency,
which often results in the inability to maintain connections
between distant elements. As shown in Figure 1, two voxels become isolated because they lie outside the range of
the convolution kernel. This issue does not affect dense detectors, where dense convolutions can establish connections
between distant voxels through intermediary ones. Second,
network optimization is challenging. Since non-empty voxels generally occupy a small proportion of each object, the
object centers are often empty, particularly in the case of
large objects. Many popular detectors [12, 40, 44] have
shown that the center feature serves as an effective proxy
for an object. As a result, the absence of center features
hampers the network optimization [10].
To address the challenges outlined above, we introduce a sparse detector called the Fully Sparse Hybrid Net-

Fully sparse 3D detectors have recently gained significant
attention due to their efficiency in long-range detection.
However, sparse 3D detectors extract features only from
non-empty voxels, which impairs long-range interactions
and causes the center feature missing. The former weakens the feature extraction capability, while the latter hinders network optimization. To address these challenges,
we introduce the Fully Sparse Hybrid Network (FSHNet).
FSHNet incorporates a proposed SlotFormer block to enhance the long-range feature extraction capability of existing sparse encoders. The SlotFormer divides sparse voxels
using a slot partition approach, which, compared to traditional window partition, provides a larger receptive field.
Additionally, we propose a dynamic sparse label assignment strategy to deeply optimize the network by providing
more high-quality positive samples. To further enhance
performance, we introduce a sparse upsampling module to
refine downsampled voxels, preserving fine-grained details
crucial for detecting small objects. Extensive experiments
on the Waymo, nuScenes, and Argoverse2 benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness of FSHNet. The code is available at https://github.com/Say2L/FSHNet.

1. Introduction
3D object detection has attracted increasing research interest with its growing range of applications in areas such
as autonomous vehicle perception and precision robotic
operations. Currently, 3D LiDAR-based object detectors
[21, 40, 42] typically transform sparse features into 2D
dense feature maps to leverage established 2D object detection techniques. However, these detectors often waste
significant computational and memory resources processing
unoccupied voxels. This issue becomes more pronounced
* Corresponding author.

8900

