This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-supervised ControlNet with Spatio-Temporal Mamba for Real-world Video
Super-resolution

1

Shijun Shi1∗ Jing Xu2 * Lijing Lu3† Zhihang Li4† Kai Hu1
Jiangnan University 2 University of Science and Technology of China
3
Peking University 4 Chinese Academy of Sciences

ssj180123@gmail.com, xujing0@mail.ustc.edu.cn, lulijing1997@gmail.com,
lizhihang.cas@gmail.com, hukai wlw@jiangnan.edu.cn
https://ssj9596.github.io/scst-project/

MGLD

Input

Abstract

StableSR

SCST

Real-World

Existing diffusion-based video super-resolution (VSR)
methods are susceptible to introducing complex degradations and noticeable artifacts into high-resolution videos
due to their inherent randomness. In this paper, we propose
a noise-robust real-world VSR framework by incorporating
self-supervised learning and Mamba into pre-trained latent
diffusion models. To ensure content consistency across adjacent frames, we enhance the diffusion model with a global
spatio-temporal attention mechanism using the Video StateSpace block with a 3D Selective Scan module, which reinforces coherence at an affordable computational cost. To
further reduce artifacts in generated details, we introduce
a self-supervised ControlNet that leverages HR features
as guidance and employs contrastive learning to extract
degradation-insensitive features from LR videos. Finally, a
three-stage training strategy based on a mixture of HR-LR
videos is proposed to stabilize VSR training. The proposed
Self-supervised ControlNet with Spatio-Temporal Continuous Mamba based VSR algorithm achieves superior perceptual quality than state-of-the-arts on real-world VSR benchmark datasets, validating the effectiveness of the proposed
model design and training strategies.

Frame T

SCST

Frame
T

Frame T+1

Figure 1. A side-by-side comparison of video super-resolution
techniques StableSR [58], MGLD [69], and our SCST on two adjacent frames from the VideoLQ dataset. The zoomed-in regions,
captured from the same local position, illustrate each method’s
performance. SCST stands out for maintaining temporal consistency while delivering crisp details in real-world scenarios.

models to real-world LR videos with unknown and more
complex degradations.
Recently, diffusion-based generative models [24] have
achieved great success in tasks of general image/video generation [25, 51–53] and downstream tasks such as image
editing [34], inpainting [45], colorization [6], etc, owing
to its powerful ability in capturing diverse and complicated data distributions. There are also efforts to adapt
these diffusion priors to image super-resolution [33, 59, 67].
[59, 67] rely on elaborately designed network architectures,
such as ControlNet, to condition the diffusion models on
low-resolution (LR) images for real-world image superresolution. Wang et al. [58] propose to inject LR images
into the U-Net blocks in a LDM network using a SFT module. While showing promising results, directly applying
pre-trained diffusion models for image super-resolution to
degraded videos is challenging due to the inherent random-

1. Introduction
Video super-resolution (VSR) aims to restore highresolution (HR) videos by leveraging complementary temporal information within low-resolution (LR) frames, which
holds great value in practical usages, e.g., surveillance and
high-definition display. Previous works mainly rely on the
assumptions of simple and known image degradations (e.g.,
bicubic downsampling) or specific camera-related degradations, making it challenging to generalize the trained VSR
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

7385

