This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

H2ST: Hierarchical Two-Sample Tests for Continual Out-of-Distribution Detection

1

Yuhang Liu1
Wenjie Zhao2
Yunhui Guo2
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
University of Texas at Dallas
1
2
yuhang.liu.ce@gmail.com, {wxz220013, yunhui.guo}@utdallas.edu
Abstract

Task Incremental Learning (TIL) is a specialized form
of Continual Learning (CL) in which a model incrementally learns from non-stationary data streams. Existing
TIL methodologies operate under the closed-world assumption, presuming that incoming data remains in-distribution
(ID). However, in an open-world setting, incoming samples
may originate from out-of-distribution (OOD) sources, with
their task identities inherently unknown. Continually detecting OOD samples presents several challenges for current OOD detection methods: reliance on model outputs
leads to excessive dependence on model performance, selecting suitable thresholds is difficult, hindering real-world
deployment, and binary ID/OOD classification fails to provide task-level identification. To address these issues, we
propose a novel continual OOD detection method called the
Hierarchical Two-sample Tests (H2ST). H2ST eliminates
the need for threshold selection through hypothesis testing
and utilizes feature maps to better exploit model capabilities without excessive dependence on model performance.
The proposed hierarchical architecture enables task-level
detection with superior performance and lower overhead
compared to non-hierarchical classifier two-sample tests.
Extensive experiments and analysis validate the effectiveness of H2ST in open-world TIL scenarios and its superiority to the existing methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/YuhangLiuu/H2ST.

known as in-distribution (ID). However, when deployed in
an open-world scenario [11], models may encounter test
samples from out-of-distribution (OOD) sources, which require careful handling. This is particularly critical in safetysensitive applications such as healthcare and autonomous
driving, where mishandling OOD samples can lead to severe consequences. Moreover, task identity (task-id) is not
explicitly provided and needs to be predicted in open-world.
To detect OOD samples, existing OOD detection methods can be considered. These include utilizing the maximum softmax probability (MSP) as the indicator score [19],
using temperature scaling and input perturbation to amplify
the separability [32], and using energy score [33] as potential indicators. However, these traditional OOD detection
methods are not specifically tailored for TIL; they assume a
static set of ID classes which starkly contrasts with the dynamic nature of TIL, wherein an OOD class may transition
into an ID class at subsequent stages. In particular, their
limitations are as follows. (1) The above methods only produce an indicator score, necessitating a threshold to distinguish between ID and OOD samples. (2) The effectiveness
of OOD detection depends on the performance of the model
[28]. In particular, existing methods largely hinge on the derived probability or logit outputs of the model [19, 20, 33].
If the model performs poorly on ID samples, its ability to
detect OOD samples will also be compromised. (3) These
OOD detection methods only achieve binary classification
of ID and OOD, without discerning among ID tasks. For instance, all ID tasks ideally have a numerically higher MSP
score than OOD, but there is no discernible separation between different ID tasks. However in open-world TIL, without task-id, the model will not be able to perform inference.
The two-sample test is a statistical hypothesis test designed to determine whether two samples are drawn from
the same distribution without requiring thresholds. Classifier two-sample tests (C2ST) [36] train a binary classifier,
using its accuracy as the test statistic. The value of the
test statistic is compared to a critical value also obtained
by statistical methods to ascertain whether the null hypothesis can be rejected. Nevertheless, C2ST does not apply to

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL) [2, 7, 8, 52], also known as lifelong
learning, is built on the idea of learning continuously about
the external world to enable the incremental development of
ever more complex knowledge. Task incremental learning
(TIL) [8, 21, 50] is a specific form of CL.
Existing TIL methods [5, 23, 25, 37] operate under the
closed-world assumption, where test data is assumed to be
drawn i.i.d. from the same distribution as the training data,

15413

