This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masking meets Supervision: A Strong Learning Alliance
Byeongho Heo

Taekyung Kim Sangdoo Yun
NAVER AI Lab

Abstract
Pre-training with random masked inputs has emerged as
a novel trend in self-supervised training. However, supervised learning still faces a challenge in adopting masking
augmentations, primarily due to unstable training. In this
paper, we propose a novel way to involve masking augmentations dubbed Masked Sub-branch (MaskSub). MaskSub
consists of the main-branch and sub-branch, the latter being a part of the former. The main-branch undergoes conventional training recipes, while the sub-branch merits intensive masking augmentations, during training. MaskSub
tackles the challenge by mitigating adverse effects through
a relaxed loss function similar to a self-distillation loss.
Our analysis shows that MaskSub improves performance,
with the training loss converging faster than in standard
training, which suggests our method stabilizes the training
process. We further validate MaskSub across diverse training scenarios and models, including DeiT-III training, MAE
finetuning, CLIP finetuning, BERT training, and hierarchical architectures (ResNet and Swin Transformer). Our results show that MaskSub consistently achieves impressive
performance gains across all the cases. MaskSub provides
a practical and effective solution for introducing additional
regularization under various training recipes. Code available at https://github.com/naver-ai/augsub

1. Introduction
Supervised learning is the most basic and effective way to
train a network to achieve high performance on a target
task. To improve supervised learning, diverse regularizations are developed and used as training recipes [36, 37, 44],
which represent a group of sophisticatedly tuned regularizations to maximize learning performance. Supervised
learning has always held an advantage over self-supervised
learning [2, 4] based on the benefit of supervision. However,
emergence of Vision Transformer (ViT) [9] and Masked Image Modeling (MIM) [1, 15, 30] is changing this trends.
ViT, which lacks inductive bias compared to convolution
networks, poses many challenges to generalization perfor-

20447

Dongyoon Han

mance for supervised learning. On the other hand, MIMs
such as MAE [15] rise as an alternative pretraining method
for ViT by achieving competitive performance with supervised learning recipes. Although a recent study [37] shows
that new supervised learning outperforms MIMs, the gap is
insignificant. Thus, MIMs are still a strong competitor of
supervised learning methods.
MIM masks random areas of an input image and forces
the network to infer the masked area using the remaining
area. A representative part of MIM is high mask ratios over
50%. Although MIM also works at small mask ratios, it
shows remarkable performance when trained with a high
mask ratio. The high mask ratio is a major difference between MIM and supervised learning since this high mask
ratio, over 50%, is not beneficial in supervised learning. Supervised learning also has utilized random masking as an
augmentation [11, 56], but it significantly degrades performance when the masking ratio is high. In other words, supervised learning is not applicable for strong masking augmentation. We conjecture that it is a major problem of the
current supervised learning recipe, and there is room for improvement by enabling strong masking.
Our goal is to improve supervised learning with strong
mask augmentation over 50%. To this end, we introduce a
novel learning framework using a “sub-branch” alongside
the main-branch; throughout this paper, we use the term
“sub-branch” to describe a model with dropped inputs. The
main-branch uses standard training recipes [37, 44], while
the sub-branch utilizes mask augmentation. We name our
method as Masked Sub-branch (MaskSub).
We visualize the overview of MaskSub in Figure 1.
We consider a high masking ratio over 50% as similar in
MAE [15]. Figure 1 (b) shows that applying the strong random masking on the main-branch may lead to degraded performance. In contrast, as in Figure 1 (c), MaskSub leverages
the sub-branch for random masking, and the sub-branch receives the training signal from the main-branch similar to
the self-distillation [32, 52, 58]. While the random masking technique amplifies the difficulty of the training process,
this is counterbalanced by self-distillation loss since the outputs of the main-branch are relaxed and easy-to-learn objective than the ground-truth label. In summary, MaskSub ap-

