This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging Modalities: Improving Universal Multimodal Retrieval by Multimodal
Large Language Models
Xin Zhang1 *, Yanzhao Zhang2 *, Wen Xie2 *, Mingxin Li2 , Ziqi Dai2 , Dingkun Long2
Pengjun Xie2 , Meishan Zhang†, Wenjie Li1 , Min Zhang3
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group 3 Soochow University
xin404.zhang@connect.polyu.hk {zhangyanzhao.zyz,dingkun.ldk}@alibaba-inc.com

Single-modal Retrieval

Abstract
Universal Multimodal Retrieval (UMR) aims to enable
search across various modalities using a unified model,
where queries and candidates can consist of pure text,
images, or a combination of both. Previous work has
attempted to adopt multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) to realize UMR using only text data. However, our preliminary experiments demonstrate that more
diverse multimodal training data can further unlock the
potential of MLLMs. Despite its effectiveness, the existing multimodal training data is highly imbalanced in
terms of modality, which motivates us to develop a training
data synthesis pipeline and construct a large-scale, highquality fused-modal training dataset. Based on the synthetic training data, we develop the General Multimodal
Embedder (GME), an MLLM-based dense retriever designed for UMR. Furthermore, we construct a comprehensive UMR Benchmark (UMRB) to evaluate the effectiveness of our approach. Experimental results show that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance among existing UMR methods. Last, we provide in-depth analyses of
model scaling and training strategies, and perform ablation
studies on both the model and synthetic data.

Textual Query

Textual Candidate

Why do I only
breathe out of
one nostril?

In 1895, a
German nose
specialist ……

Textual Query

Visual Candidate

Visual Query

Visual Candidate

Cross-modal Retrieval
Visual Query

Textual Candidate

What is the
Cybertruck
looks like?

The Tesla
Cybertruck is
a electric ……

Fused-modal Retrieval
Fused-Modal Query
What's the
max torque
on this car?

Fused-Modal Candidate
Candidate

Query

It uses
active air
suspension
……

Figure 1. Illustration of different retrieval settings in our universal multimodal retrieval task. Blocks with black borders represent
data in arbitrary modalities, i.e. text-only, image-only or fused.

based retrieval) [25], a unified model can be trained to
project inputs from various modalities into a shared embedding space [22, 74, 75]. In this space, similarity scores
are computed between the embeddings of queries and the
retrieval collection, facilitating the efficient ranking of the
top-k candidates. To achieve this, some previous studies
have primarily focused on two approaches: (1) designing
feature fusion mechanisms for cross-modal retrievers based
on the CLIP architecture [39, 66], and (2) incorporating visual plugin modules into optimized text embedding models
to achieve unified multimodal representations [74, 75].
Recently, researchers have turned to exploring Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [35, 65] in UMR.
For example, it is shown that training MLLMs with text data
alone can generate universal multimodal embeddings with
respectable retrieval performance [22]. However, modalitylimited training may fail to fully demonstrate the potential
of MLLMs in UMR. We believe that incorporating multimodal data composition (as shown in Figure 1) could further enhance the model performance and generalization.
Moreover, visual documents (i.e. document screenshots) are

1. Introduction
The growth of multimedia applications necessitates retrieval models that extend beyond traditional text-to-text
and text-to-image search [75]. In Universal Multimodal Retrieval (UMR) tasks, both queries and candidates can exist
in any modality [39]. Compared to addressing this challenge with separate uni-modal and cross-modal retrievers
in a divide-and-conquer pipeline [4], a unified retriever is a
more viable option in terms of usability and scalability. Using the dense retrieval paradigm (also known as embedding* Equal Contribution. Work done during the internship of XZ, WX and
ZD. DL is the tech lead. † Correspondence: mason.zms@gmail.com

9274

