This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Optimizing for the Shortest Path in Denoising Diffusion Model
Ping Chen1,2 , Xingpeng Zhang4 , Zhaoxiang Liu1,2∗ , Huan Hu1,2 , Xiang Liu1,2 ,
Kai Wang1,2 , Min Wang4 , Yanlin Qian3 , Shiguo Lian1,2 *
1

Data Science & Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, China Unicom
Unicom Data Intelligence, China Unicom, 3 DJI Technology Co.,Ltd.
4
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Southwest Petroleum University, Chengdu, China
2

{chenp181, liuzx178, huh30, liux750, wangk115, liansg}@chinaunicom.cn
xpzhang@swpu.edu.cn, wangmin80616@163.com, honza.qian@dji.com

Abstract
In this research, we propose a novel denoising diffusion model based on shortest-path modeling that optimizes
residual propagation to enhance both denoising efficiency
and quality. Drawing on Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models (DDIM) and insights from graph theory, our model,
termed the Shortest Path Diffusion Model (ShortDF), treats
the denoising process as a shortest-path problem aimed at
minimizing reconstruction error. By optimizing the initial
residuals, we improve the efficiency of the reverse diffusion
process and the quality of the generated samples. Extensive experiments on multiple standard benchmarks demonstrate that ShortDF significantly reduces diffusion time (or
steps) while enhancing the visual fidelity of generated samples compared to prior arts. This work, we suppose, paves
the way for interactive diffusion-based applications and establishes a foundation for rapid data generation. Code is
available at https://github.com/UnicomAI/ShortDF.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen significant advancements in generative models, in which Denoising Diffusion Models demonstrates exceptional performance across various domains,
e.g. speech synthesis, 2D or 3D visual assets generation,
and other applications [2, 4, 26, 27]. These models capture
the inherent data distribution by gradually adding random
noise to the data and learning the reverse process.
While the quality and diversity of the generation have
been massively improved, concerns still exist on intensive
computational load and time consumption [28, 34]. These
burdens the further application of diffusion models in realtime scenarios, especially in cases where quick response
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Modeling each reverse step involves identifying a data
node xt that minimizes cumulative transition costs dist(xt , t)
(akin to a shortest path Pi in a weighted graph). By relaxing
the strict ’straight-line’ analogy to consider minimal-cost paths in
the diffusion graph, we treat the initial residual |R(t, 0)| as an alternative path candidate. This relaxation is embedded in the loss
function, enabling the reverse graph to iteratively refine the residual toward a shorter path (e.g., collapsing x0 −
→ xk −
→ xt into
x0 −
→ xt ), thus optimizing the reconstruction path through dynamic path compression.

time is in need, such as interactive graphic editing and realtime video processing (even we seldom consider) [1, 12].
To address these concerns, researchers have been actively
investigating more efficient strategies. Traditional diffusion
models typically require hundreds of iterations to achieve
high-quality results, which leads to considerable computational costs [8, 23]. Recent efforts have focused on reducing the complexity through techniques such as knowledge
distillation, which packs the multi-step diffusion sampling
procedure into a single-step student network [15, 19, 28].
However, accurately approximating this high-dimensional
and complex sampling process remains a challenging task.
Coupled with distillation-based approaches, other researchers have proposed faster numerical solvers, which
rely on the current step size to estimate the next solution
[34]. While the number of diffusion steps is decreased from

18021

