This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

You See it, You Got it: Learning 3D Creation on Pose-Free Videos at Scale
Baorui Ma1∗ , Huachen Gao2,1∗ , Haoge Deng1∗ , Zhengxiong Luo1 ,
Tiejun Huang1 , Lulu Tang1† , Xinlong Wang1†
1
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
2
Westlake University, Zhejiang, China
{mabaorui2014, gaohuachen712}@gmail.com, denghaoge@bupt.edu.cn, zxluo@baai.ac.cn
tjhuang@pku.edu.cn, lulutang @outlook.com, wangxinlong@baai.ac.cn
Sparse Multi-View to 3D

(Text-) Image to 3D

3D Editing

Mesh Reconstruction

WebVi3D

Figure 1. Benefiting from the proposed web-scale dataset WebVi3D, See3D enables both object- and scene-level 3D creation, including
sparse-view-to-3D, (text-) image-to-3D, and 3D editing. It can also be used for Gaussian Splatting to extract meshes or render images.

Abstract
Recent 3D generation models typically rely on limitedscale 3D ‘gold-labels’ or 2D diffusion priors for 3D content
creation. However, their performance is upper-bounded by
constrained 3D priors due to the lack of scalable learning paradigms. In this work, we present See3D, a visualconditional multi-view diffusion model trained on largescale Internet videos for open-world 3D creation. The
model aims to Get 3D knowledge by solely Seeing the visual contents from the vast and rapidly growing video data
— You See it, You Got it. To achieve this, we first scale up
the training data using a proposed data curation pipeline
that automatically filters out multi-view inconsistencies and
*Equal contribution. † Correspondence to XW and LT. This project is
supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2022ZD0116302).

insufficient observations from source videos. This results in
a high-quality, richly diverse, large-scale dataset of multiview images, termed WebVi3D, containing 320M frames
from 16M video clips. Nevertheless, learning generic 3D
priors from videos without explicit 3D geometry or camera pose annotations is nontrivial, and annotating poses for
web-scale videos is prohibitively expensive. To eliminate
the need for pose conditions, we introduce an innovative
visual-condition - a purely 2D-inductive visual signal generated by adding time-dependent noise to the masked video
data. Finally, we introduce a novel visual-conditional 3D
generation framework by integrating See3D into a warpingbased pipeline for high-fidelity 3D generation. Our numerical and visual comparisons on single and sparse reconstruction benchmarks show that See3D, trained on cost-

2016

