This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DrivingSphere: Building a High-fidelity 4D World for Closed-loop Simulation
Tianyi Yan1 , Dongming Wu3 , Wencheng Han1 , Junpeng Jiang2 ,
Xia Zhou2 , Kun Zhan2 , Cheng-zhong Xu1 , Jianbing Shen1 *
1
SKL-IOTSC, Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, 2 Li Auto Inc.,
3
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology

Abstract
Autonomous driving evaluation requires simulation environments that closely replicate actual road conditions, including real-world sensory data and responsive feedback
loops. However, many existing simulations need to predict
waypoints along fixed routes on public datasets or synthetic
photorealistic data, i.e., open-loop simulation usually lacks
the ability to assess dynamic decision-making. While the recent efforts of closed-loop simulation offer feedback-driven
environments, they cannot process visual sensor inputs or
produce outputs that differ from real-world data. To address these challenges, we propose DrivingSphere, a realistic and closed-loop simulation framework. Its core idea
is to build 4D world representation and generate real-life
and controllable driving scenarios. In specific, our framework includes a Dynamic Environment Composition module that constructs a detailed 4D driving world with a format of occupancy equipping with static backgrounds and
dynamic objects, and a Visual Scene Synthesis module that
transforms this data into high-fidelity, multi-view video outputs, ensuring spatial and temporal consistency. By providing a dynamic and realistic simulation environment, DrivingSphere enables comprehensive testing and validation of
autonomous driving algorithms, ultimately advancing the
development of more reliable autonomous cars. The benchmark will be publicly released.

1. Introduction
End-to-end autonomous driving algorithms [5–7, 15, 19, 20,
25, 36, 42, 48, 53, 54, 59] have made significant progress in
recent years, making the accurate evaluation of these models a very urgent task. For safe and responsible evaluation,
* Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen. This work was supported
in part by the Science and Technology Development Fund of Macau
SAR (FDCT) under grants 0102/2023/RIA2 and 0154/2022/A3 and
001/2024/SKL, the Jiangyin Hi-tech Industrial Development Zone under
the Taihu Innovation Scheme (EF2025-00003-SKL-IOTSC), the University of Macau SRG2022-00023-IOTSC grant.

it is essential to have a precise simulation environment that
accurately reflects real-world driving conditions. This requirement usually includes two aspects: firstly, the generation of high-fidelity sensory data, and secondly, the implementation of closed-loop feedback mechanisms.
The most common evaluation methods involve the forecasting of waypoints along fixed routes within collected
public datasets [3, 37], that is, open-loop simulation approaches. While these benchmarks offer realistic driving
data, they have relatively fixed distributions and lack diversity [24], limiting their ability to assess the generalization capabilities of autonomous driving algorithms. Even
though several recent works [13, 43, 57] excel at producing
diverse, photo-realistic data, continue to rely on the prediction of waypoints that are pre-established. In summary, despite high-fidelity sensory data, these open-loop evaluation
solutions cannot provide the dynamic feedback necessary
for assessing how autonomous systems respond to dynamic
changes and decision-making.
In contrast, closed-loop simulations [10, 23, 46, 56] offer
feedback-driven systems where an agent’s actions influence
and are influenced by other agents and the environment. For
example, traffic flow-based simulation methods [12, 46, 56]
successfully enable multi-agent simulations. However, they
lack the ability to process visual sensor inputs, limiting their
interplay with vision-based end-to-end models. Game engine–based simulators [10, 23] create scalable and physically realistic environments, but their outputs often diverge
from real-world sensor data, restricting their utility in validating algorithms trained on actual inputs.
To address these challenges, we propose DrivingSphere,
a novel generative closed-loop simulation framework that
leverages geometric-wise prior information to generate realistic and controllable driving scenarios. In comparison
with existing simulations, DrivingSphere has three distinguished features: ❶ Rich simulation granularity. Unlike
past methods that model only roads and cars [13, 51], our
approach allows for including previously unmodeled elements, such as buildings, vegetation, and other environmental structures. Although these non-traffic elements are not

27531

