This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Quad-Pixel Image Defocus Deblurring: A New Benchmark and Model
Hang Chen1 Yin Xie1 Xiaoxiu Peng1 Lihu Sun1 Wenkai Su1 Xiaodong Yang2 Chengming Liu2
1
OMNIVISION, Wuhan, China 2 OMNIVISION, Santa Clara, CA
DP sensor vs. QP sensor

Abstract
P1

P1
Focal plane

Focal plane

Defocus deblurring is a challenging task due to the spatially
varying blur. Recent works have shown impressive results
in data-driven approaches using dual-pixel (DP) sensors.
Quad-pixel (QP) sensors represent an advanced evolution
of DP sensors, providing four distinct sub-aperture views
in contrast to only two views offered by DP sensors. However, research on QP-based defocus deblurring is scarce. In
this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end learning-based
approach for defocus deblurring that leverages QP data.
To achieve this, we design a QP defocus and all-in-focus
image pair acquisition method and provide a QP Defocus Deblurring (QPDD) dataset containing 4,935 image
pairs. We then introduce a Local-gate assisted Mamba
Network (LMNet), which includes a two-branch encoder
and a Simple Fusion Module (SFM) to fully utilize features
of sub-aperture views. In particular, our LMNet incorporates a Local-gate assisted Mamba Block (LAMB) that mitigates local pixel forgetting and channel redundancy within
Mamba, and effectively captures global and local dependencies. By extending the defocus deblurring task from a
DP-based to a QP-based approach, we demonstrate significant improvements in restoring sharp images. Comprehensive experimental evaluations further indicate that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

P2

Main lens

DP unit
PSFs of DP at scene points P1 and P2

P2

Main lens

QP unit
PSFs of QP at scene points P1 and P2
P1
P2

P1
P2

Figure 1. Characteristics of DP and QP sensors. The light rays
from different parts of the main lens fall on each DP unit or QP
unit. A DP unit has two photodiodes under a single microlens,
producing two sub-aperture views, while a QP unit has four photodiodes, producing four sub-aperture views. Different views of
DP or QP data exhibit different PSFs with directional characteristics, leading to disparity between the sub-aperture views. The
disparity d is correlated withthe amount
of defocus blur b [1, 12]:
1
1
Lf
5
−
, where α is a constant
d = α∗b ≈ α
1 − f /Df Df
D
of proportionality, L is the diameter of the aperture, f is the focal
length, Df is the focus distance, and D is the depth. DP sensors
provide disparity in only a single direction, whereas QP sensors
can provide disparity in two directions.

1. Introduction
Defocus blur occurs in scene regions captured outside the
camera’s depth of field (DoF) [1–3]. Restoring an all-infocus image from a defocused image is challenging due to
the spatially varying point spread functions (PSFs) [6, 20,
38, 40, 46], which are not only scene depth dependent, but
also vary based on intrinsic camera parameters [2].
Recently, researchers have addressed this challenge by
developing end-to-end deep neural networks that leverage
dual-pixel (DP) data [1–3, 21, 24, 29, 47, 48, 53]. The first
DP Defocus Deblurring (DPDD) [1] dataset, captured sequentially with various aperture sizes using a Canon 5D
DSLR camera, is widely utilized. Quad-pixel (QP) sensors [28, 39] represent a significant advancement over DP

sensors and have gained widespread adoption in smartphones due to their superior Phase Detection Auto Focus
(PDAF) performance. As indicated in Fig. 1, by utilizing
four photodiodes under each microlens instead of two photodiodes, a QP sensor captures more light signal aspects,
enhancing disparity detection [44] accuracy and providing
more reliable guidance for defocus deblurring.
However, to the best of our knowledge, research on QPbased defocus deblurring is limited, primarily due to the
lack of relevant dataset. Most QP sensors on smartphones
have a fixed aperture size, making it difficult to adopt the

5709

