This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-Step Event-Driven High-Speed Autofocus
Yuhan Bao
Shaohua Gao
Wenyong Li
Kaiwei Wang*
State Key Laboratory of Extreme Photonics and Instrumentation, Zhejiang University, China
{yhbao, gaoshaohua, liwenyong2023, wangkaiwei}@zju.edu.cn

Event Laplacian Product (ELP) versus ∆𝑣𝑣

ELP

Abstract
High-speed autofocus in extreme scenes remains a significant challenge. Traditional methods rely on repeated sampling around the focus position, resulting in “focus hunting”. Event-driven methods have advanced focusing speed
and improved performance in low-light conditions; however, current approaches still require at least one lengthy
round of “focus hunting”, involving the collection of a
complete focus stack. We introduce the Event Laplacian
Product (ELP) focus detection function, which combines
event data with grayscale Laplacian information, redefining focus search as a detection task. This innovation enables the first one-step event-driven autofocus, cutting focusing time by up to two-thirds and reducing focusing error by 24 times on the DAVIS346 dataset and 22 times
on the EVK4 dataset. Additionally, we present an autofocus pipeline tailored for event-only cameras, achieving
accurate results across a range of challenging motion and
lighting conditions. All datasets and code are available in
https://github.com/YuHanBaozju/ELP.

Event frame
+image
Image
Laplacian

∆𝑣𝑣 (mm)

Negative events
Positive events

-50

50

∆𝑣𝑣=-0.25mm ∆𝑣𝑣=-0.05mm ∆𝑣𝑣=0.05mm ∆𝑣𝑣=0.25mm

Figure 1. Visualization of ELP, event frames, images and Laplacian at different ∆v.

gles in scenarios with significant defocus.
Recent research has shown the potential of event cameras for high-speed AF applications. Event cameras detect
brightness changes at individual pixels with extreme temporal resolution, down to 1 µs, making them ideal for dynamic
scenarios. However, the unique asynchronous characteristics of event cameras set event-driven AF methods apart
from traditional frame-based approaches. The use of event
rate (ER) as a focus evaluation function was first proposed
in [10], where the focus position is identified by locating the
position with the highest ER in the focus stack. Building on
this, the Event Golden Search (EGS) algorithm was introduced to improve the speed of focus search. Additionally,
another study [1] noted that brightness changes exhibit symmetry around the focus position in the focus stack. Building
on this insight, the Polarity Based Autofocus (PBF) algorithm was developed, effectively leveraging this symmetry
to achieve rapid and precise focusing across various lighting conditions, including strobe lighting. However, current
event-driven AF algorithms require analyzing a complete
focus stack, including information both before and after the
focus position, before the focus position can be determined.
While these methods eliminate repeated “focus hunting”,
they still require a single round of it, which involves capturing the entire focus stack, searching for the focus position,
and moving there.

1. Introduction
Focus is a prerequisite for most visual tasks. An ideal autofocus (AF) system guides the motor directly toward the
correct focus position from any starting point, and stop immediately upon arrival, ensuring precision and efficiency,
which can be considered as “one-step AF”.
Conventional AF algorithms predict focus by evaluating
the image contrast [19] (or sharpness) at different points,
which often requires repeated sampling around the focus
position, leading to “focus hunting”. At the same time,
the contrast-based AF methods are susceptible to low frame
rates, motion blur. To enhance speed and accuracy, Phase
Detection AutoFocus (PDAF) with dual-pixel sensors is
commonly employed. These sensors measure phase differences to calculate focus position. However, PDAF is confronted with several challenges: the complexity of pixel design limits the number of dual pixels, reduced light intake
impacts performance in low-light conditions, and it strug-

6222

