This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reasoning in visual navigation of end-to-end trained agents: a dynamical
systems approach
Steeven Janny1
Gianluca Monaci1

Hervé Poirier1
Leonid Antsfeld1
Guillaume Bono1
1
3
Boris Chidlovskii
Francesco Giuliari
Alessio Del Bue2
Christian Wolf1

Abstract

Correction with
observations

Progress in Embodied AI has made it possible for end-toend-trained agents to navigate in photo-realistic environments with high-level reasoning and zero-shot or languageconditioned behavior, but benchmarks are still dominated
by simulation. In this work, we focus on the fine-grained
behavior of fast-moving real robots and present a largescale experimental study involving 262 navigation episodes
in a real environment with a physical robot, where we analyze the type of reasoning emerging from end-to-end training. In particular, we study the presence of realistic dynamics which the agent learned for open-loop forecasting, and
their interplay with sensing. We analyze the way the agent
uses latent memory to hold elements of the scene structure
and information gathered during exploration. We probe the
planning capabilities of the agent, and find in its memory
evidence for somewhat precise plans over a limited horizon.
Furthermore, we show in a post-hoc analysis that the value
function learned by the agent relates to long-term planning.
Put together, our experiments paint a new picture on how
using tools from computer vision and sequential decision
making have led to new capabilities in robotics and control.
An interactive tool is available [here].

Probing

estimated
position

position

Latent
internal memory

Occupancy map

Value estimate

Open-loop dynamics
forecasting

Figure 1. In a large-scale analysis of 262 episodes of a real robot
in a real environment, we report on the type of reasoning emerging
after end-to-end training agents with realistic motion: they learn a
dynamical motion model exploited with open-loop forecasting and
corrected by sensing, latent scene structure, exploration information, and long-term value estimates.

1. Introduction

with Reinforcement Learning (RL). Early work was visionless and focused on simple grid-like environments, finite
states and observations and tabular representations. The introduction of function approximation into RL enabled endto-end training of agents in photo-realistic environments
like Habitat [67] and AI2Thor [41], and very recently on
large-scale offline datasets like Open-X-Embodiment [18].
Now, computer vision is enabling a switch to realistic conditions in what is now known as Embodied AI (EAI).
End-to-end navigation policies are typically trained with
RL in an environment with simple motion — stepwise
teleportation, leading to learning high-level decisions only.
When deployed on a real robot, the displacements predicted
by the policy are passed to a classical low-level controller,
tasked with reaching the desired position. While this strategy led to breakthroughs in navigation, it results in very
slow motion, as the agent stops between each step, and
heavily relies on the quality of the low-level controller.
Interestingly, robotic manipulation followed a similar
track, but moved rapidly to dynamic-aware environments

Historically, the importance of computer vision for robot
navigation tasks largely depended on which field addressed
the problem. On one hand, roboticists consider navigation
as a perception and reconstruction problem combined with
planning. This naturally required robots to deal with noise
and uncertainty [75] and thus computer vision, leading to
the development of visual odometry and SLAM solutions
[22, 53, 55, 74, 75]. On the other hand, research in machine
learning addressed it as a form of sequential decision making and a large body of work modeled it as a POMDP solved
1 Naver Labs Europe, France. firstname.lastname@naverlabs.com
2 Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy.
3 Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy.

12111

