This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Nullu: Mitigating Object Hallucinations in Large Vision-Language Models via
HalluSpace Projection
Le Yang∗ , Ziwei Zheng∗ , Boxu Chen, Zhengyu Zhao, Chenhao Lin, Chao Shen†
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, 710049, China
{yangle15@, ziwei.zheng@stu., chenboxu@stu., zhengyu.zhao@}xjtu.edu.cn
{linchenhao@, chaoshen@mail.}xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that large vision-language
models (LVLMs) often suffer from the issue of object hallucinations (OH). To mitigate this issue, we introduce an
efficient method that edits the model weights based on an
unsafe subspace, which we call HalluSpace in this paper.
With truthful and hallucinated text prompts accompanying
the visual content as inputs, the HalluSpace can be identified by extracting the hallucinated embedding features and
removing the truthful representations in LVLMs. By orthogonalizing the model weights, input features will be projected
into the Null space of the HalluSpace to reduce OH, based
on which we name our method Nullu. We reveal that HalluSpaces generally contain prior information in the large
language models (LLMs) applied to build LVLMs, which
have been shown as essential causes of OH in previous
studies. Therefore, null space projection suppresses the
LLMs’ priors to filter out the hallucinated features, resulting in contextually accurate outputs. Experiments show
that our method can effectively mitigate OH across different LVLM families without extra inference costs and also
show strong performance in general LVLM benchmarks.
Code is released at https://github.com/ZiweiZheng/Nullu.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. An illustration of Nullu. (a) In the editing phase, Nullu
will ① Extract hidden features of truthful (T.) and hallucinated
(H.) inputs. ② Explore a low-rank HalluSpace v in the feature
space by contrasting the differences between T. and H. features.
③ Edit the model weights by projecting them to the null space of
v. (b) In the inference phase, using the edited weights equals to
project input features into the safe subspace, away from the hallucinated areas, leading to contextually accurate outputs.

Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) [1,
35, 40] have spurred rapid developments in large visionlanguage models (LVLMs), such as GPT-4V [1], Gemini [39], LLaVA [31] and mPLUG-Owl2 [48]. By integrating a vision encoder and fine-tuning on multimodal
instruction-following datasets, LVLMs exhibit a strong ability to interpret and convert complex visual patterns into co∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

14635

herent linguistic representations. Whereas, the widespread
use of these LVLMs has shed light on their limitations—
object hallucinations (OH).
Object Hallucination (OH) refers to the phenomenon
where LVLMs generate text that inaccurately represents the
actual objects in the accompanying image [4, 20, 23, 27,
29]. Considering the wide application of LVLMs in different fields, hallucinations in generated content can lead
to misinformation or even harmful decisions. Therefore,
mitigating OH is crucial for AI safety and trustworthiness. Recent works propose to address OH by either performing fine-tuning in an end-to-end manner [20, 22, 29]
or using post-processing methods to modify model outputs [9, 23, 50, 53], which show effectiveness in mitigating
OH for modern open-source LVLMs.

