This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LOGICZSL: Exploring Logic-induced Representation for
Compositional Zero-shot Learning
Peng Wu1 , Xiankai Lu1 *, Hao Hu1 , Yongqin Xian3 , Jianbing Shen4 , Wenguan Wang2
1

Shandong University, 2 ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University, 3 Google, 4 SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau
https://github.com/Pieux0/LOGICZSL

Abstract
Compositional zero-shot learning (CZSL) aims to recognize unseen attribute-object compositions by learning the
primitive concepts (i.e., attribute and object) from the
training set. While recent works achieve impressive results in CZSL by leveraging large vision-language models
like CLIP, they ignore the rich semantic relationships between primitive concepts and their compositions. In this
work, we propose LOGICZSL, a novel logic-induced learning framework to explicitly model the semantic relationships. Our logic-induced learning framework formulates
the relational knowledge constructed from large language
models as a set of logic rules, and grounds them onto the
training data. Our logic-induced losses are complementary to the widely used CZSL losses, therefore can be employed to inject the semantic information into any existing
CZSL methods. Extensive experimental results show that
our method brings significant performance improvements
across diverse datasets (i.e., CGQA, UT-Zappos50K, MITStates) with strong CLIP-based methods and settings (i.e.,
Close World, Open World).

1. Introduction
Due to the availability of large-scale datasets (e.g.,
CGQA [47]) and pre-trained vision-language models (e.g.,
CLIP [54], SigLIP [71], EVA-CLIP [58], BLIP [30]), compositional zero-shot learning (CZSL) has made remarkable
progress. In particular, CLIP [54] has recently received a
lot of attention in CZSL due to its impressive zero-shot
capability. The CLIP-based methods focus on efficient
finetuning techniques to empower CLIP for recognizing
attribute-object compositions, e.g., prompt tuning [41, 49],
adapter [23, 74]. Besides, multi-modal interaction module,
i.e., cross-attention mechanism [5], is adopted to enforce
the alignment between visual feature and textual feature in
the shared embedding space.
* Corresponding author: Xiankai Lu.

Basically, these methods leverage CLIP to recognize compositions following the zero-shot classification
paradigm, i.e., computing the similarities between the query
image and the embedded words for each primitive concept
(i.e., attribute, object and composition). However, they ignore the rich semantic relationships between primitive concepts and their compositions: i) there is a hierarchical structure among object classes (e.g., “tree” and “flower” are both
plant (Fig. 1)); ii) the inter-class similarity among the object
classes is high (e.g., “dog” and “wolf” (Fig. 1)); iii) the same
attribute may have different visual appearance or meaning
when used to describe different objects (e.g., “young” in
“young dog” and “young tree” (Fig. 1)).
In light of the above discussions, we propose to explicitly model the semantic relationship for primitive concepts and their compositions via the integration of large language models (LLMs) and logic-induced learning, resulting in LOGICZSL. Through constructing relational knowledge using LLMs and modeling the the relational knowledge as a set of logic rules, LOGICZSL effectively captures
rich semantic relationships, thereby improving the compositionality of existing CLIP-based methods. Specifically,
given the class labels, we start by querying LLMs to generate descriptive texts, which are then represented as relational knowledge among semantic concepts. These relational knowledge captures rich semantic relationships, such
as how “dog” differs from “wolf” by distinguishing between
their detailed descriptions. We then use first-order logic to
specify these relationships on relational knowledge. After
fuzzy logic based relaxation, the logical formulae of hierarchy constraints can be grounded on data and be used for
training in the form of loss functions. Our logic-induced
losses are complementary to the widely used CZSL losses,
therefore can be employed to inject the semantic information into any existing CZSL methods. By integrating LLMs
and logic-induced learning, LOGICZSL not only alleviates
the limitations of existing CZSL methods, but also provides
an alternative paradigm that benefits from both neural network learning and logical reasoning.
In a nutshell, our contributions are four-fold:

30301

