This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distinguish Then Exploit: Source-free Open Set Domain Adaptation via Weight
Barcode Estimation and Sparse Label Assignment
Weiming Liu1* , Jun Dan2* , Fan Wang2 , Xinting Liao2 , Junhao Dong3 ,
Hua Yu3 , Shunjie Dong4 , Lianyong Qi56†
1
Bytedance Inc. 2 Zhejiang University 3 Nanyang Technological University 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
5
China University of Petroleum (East China)
6
Shandong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Oil & Gas Industrial Software
lwming95@gmail.com, danjun@zju.edu.cn, fanwang97@zju.edu.cn, xintingliao@zju.edu.cn
junhao003@ntu.edu.sg, yu hua@ntu.edu.sg , sjdong@sjtu.edu.cn, lianyongqi@gmail.com

Abstract
Nowadays, domain adaptation techniques have been
widely investigated for knowledge sharing from labeled
source domain to unlabeled target domain. However, target domain may include some data samples that belong to
unknown categories in real-world scenarios. Moreover, the
target domain cannot access the source data samples due
to privacy-preserving restrictions. In this paper, we focus on the source-free open set domain adaptation problem
which includes two main challenges, i.e., how to distinguish
known and unknown target samples and how to exploit useful source information to provide trustworthy pseudo labels for known target samples. Existing approaches that directly apply conventional domain alignment methods could
lead to sample mismatch and misclassification in this scenario. To overcome these issues, we propose a Distinguish
Then Exploit model (DTE) with two components, i.e., weight
barcode estimation and sparse label assignment. Weight
barcode estimation first calculates the marginal probability
of target samples via partially unbalanced optimal transport, then quantize barcode results to distinguish unknown
target samples. Sparse label assignment utilizes sparse
sample-label matching via proximal term to fully exploit
useful source information. Our empirically study on several
datasets shows that DTE outperforms the state-of-the-art
models on tackling the source-free open set domain adaptation problem.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, deep learning technique has been successfully
adopted to image classification tasks with the help of largescale labeled datasets [16, 19, 48, 51–54, 57, 65, 66]. How* Equal Contribution, † Corresponding Author.

ever, it is time-consuming to sufficiently annotate data for
providing satisfied results. A promising solution is to leverage useful information from the labeled source domain to
assign reliable labels within the unlabeled target domain
[18, 58, 60]. Nevertheless, the data distribution could be
significantly different across domains, leading to the model
degradation on final performance [12, 56, 94]. How to reduce the domain bias and discrepancy while avoiding negative transfer across domains has become an urgent problem.
In this paper, we focus on a more general problem of
source-free open set domain adaptation. That is, there could
exist some target samples belong to extra categories that
does not present in the source domain. Moreover, due to
data privacy protection constraints, the target domain could
only have access to the well-trained model in the source
domain. Such settings are commonly encountered in realworld scenarios and it is rather complicated than conventional domain adaptation problem. Specifically, there are
two main challenges: CH1: How can we enhance the ability to distinguish target samples that belong to unknown categories? CH2: How to better exploit appropriate pseudo
labels for the remaining known target samples?
Existing researches cannot solve source-free open set domain adaptation well. Firstly, conventional transfer learning
always assumes that both source and target domains share
the same set of label categories [15, 59, 61]. Directly aligning the latent distributions of source and target domains may
lead to negative transfer, where target unknown samples
are incorrectly matched to source samples. Secondly, traditional open set domain adaptation approaches should incorporate well-tuned thresholds for determining the decision
boundary between known and unknown target samples [69].
This suggests that many of these methods (e.g., OSBP [78]
and JPOT [91]) typically rely on prior knowledge about the
target domain, which will limit their potential applicabil-

4927

