This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mimic In-Context Learning for Multimodal Tasks
Yuchu Jiang1,2
kamichanw@seu.edu.cn

Jiale Fu1,2

Chenduo Hao1,2

jiale.fu@seu.edu.cn

213201447@seu.edu.cn

Xinting Hu 3
xinting001@e.ntu.edu.sg

Yingzhe Peng1,2

Xin Geng1,2

Xu Yang1,2 *

yingzhe.peng@seu.edu.cn

xgeng@seu.edu.cn

xuyang palm@seu.edu.cn

1

Southeast University
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and
Its Interdisciplinary Applications, (Southeast University), Ministry of Education
3
Nanyang Technological University
2

Abstract
Recently, In-context Learning (ICL) has become a significant inference paradigm in Large Multimodal Models
(LMMs), utilizing a few in-context demonstrations (ICDs)
to prompt LMMs for new tasks. However, the synergistic effects in multimodal data increase the sensitivity of
ICL performance to the configurations of ICDs, stimulating the need for a more stable and general mapping function. Mathematically, in Transformer-based models, ICDs
act as “shift vectors” added to the hidden states of query
tokens. Inspired by this, we introduce Mimic In-Context
Learning (MimIC) to learn stable and generalizable shift
effects from ICDs. Specifically, compared with some previous shift vector-based methods, MimIC more strictly approximates the shift effects by integrating lightweight learnable modules into LMMs with four key enhancements: 1)
inserting shift vectors after attention layers, 2) assigning a
shift vector to each attention head, 3) making shift magnitude query-dependent, and 4) employing a layer-wise alignment loss. Extensive experiments on two LMMs (Idefics9b and Idefics2-8b-base) across three multimodal tasks
(VQAv2, OK-VQA, Captioning) demonstrate that MimIC
outperforms existing shift vector-based methods. The code
is available at https://github.com/Kamichanw/
MimIC.

plicit fine-tuning [3, 7, 29, 37, 55]. This approach has
become a significant inference paradigm for both Large
Language Models (LLMs) and Large Multimodal Models
(LMMs) [36] and finds broad applications in areas such as
recommendation systems [11, 40, 54] and point cloud understanding [16]. However, ICL in LMMs faces more limitations than LLMs due to the synergistic effects of integrating vision and language data [23, 53], making some strategies useful in LLM lose their efficacy. For example, while
various studies in LLM show that using similar ICDs as the
query is beneficial [26, 43], [50] found that in captioning tasks, using less similar images may actually improve
performance when only low-quality in-context captions are
available. This is because similar images can lead LMMs to
copy captions through shortcut inference, rather than generalizing to new examples.

1. Introduction

Due to synergistic effects, when implementing ICL, it is
hard for LMMs to capture the general mapping from inputoutput pairs of complex multimodal ICDs as LLMs. Instead, [23] shows that LMMs tend to rely on the distribution of ICDs to narrow the prediction space, e.g., in Visual
Question Answering (VQA), a LMM might recognize the
ICD answer format and respond an answer in the same format, rather than learning the correct function as in language
QA. Consequently, the ICL performance in LMMs is more
sensitive than in LLMs to ICD configurations [28, 58] and
finding optimal ICD configurations in LMM is still an open
question [7]. A straightforward approach to mitigate the
high sensitivity issue is to use more ICDs to help LMMs
recognize stable patterns for improved predictions. However, image inputs require more tokens than text, and increasing the number of ICDs significantly raises computational demands. Moreover, current LMMs, like open-source
8B models, typically support only up to 32-shot ICDs [18],

In-Context Learning (ICL) allows models to generalize
from a few examples, known as in-context demonstrations (ICDs), enabling them to learn new tasks without ex* Corresponding Author

29825

