This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-Minute Video Generation with Test-Time Training
*
Karan Dalal∗4
Daniel Koceja∗2 Jiarui Xu∗1,3 Yue Zhao5 Shihao Han1

Ka Chun Cheung1 Jan Kautz1 Yejin Choi1 Yu Sun1,2 Xiaolong Wang1,3
1 NVIDIA

2 Stanford University

00:00

3 UCSD

00:20

4 UC Berkeley

00:40

5 UT Austin

01:00

On a sunny morning in New York, Tom, a blue-gray cat carrying a briefcase, arrives at his office in the World Trade Center. As he settles in, his computer suddenly shuts down – Jerry, a
mischievous brown mouse, has chewed the cable. A chase ensues, ending with Tom crashing into the wall as Jerry escapes into his mousehole. Determined, Tom bursts through an office
door, accidentally interrupting a meeting led by Spike, an irritated bulldog, who angrily sends him away. Safe in his cozy mousehole, Jerry laughs at the chaos.

Jerry happily eats cheese in a tidy kitchen until Tom playfully takes it away, teasing him. Annoyed, Jerry packs his belongings and leaves home, dragging a small suitcase behind him. Later,
Tom notices Jerry's absence, feels sad, and follows Jerry’s tiny footprints all the way to San Francisco. Jerry sits disheartened in an alleyway, where Tom finds him, gently offering cheese as
an apology. Jerry forgives Tom, accepts the cheese, and the two return home together, their friendship restored.

Figure 1. TTT layers enable pre-trained Diffusion Transformers to generate one-minute videos from text storyboards. We use Tom and
Jerry cartoons as a proof-of-concept. The videos tell complete stories with coherent scenes composed of dynamic motion. Every video is
produced directly by the model in a single shot, without editing, stitching, or post-processing. All stories are original.

Abstract

Sample videos, code and annotations are available at:
https://test-time-training.github.io/video-dit

Transformers today still struggle to generate one-minute
videos because self-attention layers are inefﬁcient for long
context. Alternatives such as Mamba layers struggle to
produce coherent scenes because their hidden states are
small and less expressive. We experiment with Test-Time
Training (TTT) layers, whose hidden states themselves can
be neural networks, therefore larger and more expressive.
Adding TTT layers into a pre-trained Transformer enables
it to generate one-minute videos from text storyboards. We
curate a dataset based on Tom and Jerry cartoons as a
proof-of-concept benchmark. Compared to baselines such
as Mamba 2, Gated DeltaNet, and sliding-window attention
layers, TTT layers generate much more coherent videos that
tell complete stories, leading by 34 Elo points in a human
evaluation of 100 videos per method. Although promising,
our results are still limited in physical realism, and the efﬁciency of our implementation can be further improved.
* Joint ﬁrst authors

17702

1. Introduction
Despite the remarkable progress in visual and physical realism, state-of-the-art video Transformers are still generating
mostly short clips of single scenes. At the time of writing
(March 2025), the maximum length of public video generation APIs is 8 seconds for Veo 2 (Google), 20 seconds for
Sora (OpenAI), 16 seconds for MovieGen (Meta), and 10
seconds for Ray 2 (Luma).
A major challenge in video generation is long context,
because the computation and memory cost of self-attention
layers in Transformers increases quadratically with context length. This challenge is especially acute for videos
with dynamic motion, whose context cannot be easily compressed by a tokenizer. Using a standard tokenizer, our oneminute videos requires over 300k tokens in context.
To address this challenge, recent work in long video

