This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C ALICO: Part-Focused Semantic Co-Segmentation with
Large Vision-Language Models
Kiet A. Nguyen

Adheesh Juvekar Tianjiao Yu Muntasir Wahed
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Ismini Lourentzou

{kietan2, adheesh2, ty41, mwahed2, lourent2}@illinois.edu
https://plan-lab.github.io/calico

Common Objects:
Can you segment the common
object in these images?

The common object is the dog.

Common Parts:
Please segment the common
parts of the objects.

Both images show a dog. The
common part is the head.

Unique Parts:
What are the unique parts of the
objects in these images? Please
output segmentation masks.

CALICO

The images show a dog. The
unique parts are the neck
(IMAGE1), the leg, the foot,
the body, and the tail (IMAGE2).

Figure 1. Multi-Image Part-focused Object Comparison with C ALICO. Our pixel-grounded Large Vision-Language Model, C ALICO,
performs part-focused semantic co-segmentation, a newly introduced task where the goal is to identify, segment, and label common objects,
as well as common and unique object parts across multiple images.

Abstract

ject and part categories. Experimental results demonstrate
that C ALICO, with just 0.3% of its parameters finetuned,
achieves strong performance on this challenging task.

Recent advances in Large Vision-Language Models
(LVLMs) have enabled general-purpose vision tasks
through visual instruction tuning. While existing LVLMs
can generate segmentation masks from text prompts for single images, they struggle with segmentation-grounded reasoning across images, especially at finer granularities such
as object parts. In this paper, we introduce the new task
of part-focused semantic co-segmentation, which involves
identifying and segmenting common objects and their constituent common and unique parts across images. To address this task, we present C ALICO, the first LVLM designed
for multi-image part-level reasoning segmentation. C AL ICO features two key components, a novel Correspondence
Extraction Module that identifies semantic part-level correspondences, and Correspondence Adaptation Modules that
embed this information into the LVLM to facilitate multiimage understanding in a parameter-efficient manner. To
support training and evaluation, we curate M IXED PARTS,
a large-scale multi-image segmentation dataset containing
∼2.4M samples across ∼44K images spanning diverse ob-

1. Introduction
Analyzing objects by decomposing them into their constituent parts can enhance understanding of inter-object relationships both within and across categories. This partlevel reasoning is crucial for applications requiring detailed
object comparisons, such as robotic manipulation, medical
imaging, and educational tools. Detailed comparisons that
identify shared and unique parts offer insights into the critical features and functions of objects. For example, while
both spoons and forks have handles, this part is not central
to their primary functions. Instead, distinguishing the fork’s
tines from the spoon’s bowl allows tasks like robotic grasping or visual comparisons to differentiate and interact with
these objects based on their unique functions.
Designing effective methods to analyze multiple images
featuring diverse objects by locating and identifying their

4550

