This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ModeSeq: Taming Sparse Multimodal Motion Prediction with Sequential Mode
Modeling
Zikang Zhou1 Hengjian Zhou2 Haibo Hu1 Zihao Wen1
Jianping Wang1 Yung-Hui Li3 Yu-Kai Huang4
1
City University of Hong Kong
2
3
Zhejiang University Hon Hai Research Institute 4 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract

0.4
0.5

Scene Embedding

0.3

(a) Parallel mode modeling

Anticipating the multimodality of future events lays the
foundation for safe autonomous driving. However, multimodal motion prediction for traffic agents has been clouded
by the lack of multimodal ground truth. Existing works
predominantly adopt the winner-take-all training strategy
to tackle this challenge, yet still suffer from limited trajectory diversity and uncalibrated mode confidence. While
some approaches address these limitations by generating
excessive trajectory candidates, they necessitate a postprocessing stage to identify the most representative modes,
a process lacking universal principles and compromising
trajectory accuracy. We are thus motivated to introduce
ModeSeq, a new multimodal prediction paradigm that models modes as sequences. Unlike the common practice of
decoding multiple plausible trajectories in one shot, ModeSeq requires motion decoders to infer the next mode step
by step, thereby more explicitly capturing the correlation
between modes and significantly enhancing the ability to
reason about multimodality. Leveraging the inductive bias
of sequential mode prediction, we also propose the EarlyMatch-Take-All (EMTA) training strategy to diversify the
trajectories further. Without relying on dense mode prediction or heuristic post-processing, ModeSeq considerably
improves the diversity of multimodal output while attaining satisfactory trajectory accuracy, resulting in balanced
performance on motion prediction benchmarks. Moreover,
ModeSeq naturally emerges with the capability of mode
extrapolation, which supports forecasting more behavior
modes when the future is highly uncertain.

Scene Embedding

0.7

0.3

0.1

(b) Sequential mode modeling

Figure 1. A comparison between parallel and sequential mode
modeling. While parallel mode modeling (Fig. 1a) decodes multimodal trajectories in one shot, our sequential mode modeling
(Fig. 1b) reasons about multiple plausible futures step by step,
which captures the relationships between modes to avoid producing indistinguishable trajectories and confidence scores.

future may be compatible with a given observation of the
past. Without characterizing the multimodal distribution
of agent motions, autonomous vehicles may fail to interact
with the surroundings in a safe and human-like manner. For
this reason, advanced decision-making systems demand a
motion predictor to forecast several plausible and representative trajectories of critical agents [8, 16].
Although multimodality has long been the central topic
studied in motion prediction, this problem has not been
fundamentally solved owing to the unavailability of multimodal ground truth, i.e., only one possibility is observable
in real-world driving data. To struggle with this dilemma,
most existing works adopt the winner-take-all (WTA) strategy [15] for training [4, 6, 17, 25, 37, 44, 50, 51]. Under this strategy, only the best among all predicted modes
will receive explicit supervision signals for trajectory regression and confidence scoring, while all the remaining
will be masked in loss calculation. Despite being the current standard practice in the research community, the WTA
solution has been found to cause mode collapse easily and
produce indistinguishable trajectories [23, 32, 43], further
confusing the learning of mode scoring [18]. As a remedy, some recent research intends to cover the ground-truth
mode by generating a massive number of trajectory candidates [25, 37, 44], from which the most representative ones
are heuristically selected based on post-processing methods

1. Introduction
Handling the intricate uncertainty presented in the real
world is one of the major hurdles in autonomous driving.
One aspect of the uncertainty lies in the multimodal behavior of traffic agents, i.e., multiple instantiations of an agent’s

1612

