This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiscoVLA: Discrepancy Reduction in Vision, Language, and Alignment
for Parameter-Efficient Video-Text Retrieval
Leqi Shen1,2,4 * Guoqiang Gong5† Tianxiang Hao1,2 Tao He6,7 Yifeng Zhang5
Pengzhang Liu5 Sicheng Zhao2‡ Jungong Han3 Guiguang Ding1,2‡
1
School of Software 2 BNRist 3 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
4
Hangzhou Zhuoxi Institute of Brain and Intelligence
5
6
JD.com
GRG Banking Equipment Co., Ltd. 7 South China University of Technology
Vision

Abstract

Alignment

Language
A woman in a kitchen
preparing food on a stove.

A person is pouring milk
into a pot.

Image-Level

The parameter-efficient adaptation of the image-text pretraining model CLIP for video-text retrieval is a prominent area of research. While CLIP is focused on imagelevel vision-language matching, video-text retrieval demands comprehensive understanding at the video level.
Three key discrepancies emerge in the transfer from imagelevel to video-level: vision, language, and alignment. However, existing methods mainly focus on vision while neglecting language and alignment. In this paper, we propose Discrepancy Reduction in Vision, Language, and
Alignment (DiscoVLA), which simultaneously mitigates all
three discrepancies. Specifically, we introduce Image-Video
Features Fusion to integrate image-level and video-level
features, effectively tackling both vision and language discrepancies. Additionally, we generate pseudo image captions to learn fine-grained image-level alignment. To mitigate alignment discrepancies, we propose Image-to-Video
Alignment Distillation, which leverages image-level alignment knowledge to enhance video-level alignment. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our DiscoVLA. In particular, on MSRVTT with CLIP (ViT-B/16),
DiscoVLA outperforms previous methods by 2.2% R@1
and 7.5% R@sum. The code is available at https:
//github.com/LunarShen/DsicoVLA.

A person is cutting a piece
of vanilla bean with a knife.

Video-Level

Parameter-Efficient Transfer Learning

An instructional video on
cooking taught by a women.

PETL

Method
Previous Methods
Our DiscoVLA

Image-Level ====⇒ Video-Level
Vision
!
!

Language
✗
!

Alignment
✗
!

Figure 1. When parameter-efficient transferring image-level CLIP
to video-text retrieval, we identify three key discrepancies: vision, alignment, and language. Unlike previous methods, our DiscoVLA aims to address all these discrepancies. More visualization
examples are provided in Figure 4.

1. Introduction
The rapid expansion of online video content has generated
a growing demand for effective video-text retrieval, focusing on matching video content with relevant textual descriptions. Inspired by the success of image-text pretraining approaches such as CLIP [42], recent efforts [9, 14,
24, 37, 48, 49, 51] have increasingly focused on extend* lunarshen@gmail.com. Work done during an internship at JD.com.
† Project leader. ‡ Corresponding authors.

ing these powerful capabilities to video-text retrieval tasks.
However, fully fine-tuning these pretrained models requires
updating numerous parameters for every dataset, resulting
in large storage overhead [22, 58]. Therefore, we focus
on parameter-efficient transfer learning methods, targeting
strong performance with minimal trainable parameters.
Although both image-text pretraining and video-text retrieval involve vision-language (VL) matching, they exhibit

19702

