This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Symbolic Representation for Any-to-Any Generative Tasks
Yue Wang5 *
Jiaqi Chen1,2,3 * †
Xiaoye Zhu4 *
Tianyang Liu6
Xinhui Chen7,8
Ying Chen9
Chak Tou Leong10
Yifei Ke8
11
12
6
13
Joseph Liu
Yiwen Yuan
Julian McAuley
Li-jia Li
1

Stanford University 2 Fellou AI 3 Fudan University 4 South China University of Technology
5
Cornell University 6 University of California San Diego 7 Fenz.AI 8 Wuhan University
9
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 10 Hong Kong Polytechnic University
11
University of Southern California 12 Carnegie Mellon University 13 LiveX AI
https://github.com/Jiaqi-Chen-00/Any-2-Any

Figure 1. A symbolic representation for Any-to-Any generative tasks. (a) We develop a training-free inference engine that transforms
natural language task descriptions into executable symbolic flow comprising functions, parameters, and the topology. (b) The symbolic
flow allows executing generative tasks as programs. Example task is mentioned in the first sentence of Sec. 1. (c) Both functions and
parameters can be easily modified to customize the generation process and the output style.

Abstract
We propose a symbolic generative task description language and a corresponding inference engine capable of representing arbitrary multimodal tasks as structured symbolic
flows. Unlike conventional generative models that rely on
large-scale training and implicit neural representations to
learn cross-modal mappings—often at high computational
cost and with limited flexibility—our framework introduces

an explicit symbolic representation comprising three core
primitives: functions, parameters, and topological logic.
Leveraging a pre-trained language model, our inference engine maps natural language instructions directly to symbolic workflows in a training-free manner. Our framework
successfully performs over 12 diverse multimodal generative tasks, demonstrating strong performance and flexibility without the need for task-specific tuning. Experiments
show that our method not only matches or outperforms existing state-of-the-art unified models in content quality, but
also offers greater efficiency, editability, and interruptibil-

* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding author.

27816

