This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MotiF: Making Text Count in Image Animation with Motion Focal Loss
Shijie Wang1†

Samaneh Azadi2
Rohit Girdhar2
Chen Sun1
Xi Yin2
1
2
Brown University
GenAI, Meta

Saketh Rambhatla2

{shijie wang, chensun}@brown.edu, {azadis, rgirdhar, rssaketh, yinxi}@meta.com

“Common vole
drags sunflower
seeds in the hole.”
Re-weighting

⊕

L2 loss

Condition leakage

(a)

(b)

A bear jumping high on a meadow.

A bear running to the left on a meadow.

MotiF

Baseline

(c)

Figure 1. Motivation and results of MotiF. (a) Example video frames and the corresponding motion heatmaps calculated from optical
flow. In this example, 97% of the pixels are static while only 3% has meaningful motion. (b) In standard TI2V training pipeline, the model
may learn to over-rely on the conditional image to optimize the L2 loss. This issue has been identified in [53] and termed as conditional
image leakage. We propose MotiF to guide the model’s learning to focus on regions with more motion via motion heatmap re-weighting.
(c) Qualitative results comparing MotiF to the baseline on examples from our proposed TI2V-Bench evaluation set.

Abstract

the intensity of the motion. This modified objective leads to
noticeable improvements and complements existing methods that utilize motion priors as model inputs. Additionally,
due to the lack of a diverse benchmark for evaluating TI2V
generation, we propose TI2V-Bench, a dataset consists of
320 image-text pairs for robust evaluation. We present a
human evaluation protocol that asks the annotators to select an overall preference between two videos followed by
their justifications. Through a comprehensive evaluation,
MotiF outperforms nine open-sourced models, achieving an
average preference of 72%. The TI2V-Bench and additional
results are released in the project website.

Text-Image-to-Video (TI2V) generation aims to generate a
video from an image following a text description, which is
also referred to as text-guided image animation. Most existing methods struggle to generate videos that align well with
the text prompts, particularly when motion is specified. To
overcome this limitation, we introduce MotiF, a simple yet
effective approach that directs the model’s learning to the
regions with more motion, thereby improving the text alignment and motion generation. We use optical flow to generate a motion heatmap and weight the loss according to
† This work is done during Shijie’s internship at Meta.

7773

