This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interleaved-Modal Chain-of-Thought
Jun Gao1 ,Yongqi Li2 ,* Ziqiang Cao1 ,* Wenjie Li2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University
Department of Computer Science, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
jgao1106@stu.suda.edu.cn, liyongqi0@gmail.com
zqcao@suda.edu.cn, cswjli@comp.polyu.edu.hk
1

2

https://github.com/jungao1106/ICoT

Abstract
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting elicits large language
models (LLMs) to produce a series of intermediate reasoning steps before arriving at the final answer. However, when
transitioning to vision-language models (VLMs), their textonly rationales struggle to express the fine-grained associations with the original image. In this paper, we propose an
image-incorporated multimodal Chain-of-Thought, named
Interleaved-modal Chain-of-Thought (ICoT), which generates sequential reasoning steps consisting of paired visual
and textual rationales to infer the final answer. Intuitively,
the novel ICoT requires VLMs to enable the generation of
fine-grained interleaved-modal content, which is hard for
current VLMs to fulfill. Considering that the required visual
information is usually part of the input image, we propose
Attention-driven Selection (ADS) to realize ICoT over existing VLMs. ADS intelligently inserts regions of the input
image to generate the interleaved-modal reasoning steps
with ignorable additional latency. ADS relies solely on the
attention map of VLMs without the need for parameterization, and therefore it is a plug-and-play strategy that can be
generalized to a spectrum of VLMs. We apply ADS to realize ICoT on two popular VLMs of different architectures.
Extensive evaluations of three benchmarks have shown that
ICoT prompting achieves substantial performance (up to
14%) and interpretability improvements compared to existing multimodal CoT prompting methods.

fore arriving at the final output. CoT has proven effective in
various reasoning tasks, including arithmetic [9], commonsense [17], and symbolic [3], and it has become a potential
pathway to advanced artificial intelligence, as depicted in
GPT-o1 [20].
With the development of vision-language models
(VLMs), extending CoT prompting into multimodal CoT
to improve the reasoning capabilities of VLMs in visionrelated tasks becomes increasingly important [19, 28, 33,
34]. The initial multimodal CoT attempts [28, 33] take as
input the fused visual and textual embeddings and train language models, such as T5 [23] models, to generate textonly rationales and answers. In the era of VLMs, introducing triple demonstrations composed of an image with the
instruction, textual rationales, and the final output (e.g., answer) has proven effective in sparking the reasoning ability of VLMs [6]. Then, related studies focus on improving the linguistic reasoning ability of VLMs. Specifically,
DDCoT [34] leverages VLMs to deconstruct problems and
resolve them respectively, and CCoT [19] generates scene
graphs to prompt VLMs with object and position descriptions. SCAFFOLD [12] overlays a coordinate matrix onto
the image to prompt the VLMs with relative visual positions. However, these methods still generate text-only reasoning steps, making it hard to express the fine-grained associations with the origin image exactly. As shown on the
left of Figure 1, textual position descriptions, e.g., at the top,
are too rough to identify all fruits (orange and banana).

1. Introduction

In light of the limitations of text-only rationales, we propose incorporating visual information to enhance the precision of fine-grained associations between generated textual
rationales and the corresponding image. We therefore propose an advanced multimodal Chain-of-Thought prompting, named Interleaved-modal Chain-of-thought (ICoT),
as shown on the right of Figure 1. ICoT generates multimodal rationales consisting of paired images and textual
rationales that formulate interleaved-modal reasoning steps

Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [31] prompting aims to augment the reasoning capabilities of large language models
(LLMs) [4, 8, 22, 26] by eliciting them to produce a sequence of intermediate natural language reasoning steps be* Corresponding authors.

19520

