This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Language Model Pretraining with Spatio-temporal Masking
Yue Wu1,2,4 , Zhaobo Qi3 , Junshu Sun1 , Yaowei Wang2,5 , Qingming Huang2,4 , Shuhui Wang1,2 *
1
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS
2
Pengcheng Laboratory 3 Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
wuyue221@mails.ucas.ac.cn qizb@hit.edu.cn wangyw@pcl.ac.cn
{sunjunshu21s, wangshuhui}@ict.ac.cn qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
The development of self-supervised video-language
models based on mask learning has significantly advanced
downstream video tasks. These models leverage masked reconstruction to facilitate joint learning of visual and linguistic information. However, recent study reveals that
reconstructing image features yields superior downstream
performance compared to video feature reconstruction. We
hypothesize that this performance gap stems from the way
how masking strategies influence the model’s attention to
temporal dynamics. To validate this hypothesis, we performed two sets of experiments that demonstrate that alignment between the masked target and the reconstruction
target is crucial for self-supervised video-language learning. Based on these findings, we propose a spatio-temporal
masking strategy (STM) for video-language model pretraining that operates across adjacent frames, and a decoder
leverages semantic information to enhance the spatiotemporal representations of masked tokens. Thanks to the
combination of masking strategy and reconstruction decoder, STM enforces the model to learn spatio-temporal feature representation comprehensively. Experiments in three
video understanding downstream tasks validate the superiority of our method. Codes are available here.

(a) masked targets w./wo. consistent reconstruction targets.

(b) Reconstructing image/video feature with different masking strategies.

Figure 1. Different masked target + reconstruction target results:
(a) Retrieval (RT) and video QA (QA) results are improved
when the reconstruction targets are consistent with the masked
targets. (b) Spatio-temporal-oriented masking strategies benefit
downstream tasks when reconstructing video features, but may
hurt when reconstructing image features.

1. Introduction
Following the success of masked autoencoders [16], the
masking and reconstruction strategies have been extended
to video-language models to enhance their multimodal representation capabilities [8, 11, 13, 30, 31, 59]. Notably,
VIOLETv2 [12] systematically investigates the reconstruction targets for video understanding, i.e., pixel, HoG, depth,
flow, image features, video features, and multimodal features. The investigation reveals a counterintuitive finding,
i.e., when masking image-level information, the reconstruction of image features yields superior performance com-

Video-language models (VLMs) have made significant
strides in advancing video understanding [15, 23, 28, 38,
46, 49, 50]. Through large-scale pre-training on video-text
pairs, these models learn to align visual dynamics with semantic concepts, establishing rich cross-modal representations that enhance various downstream tasks such as video
retrieval [13, 35, 36], video question answering (video
QA) [22, 54], and video captioning [40, 58].
* Corresponding author.

8557

