This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LLaVA-Critic: Learning to Evaluate Multimodal Models
Tianyi Xiong♮,♡ , Xiyao Wang♮,♡ , Dong Guo† , Qinghao Ye† , Haoqi Fan† , Quanquan Gu† ,
Heng Huang♮ , Chunyuan Li†
†
ByteDance, ♮ University of Maryland, College Park
https://llava-vl.github.io/blog/2024-10-03-llava-critic

Abstract
We introduce LLaVA-Critic, the first open-source large multimodal model (LMM) designed as a generalist evaluator to assess performance across a wide range of multimodal tasks. LLaVA-Critic is trained using a high-quality
critic instruction-following dataset that incorporates diverse evaluation criteria and scenarios. Our experiments
demonstrate the model’s effectiveness in two key areas:
(i) LMM-as-a-Judge, where LLaVA-Critic provides reliable
evaluation scores, performing on par with or surpassing
GPT models on multiple evaluation benchmarks; and (ii)
Preference Learning, where it generates reward signals for
preference learning, enhancing model alignment capabilities. This work underscores the potential of open-source
LMMs in self-critique and evaluation, setting the stage for
future research into scalable, superhuman alignment feedback mechanisms for LMMs.

follow a well-designed, itemized evaluation criterion to provide a score between 1 and 10 for rating different model responses in a visual chat task [24]. Along with the score, it
would also offer the associated reasoning behind the evaluation, ensuring transparency and consistency in assessing
model performance. In this paper, we present the first attempt to curate the instruction-following data particularly
for evaluation, based on which we develop a LMM, LLaVACritic. Two primary scenarios/goals of building LLaVACritic are highlighted:
• Scenario 1: LMM-as-a-Judge. Open-source LMMs that
can deliver reliable evaluation scores, comparable to or
surpassing proprietary models like GPT-4V [30]/-4o [32].
These models offer a free alternative to replace commercial GPT models in various evaluation benchmarks.
• Scenario 2: Preference Learning. A scalable solution
for generating effective reward signals, reducing the need
for costly human feedback collection. This approach enhances preference alignment with AI-generated feedback.
Our experimental results demonstrate that: (i) As a
judge model, the evaluation scores and rankings provided by LLaVA-Critic show a high correlation with commercial GPT models, making it a cost-effective alternative for model developers in resource-constrained settings; (ii) In preference learning, LLaVA-Critic offers AIgenerated feedback in iterative Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [35], outperforming the preference signals provided by the reward model in LLaVA-RLHF [38], which
relies on human feedback for training the reward model.

1. Introduction
The ability of learning to evaluate is increasingly taking
on a pivotal role in the development of modern large multimodal models (LMMs), as pre-training on existing web
data reaches maturity and the focus is shifting towards
post-training with AI-enhanced synthetic data, which shows
growing potential. Reliable AI evaluation is essential, not
only for offering scalable solutions to reduce human labor
in complex task assessments, but also for generating effective reward signals in reinforcement learning and guiding
inference-time search [31, 33, 36].
Existing LMMs have made tremendous progress in recent research community [17], primarily on improving the
performance of various real-world vision tasks in singleimage [3, 8, 24], multi-image [13, 19] and video scenarios [16, 22, 41]. It remains unexplored to develop open
LMMs to play the role of a judge and evaluate the performance of multimodal models. For instance, a model can
♡ Work collaborated with ByteDance

In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• Critic Instruction-Following Data: We present a highquality dataset tailored to follow instructions in complex
evaluation setting to provide quantitative judgment and
the corresponding reasoning process. It consists of 46k
images with 113k evaluation instruction samples, including both pointwise and pairwise evaluation settings.
• Large Multimodal Models: We develop LLaVA-Critic,
LMMs that expand the capabilities of open models to act
as critic, providing effective evaluation and feedback.

13618

