This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Filter Images First, Generate Instructions Later:
Pre-Instruction Data Selection for Visual Instruction Tuning
Bardia Safaei1* , Faizan Siddiqui2 , Jiacong Xu1 , Vishal M. Patel1 , Shao-Yuan Lo2
1

Johns Hopkins University, 2 Honda Research Institute USA

{bsafaei1, jxu155, vpatel36}@jhu.edu

{faizan siddiqui, shao-yuan lo}@honda-ri.com

Abstract
Visual instruction tuning (VIT) for large vision-language
models (LVLMs) requires training on expansive datasets of
image-instruction pairs, which can be costly. Recent efforts
in VIT data selection aim to select a small subset of highquality image-instruction pairs, reducing VIT runtime while
maintaining performance comparable to full-scale training.
However, a major challenge often overlooked is that generating instructions from unlabeled images 1 for VIT is highly
expensive. Most existing VIT datasets rely heavily on human annotations or paid services like the GPT API, which
limits users with constrained resources from creating VIT
datasets for custom applications. To address this, we introduce Pre-Instruction Data Selection (PreSel), a more
practical data selection paradigm that directly selects the
most beneficial unlabeled images and generates instructions
only for the selected images. PreSel first estimates the
relative importance of each vision task within VIT datasets
to derive task-wise sampling budgets. It then clusters image
features within each task, selecting the most representative
images with the budget. This approach reduces computational overhead for both instruction generation during VIT
data formation and LVLM fine-tuning. By generating instructions for only 15% of the images, PreSel achieves
performance comparable to full-data VIT on the LLaVA1.5 and Vision-Flan datasets. The link to our project page:
https://bardisafa.github.io/PreSel

1. Introduction
Recent advances in large vision-language models
(LVLMs) [2, 7, 21, 22, 49] have demonstrated remarkable
capabilities in complex multimodal reasoning and human
instruction following. Visual instruction tuning (VIT) is
a crucial stage in training LVLMs, enabling these models
1 Throughout the paper, we refer to images without corresponding
textual instructions as unlabeled images.
* This work was mostly done when B. Safaei was an intern at HRI-USA.

100%

Instruction Generation
GPT API

Unlabeled
Images

Humans

Instructions
Images

Selected
LVLM
Fine-tuning

100%

15%
Existing Data Selection on
(Image, Instruction) Pairs

Requires instruction generation
for 100% of images
100%
Unlabeled
Images

Selected Images
Our Pre-Instruction
Data Selection
Selected

LVLM
Fine-tuning

15%

Requires instruction generation
for 15% of images

15%

Instruction Generation
GPT API
Humans

Figure 1. Top: Existing VIT data selection methods assume access
to well-prepared VIT datasets in which all the images are already
annotated with instructions by costly resources, such as GPT API
and human labor. These methods require information on both
images and their instructions. Bottom: Our approach performs
selection directly on unlabeled images and then utilizes resources
to generate instructions exclusively for the selected images. Hence,
we not only enable faster fine-tuning but also significantly reduce
instruction generation costs (e.g., 15%).

to follow instructions and generalize across various tasks.
VIT datasets [22, 44, 46] contain visual instructions from
a diverse range of vision tasks, such as visual question
answering (VQA) [10, 27, 36], optical character recognition
(OCR) [29], visual grounding [13], captioning [37], etc. A
typical VIT sample is an image-instruction pair consisting
of an unlabeled image and instructions generated by human
labor or paid services such as the GPT API [1, 3, 32].
However, two key challenges arise with the current VIT
process: (1) Combining visual instructions from diverse

14247

