This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Category-Agnostic Neural Object Rigging
Guangzhao He1,∗,†
1

Chen Geng 1,∗

Shangzhe Wu1,2
2

Stanford University

University of Cambridge

Edit Blobs

Encoder
Blobs

Quadruped

Fish

Edited Blobs

Decoder

Edit Blobs

Encoder

Edited Result

Edited Blobs

Blobs

Glasses

Decoder

Edit Blobs

Encoder

Jiajun Wu1

Decoder
Edited Blobs

Blobs

Edited Result

Edited Result

Figure 1. We introduce Category-Agnostic Neural Object Rigging (CANOR), a novel approach that learns to discover a low-dimensional
pose space for dynamic objects. The representation is learned from animated 3D sequences of a deformable object category in an unsupervised fashion without relying on any category-specific expert knowledge. By decomposing each object’s geometry into a sparse set
of feature-embedded blobs, CANOR enables intuitive manipulation of object poses by editing the blobs. This representation captures
interpretable motion structures for a diverse range of dynamic object categories.

Abstract
The motion of deformable 4D objects lies in a lowdimensional manifold. To better capture the low dimensionality and enable better controllability, traditional methods
have devised several heuristic-based methods, i.e., rigging,
for manipulating dynamic objects in an intuitive fashion.
However, such representations are not scalable due to the
need for expert knowledge of specific categories. Instead,
we study the automatic exploration of such low-dimensional
structures in a purely data-driven manner. Specifically, we
design a novel representation that encodes deformable 4D
objects into a sparse set of spatially grounded blobs and an
instance-aware feature volume to disentangle the pose and
instance information of the 3D shape. With such a representation, we can manipulate the pose of 3D objects intuitively
by modifying the parameters of the blobs, while preserv-

ing rich instance-specific information. We evaluate the proposed method on a variety of object categories and demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework. Project
page: https://guangzhaohe.com/canor.

1. Introduction

∗ Equal contribution. † Work was done when G. He was a visiting student at Stanford University. G. He is currently with Zhejiang University.

We live in a dynamic 4D world populated by diverse, evermoving beings — not just humans, but also pets, wild animals, and other dynamic entities that can move and deform.
Modeling and understanding the structure of motion across
different categories of deformable objects has been a longstanding challenge in Computer Graphics and 3D Computer
Vision, with applications in character animation, 4D reconstruction, and AR/VR.
One fundamental property of the motion structure shared
by almost all dynamic objects is their inherent lowdimensionality, often captured using various rigging representations [31]. Historically, extensive efforts have been

22078

