This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BlobGEN-Vid: Compositional Text-to-Video Generation with Blob Video
Representations
Weixi Feng1

Chao Liu2
Sifei Liu2
William Yang Wang1
Arash Vahdat2
Weili Nie2
1

UC Santa Barbara

Abstract
Existing video generation models struggle to follow complex text prompts and synthesize multiple objects, raising
the need for additional grounding input for improved controllability. In this work, we propose to decompose videos
into visual primitives – blob video representation, a general
representation for controllable video generation. Based on
blob conditions, we develop a blob-grounded video diffusion model named BlobGEN-Vid that allows users to control object motions and fine-grained object appearance.
In particular, we introduce a masked 3D attention module that effectively improves regional consistency across
frames. In addition, we introduce a learnable module to
interpolate text embeddings so that users can control semantics in specific frames and obtain smooth object transitions. We show that our framework is model-agnostic and
can build BlobGEN-Vid on both U-Net and DiT-based video
diffusion models. Extensive experimental results show that
BlobGEN-Vid achieves superior zero-shot video generation
ability and state-of-the-art layout controllability on multiple benchmarks. When combined with an LLM for layout
planning, our framework even outperforms proprietary textto-video generators regarding compositional accuracy. Our
project page: blobgen-vid.github.io

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in text-to-video generation have enabled us to generate more realistic videos with high visual quality and intricate motions. These advancements are
driven by new model architectures [2, 12, 46], improved
training techniques [1, 4, 16] and large-scale video datasets
[6, 43]. Despite the progress, existing text-to-video models
still struggle to follow complex prompts, where they often
neglect key objects or confuse multiple objects as one concept. In addition, users cannot control semantic transitions
or camera motion with merely text descriptions with these

2

NVIDIA

models. Therefore, it remains an open challenge to enhance
the compositionality and controllability of video generators
with layout guidance in the diffusion process.
To resolve these challenges, recent studies propose to
condition video diffusion models on visual layouts. Since
a text prompt can be ambiguous in object locations and visual appearances, video generators often fail to generate
scenes with large motion or complex compositions. Additional grounding inputs can guide the generation process for enhanced controllability. These layouts are usually represented by bounding boxes moving across frames
[17, 20, 21, 39]. Compared to other modalities such as
depth or semantic maps [31, 49], bounding boxes are easier
to create while providing coarse-grained information about
local objects. However, 2D bounding boxes lack perspective invariance: the 3D counterpart of a 2D bounding box
on an image is not a 3D bounding box, and vice versa.
This makes it difficult to synthesize 3D scenes using models
grounded by bounding boxes.
In this work, we introduce a new type of visual layout
for video generation, named blob video representations, to
serve as grounding conditions. Each blob sequence corresponds to an object instance and can be automatically extracted from videos (or 3D scenes), making it a more general and robust representation for different visual domains.
Specifically, a blob video representation has two components: 1) the blob parameters, which formulate a tilted ellipse to specify the object’s location, size, and orientation,
and 2) the blob description, which is a free-form language
description of the object’s visual attributes. With this definition, our blob representation enables both motion and semantic control of visual compositions. It is also convenient
for users to create and manipulate such representations, as
the blob parameters can be represented as structured text.
While layout conditions have been widely studied in image generation [5, 18, 28, 49], directly applying these methods in video can lead to temporal inconsistency or compromised layout control [17]. Some recent studies have
adapted these conditions for video generation with new

12989

