This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Fairness in Multitask Learning:
A Performance-Driven Approach for Variance Reduction
Xiaohan Qin Xiaoxing Wang‡ Junchi Yan‡
School of Computer Science & School of Artificial Intelligience, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{galaxy-1,figure1 wxx,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
https://github.com/jianke0604/MTLlib

Abstract
Multi-task learning (MTL) can leverage shared knowledge
across tasks to improve data efficiency and generalization
performance, and has been applied in various scenarios.
However, task imbalance remains a major challenge for
existing MTL methods. While the prior works have attempted to mitigate inter-task unfairness through loss-based
and gradient-based strategies, they still exhibit imbalanced
performance across tasks on common benchmarks. This key
observation motivates us to consider performance-level information as an explicit fairness indicator, which can precisely reflect the current optimization status of each task,
and accordingly help to adjust the gradient aggregation
process. Specifically, we utilize the performance variance
among tasks as the fairness indicator and introduce a dynamic weighting strategy to gradually reduce the performance variance. Based on this, we propose PIVRG, a
novel performance-informed variance reduction gradient
aggregation approach. Extensive experiments show that
PIVRG achieves SOTA performance across various benchmarks, spanning both supervised learning and reinforcement learning tasks with task numbers ranging from 2 to 40.
Results from the ablation study also show that our approach
can be integrated into existing methods, significantly enhancing their performance while reducing the performance
variance among tasks, thus achieving fairer optimization.

tasks [5, 29, 36]. MTL is especially beneficial in scenarios where computational resources are limited, as it reduces the need for separate models for each task. Its applications span a variety of domains, such as computer vision [1, 26, 43], natural language processing [8, 25, 31],
and robotics [13, 37]. Despite its advantages, MTL faces
one major significant challenge: task imbalance, which describes the phenomenon where some tasks dominate the
learning process while others are under-optimized, leading
to degraded overall performance. Overcoming this challenge requires careful design of optimization strategies to
ensure that all tasks benefit equally from the shared model.
To address these issues, previous works have focused
on two primary approaches: loss-based and gradient-based
methods [24, 34]. Loss-based methods aggregate the losses
of different tasks by adjusting the loss scales, then backpropagate the total loss to compute gradients for shared parameters. These methods attempt to reflect the optimization
status of each task through their respective losses. However,
since tasks often use different loss functions (e.g., crossentropy for classification and L1 loss for regression), their
scales can differ significantly, making it hard to compare
or balance them directly. Gradient-based methods compute the gradient for each task separately and then aggregate these gradients using various algorithms to produce a
final update. Although these methods ensure that the gradient of each task is considered, relying on the gradients
to represent optimization fairness can be misleading at certain stages of the optimization process. For instance, the
gradient approaches zero at a local minimum, while the optimization state may still be suboptimal. Additionally, these
methods typically aim to equalize the task gradients at the
shared layers [9, 24], but can not guarantee the balance in
the training progress because the difficulty of tasks may differ. Easier tasks may converge quickly, while difficult tasks
require more time to optimize [16]. As a result, considering
only gradients can overlook differences in task difficulty,
making it insufficient to ensure balance across all tasks.
A clear illustration of the issues above can be observed

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) [7, 32, 42] is an approach where
a single model is trained to solve multiple tasks simultaneously. This paradigm allows tasks to share information
and representations, which can enhance the generalization
capabilities of the model and improve performance across
‡ Corresponding author. This work was partly supported by NSFC
(62222607) and Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major
Project under Grant 2021SHZDZX0102.

20492

