This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ERUPT: Efficient Rendering with Unposed Patch Transformer
Maxim V. Shugaev*
Vincent Chen*
Maxim Karrenbach†
Kyle Ashley*
Bridget Kennedy*
Naresh P. Cuntoor*
*
†
BlueHalo
Carnegie Mellon University
maxim.shugaev@bluehalo.com

Abstract

lem, which is central to both the NeRF and Gaussian Splatting frameworks, is that a new network or a set of Gaussians must be trained for each scene. This requires significant training time and limits the model’s ability to incorporate prior knowledge in cases such as limited input views
or large camera shifts. Several methods have been introduced to reduce this scene dependency, by including depth
[8], normal [32], semantic [5] and other priors to use information from external data as a basis for learning a particular
scene. Yet the problem remains that these frameworks are
generally unable to perform novel view synthesis without
training on a sufficiently large number of input views and
associated camera information for each new scene.
More recent work has explored techniques for generalized 3D reconstruction with limited imagery using a latent
scene representations transformer (SRT) [28] and learnable
pose estimator (RUST) [27] to reduce reliance on precise
camera poses. By training on large and diverse datasets
these models learn to reconstruct arbitrary scenes using
fewer images and limited camera pose information.
While SRT allows images to be queried directly using
an arbitrary camera pose, it does not provide a mechanism
for learning from unposed target views. This makes it difficult to apply in datasets where ground truth camera pose
is noisy or unknown. RUST addresses this limitation using
a learnable pose estimator but requires a portion of the target image to query the model, which limits control of the
camera at inference. Both methods require significant compute during training and inference using individual queries
to the decoder for each pixel in the rendered images. Furthermore, existing benchmark datasets of sufficient scale are
either composed of synthetic data (MSN) or are proprietary
datasets not available to the public, making verification and
real-world application of these techniques difficult.
To address these limitations we propose ERUPT, a computationally effective approach for novel view synthesis
trained on posed and unposed target images, providing direct camera control at inference. Our model includes a
learnable latent camera pose which is sampled in conjunction with sparse ground truth pose to address cases of sparse

This work addresses the problem of novel view synthesis in
diverse scenes from small collections of RGB images. We
propose ERUPT (Efficient Rendering with Unposed Patch
Transformer) a state-of-the-art scene reconstruction model
capable of efficient scene rendering using unposed imagery.
We introduce patch-based querying, in contrast to existing
pixel-based queries, to reduce the compute required to render a target view. This makes our model highly efficient
both during training and at inference, capable of rendering
at 600 fps on commercial hardware. Notably, our model is
designed to use a learned latent camera pose which allows
for training using unposed targets in datasets with sparse
or inaccurate ground truth camera pose. We show that our
approach can generalize on large real-world data and introduce a new benchmark dataset (MSVS-1M) for latent view
synthesis using street-view imagery collected from Mapillary. In contrast to NeRF and Gaussian Splatting, which
require dense imagery and precise metadata, ERUPT can
render novel views of arbitrary scenes with as few as five
unposed input images. ERUPT achieves better rendered
image quality than current state-of-the-art methods for unposed image synthesis tasks, reduces labeled data requirements by 95% and decreases computational requirements
by an order of magnitude, providing efficient novel view synthesis for diverse real-world scenes.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D scene representation from a few images
is a fundamental challenge in computer vision with widereaching applications in navigation, robotics, and augmented reality. Recent advances in learning implicit (e.g.
NeRF [21]) and explicit (e.g. Gaussian Splatting [13]) scene
representation have shown impressive capability in rendering high-fidelity, novel views of complex environments.
These models typically rely on dense imagery with precise
camera pose to reconstruct highly accurate models which
can render novel views of the scene. However, one prob-

6057

