This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Personalization of Quantized Diffusion Model without Backpropagation
Hoigi Seo∗1
Wongi Jeong∗1
Kyungryeol Lee1
Se Young Chun1,2†
1
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2 INMC & IPAI
Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
{seohoiki3215, wg7139, kr.lee, sychun}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

framework for high-quality, diverse data generation. Diffusion models have shown impressive capabilities across various applications, including image synthesis [22, 36, 43, 54–
56, 62], text-guided image synthesis [9, 15, 44, 48, 49],
video generation [4, 23, 24, 26, 37], and 3D content generation [31, 34, 45, 53, 61], outperforming traditional generative approaches. However, modern diffusion models face
significant memory and computational costs during training, fine-tuning, and inference due to their size.

Diffusion models have shown remarkable performance
in image synthesis, but they demand extensive computational and memory resources for training, fine-tuning and
inference. Although advanced quantization techniques have
successfully minimized memory usage for inference, training and fine-tuning these quantized models still require
large memory possibly due to dequantization for accurate computation of gradients and/or backpropagation for
gradient-based algorithms. However, memory-efficient finetuning is particularly desirable for applications such as personalization that often must be run on edge devices like mobile phones with private data. In this work, we address this
challenge by quantizing a diffusion model with personalization via Textual Inversion and by leveraging a zeroth-order
optimization on personalization tokens without dequantization so that it does not require gradient and activation storage for backpropagation that consumes considerable memory. Since a gradient estimation using zeroth-order optimization is quite noisy for a single or a few images in
personalization, we propose to denoise the estimated gradient by projecting it onto a subspace that is constructed
with the past history of the tokens, dubbed Subspace Gradient. In addition, we investigated the influence of text
embedding in image generation, leading to our proposed
time steps sampling, dubbed Partial Uniform Timestep Sampling for sampling with effective diffusion timesteps. Our
method achieves comparable performance to prior methods
in image and text alignment scores for personalizing Stable
Diffusion with only forward passes while reducing training memory demand up to 8.2×. Project page: https:
//ignoww.github.io/ZOODiP_project/

These overheads pose major challenges in personalization tasks, which require fine-tuning diffusion models with
only a few user-provided images. Typically, personalization is achieved by either fine-tuning the denoising network [20, 29, 50, 51, 59, 63] or introducing new text tokens [1, 17, 29, 41, 60, 66] to represent desired subjects.
However, both approaches require gradient-based optimization, leading to significant memory and computational
overhead, which is especially problematic in memoryconstrained on-device training for sensitive data. To tackle
the overheads in personalization, efficient tuning techniques
have emerged. Existing methods reduce trainable parameters [20, 29, 51, 59, 63], leverage quantized models [27, 52],
or employ gradient-free optimization with evolution strategy [16]. However, these methods have limitations: 1) they
mostly rely on backpropagation, unsuitable for most mobile
processors, which are designed to accelerate inference [46];
2) they still require significant memory for storing activations and gradients; 3) evolutionary algorithms can be unstable and inefficient in small-batch [11, 21].
Here we propose Zeroth-Order Optimization for Diffusion model Personalization (ZOODiP) that can personalize
Stable Diffusion with 2.37GB VRAM consumption using
only forward passes without compromising the image quality. Our method relies on three key observations: First,
Zeroth-Order (ZO) optimization effectively handles nondifferentiable objectives [38] (e.g., accuracy) during training. Second, tokens optimized via Textual Inversion [17]
undergo significant changes in a low-dimensional subspace.
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on the token embeddings reveals that the initial and personalized tokens pri-

1. Introduction
Recent advances in diffusion models [22, 54, 56, 57, 62]
have revolutionized generative AI, offering a powerful
* Authors contributed equally. † Corresponding author.

7717

