This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpiritSight Agent: Advanced GUI Agent with One Look
Zhiyuan Huang1
Ziming Cheng1,2 *
Junting Pan3
Zhaohui Hou1
Mingjie Zhan1
1
SenseTime Research, 2 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 3 MMLab, CUHK
{huangzhiyuan, houzhaohui, zhanmingjie}@sensetime.com
harrytheorange@bupt.edu.cn

junting.pa@gmail.com

Abstract
Graphical User Interface (GUI) agents demonstrate
promising potential in assisting human-computer interaction, automating human user’s navigation on digital devices. An ideal GUI agent is expected to achieve high accuracy, low latency, and compatibility for different GUI
platforms. Recent vision-based approaches have shown
promise by leveraging advanced Vision Language Models (VLMs). While they generally meet the requirements
of compatibility and low latency, these vision-based GUI
agents tend to have low accuracy due to their limitations
in element grounding. To address this issue, we propose
SpiritSight, a vision-based, end-to-end GUI agent that excels in GUI navigation tasks across various GUI platforms.
First, we create a multi-level, large-scale, high-quality GUI
dataset called GUI-Lasagne using scalable methods, empowering SpiritSight with robust GUI understanding and
grounding capabilities. Second, we introduce the Universal Block Parsing (UBP) method to resolve the ambiguity
problem inherited from the dynamic resolution strategy, further enhancing SpiritSight’s ability to ground GUI objects.
Through these efforts, SpiritSight agent outperforms other
advanced methods on diverse GUI benchmarks, demonstrating its superior capability and compatibility in GUI
navigation tasks. The models and code will be made available upon publication.

Figure 1. Our SpiritSight agent achieves new state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance across various benchmarks in web, mobile,
and desktop scenarios.

1. Introduction

ment and user’s instruction.
Current approaches can be divided into three categories based on their input modalities. Language-based
and vision-based approaches use Hyper Text Markup Language (HTML) or Extensible Markup Language (XML) and
screenshots as input [7, 11, 13, 19, 22, 26, 28, 53, 68, 75],
respectively, while vision-language-based approaches combine both HTML and screenshots as input [15, 24, 52, 74].
The language-based and vision-language-based methods
typically applied only in the web domain, and are often
limited by the excessive length of HTML or security concerns [34, 61, 71]. The vision-based approaches exhibit
compatibility across various GUI platforms, as acquiring
screenshots is generally easier than obtaining hierarchical
data from non-web platforms.
However, vision-based approaches struggle to ground
GUI elements (e.g. buttons, text boxes) from the visual

Graphical User Interface (GUI) automation has long been
pursued by people along with the development of modern
digital devices. Thanks to recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs), GUI agents are constructed to assist
users in interacting with graphical interfaces, automatically
making action decisions based on observations of environ* Equal contribution.

29490

