This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Augmenting Multimodal LLMs with Self-Reflective Tokens for
Knowledge-based Visual Question Answering
Federico Cocchi∗1,2 , Nicholas Moratelli∗1 , Marcella Cornia1 , Lorenzo Baraldi1 , Rita Cucchiara1,3
1
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy
2
University of Pisa, Italy 3 IIT-CNR, Italy
{name.surname}@unimore.it

Visual Tokens
Image
Encoder

Abstract

Answer

+

ReflectiVA

ReflectiVA

Image
Encoder

Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) are the natural extension of
large language models to handle multimodal inputs, combining text and image data. They have recently garnered attention due to their capability to address complex tasks involving both modalities. However, their effectiveness is limited
to the knowledge acquired during training, which restricts
their practical utility. In this work, we introduce a novel
method to enhance the adaptability of MLLMs by integrating
external knowledge sources. Our proposed model, Reflective
LLaVA (ReflectiVA), utilizes reflective tokens to dynamically
determine the need for external knowledge and predict the
relevance of information retrieved from an external database.
Tokens are trained following a two-stage two-model training
recipe. This ultimately enables the MLLM to manage external knowledge while preserving fluency and performance
on tasks where external knowledge is not needed. Through
our experiments, we demonstrate the efficacy of ReflectiVA
for knowledge-based visual question answering, highlighting its superior performance compared to existing methods.
Source code and trained models are publicly available at
https://aimagelab.github.io/ReflectiVA.

Question

.
.
.

Question

Image
Encoder

Visual Tokens

Question

Passages
Answer

ReflectiVA

Figure 1. Overview of ReflectiVA, which employs reflective tokens
for knowledge-based visual question answering. Our model learns
to predict the need of retrieving data from an external knowledge
source (top), classifies the relevance of each retrieved item (middle)
and generate the final answer based on relevant items (bottom).

innovations [2, 40, 72], and novel training recipes [34, 46].
What most existing MLLMs share, though, is their exclusive reliance on the knowledge learned at training time – an
issue that severely limits their practical applicability to cases
that adhere to the training distribution. While this issue is
also common to LLMs, it becomes more pressing in the case
of MLLMs, where obtaining high-quality and large-scale
multimodal data becomes even more difficult. Ideally, indeed, an MLLM should be capable of engaging in dialogues
concerning specific visual details, long-tail knowledge, finegrained categories, and instances [12, 51]. However, this
type of knowledge makes it hard for MLLMs to encode in
their parameters because such long-tail information occurs
rarely in the training data. Additionally, this lack of precise
knowledge can also lead the MLLM to generate incorrect
answers, thus again limiting their usage in practical cases.
A viable solution to this issue is to rely on a nonparametric approach, where content from external knowledge sources is incorporated into the MLLM context, con-

1. Introduction
While the past few years have seen a surge of Large Language Models (LLMs) with increasing fluency and reasoning
capabilities [6, 57, 66], thanks to the availability of largescale training data and novel training techniques [14, 31, 54],
the Computer Vision community has recently started extending the capabilities of such models beyond pure text, with
the inclusion of additional modalities like images, video, and
3D data. The resulting emergence of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) has been characterized by the development of models targeting multiple tasks [8, 24, 64] – ranging from visual dialogue to image generation –, architectural
∗ Equal contribution.

9199

