This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reconstructing In-the-Wild Open-Vocabulary Human-Object Interactions
Boran Wen1,2 Dingbang Huang1 Zichen Zhang1 Jiahong Zhou1 Jianbin Deng1
Jingyu Gong3 Yulong Chen1 * Lizhuang Ma1 * Yong-Lu Li1,2 *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute, 3 East China Normal University

{wenboran, 2331970490, zhoujiahong, 13610214637, deng4a42}@sjtu.edu.cn
{llong c, lzma, yonglu li}@sjtu.edu.cn, jygong@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Reconstructing human-object interactions (HOI) from single images is fundamental in computer vision. Existing
methods are primarily trained and tested on indoor scenes
due to the lack of 3D data, particularly constrained by
the object variety, making it challenging to generalize to
real-world scenes with a wide range of objects. The limitations of previous 3D HOI datasets were primarily due
to the difficulty in acquiring 3D object assets. However,
with the development of 3D reconstruction from single images, recently it has become possible to reconstruct various objects from 2D HOI images. We therefore propose
a pipeline for annotating fine-grained 3D humans, objects, and their interactions from single images. We annotated 2.5k+ 3D HOI assets from existing 2D HOI datasets
and built the first open-vocabulary in-the-wild 3D HOI
dataset Open3DHOI, to serve as a future test set. Moreover, we design a novel Gaussian-HOI optimizer, which efficiently reconstructs the spatial interactions between humans and objects while learning the contact regions. Besides the 3D HOI reconstruction, we also propose several
new tasks for 3D HOI understanding to pave the way for
future work. Data and code will be publicly available at
https://wenboran2002.github.io/3dhoi/.

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) is an important area in
action understanding, with numerous datasets and methods proposed. In the 2D HOI domain, large-scale image
datasets such as HICO-DET [49] and HAKE [20] have been
* Corresponding authors.
1 Boran Wen and Yong-Lu Li are with the School of Artificial Intelli-

gence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and the Zhiyuan College, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University.
2 Zichen Zhang, Jiahong Zhou, Jianbin Deng, Yulong Chen, and
Lizhuang Ma are with the School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University.

introduced. For 3D HOI, datasets like BEHAVE [2] and
InterCap [12] have also been proposed to study human interactions with objects in 3D. Despite achieving promising
results in open-vocabulary and in-the-wild scenarios within
2D HOI, the 3D HOI field faces challenges in generalizing
existing methods to real-world images due to dataset limitations and the lack of 3D open-world HOI data.
In 3D HOI, many datasets have been introduced.
Datasets such as BEHAVE [2], InterCap [12], ImHOI [52],
and PROX-S [53] provide multi-view RGBD sequences and
3D annotations in indoor scenes. Though datasets like
WildHOI and 3DIR [13, 47] are constructed from in-thewild images, they contain limited object categories and unreal CAD objects. To better understand 3D HOIs and apply
them to the real world, we need to collect more realistic
and diverse data on interactions with objects. Thus, in this
work, we propose a novel 3D HOI annotation method for
real-world images of any objects and interactions.
In detail, we built our annotation pipeline on two bases:
1) Existing 2D HOI datasets provide rich 2D annotations,
including bounding boxes, and a wide variety of objects
and actions. This diversity creates the potential for reconstructing 3D assets from 2D HOI images. 2) The development of existing image-based 3D object/human reconstruction techniques. We selected images with contact interactions from existing 2D HOI datasets, e.g., HAKE [20]
and SWIG-HOI [40]. Next, we used InstantMesh [43] and
OSX [23] to reconstruct the objects and the human body respectively and designed an algorithm for automatically reconstructing rough 3D interactions. Furthermore, we developed two annotation tools: one for filtering the reconstruction quality and the other for annotating 3D spatial positions. We manually annotated over 2.5k+ images to create
an open-vocabulary, in-the-wild HOI dataset, as the test set
for future 3D HOI studies and designed tasks and metrics
to evaluate their performance. It consists of 370 3D humanobject pairs, 2,561 objects in 133 categories, and 3,671 interactions in 120 categories.
Given the new dataset, we also proposed a training-free

17426

