This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PanSplat: 4K Panorama Synthesis with Feed-Forward Gaussian Splatting

3

ETH Zurich

Input Views

Output Novel View

Cheng Zhang1,2 Haofei Xu3 Qianyi Wu1 *
Camilo Cruz Gambardella1,2 Dinh Phung1 Jianfei Cai1
1
Monash University 2 Building 4.0 CRC, Caulfield East, Victoria, Australia

Trained on 4K panorama rendering of Matterport3D

Fine-tuned on real data and generalize to self-captured panoramas

Figure 1. Our PanSplat can generate novel views from two 4K (2048 → 4096) panoramas. We train on rendered Matterport3D [11]
data at 4K resolution (left) and can generalize to 4K real-world data (right) with a few fine-tunings on 360Loc [30] data (Zoom in for
details). Please refer to the supplementary video for more results.

Abstract
With the advent of portable 360° cameras, panorama has
gained significant attention in applications like virtual reality (VR), virtual tours, robotics, and autonomous driving. As a result, wide-baseline panorama view synthesis
has emerged as a vital task, where high resolution, fast
inference, and memory efficiency are essential. Nevertheless, existing methods are typically constrained to lower
resolutions (512 → 1024) due to demanding memory and
computational requirements. In this paper, we present
PanSplat, a generalizable, feed-forward approach that efficiently supports resolution up to 4K (2048 → 4096). Our
approach features a tailored spherical 3D Gaussian pyramid with a Fibonacci lattice arrangement, enhancing image quality while reducing information redundancy. To accommodate the demands of high resolution, we propose a
pipeline that integrates a hierarchical spherical cost volume
and Gaussian heads with local operations, enabling twostep deferred backpropagation for memory-efficient train-

ing on a single A100 GPU. Experiments demonstrate that
PanSplat achieves state-of-the-art results with superior efficiency and image quality across both synthetic and realworld datasets. Code is available at https://github.
com/chengzhag/PanSplat.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.

The demand for rich visual content for virtual reality (VR)
and virtual tours has surged alongside the rise of 360° cameras and immersive technologies. Panoramic light field systems [9, 52] offer compelling solutions for delivering realistic, immersive experiences, by enabling users to explore
environments from a range of arbitrary viewpoints within
designated virtual spaces. Recent advancements in 360°
cameras simplify immersive content creation, driving applications like street view (Google Maps [3], Apple Maps [1])
and virtual tours (Matterport [4], Theasys [5]), where novel
view synthesis from wide-baseline panoramas is essential
for providing smooth transitions between locations.
In recent years, deep learning has driven advancements
in medical imaging [54, 70] and robotics [10, 37–41], while

11437

