This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OSMamba: Omnidirectional Spectral Mamba with Dual-Domain Prior
Generator for Exposure Correction
Gehui Li1,∗
Bin Chen1,∗
Chen Zhao3,†
Lei Zhang4,5
Jian Zhang1,2
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology,
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
3
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
4
5
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
OPPO Research Institute
{ligehui921, chenbin}@stu.pku.edu.cn
cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

chen.zhao@kaust.edu.sa
zhangjian.sz@pku.edu.cn

Incorrectly Exposed Image
FFT

Abstract

Amplitude

Exposure correction is a fundamental problem in computer
vision and image processing. Recently, frequency domainbased methods have achieved impressive improvement, yet
they still struggle with complex real-world scenarios under
extreme exposure conditions. This is due to the local convolutional receptive fields failing to model long-range dependencies in the spectrum, and the non-generative learning paradigm being inadequate for retrieving lost details
from severely degraded regions. In this paper, we propose
Omnidirectional Spectral Mamba (OSMamba), a novel exposure correction network that incorporates the advantages
of state space models and generative diffusion models to
address these limitations. Specifically, OSMamba introduces an omnidirectional spectral scanning mechanism that
adapts Mamba to the frequency domain to capture comprehensive long-range dependencies in both the amplitude and
phase spectra of deep image features, hence enhancing illumination correction and structure recovery. Furthermore,
we develop a dual-domain prior generator that learns from
well-exposed images to generate a degradation-free diffusion prior containing correct information about severely
under- and over-exposed regions for better detail restoration. Extensive experiments on multiple-exposure and
mixed-exposure datasets demonstrate that the proposed OSMamba achieves state-of-the-art performance both quantitatively and qualitatively. Our code and models can be
found at https://github.com/cvsym/OSMamba.

Phase

Incorrectly Exposed Image
FFT
Amplitude

Random Noise

Phase

Dual-Domain
Prior Generator
Convolution Kernel

Omnidirectional Spectral Scan

Local Receptive Field

Global Receptive Field

Convolution

(a) Previous

Diffusion Prior Injection

Omnidirectional Spectral Mamba

(b) Proposed

Figure 1. Comparison of OSMamba with previous methods.
(a) Previous frequency-domain approaches (e.g., [29]) process
spectrum with convolutions, limited by local receptive fields. (b)
Proposed OSMamba enjoys global receptive field by using omnidirectional spectral scanning. It also leverages a dual-domain prior
generator to generate and inject diffusion prior into the network.

tions, inherent limitations of capturing devices, and potential operator errors [1, 5, 42]. For example, under-exposure
occurs when image details are obscured in shadows, significantly reducing contrast and clarity; over-exposure can
lead to saturation in highlight areas, resulting in irreversible
loss of important details. These issues severely affect image quality and can also impact many applications including but not limited to visual recognition [12, 34, 48] and
video processing [7, 33, 63]. Consequently, exposure correction [1, 6, 56] has been a critical problem in computer
vision, attracting widespread attention from researchers.
In the past decade, many low-light enhancement methods [11, 45, 57, 58, 64, 65] have been developed. They usually assume that input images are purely under-exposed and
employ the Retinex theory [50] to decompose images into
illumination and reflectance components for separate processing. However, these methods falter when faced with
multi-exposure conditions. The emergence of deep networks [8–10, 41, 51, 67] has changed the field of exposure
correction by enabling end-to-end learning for directly predicting corrected results from inputs. Notably, recent meth-

1. Introduction
In real-world scenarios, images often suffer from under- or
over-exposure due to complex and variable lighting condi∗ Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Author.

7480

