This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoboSense: Large-scale Dataset and Benchmark for Egocentric Robot
Perception and Navigation in Crowded and Unstructured Environments
Haisheng Su1,2 Feixiang Song2 Cong Ma2 Wei Wu2,3 Junchi Yan1( )
1
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
SenseAuto Research, 3 Tsinghua University
Code & Dataset: SenseAuto & SJTU-ReThinkLab/RoboSense
Abstract
Reliable embodied perception from an egocentric perspective is challenging yet essential for autonomous navigation technology of intelligent mobile agents. With the
growing demand of social robotics, near-field scene understanding becomes an important research topic in the
areas of egocentric perceptual tasks related to navigation
in both crowded and unstructured environments. Due to
the complexity of environmental conditions and difficulty
of surrounding obstacles owing to truncation and occlusion, the perception capability under this circumstance is
still inferior. To further enhance the intelligence of mobile robots, in this paper, we setup an egocentric multisensor data collection platform based on 3 main types of
sensors (Camera, LiDAR and Fisheye), which supports flexible sensor configurations to enable dynamic sight of view
from ego-perspective, capturing either near or farther areas. Meanwhile, a large-scale multimodal dataset is constructed, named RoboSense, to facilitate egocentric robot
perception. Specifically, RoboSense contains more than
133K synchronized data with 1.4M 3D bounding box and
IDs annotated in the full 360◦ view, forming 216K trajectories across 7.6K temporal sequences. It has 270× and 18×
as many annotations of surrounding obstacles within near
ranges as the previous datasets collected for autonomous
driving scenarios such as KITTI and nuScenes. Moreover,
we define a novel matching criterion for near-field 3D perception and prediction metrics. Based on RoboSense, we
formulate 6 popular tasks to facilitate the future research
development, where the detailed analysis as well as benchmarks are also provided accordingly. Data desensitization
measures have been conducted for privacy protection.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant progress achieved
in the field of autonomous driving, enabling numerous intelCorresponding author. yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn

Camera Surround View

Splicing LiDAR Points

Fisheye Surround View

BEV

Occupancy

Figure 1. An example from RoboSense dataset: The data with annotated 3D boxes and occupancy descriptions on Camera, Fisheye,
LiDAR, and BEV respectively, where the same targets are associated with unique IDs across different devices and timestamps.

ligent vehicles running on highway or urban areas. In addition to self-driving cars, social mobile robots have emerged
as a new industry tailored to autonomous navigation for typical applications, such as tractor, sweeper, retail and delivery. Notably, such intelligent mobile agents usually operate and navigate in crowded and unstructured environments (i.e., campuses, scenic spots, streets, parks and sidewalks, etc.), with varying and uncontrolled natural conditions such as illumination, occlusion and obstruction. In order to achieve navigation tasks safely, egocentric perceptual
solutions enable these robots to perceive and comprehend
the surrounding context from a first-person view, so as to
interact successfully with passby pedestrians and vehicles,
predict their intentions and incorporate this information in
agents’ planning and decision reasoning process.
To evaluate and compare different egocentric perceptual
methods fairly, several standarized benchmarks [3, 7, 13,
25, 32, 38] have been proposed in recent years, advancing the development of modern data-driven approaches.
KITTI [7] is a pioneering dataset providing multi-modal
sensor data including front-view LiDAR pointclouds as
well as corresponding stereo images and GPS / IMU data.
nuScenes [3] constructs a multi-sensor dataset collected in

27446

