This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Binarized Mamba-Transformer for Lightweight Quad Bayer HybridEVS
Demosaicing
Shiyang Zhou1 * Haijin Zeng2 * Yunfan Lu3 Tong Shao1
Ke Tang1 Yongyong Chen1† Jie Liu1 Jingyong Su1†
1
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) 2 Harvard University
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Guangzhou

Abstract
Quad Bayer demosaicing is the central challenge for enabling the widespread application of Hybrid Event-based Vision Sensors (HybridEVS). Although existing learning-based
methods that leverage long-range dependency modeling have
achieved promising results, their complexity severely limits deployment on mobile devices for real-world applications. To address these limitations, we propose a lightweight
Mamba-based binary neural network designed for efficient
and high-performing demosaicing of HybridEVS RAW images. First, to effectively capture both global and local
dependencies, we introduce a hybrid Binarized MambaTransformer architecture that combines the strengths of the
Mamba and Swin Transformer architectures. Next, to significantly reduce computational complexity, we propose a
binarized Mamba (Bi-Mamba), which binarizes all projections while retaining the core Selective Scan in full precision. Bi-Mamba also incorporates additional global visual information to enhance global context and mitigate
precision loss. We conduct quantitative and qualitative experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of BMTNet in
both performance and computational efficiency, providing
a lightweight demosaicing solution suited for real-world
edge devices. Our codes and models are available at
https://github.com/Clausy9/BMTNet.

R

R

Bayer
Quad Bayer
HybridEVS
Figure 1. Up-left: PSNR and parameters comparisons of our BMTNet and other BNNs on MIPI dataset. Up-right: PSNR and Parameters comparisons of our BMTNet and other FP methods on MIPI
dataset. Down: CFA comparisons between Bayer, Quad Bayer, and
Quad Bayer HybridEVS. Event pixel appears as a mixed color.

recent studies [51, 56] have shown that non-Bayer color
filter arrays (CFAs), like Quad Bayer, make great success
in low-light scenes on mobile devices with limited sensors.
These features make the Quad Bayer HybridEVS camera a
cutting-edge device. However, despite its significant advantages in dynamic scenarios and low light conditions, it faces
challenges in image demosaicing due to its limited sensor
size, the complexity of the Quad Bayer CFA, and color loss
caused by event pixels, as shown in Figure 1.
Recently, with the development of mobile imaging, artificial intelligence image signal processors (AI-ISPs) have
become crucial for enhancing imaging quality on mobile
devices. Specifically, for the critically demosaicing process, deep learning methods provide a strong fitting ability to reconstruct full RGB images from degraded mosaic
images, significantly improving restoration result and overcoming artifacts and aliasing issues on Quad Bayer CFA
sensors [1, 65]. Although existing methods have demonstrated the effectiveness of deep learning in demosaicing,

1. Introduction
By integrating traditional frame-based imaging with eventbased detection, the Quad Bayer HybridEVS camera [21]
has been designed as an advanced type of event camera for
next-generation mobile phones. This integration captures detailed spatial information and high-speed temporal changes,
offering superior performance in dynamic environments by
effectively detecting motion and rapid events. Moreover,
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

8817

