This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FluxSpace: Disentangled Semantic Editing in Rectified Flow Models
Yusuf Dalva

Kavana Venkatesh
Virginia Tech

Pinar Yanardag

https://fluxspace.github.io

Original

Dragon

Original

Baby

Original

Eyeglasses

Beard

Original

Alien

Original

Female

Original

Truck

Cabrio Car

Original

Smile

Original

Comics Style

Original

Remove Crowd

Raining

Figure 1. FluxSpace. We propose a text-guided image editing approach on rectified flow transformers [15], such as Flux. Our method
can generalize to semantic edits on different domains such as humans, animals, cars, and extends to even more complex scenes such as
an image of a street (third row, last example). FluxSpace can apply edits described as keywords (e.g. “truck” for transforming a car into
a truck) and offers disentangled editing capabilities that do not require manually provided masks to target a specific aspect in the original
image. In addition, our method does not require any training and can apply the desired edit during inference time.

Abstract
Rectified flow models have emerged as a dominant approach in image generation, showcasing impressive capabilities in high-quality image synthesis. However, despite
their effectiveness in visual generation, rectified flow models often struggle with disentangled editing of images. This
limitation prevents the ability to perform precise, attributespecific modifications without affecting unrelated aspects of
the image. In this paper, we introduce FluxSpace, a domainagnostic image editing method leveraging a representation
space with the ability to control the semantics of images
generated by rectified flow transformers, such as Flux. By
leveraging the representations learned by the transformer
blocks within the rectified flow models, we propose a set
of semantically interpretable representations that enable a

wide range of image editing tasks, from fine-grained image
editing to artistic creation. This work offers a scalable and
effective image editing approach, along with its disentanglement capabilities.

1. Introduction

13083

Recent research aimed at enhancing the interpretability
of generative models has increasingly focused on disentangled editing capabilities, which allows precise control
over specific features or attributes within generated images [21, 43, 45]. These capabilities are crucial for understanding and manipulating the outputs of generative models, such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and
multi-step diffusion models like Stable Diffusion. In singlestep models such as GANs [18], the editing process is

