This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoboPEPP: Vision-Based Robot Pose and Joint Angle Estimation
through Embedding Predictive Pre-Training
Raktim Gautam Goswami1 * Prashanth Krishnamurthy1

Yann LeCun2,3

Farshad Khorrami1

1

2

New York University Tandon School of Engineering
New York University Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences 3 Meta-FAIR
Abstract

Vision-based pose estimation of articulated robots with
unknown joint angles has applications in collaborative
robotics and human-robot interaction tasks. Current frameworks use neural network encoders to extract image features and downstream layers to predict joint angles and
robot pose. While images of robots inherently contain rich
information about the robot’s physical structures, existing
methods often fail to leverage it fully; therefore, limiting
performance under occlusions and truncations. To address
this, we introduce RoboPEPP, a method that fuses information about the robot’s physical model into the encoder using a masking-based self-supervised embedding-predictive
architecture. Specifically, we mask the robot’s joints and
pre-train an encoder-predictor model to infer the joints’ embeddings from surrounding unmasked regions, enhancing
the encoder’s understanding of the robot’s physical model.
The pre-trained encoder-predictor pair, along with joint angle and keypoint prediction networks, is then fine-tuned for
pose and joint angle estimation. Random masking of input
during fine-tuning and keypoint filtering during evaluation
further improves robustness. Our method, evaluated on several datasets, achieves the best results in robot pose and
joint angle estimation while being the least sensitive to occlusions and requiring the lowest execution time. The code
is available at https://github.com/raktimgg/RoboPEPP.

Figure 1. Comparison of an existing robot pose estimation
method [4] with our RoboPEPP framework. RoboPEPP integrates
joint masking-based pre-training (b.1) to enhance the encoder’s
grasp of the robot’s physical model, combined with downstream
networks, and keypoint filtering (b.2) to achieve high accuracy.

ers [11, 12, 24] attached to the robot’s end-effector to establish 2D-3D correspondences between the image pixels and
the robot’s frame. Recent advancements in deep learning
enable the prediction of 2D keypoints on robot joints from
a single image [13, 17, 23, 33]. However, the assumption
of known joint angles is not valid in many practical settings
such as in collaborative robotics and human-robot interaction, where the joint angles may be unreliable or completely
unknown. This challenge of simultaneously estimating joint
angles and robot poses is particularly complex due to the
high degrees of freedom in robotic systems and the infinite space of potential robot poses and joint angle configurations. RoboPose [15] pioneered the field of robot pose
estimation with unknown joints by using an iterative render-

1. Introduction
Estimating the pose and joint angles of an articulated robot
in the coordinate frame of an external camera is valuable
for facilitating collaborative applications wherein an agent
(e.g., a human or another robot) operates in a shared space
with the articulated robot [9, 19, 25, 28, 31, 35]. Traditional robot pose estimation methods assume known joint
angles and capture multiple images with fiducial mark* Corresponding author: rgg9769@nyu.edu. This paper is supported in part by the Army Research Office under grant number W911NF21-1-0155 and by the New York University Abu Dhabi (NYUAD) Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, funded by Tamkeen under the
NYUAD Research Institute Award CG010.

6930

