This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D3 : Scaling Up Deepfake Detection by Learning from Discrepancy
Yongqi Yang1 ,* Zhihao Qian1∗ , Ye Zhu2 , Olga Russakovsky2 , Yu Wu1†
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, 2 Department of Computer Science, Princeton University

{yongqiyang, qianzhihao, wuyucs}@whu.edu.cn, {yezhu, olgarus}@princeton.edu

Abstract
The boom of Generative AI brings opportunities entangled
with risks and concerns. Existing literature emphasizes
the generalization capability of deepfake detection on unseen generators, significantly promoting the detector’s ability to identify more universal artifacts. This work seeks
a step toward a universal deepfake detection system with
better generalization and robustness. We do so by first
scaling up the existing detection task setup from the onegenerator to multiple-generators in training, during which
we disclose two challenges presented in prior methodological designs and demonstrate the divergence of detectors’
performance. Specifically, we reveal that the current methods tailored for training on one specific generator either
struggle to learn comprehensive artifacts from multiple generators or sacrifice their fitting ability for seen generators (i.e., In-Domain (ID) performance) to exchange the
generalization for unseen generators (i.e., Out-Of-Domain
(OOD) performance). To tackle the above challenges, we
propose our Discrepancy Deepfake Detector (D3 ) framework, whose core idea is to deconstruct the universal artifacts from multiple generators by introducing a parallel
network branch that takes a distorted image feature as an
extra discrepancy signal and supplement its original counterpart. Extensive scaled-up experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of D3 , achieving 5.3% accuracy improvement
in the OOD testing compared to the current SOTA methods while maintaining the ID performance. The source
code will be updated in our GitHub repository: https:
//github.com/BigAandSmallq/D3.

nificant achievements in scaling generative models—such
as BigGAN [4], DALL·E [35], and StableDiffusion [36]
— to unprecedented model sizes and leveraging expansive,
open-world datasets. However, with these opportunities
come inherent risks; these advancements also raise concerns
about diverse aspects including data privacy, AI ethics, social fairness, and regulatory compliance [15]. Among these
challenges, the risk of malicious use of synthetic data stands
out as one of the particularly pressing issues that demand
focused research attention.
Deepfake detection, which aims at discerning between
real and generated fake images, acts as a crucial defense
in responsibly deploying large generative models in the
real world. The effectiveness of these detection systems
largely depends on their generalization capability; ideally,
they should reliably identify any synthesized image as fake,
regardless of the generating source (i.e., the deep generative models from which they are generated). Accordingly,
current deepfake detection methods [5, 10, 28, 31, 45, 46]
usually follow a standard task setup for evaluating performance, which involves training on images from one specific generator and testing on images from various unseen
generators, emphasizing and enhancing the detector’s ability to identify universal artifacts from a single generator
source. As a natural step towards a universal deepfake detection foundation model, in this work, we propose to scale
up this current setup from “train-on-one and test-on-many”
to “train-on-many and test-on-many”, to accommodate the
rapid development pace from the generative modeling side
and better align with the real-world scenario.

1. Introduction

However, in the process of scaling up existing deepfake
detection models to multiple generators, existing methods
encounter two challenges that have not yet been adequately addressed in prior literature, limiting the generalization performance and robustness of an expanded detection system. First, we reveal that the existing methodology
designs tailored for the “train-on-one and test-on-many”
setup struggle to learn the comprehensive and universal artifacts when the fake images in training present different fingerprint patterns from more than one generator.
For instance, one of the current SOTA detection models,

Recent advances in generative modeling have marked a
new era of Generative AI, which is transforming society
as it progresses from our research community into the real
world. The widespread appeal of generative AI technologies among the general populace can be attributed to the sig* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

23850

