This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Potential Field Based Deep Metric Learning
Shubhang Bhatnagar
Narendra Ahuja
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{sb56, n-ahuja}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Deep metric learning (DML) involves training a network
to learn a semantically meaningful representation space.
Many current approaches mine n-tuples of examples and
model interactions within each tuplets. We present a novel,
compositional DML model that instead of in tuples, represents the inﬂuence of each example (embedding) by a continuous potential ﬁeld, and superposes the ﬁelds to obtain
their combined global potential ﬁeld. We use attractive/repulsive potential ﬁelds to represent interactions among embeddings from images of the same/different classes. Contrary to typical learning methods, where mutual inﬂuence
of samples is proportional to their distance, we enforce reduction in such inﬂuence with distance, leading to a decaying ﬁeld. We show that such decay helps improve performance on real world datasets with large intra-class variations and label noise. Like other proxy-based methods, we
also use proxies to succinctly represent sub-populations of
examples. We evaluate our method on three standard DML
benchmarks- Cars-196, CUB-200-2011, and SOP datasets
where it outperforms state-of-the-art baselines.

plet depends on samples’ relative locations and labels. Most
tuplet-based methods use sample mining strategies [15, 40]
to choose a subset of informative tuplets to train the network, without which they suffer from lower performance
and slower convergence [53]. Such strategies not only require the computationally demanding calculation of the relative hardness of all tuples formed (O(n3 ) for triplets among
n samples), but also incur a loss of valuable supervision by
discarding interactions. Speciﬁcally, limiting interactions to
only a subset of all possible tuplets leads to greater susceptibility to noise [25], overﬁtting on the training set [26], and
reduced learning of intra-class variations and generalizable
features [38].
Proxy-based methods, ﬁrst proposed in [34] attempt to
mitigate some of these shortcomings by instead using class
representative ‘proxies’ as one or more hypothesized centers for each class. Computation of the loss is then in terms
of sample-proxy distances instead of sample-sample distances, helping circumvent the problem of tuplet sampling.
However, these methods have been found to learn less
generalizable intra-class features due to the exclusive use
of proxy-sample distances while ignoring sample-sample
distances[39]. This effect is compounded when proxies,
whose locations are themselves learned, end up far from
sample embedding locations they are intended to represent.

1. Introduction
The goal of visual metric learning is to learn a representation function where common distance metrics like the 2
distance capture similarity between images. Semantic similarity is useful for applications such as image/video retrieval
and search [3, 4, 21, 34], open set classiﬁcation and segmentation [6, 14, 32, 37], few-shot learning [41, 45], person reidentiﬁcation[7, 54] and face veriﬁcation [10, 17, 31]. Deep
neural networks have helped make signiﬁcant advances in
visual metric learning [40], as they are trained to learn a
non-linear mapping of images onto a semantic space.
Existing Methods: Popular loss functions to train such
networks help force tuplets of examples/samples/embeddings of the same class to be closer than those in different classes. Examples include the triplet loss [52], the contrastive loss [8] and their extensions [42, 51].
The utility of supervision provided by samples in a tu-

Proposed Representation: To address these challenges,
we propose Potential Field based Deep Metric learning
(PFML), a metric learning framework that uses a continuous, potential ﬁeld representation of all data samples motivated by potential ﬁelds used to model inﬂuence of charges
in physics. Besides its analogical relevance, our motivation
for using this representation comes from its previous, very
successful uses, where it also helps overcome complexity in
modeling interactions. These applications include planning
paths of a robot avoiding obstacles [19] and planning an efﬁcient strategy for a robot manipulator to grasp an object
[20].
In PFML, we view each data sample as a charge, creating
a ﬁeld. The ﬁelds due to the individual samples are added
(superposed) to obtain the global potential ﬁeld. This global
ﬁeld thus constitutes a compositional representation, cap-

25549

