This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Human-Understandable Multi-Dimensional Concept Discovery
Arne Grobrügge1
1

Niklas Kühl2

Gerhard Satzger1
2

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany

Abstract

University of Bayreuth, Germany

transparency of ML models is essential. With the recent European regulations—including the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) [19] and the European AI act [24]—
this need for transparency has made eXplainable Artificial
Intelligence (XAI) a central topic in ML research [36]. XAI
methods aim to provide transparency of ML models by providing insights into their decision-making processes.
Due to their convenience, post-hoc explanations that do not
require modifying the underlying model architecture are
widely used in the computer vision domain, particularly local XAI methods that provide explanations for single predictions [1, 33, 45]. For instance, saliency maps highlight
areas in images that are significant for the model’s predictions. However, there is a growing consensus that these
methods do not provide understandable explanations. Adebayo et al. [2] find that these maps are independent of both
the model and the data-generating process, questioning the
reliability of such approaches. Moreover, local explanation
methods are vulnerable to human confirmation bias [37]—
the tendency of humans to favor information that confirms
their preexisting assumptions while disregarding contradictory evidence. Finally, the human interpretation of local explanations, such as attribution maps on individual instances,
poses challenges and may lead humans to draw contradictory conclusions [16, 20, 21]. Highlighting the location
of important regions within an image—where the model
“looks”—is thus not sufficient for humans to interpret the
reasoning of a model. Humans also require the semantic
content—what the model “sees” [12].
To address the shortcomings of local methods, Conceptbased XAI (C-XAI) has emerged as a promising line of
research within the area of global post-hoc explanations—
which take a more holistic approach and explain the overall decision logic of ML models [30]. Concepts refer to
patterns learned by the model that can be associated with
high-level and human-understandable visual attributes. For
instance, in the medical field, the recognition of such patterns is crucial to assist clinicians in improving diagnostic accuracy. Lucieri et al. [25] utilize C-XAI in a medical scenario and demonstrate its use in dermatology. While
early methods used pre-defined concept datasets [4, 20, 47]

Concept-based eXplainable AI (C-XAI) aims to overcome
the limitations of traditional saliency maps by converting
pixels into human-understandable concepts that are consistent across an entire dataset. A crucial aspect of C-XAI
is completeness, which measures how well a set of concepts explains a model’s decisions. Among C-XAI methods, Multi-Dimensional Concept Discovery (MCD) effectively improves completeness by breaking down the CNN latent space into distinct and interpretable concept subspaces.
However, MCD’s explanations can be difficult for humans
to understand, raising concerns about their practical utility. To address this, we propose Human-Understandable
Multi-dimensional Concept Discovery (HU-MCD). HUMCD uses the Segment Anything Model for concept identification and implements a CNN-specific input masking technique to reduce noise introduced by traditional masking
methods. These changes to MCD, paired with the completeness relation, enable HU-MCD to enhance concept understandability while maintaining explanation faithfulness.
Our experiments, including human subject studies, show
that HU-MCD provides more precise and reliable explanations than existing C-XAI methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/grobruegge/hu-mcd.

1. Introduction
In recent years, industry and research have witnessed an exponential growth of Machine Learning (ML), particularly
accelerated by the advancements of Deep Learning (DL).
ML models have proven to solve various problems given
sufficient data. However, these models are not failure-free.
Previous work has identified various failure cases, including
vulnerability to adversarial attacks [35] or biased data [6]
and reliance on spurious features [39] that leads to shortcut
learning [14]. In high-stake sectors, such as autonomous
driving and healthcare, failures could lead to catastrophic
outcomes [26, 32]. To prevent such risks, ensuring reliable
* Correspondence:

Philipp Spitzer1 *

philipp.spitzer@kit.edu

20018

