This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structured 3D Latents for Scalable and Versatile 3D Generation
Jianfeng Xiang1,3 Zelong Lv2,3 Sicheng Xu3 Yu Deng3 Ruicheng Wang2,3
Bowen Zhang2,3 Dong Chen3 Xin Tong3 Jiaolong Yang3
1
Tsinghua University 2 USTC 3 Microsoft Research
Image to 3D
Assets

Text to 3D
Assets

Vintage camera
with leather case

Two-story brick house
with red roof and fence

Flexible
Editing
Detail
Variation
Made of wood

Silver glossy metal

Transparent glass

Local
Editing

Voxelized, pixelated

House → Trees

+ River

→

Figure 1. High-quality 3D assets generated by our method in various formats from text or image prompts (using GPT-4o and DALL-E
3). Our method enables versatile generation in about 10 seconds, offering vivid appearances with 3D Gaussians or Radiance Fields and
detailed geometries with meshes. It also supports flexible 3D editing. Best viewed with zoom-in.

Abstract
We introduce a novel 3D generation method for versatile
and high-quality 3D asset creation. The cornerstone is a
unified Structured LATent (SL AT) representation which allows decoding to different output formats, such as Radiance
Fields, 3D Gaussians, and meshes. This is achieved by integrating a sparsely-populated 3D grid with dense multiview
visual features extracted from a powerful vision foundation
model, comprehensively capturing both structural (geometry) and textural (appearance) information while maintaining flexibility during decoding.
We employ rectified flow transformers tailored for SL AT
as our 3D generation models and train models with up to
2 billion parameters on a large 3D asset dataset of 500K

21469

diverse objects. Our model generates high-quality results
with text or image conditions, significantly surpassing existing methods, including recent ones at similar scales. We
showcase flexible output format selection and local 3D editing capabilities which were not offered by previous models.
Project Page: trellis3d.github.io.

1. Introduction
While AI Generated Content (AIGC) for 3D has made
tremendous progress in recent years [42, 59, 77], existing
3D generative models still fall short in generation quality
compared to their 2D predecessors, where large image generation models [8, 16] have enabled ready-to-use tools that

