This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

JarvisIR: Elevating Autonomous Driving Perception
with Intelligent Image Restoration
Yunlong Lin1*♣ Zixu Lin1*♣ Haoyu Chen2* Panwang Pan3* Chenxin Li6
Sixiang Chen2 Kairun Wen1 Yeying Jin4 Wenbo Li5† Xinghao Ding1†
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
Bytedance’s Pico 4 Tencent 5 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
6
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Project page:

https://cvpr2025-jarvisir.github.io/

narios exhibit multiple and coupled degradations. Current
adverse weather image restoration methods are primarily
categorized into task-specific methods and all-in-one approaches. Both categories struggle with real-world coupled degradations, as shown in Figure 1. Task-specific
methods [21, 28, 29, 40, 78] often require prior knowledge of specific degradation types, while real-world degradations are often unknown and coupled. All-in-one methods [12, 17, 27, 33, 44] trained on synthetic datasets in a supervised manner, suffer from a significant domain gap when
applied to real-world data. One promising strategy to tackle
multiple degradations in the wild is to integrate specialized
models that excel in their domains. However, this strategy
is highly sensitive to task order, and even minor changes
in execution sequence can lead to significant performance
degradation. Therefore, autonomously and efficiently coordinating expert models in real-world scenarios is essential
for perceptual restoration.

Abstract
Vision-centric perception systems struggle with unpredictable and coupled weather degradations in the wild.
Current solutions are often limited, as they either depend on specific degradation priors or suffer from significant domain gaps. To enable robust and autonomous
operation in real-world conditions, we propose JarvisIR,
a VLM-powered agent that leverages the VLM as a controller to manage multiple expert restoration models. To
further enhance system robustness, reduce hallucinations,
and improve generalizability in real-world adverse weather,
JarvisIR employs a novel two-stage framework consisting
of supervised fine-tuning and human feedback alignment.
Specifically, to address the lack of paired data in real-world
scenarios, the human feedback alignment enables the VLM
to be fine-tuned effectively on large-scale real-world data in
an unsupervised manner. To support the training and evaluation of JarvisIR, we introduce CleanBench, a comprehensive dataset consisting of high-quality and large-scale
instruction-responses pairs, including 150K synthetic entries and 80K real entries. Extensive experiments demonstrate that JarvisIR exhibits superior decision-making and
restoration capabilities. Compared with existing methods,
it achieves a 50% improvement in the average of all perception metrics on CleanBench-Real.

1. Introduction

Recently, large language models (LLMs) have exhibited remarkable proficiency in reasoning, decision-making
and interaction with environments [23, 26, 48, 74, 86].
These advancements raise an important question: Could
vision-language models (VLMs) act as controllers, managing publicly available specialized restoration models, autonomously planning tasks, and selecting models to facilitate the development of comprehensive restoration systems?
The answer is affirmative, however, constructing such systems is non-trivial and typically requires extensive paired
data. In real-world scenarios, while there exists extensive real degraded data, the lack of corresponding labels
prevents the implementation of supervised fine-tuning approaches. To tackle this issue and harness large-scale unlabeled data, we design a fine-tuning framework based on
human feedback, allowing the VLM to be trained in an unsupervised manner. With this approach, we could create a

Vision-centric perception systems often struggle in adverse weather, where images captured in real-world sce∗ Authors Yunlong Lin and Zixu Lin contributed the most and led the
study, while Authors Haoyu Chen and Panwang Pan also made significant
contributions. † Corresponding author.

22369

