This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AniMer: Animal Pose and Shape Estimation Using Family Aware Transformer
Jin Lyu1,∗ , Tianyi Zhu2,∗ , Yi Gu3 , Li Lin1,4 , Pujin Cheng1,4 , Yebin Liu5 , Xiaoying Tang1,† , Liang An5,†
1
Southern University of Science and Technology
2
China Mobile Research Institute
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
The University of Hong Kong 5 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Quantitative analysis of animal behavior and biomechanics requires accurate animal pose and shape estimation
across species, and is important for animal welfare and
biological research. However, the small network capacity of previous methods and limited multi-species dataset
leave this problem underexplored. To this end, this paper
presents AniMer to estimate animal pose and shape using
family aware Transformer, enhancing the reconstruction
accuracy of diverse quadrupedal families. A key insight
of AniMer is its integration of a high-capacity Transformerbased backbone and an animal family supervised contrastive
learning scheme, unifying the discriminative understanding
of various quadrupedal shapes within a single framework.
For effective training, we aggregate most available opensourced quadrupedal datasets, either with 3D or 2D labels.
To improve the diversity of 3D labeled data, we introduce CtrlAni3D, a novel large-scale synthetic dataset created through
a new diffusion-based conditional image generation pipeline.
CtrlAni3D consists of about 10k images with pixel-aligned
SMAL labels. In total, we obtain 41.3k annotated images for
training and validation. Consequently, the combination of a
family aware Transformer network and an expansive dataset
enables AniMer to outperform existing methods not only on
3D datasets like Animal3D and CtrlAni3D, but also on out-ofdistribution Animal Kingdom dataset. Ablation studies further demonstrate the effectiveness of our network design and
CtrlAni3D in enhancing the performance of AniMer for inthe-wild applications. Project page: https://luoxuestar.github.io/AniMer_project_page/.

1. Introduction
Animal pose and shape estimation from images is essential
for capturing animal behavior, biomechanics, and interac* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

tions with their environment, thereby yielding vital insights
for animal welfare, agriculture, ecology and life sciences.
The integration of geometric and appearance information
from diverse species into a unified deep neural network represents a significant step to comprehensively interpret the
intricate and dynamic animal world. A notable endeavor in
this domain involves the estimation of pose and shape parameters from an articulated animal template known as the
SMAL model [52], primarily targeting general quadrupeds.
While extensive researches have been conducted regarding
single species or families, such as horses [18, 54, 55] and
dogs [4, 5, 17, 35–37], investigations into other quadrupedal
species, including cats, cows or hippos, remain relatively
underexplored.
The reconstruction of multiple species within a single
network is hampered by the limited capacity of backbones
and the scarcity of multi-species datasets annotated with
SMAL labels. Recent advancements in human mesh recovery via the SMPL model [23] have proved that using
a high-capacity backbone in conjunction with large-scale
datasets significantly enhances the accuracy of human pose
and shape estimation in diverse settings [6, 10, 30]. However, this simple and effective paradigm remains untested
within the context of animal studies. Xu et al. [45] introduce
the first large-scale dataset Animal3D featuring SMAL mesh
annotations; nevertheless, their study predominantly utilizes
CNN-based networks such as HMR [13] and WLDO [5].
In this paper, we present AniMer, a systematic approach
pursuing accurate animal pose and shape estimation using
Transformer which surpasses existing methodologies on all
benchmarks. This success relies on two key scaling factors: scaled backbone and scaled dataset. In previous animal
researches, the well-known scaled Transformer backbone
proposed by ViT [46] has only been used for 2D animal
pose estimation. We go beyond it by connecting ViT with
a Transformer-based decoder to yield SMAL parameters,
following HMR2.0 [10]. Different from HMR2.0, our Transformer is family aware by applying a new animal family
supervised contrastive learning scheme, which enhances the

17486

