This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Articulated Kinematics Distillation from Video Diffusion Models
Xuan Li1,2,∗ Qianli Ma2 Tsung-Yi Lin2 Yongxin Chen2
Chenfanfu Jiang1 Ming-Yu Liu2 Donglai Xiang2
1
UCLA, 2 NVIDIA
“a lion is walking”

“an astronaut is walking”

“a T-Rex is walking”

“a gorilla is walking”

“a camel is walking”

“an elephant is walking”

Figure 1. By incorporating articulation into static assets, AKD synthesizes realistic motions distilled from large video diffusion models.

Abstract
We present Articulated Kinematics Distillation (AKD), a
framework for generating high-fidelity character animations by merging the strengths of skeleton-based animation
and modern generative models. AKD uses a skeleton-based
representation for rigged 3D assets, drastically reducing
the Degrees of Freedom (DoFs) by focusing on joint-level
control, which allows for efficient, consistent motion synthesis. Through Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) with pretrained video diffusion models, AKD distills complex, articulated motions while maintaining structural integrity, overcoming challenges faced by 4D neural deformation fields
in preserving shape consistency. This approach is naturally
compatible with physics-based simulation, ensuring physically plausible interactions. Experiments show that AKD
achieves superior 3D consistency and motion quality compared with existing works on text-to-4D generation.

ging, motion capture, motion retargeting, and editing. As a
mature technology, such pipelines can achieve high realism
and good controllability over the motion, but they typically
require extensive manual work from digital artists, making
the process time-consuming and thus hardly scalable. Recent advances in video generation models [6, 59] offer a
promising avenue for streamlining the animation authoring
process: with a text-to-video model, generating a sequence
of character animation only requires a text prompt. However, existing video generation models still struggle to generate high-fidelity dynamics for real-world objects because
of a lack of 3D information. Common issues include failing to preserve the 3D structure consistency (e.g. number of
limbs of a character) during animation, or producing physically implausible articulated motion, such as foot-skating
and ground penetration.

1. Introduction

Recent works on text-to-4D generation [1, 2] leverage
these video generation models to distill the learned dynamic
motion into consistent 4D sequences. These frameworks
commonly rely on neural deformation fields which predict
displacements at each location in a pre-defined 3D volume
to deform a 3D shape. Animation is thus a temporal sequence of such deformed shapes. While flexible, this approach introduces a large number of Degrees of Freedom

In traditional 3D graphics, a skeleton-based character animation pipeline involves steps like shape modeling, rig* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.

17571

