This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Single-Modal Boundary: Cross-Modal Anomaly Detection
through Visual Prototype and Harmonization
Kai Mao, Ping Wei *, Yiyang Lian, Yangyang Wang, Nanning Zheng
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
kaimao@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, pingwei@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Train on:

Anomaly detection is a significant task for its application
and research value. While existing methods have made
impressive progress within the same modality, cross-modal
anomaly detection remains an open and challenging problem. In this paper, we propose a cross-modal anomaly detection model that is trained using data from a variety of
existing modalities and can be generalized well to unseen
modalities. The model consists of three major components:
1) the Transferable Visual Prototype directly learns normal/abnormal semantics in visual space; 2) the Prototype
Harmonization strategy adaptively utilizes the Transferable
Visual Prototypes from various modalities for inference on
the unknown modality; 3) the Visual Discrepancy Inference
under the few-shot setting enhances performance. In the
zero-shot setting, the proposed method achieves AUROC
improvements of 4.1%, 6.1%, 7.6%, and 6.8% over the best
competing methods in the RGB, 3D, MRI/CT, and Thermal
modalities, respectively. In the few-shot setting, our model
also achieves the highest AUROC/AP on ten datasets in four
modalities, substantially outperforming existing methods.
Codes are available at https://github.com/Kerio99/CMAD.

RGB

Depth
Other modal….

Test on unseen modal

abnormal
normal

Decision boundary of previous
auxiliary training zero-shot methods

Figure 1. Illustration of cross-modal anomaly detection. Data
from different modalities exhibit a more dispersed distribution in
the feature space, making the decision boundaries developed by
previous zero-shot methods on the auxiliary dataset inapplicable
in cross-modal scenarios.

requirement to perform anomaly detection on cross-modal
data frequently arises across various scenarios. For example, sensors with varying wavelengths in industry are used
to capture different modalities of product images, such as
RGB, 3D, and thermal. Instruments across different spectral
ranges in medicine are utilized to produce MRI and CT scan
images. The ability of detecting anomalies on cross-modal
data is becoming a necessity. We define the cross-modal
anomaly detection task as: the anomaly detection model is
trained with data of known modalities and tested on data of
unseen modalities.

1. Introduction
Identifying various unknown anomalies only given normal
samples is an essential and challenging problem. It has
attracted increasing attention for its practical significance
in numerous scenarios such as industrial quality inspection
and medical diagnosis[2, 9, 12, 13, 22, 25, 27, 29, 30, 33].
For the recent success of vision-language models [15,
26, 39, 41], some methods [17, 20, 40] focus on detecting unknown anomalies in zero-shot setting. A strong correlation between the auxiliary datasets and test images is
necessary in this setting, indicating that they should belong
to the same modality. However, in practical settings, the

Cross-modal anomaly detection can be regarded as a
zero-shot problem. Thus existing zero-shot methods can
be tentatively employed for this task. These methods [10,
11, 17, 40] utilize prior knowledge about normal/abnormal
semantics in the text space to guide anomaly detection in
the visual space using vision-language models like CLIP
[26]. However, although the text and visual space have
been aligned to some extent in these vision-language mod-

* Corresponding author.

9964

