This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MicroVQA: A Multimodal Reasoning Benchmark for Microscopy-Based
Scientific Research
James Burgess*1 Jeffrey J Nirschl*1 Laura Bravo-Sánchez1,⇤
Alejandro Lozano1 Sanket Rajan Gupte1 Jesus G. Galaz-Montoya1 Yuhui Zhang1
Yuchang Su2 Disha Bhowmik3 Zachary Coman3 Sarina M. Hasan4
Alexandra Johannesson5 William D. Leineweber1 Malvika G Nair3 Ridhi Yarlagadda3
Connor Zuraski1 Wah Chiu1 Sarah Cohen3 Jan N. Hansen1 Manuel D Leonetti6
Chad Liu6 Emma Lundberg1,5,6 Serena Yeung-Levy1,6
Stanford University, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Princeton University, 5 KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 6 Chan Zuckerberg Biohub Network
1

4

1

Expert Visual Understanding

2

Hypothesis generation

3

Experimental proposal

What is unusual about the result?

Why does this happen in my experiment?

How do I test my hypothesis?

Perception

Assessment

Action

"How is the Seipin
localized within the
endoplasmic
reticulum (ER)?"

"Which mechanism
might explain why ASLV
particles show signs of
merging in a CryoEM
image?"

"What experiment could
you perform to test if
CCNB1 protein levels
relate to cell cycle stages
in human A-431 cells?"

"Do cells treated
with BafA1 (left)
express more
p26 compared to
control (right)?"

"Which glial cell is
likely responsible for
this abnormal reticular
ﬁber pattern?"

"What experimental
change can increase
the likelihood of
achieving a highresolution structure?"

Figure 1. A scientific experimentation workflow drives discovery: researchers analyze experiments, develop hypotheses, and design further
experiments to test their ideas. We release MicroVQA, a visual question answering (VQA) benchmark to test these three tasks in the context
of biological microscopy. Each of the 1,042 samples is created by a biology expert, and transformed into a multiple choice question (MCQ).

Abstract
Scientific research demands sophisticated reasoning over
multimodal data, a challenge especially prevalent in biology. Despite recent advances in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) for AI-assisted research, existing
multimodal reasoning benchmarks only target up to collegelevel difficulty, while research-level benchmarks emphasize
lower-level perception, falling short of the complex multimodal reasoning needed for scientific discovery. To bridge
this gap, we introduce MicroVQA, a visual-question answering (VQA) benchmark designed to assess three reasoning capabilities vital in research workflows: expert image
understanding, hypothesis generation, and experiment pro-

posal. MicroVQA consists of 1,042 multiple-choice questions (MCQs) curated by biology experts across diverse
microscopy modalities, ensuring VQA samples represent
real scientific practice. In constructing the benchmark, we
find that standard MCQ generation methods induce language shortcuts, motivating a new two-stage pipeline: an
optimized LLM prompt structures question-answer pairs
into MCQs; then, an agent-based ‘RefineBot’ updates them
to remove shortcuts. Benchmarking on state-of-the-art
MLLMs reveal a peak performance of 53%; models with
smaller LLMs only slightly underperform top models, suggesting that language-based reasoning is less challenging
than multimodal reasoning; and tuning with scientific articles enhances performance. Expert analysis of chain-ofthought responses shows that perception errors are the most
frequent, followed by knowledge errors and then overgen-

Correspondence {jmhb,jnirschl,lmbravo}@stanford.edu
⇤ These authors contributed equally

19552

