This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FRAME: Floor-aligned Representation for Avatar Motion from Egocentric Video
Andrea Boscolo Camiletto1,2 Jian Wang1,2 Eduardo Alvarado1 Rishabh Dabral1,2
Thabo Beeler3 Marc Habermann1,2 Christian Theobalt1,2
1
2

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

Saarbrücken Research Center for Visual Computing, Interaction and AI

3

Google, Switzerland

Figure 1. We introduce a large scale egocentric dataset (b) collected with a custom-made wearable capture rig (a). With this data we train
FRAME, which takes as input a series of egocentric views and the VR pose tracking and predicts the skeletal motion of the user (c).

Abstract

1. Introduction

Egocentric motion capture with a head-mounted bodyfacing stereo camera is crucial for VR and AR applications but presents significant challenges such as heavy occlusions and limited annotated real-world data. Existing
methods rely on synthetic pretraining and struggle to generate smooth and accurate predictions in real-world settings,
particularly for lower limbs. Our work addresses these limitations by introducing a lightweight VR-based data collection setup with on-board, real-time 6D pose tracking. Using this setup, we collected the most extensive real-world
dataset for ego-facing ego-mounted cameras to date in size
and motion variability. Effectively integrating this multimodal input – device pose and camera feeds – is challenging due to the differing characteristics of each data source.
To address this, we propose FRAME, a simple yet effective
architecture that combines device pose and camera feeds
for state-of-the-art body pose prediction through geometrically sound multimodal integration and can run at 300 FPS
on modern hardware. Lastly, we showcase a novel training
strategy to enhance the model’s generalization capabilities.
Our approach exploits the problem’s geometric properties,
yielding high-quality motion capture free from common artifacts in prior work. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations, along with extensive comparisons, demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method. Data, code, and CAD designs
will be available at vcai.mpi-inf.mpg.de/projects/FRAME.

17497

Egocentric motion capture poses unique challenges, as predicting body pose without an external viewpoint introduces
ambiguities and limits contextual information. Nonetheless,
the demand for egocentric motion capture spans numerous
applications, including virtual reality (VR), augmented reality (AR), remote collaboration, and robotic control.
In VR, body pose estimation traditionally relies on inverse kinematics [33], using only head and hand poses
from the headset and controllers. However, recent trends
in industry and research reflect a push towards more accurate body tracking by leveraging priors on human body
motion [3, 8, 18, 19, 43], using existing forward-facing
cameras [12, 24, 30, 50, 52], or incorporating additional
sensing modalities, such as dedicated body-facing cameras [2, 15, 32, 41], multiple inertial measurement units
(IMU) [14, 20, 31, 44, 48, 49, 51], direct time-of-flight sensors [34] and pressure-sensing insoles [45].
Among wearable alternatives, capturing a user motion
via an ego-facing head-mounted camera offers compelling
advantages: it provides a top-down view of the user’s body
and surroundings, and captures detailed cues – essential for
realistic 3D avatars – including clothing and wrinkles [6].
For these reasons, many works have tackled this problem, both in monocular [36, 39–42, 46] and stereo [1, 2,
7, 21, 22, 32, 47, 53] settings, although they assume impractical sensor configurations, such as fisheye cameras

