This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Homogeneous Dynamics Space for Heterogeneous Humans
Xinpeng Liu1,2 , Junxuan Liang1 , Chenshuo Zhang1 , Zixuan Cai3 , Cewu Lu1,2 ,* Yong-Lu Li1,2 *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute, 3 Soochow University
xinpengliu0907@gmail.com, zxcai@stu.suda.edu.cn,
{whitefork, zhangchenshuo, lucewu, yonglu li}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Heterogeneous Dynamics Representations

Analyses of human motion kinematics have achieved
tremendous advances. However, the production mechanism,
known as human dynamics, is still undercovered. In this
paper, we aim to push the understanding of data-driven
human dynamics forward. We identify a major obstacle
to this as the heterogeneity of existing human motion understanding efforts. Specifically, heterogeneity exists in not
only the diverse kinematics representations and hierarchical dynamics representations but also the data from different domains, namely biomechanics and reinforcement
learning. With an in-depth analysis of the existing heterogeneity, we propose to emphasize the beneath homogeneity:
all of them represent the homogeneous fact of human motion, though from different perspectives. Given this, we propose Homogeneous Dynamics Space (HDyS) as a fundamental space for human dynamics by aggregating heterogeneous data and training a homogeneous latent space with
inspiration from the inverse-forward dynamics procedure.
HDyS achieves decent mapping between human kinematics
and dynamics by leveraging the heterogeneous representations and datasets. We demonstrate the feasibility of HDyS
with extensive experiments and applications. The project
page is https://foruck.github.io/HDyS.

Neural Electric Signals Activation
Dynamics
(sEMG)
System

Muscle
Actions

Contraction
Dynamics

Joint
Torques

Drive

Kinematics Models

Optical
MoCap

Fitted
Simplified
Markers
Human Template Models
Skeleton
to
as
Rajagopal’s

SMPL

Heterogeneous Kinematics Representations

Figure 1. The representation heterogeneity exists for both kinematics and dynamics.

1. Introduction

dynamics forward with data-driven methodologies. Specifically, we pursue to build a bidirectional mapping between
human kinematics and dynamics. We identify the major obstacle to this as the heterogeneity of existing human motion
understanding efforts, which could be two-fold.
First, representation heterogeneity exists for both kinematics and dynamics, as shown in Figure 1. A typical
optical motion capture pipeline, which produces most existing available data for human kinematics [20, 40], involves tracking the markers placed on the surface of humans. Then, different human template models are fitted
to the tracked markers, resulting in parameters of musculoskeletal models [52] for biomechanics uses or SMPLlike models [36] for general CV/CG uses. Skeletons with
pre-defined kinematic trees are sometimes preferred as a
simple and intuitive representation. Different datasets tend
to include only representations preferred by their designed
goal. Besides the kinematics representation heterogeneity, the dynamics representation heterogeneity exists more
severely. Human dynamics function in a hierarchical manner. The closest dynamics hierarchy to the kinematics is the
joint torques, which are further produced by muscle forces
from muscle actions according to the muscle contraction
dynamics. Furthermore, electric signals from the neural
system activate the muscle, which surface electromyogra-

Analyses on human motion have a wide range of applications, including animation [11, 60], healthcare [10, 55],
and robotics [57, 70]. The computer vision community has
made tremendous progress in understanding human kinematics with tasks like human reconstruction [24, 27, 34],
action recognition [25, 26, 28, 29, 51], and motion generation [30, 32, 60]. However, the production mechanism hidden beneath human motion, known as human dynamics, is
still limitedly explored.
In this paper, we aim to push the understanding of human
* Corresponding authors.

27782

