This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ASHiTA: Automatic Scene-grounded HIerarchical Task Analysis
Yun Chang*

Leonor Fermoselle†

Duy Ta†

Bernadette Bucher‡

Luca Carlone*

Prepare for dinner

Abstract
While recent work in scene reconstruction and understanding has made strides in grounding natural language to physical 3D environments, it is still challenging to ground abstract, high-level instructions to a 3D scene. High-level
instructions might not explicitly invoke semantic elements
in the scene, and even the process of breaking a high-level
task into a set of more concrete subtasks —a process called
hierarchical task analysis— is environment-dependent. In
this work, we propose ASHiTA, the first framework that
generates a task hierarchy grounded to a 3D scene graph
by breaking down high-level tasks into grounded subtasks.
ASHiTA alternates LLM-assisted hierarchical task analysis —to generate the task breakdown— with task-driven 3D
scene graph construction to generate a suitable representation of the environment. Our experiments show that ASHiTA
performs significantly better than LLM baselines in breaking down high-level tasks into environment-dependent subtasks and is additionally able to achieve grounding performance comparable to state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Modern machine vision applications, ranging from robotics
to augmented reality, demand the development of vision
systems that are able to parse and support the execution
of high-level instructions, possibly provided by non-expert
users. For example, consider a robot that is given a highlevel task of preparing for dinner. To carry out this task,
the robot is required to decompose the task into granular
subtasks like fetching objects or visiting locations of interest (e.g., go to the kitchen, preheat the oven). Moreover, it
must be able to ground these instructions into 3D objects
and locations observed in the environment.
Towards these goals, prior work has mostly focused
on developing more expressive map representations, which
* LIDS,

Massachusetts

Institute

of

Technology,

MA,

USA.

{yunchang, lcarlone}@mit.edu
† Robotics and AI Institute, MA, USA. {lfermoselle, dta,
jw}@theaiinstitute.com
‡ Department

Jiuguang Wang†

of Robotics, University of Michigan, MI, USA.

bucherb@umich.edu
This work was done partially while Chang was an intern at the Boston Dynamics AI Institute and partially supported by the ARL DCIST Program.

Set the dining table.
Preheat the oven if you’re cooking.
Wash the plates and utensils thoroughly.

Refrigerate
beverages and
chilled food.

Dining Table
Plate

Stove

Oven
Sink

Refrigerator

Figure 1. Given the high-level task of "Prepare for dinner", ASHiTA automatically generates a hierarchy of subtasks (and items) while grounding
them to a 3D scene graph. For the scene graph in the figure, the blue node
corresponds to the high-level task, magenta nodes correspond to the subtasks, and red nodes correspond to the items required by the subtasks.

combines both geometric and semantic information, to facilitate the grounding process. Related work investigates
sparse object-based metric-semantic maps [36, 38], dense
metric-semantic maps [31, 35], and 3D scene graphs [2,
15, 46]. Traditionally, these representations have relied
on closed-set semantic labels, where the semantic concepts
are restricted to the set of labels annotated in the training
dataset. However, using a pre-defined set of labels limits the
expressiveness of the map model (e.g., if our robot only has
a “chair” class, it might not be able to distinguish a folding
chair from a rocking chair), thus imposing constraints and
creating ambiguity when grounding language commands.
To overcome this constraint, recent work has utilized
new foundation models with open-set semantics for mapping [12, 17, 45]. However, as pointed out in [30], when
using open-set semantics, it becomes unclear how to group
objects (e.g., is the zipper of a bag an object, or only
the bag itself?) Therefore, the work [30] proposes an approach that clusters open-set concepts in the map in a taskdriven fashion, thus representing the objects and places in a
scene graph at the granularity required by specified naturallanguage tasks. However, the resulting approach, Clio [30],
still cannot support high-level tasks and is limited to supporting simple tasks that explicitly invoke relevant objects
and locations (e.g., preheat the oven, go to the kitchen).

29458

