This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reconstruction vs. Generation:
Taming Optimization Dilemma in Latent Diffusion Models
*

Jingfeng Yao1 , Bin Yang2 , Xinggang Wang1,
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Independent Researcher

Abstract

Reconstructed Images

Original Image

Latent diffusion models with Transformer architectures
excel at generating high-fidelity images. However, recent
studies reveal an optimization dilemma in this two-stage
design: while increasing the per-token feature dimension
in visual tokenizers improves reconstruction quality, it requires substantially larger diffusion models and more training iterations to achieve comparable generation performance. Consequently, existing systems often settle for suboptimal solutions, either producing visual artifacts due to
information loss within tokenizers or failing to converge
fully due to expensive computation costs. We argue that
this dilemma stems from the inherent difficulty in learning unconstrained high-dimensional latent spaces. To address this, we propose aligning the latent space with pretrained vision foundation models when training the visual tokenizers. Our proposed VA-VAE (Vision foundation
model Aligned Variational AutoEncoder) significantly expands the reconstruction-generation frontier of latent diffusion models, enabling faster convergence of Diffusion
Transformers (DiT) in high-dimensional latent spaces. To
exploit the full potential of VA-VAE, we build an enhanced
DiT baseline with improved training strategies and architecture designs, termed LightningDiT. The integrated system achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on ImageNet 256×256 generation with an FID score of 1.35 while
demonstrating remarkable training efficiency by reaching
an FID score of 2.11 in just 64 epochs – representing
an over 21× convergence speedup compared to the original DiT. Models and codes are available at https://
github.com/hustvl/LightningDiT.

Tokenizer
Specification

f16d16

f16d32

f16d64

rFID=0.29

rFID=0.18

Latent
Distribution

Reconstruction

rFID=0.49

better reconstruction
Generation

gFID=20.3

gFID=28.7

gFID=45.8

worse generation

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Optimization dilemma within latent diffusion models. In latent diffusion models, increasing the dimension of the visual tokenizer enhances detail reconstruction but significantly reduces generation quality. (In tokenizer specification, “f” and “d”
represent the downsampling rate and dimension, respectively. All
results are evaluated on ImageNet 256×256 dataset with a fixed
compute budget during diffusion model training.)

The latent diffusion model [34] utilizes a continuous-valued
variational autoencoder (VAE) [19], or visual tokenizer, to
* Corresponding author: xgwang@hust.edu.cn

15703

compress visual signals and thereby reduce the computational demands of high-resolution image generation. The
performance of these visual tokenizers, particularly their
compression and reconstruction capabilities, plays a crucial
role in determining the overall system effectiveness [6, 8].
A straightforward approach to enhance the reconstruction

