This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Online Task-Free Continual Learning
via Dynamic Expansionable Memory Distribution
Fei Ye1 and Adrian G. Bors2
School of Information and Software Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu
2
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York YO10 5GH, UK
1

feiye@uestc.edu.cn, adrian.bors@york.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent continuous learning (CL) research primarily addresses catastrophic forgetting within a straightforward
learning framework where class and task information are
predefined. However, in the Task-Free Continual Learning
(TFCL), representing a more realistic and challenging CL
scenarios, such information is typically absent. In this paper, we address the online TFCL by introducing an innovative memory management approach, by incorporating a
dynamic memory system for storing selected data representatives from evolving distributions while a dynamically expandable memory system enables the retention of essential
long-term knowledge. The proposed dynamic expandable
memory system manages a series of memory distributions,
each designed to represent the information from a distinct
data category. A new memory expansion mechanism that
assesses the proximity between incoming samples and existing memory distributions is proposed for evaluating when
to add new memory distributions into the system. Additionally, a novel memory distribution augmentation technique is
proposed for selectively gathering suitable samples for each
memory distribution, enhancing the statistical robustness
over time. To prevent memory saturation before the training phase, we introduce a memory distribution reduction
strategy that automatically eliminates overlapping memory
distributions, ensuring adequate capacity for accommodating new information in subsequent learning episodes. We
conduct a series of experiments demonstrating that our proposed approach attains state-of-the-art performance in both
supervised and unsupervised learning contexts. The source
code is available at https://github.com/dtuzi123/DEMD.

1. Introduction
Lifelong/Continual learning aims to train a model that is
able to continually capture novel information over time

20512

without forgetting any of the previously learnt knowledge.
Different from the traditional deep learning, which would
consider large dataset for training altogether, continual
learning paradigm aims to learn successively a sequence
of tasks, each defined by using a certain amount of data
for training. When considering training successively a machine learning model on a sequence of datasets, the model
suffers from significant performance degeneration, caused
by catastrophic forgetting, [42].
Existing models aiming to mitigate catastrophic forgetting in continual learning can be summarized into three different branches : rehearsal-based methods [6, 9], which employ and manage a small size memory buffer for storing
and replaying samples from previous tasks; regularizationbased methods [29, 38], which modify the primary objective
function by adding regularization terms that penalize significant changes of certain important network parameters;
and expansion-based methods [11, 24], which dynamically
creates and adds new sub-models and hidden layers into an
expandable framework in order to learn new tasks. Among
these approaches, the rehearsal-based method is a straight
forward approach that balances the usage of memory with
processing the requirements to address network forgetting
in continual learning [17]. However, most rehearsal-based
methods require access to the class and task information for
implementing memory updating mechanisms [4, 53]. Consequently, such methods can not be applied in the Task-Free
Unsupervised Continual Learning (TFUCL), which represents a more realistic continual learning scenario where
both task and class labels are unavailable.
Numerous studies have addressed mitigating the issue of
classifier forgetting during continual learning, whereas continual data generative models have received comparatively
less attention [62]. Enabling generative models into continual learning frameworks can facilitate the implementation of artificial intelligence generation systems in dynamic,
real-time learning environments, which holds substantial

