This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiET-GS: Diffusion Prior and Event Stream-Assisted Motion Deblurring 3D
Gaussian Splatting
Seungjun Lee
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
seungjun.lee@u.nus.edu, gimhee.lee@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Reconstructing sharp 3D representations from blurry
multi-view images is a long-standing problem in computer
vision. Recent works attempt to enhance high-quality novel
view synthesis from the motion blur by leveraging eventbased cameras, benefiting from high dynamic range and
microsecond temporal resolution. However, they often
reach sub-optimal visual quality in either restoring inaccurate color or losing fine-grained details. In this paper,
we present DiET-GS, a diffusion prior and event streamassisted motion deblurring 3DGS. Our framework effectively leverages blur-free event streams and diffusion prior
in a two-stage training strategy. Specifically, we introduce
the novel framework to constrain 3DGS with event double integral, achieving both accurate color and well-defined
details. Additionally, we propose a simple technique to
leverage diffusion prior to further enhance the edge details.
Qualitative and quantitative results on both synthetic and
real-world data demonstrate that our DiET-GS is capable
of producing better quality of novel views compared to the
existing baselines. Our project page is: DiET-GS.github.io.

Figure 1. Given a set of blurry images and corresponding event
streams, we propose a novel framework to construct deblurring
3DGS by jointly leveraging the EDI [33] formulation and a pretrained diffusion model as a prior. Our DiET-GS++ enables highquality novel-view synthesis by recovering precise color and welldefined details from the blurry multi-view images.

1. Introduction

tured and free from any artifact. However, this preliminary
condition is often unavailable in the real world. For example, a camera needs prolonged exposure time in a low
light environment to allow enough light to reach the sensor
for image formation. The camera has to remain absolutely
still during this lengthy exposure time. Any camera motion
during the capture leads to undesired motion blur. To circumvent this issue, a line of works [19, 29, 34, 54, 66] has
attempted to recover sharp 3D representations from blurry
multi-view images. Despite the promising potential, it is
non-trivial to restore fine-grained details from blurry images
alone and thus often leading to sub-optimal visual quality.
Several recent works have shown the efficacy of eventbased cameras, significantly improving motion deblurring
in images captured from standard frame-based cameras.
Event sensors enable blur-free measurements of brightness
changes, benefiting from higher dynamic range and temporal resolution compared to standard cameras. Motivated
by this distinct competency, several recent works have explored the potential of recovering sharp 3D representations
from event streams. Earlier works [1, 11, 42] focus on
utilizing solely event-based data, lacking the capacity to
preserve color information. E-NeRF [16] combines blurry

Novel view synthesis plays an important role in various vision applications such as scene understanding [17, 27, 58],
virtual reality [18, 60], image processing [9, 29, 32], etc. To
this end, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [31] achieves notable success in generating high-quality novel views by reconstructing implicit 3D representations with a deep neural
network. However, it falls short of real-time rendering and
efficient training, limiting its application in real-world scenarios. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [15] has
emerged as an efficient alternative to NeRF by representing
scenes with explicit 3D Gaussian primitives. The explicit
representation of 3DGS serves as a lightweight replacement
of the implicit neural representations used in NeRF, achieving better training and rendering efficiency as well as visual
quality of novel views.
To enable high-quality 3D reconstructions, both NeRF
and 3DGS rely on multi-view images that are perfectly cap-

21739

