This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LiDAR-RT: Gaussian-based Ray Tracing for Dynamic LiDAR Re-simulation
Chenxu Zhou1*
1

Lvchang Fu2* Sida Peng1† Yunzhi Yan1
Yong Chen3 Jiazhi Xia2 Xiaowei Zhou1

Zhejiang University

LiDAR4D

PSNR: 21.8583
FPS:
~0.2

Ours

PSNR: 22.0792
FPS:
~30

2

Central South University

3

Zhanhua Zhang3

Geely Automobile Research Institute

Figure 1. Realistic and real-time rendering of LiDAR views in dynamic driving scenes. Our LiDAR-RT produces high-fidelity LiDAR
views at 30 FPS (64×2650) within 2 hours of training. SOTA method [61] struggles to model the dynamic objects in complex scenes and
suffers from high training and rendering costs (15 hours for training and 0.2 FPS for rendering a range image).

rendering algorithm. Importantly, our framework supports
realistic rendering with flexible scene editing operations
and various sensor configurations. Extensive experiments
across multiple public benchmarks demonstrate that our
method outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of
rendering quality and efficiency. Our code and data are
available at https://github.com/zju3dv/LiDAR-RT.

Abstract
This paper targets the challenge of real-time LiDAR
re-simulation in dynamic driving scenarios. Recent approaches utilize neural radiance fields combined with
the physical modeling of LiDAR sensors to achieve highfidelity re-simulation results. Unfortunately, these methods
face limitations due to high computational demands in
large-scale scenes and cannot perform real-time LiDAR
rendering. To overcome these constraints, we propose
LiDAR-RT, a novel framework that supports real-time,
physically accurate LiDAR re-simulation for driving
scenes. Our primary contribution is the development
of an efficient and effective rendering pipeline, which
integrates Gaussian primitives and hardware-accelerated
ray tracing technology. Specifically, we model the physical
properties of LiDAR sensors using Gaussian primitives
with learnable parameters and incorporate scene graphs
to handle scene dynamics. Building upon this scene
representation, our framework first constructs a bounding
volume hierarchy (BVH), then casts rays for each pixel
and generates novel LiDAR views through a differentiable

1. Introduction
Modeling dynamic urban scenes is of great importance for
a variety of applications, such as digital twin simulation,
autonomous driving, and virtual reality. Recent research
has shown impressive results of novel view synthesis
in driving scenarios [8, 9, 54, 62] with camera sensors,
significantly enhancing the fidelity and diversity of data for
downstream tasks and applications. However, the majority
of current approaches overlook the re-simulation of LiDAR
sensors, which are key components for many 3D perception
algorithms, thereby restricting the scope of simulation
applications. In contrast to cameras, the inherent physical
properties of LiDAR sensors and sparsity of point clouds
make it challenging to reconstruct and simulate, especially
in dynamic scenes with complicated motions.
Previous methods [20, 27] initially reconstruct 3D
scenes from real-world data with explicit representations

∗ The first two authors contributed equally. † Corresponding author:
Sida Peng.

1538

