This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion Self-Distillation for Zero-Shot Customized Image Generation
Shengqu Cai Eric Ryan Chan Yunzhi Zhang
Leonidas Guibas Jiajun Wu Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University

Figure 1. Given an input image, Diffusion Self-Distillation is a novel diffusion-based approach that generates diverse images that maintain
the input’s identity across various contexts. Unlike prior approaches that require fine-tuning or are limited to specific domains, Diffusion
Self-Distillation offers instant customization without any additional inference-stage training, enabling precise control and editability in
text-to-image diffusion models. This ability makes Diffusion Self-Distillation a valuable tool for general AI content creation.

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent years, text-to-image diffusion models [26, 31, 32,
35] have set new standards in image synthesis, generating
high-quality and diverse images from textual prompts. However, while their ability to generate images from text is impressive, these models often fall short in offering precise
control, editability, and consistency—key features that are
crucial for real-world applications. Text input alone can be
insufficient to convey specific details, leading to variations
that may not fully align with the user’s intent, especially in
scenarios that require faithful adaptation of a character or
asset’s identity across different contexts.
Maintaining the instance’s identity is challenging, however. We distinguish structure-preserving edits, in which the
target and source image share the general layout, but may
differ in style, texture, or other local features, and identitypreserving edits, where assets are recognizably the same
across target and source images despite potentially largescale changes in image structure (Fig. 3). The latter task
is a superset of the former and requires the model to have
a significantly more profound understanding of the input
image and concepts to extract and customize the desired

Text-to-image diffusion models produce impressive results
but are frustrating tools for artists who desire fine-grained
control. For example, a common use case is to create images of a specific concept in novel contexts, i.e., “identitypreserving generation”. This setting, along with many
other tasks (e.g., relighting), is a natural fit for image+textconditional generative models. However, there is insufficient
high-quality paired data to train such a model directly. We
propose Diffusion Self-Distillation, a method for using a
pre-trained text-to-image model to generate its own dataset
for text-conditioned image-to-image tasks. We first leverage a text-to-image diffusion model’s in-context generation
ability to create grids of images and curate a large paired
dataset with the help of a vision-language model. We then
fine-tune the text-to-image model into a text+image-to-image
model using the curated paired dataset. We demonstrate that
Diffusion Self-Distillation outperforms existing zero-shot
methods and is competitive with per-instance tuning techniques on a wide range of identity-preserving generation
tasks, without requiring test-time optimization. Project page:
primecai.github.io/dsd.

18434

