This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DriveDreamer4D: World Models Are Effective Data Machines
for 4D Driving Scene Representation
Guosheng Zhao1, 2, 3 *, Chaojun Ni4 *, Xiaofeng Wang1, 2, 3 *, Zheng Zhu5 *†,
Xueyang Zhang6 , Yida Wang6 , Guan Huang5 , Xinze Chen5 , Boyuan Wang1, 2, 3 ,
Youyi Zhang7 , Wenjun Mei4 , Xingang Wang2, 3†
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Luoyang Institute for Robot and Intelligent Equipment, China 4 Peking University, China
5
GigaAI, China 6 Li Auto Inc., China 7 Technical University o f Munich, Germeny

Original Video
4DGS
Reconstruction

Rendering

PVG

S3Gaussian

Deformable-GS

DriveDreamer4D
with PVG

DriveDreamer4D
with S3Gaussian

DriveDreamer4D
with Deformable-GS

Lane Change
Novel Trajectory

DriveDreamer4D
Reconstruction

Rendering

Figure 1. Previous 4D Gaussian Splatting methods (e.g., PVG [9], S3 Gaussian [31], Deformable-GS [80]) face challenges in rendering
novel trajectories, such as lane change. DriveDreamer4D addresses this by enhancing 4D driving scene representation via integrating
priors from world models, significantly improving rendering quality under complex scenarios and novel trajectory viewpoints.

Abstract
Closed-loop simulation is essential for advancing end-toend autonomous driving systems. Contemporary sensor
simulation methods, such as NeRF and 3DGS, rely predominantly on conditions closely aligned with training
data distributions, which are largely confined to forwarddriving scenarios. Consequently, these methods face limitations when rendering complex maneuvers (e.g., lane
change, acceleration, deceleration). Recent advancements
in autonomous-driving world models have demonstrated
the potential to generate diverse driving videos. However,
these approaches remain constrained to 2D video generation, inherently lacking the spatiotemporal coherence required to capture intricacies of dynamic driving environments. In this paper, we introduce DriveDreamer4D, which

enhances 4D driving scene representation leveraging world
model priors. Specifically, we utilize the world model as a
data machine to synthesize novel trajectory videos, where
structured conditions are explicitly leveraged to control
the spatial-temporal consistency of traffic elements. Besides, the cousin data training strategy is proposed to facilitate merging real and synthetic data for optimizing 4DGS.
To our knowledge, DriveDreamer4D is the first to utilize
video generation models for improving 4D reconstruction in
driving scenarios. Experimental results reveal that DriveDreamer4D significantly enhances generation quality under novel trajectory views, achieving a relative improvement in FID by 32.1%, 46.4%, and 16.3% compared to
PVG, S3 Gaussian, and Deformable-GS. Moreover, DriveDreamer4D markedly enhances the spatiotemporal coherence of driving agents, which is verified by a comprehensive
user study and the relative increases of 22.6%, 43.5%, and
15.6% in the NTA-IoU metric.

* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors. zhengzhu@ieee.org, xingang.wang@ia.ac.cn.
‡ Project Page: https://drivedreamer4d.github.io

12015

