This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DynamicScaler: Seamless and Scalable Video Generation for Panoramic Scenes
Jinxiu Liu1, * Shaoheng Lin1,* Yinxiao Li2,† Ming-Hsuan Yang2,3,†
1
South China University of Technology 2 Google DeepMind 3 UC Merced

Regular (perspective) Dynamic Panorama

Abstract
(T2V)

The increasing demand for immersive AR/VR applications and spatial intelligence has heightened the need
to generate high-quality scene-level and 360° panoramic
video. However, most video diffusion models are constrained by limited resolution and aspect ratio, which restricts their applicability to scene-level dynamic content
synthesis. In this work, we propose DynamicScaler, addressing these challenges by enabling spatially scalable and
panoramic dynamic scene synthesis that preserves coherence across panoramic scenes of arbitrary size. Specifically, we introduce a Offset Shifting Denoiser, facilitating
efficient, synchronous, and coherent denoising panoramic
dynamic scenes via a diffusion model with fixed resolution through a seamless rotating Window, which ensures
seamless boundary transitions and consistency across the
entire panoramic space, accommodating varying resolutions and aspect ratios. Additionally, we employ a Global
Motion Guidance mechanism to ensure both local detail
fidelity and global motion continuity. Extensive experiments demonstrate our method achieves superior content
and motion quality in panoramic scene-level video generation, offering a training-free, efficient, and scalable solution for immersive dynamic scene creation with constant
VRAM consumption regardless of the output video resolution. Project page is available at https://dynamicscaler.pages.dev/new .

(I2V)

Input image

Thunderstorm coming, lighting bolts
sparks in dark sky...

Beautiful northern light swirling and
shifting across the night sky...

360° Dynamic Panorama (displayed in equirectangular projection)
(T2V)

(I2V)

Input image

1. Introduction
The increasing demand for immersive AR/VR applications
has heightened the need for high-quality panoramic scene
synthesis, essential for industries like digital advertising,
wearable displays, and related tasks, where content often
requires wide or portrait formats. However, achieving scalable panoramic scene synthesis poses unique challenges. A
successful approach must enable spatially scalable generation while preserving motion coherence across panoramic

Clouds swirled over the
green grass field…

Underwater world with various
marine creatures swimming …

Figure 1. We introduce DynamicScaler, a framework for generating dynamic panoramas conditioned on both images and text, or
text alone. DynamicScaler enables the creation of regular panoramas with arbitary aspect ratio as well as 360° panoramic views, offering immersive visual experiences for AR/VR applications and
displays of arbitrary aspect ratio and resolution.

scenes of any size, ensuring a seamless and immersive experience across various scenes in a panoramic view.

* Equal contribution.
† Equal advising

6144

