This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Correspondence-based Category-Level Object Pose Estimation
Huan Ren1,2

Wenfei Yang1,2,3

Shifeng Zhang4

Tianzhu Zhang1,2 *

1

University of Science and Technology of China
National Key Laboratory of Deep Space Exploration, Deep Space Exploration Laboratory
3
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence 4 Sangfor Technologies
zhangshifeng@sangfor.com.cn

Observation

Abstract

{yangwf,tzzhang}@ustc.edu.cn

Category-level object pose estimation aims to determine the
pose and size of arbitrary objects within given categories.
Existing two-stage correspondence-based methods first establish correspondences between camera and object coordinates, and then acquire the object pose using a pose fitting
algorithm. In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive analysis of this paradigm and introduce two crucial essentials:
1) shape-sensitive and pose-invariant feature extraction for
accurate correspondence prediction, and 2) outlier correspondence removal for robust pose fitting. Based on these
insights, we propose a simple yet effective correspondencebased method called SpotPose, which includes two stages.
During the correspondence prediction stage, pose-invariant
geometric structure of objects is thoroughly exploited to facilitate shape-sensitive holistic interaction among keypointwise features. During the pose fitting stage, outlier scores
of correspondences are explicitly predicted to facilitate efficient identification and removal of outliers. Experimental
results on CAMERA25, REAL275 and HouseCat6D benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed SpotPose outperforms
state-of-the-art approaches by a large margin.

Point Cloud

rh hr 666@mail.ustc.edu.cn

NOCS

Correspondence Prediction

Outliers
Segment and
Back-Project
Correspondence Prediction

NOCS Error

2

Outlier
Removal

10cm
8cm
6cm
4cm
2cm
0cm

Pose Fitting
Shape-Sensitive Pose-Invariant
(a)

8.4°, 0.44cm

Pose Error

2.2°, 0.17cm

(b)

Figure 1. Reconsideration of the two-stage correspondence-based
paradigm. (a) Essential of shape-sensitive and pose-invariant features during the correspondence prediction stage. (b) Essential of
outlier correspondence removal during the pose fitting stage.

Most existing category-level methods [1, 12, 14, 24, 27]
adopt a two-stage correspondence-based paradigm, which
first establishes correspondences between the camera coordinate space and the Normalized Object Coordinate Space
(NOCS) [32], and subsequently determines the object pose
through a pose fitting algorithm. We conduct an in-depth
analysis of this paradigm and introduce two crucial insights.
(1) During the correspondence prediction stage, shapesensitive and pose-invariant features are fundamental.
Since there are significant shape variations among diverse
objects within the same category, shape-sensitive features
should be exploited to learn object-specific transformation.
As shown in Figure 1(a), points on camera lenses of varying
lengths ought to be mapped to different NOCS coordinates.
Besides, since the specific object might be observed from
arbitrary poses, pose-invariant features should be extracted
to learn pose-irrelevant transformation. As illustrated in
Figure 1(a), a static point on the camera lens under varying
poses ought to be mapped to the same NOCS coordinates.
(2) During the pose fitting stage, the removal of outlier
correspondences is essential. Noise in the object segmentation mask and depth camera sensor can yield outlier points
within the observed object point cloud. These outlier points,
combined with inaccurate correspondence predictions, lead
to outlier correspondences that have a detrimental impact
on the pose fitting process. Therefore, a robust pose fitting

1. Introduction
Category-level object pose estimation is one of the fundamental tasks in robotic vision, which aims to predict the 6D
pose and 3D size of arbitrary objects in the given categories.
This task has received increasing attention from the research
community due to its broad applications in augmented reality [18, 26], robotic manipulation [17, 35], and hand-object
interaction [15, 25]. Compared to traditional instance-level
approaches [20, 30, 31], category-level approaches do not
require a CAD model for each object instance, providing
stronger generalization in real-world scenarios.
* Corresponding author. Website: renhuan1999.github.io/SpotPose.

1170

