This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoMM: A Coherent Interleaved Image-Text Dataset
for Multimodal Understanding and Generation
Wei Chen1,2 *, Lin Li1,3∗ , Yongqi Yang2∗ ,
Bin Wen , Fan Yang4 , Tingting Gao4 , Yu Wu2† , Long Chen1†
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 Wuhan University,
3
AI Chip Center for Emerging Smart Systems, 4 Kuaishou Technology
4

{wchendb, lllidy, longchen}@ust.hk, {yongqiyang, wuyucs}@whu.edu.cn
https://github.com/HKUST-LongGroup/CoMM

Abstract

like capability to alternately create visual and textual content [3, 45]. Specifically, it aims to generate a sequence of
interleaved text descriptions and illustrative images given a
query [3]. With its interleaved multimodal generation ability,
state-of-the-art models can facilitate a variety of applications, e.g., multimodal instruction generation, tutorial step
generation, and visual storytelling.

Interleaved image-text generation has emerged as a vital
multimodal task aimed at creating sequences of interleaved
visual and textual content given a query. Despite notable
advancements in recent multimodal large language models
(MLLMs), generating integrated image-text sequences that
exhibit narrative coherence and entity and style consistency
remains challenging due to poor training data quality. To
this end, we introduce CoMM, a high-quality Coherent interleaved image-text MultiModal dataset designed to enhance
the coherence, consistency, and alignment of generated multimodal content. Initially, CoMM harnesses raw data from
diverse sources, focusing on instructional content and visual
storytelling, establishing a foundation for coherent and consistent content. To further refine the data quality, we devise
a multi-perspective filter strategy that leverages advanced
pre-trained models to ensure the development of sentences,
consistency of inserted images, and semantic alignment between them. Various quality evaluation metrics are designed
to prove the high quality of the filtered dataset. Meanwhile,
extensive few-shot experiments on various downstream tasks
demonstrate CoMM’s effectiveness in significantly enhancing the in-context learning capabilities of MLLMs. Moreover,
we propose four new tasks to evaluate MLLMs’ interleaved
generation abilities, supported by a comprehensive evaluation framework. We believe CoMM opens a new avenue
for advanced MLLMs with superior multimodal in-context
learning and understanding ability.

Recent advancements in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have exhibited exceptional capabilities in
cross-modal generation, but they still struggle to generate
interleaved image-text sequences coherently [36, 44]. The
main reason is that most of them are trained on single imagetext pairs, limited in generating coherent and contextually
integrated multimodal content [18, 44]. To this end, some
efforts integrate multiple models (e.g., GPT-4 [1] and Stable Diffusion XL [28]) to generate open-domain interleaved
image-text contents with arbitrary formats in a training-free
manner [3]. However, their results are often dominated by
the generated text descriptions, limited by the generation
model’s understanding of these textual inputs. In contrast,
other research efforts [6, 10] have attempted to train models
with seamless multimodal understanding and generation capabilities using existing interleaved image-text datasets (e.g.,
MMC4 [45]).
Albeit the unprecedented progress, it is becoming increasingly evident that data-centric methods still suffer several
limitations: 1) Narrative Coherence: The contextual relevance and coherence of generated image-text sentences are
relatively low. In Figure 1(a), the model pre-trained on the
MMC4 [45] directly draws the final cooked dessert, missing
the intermediate coherent steps of generation. These coherent generation steps not only enhance interpretability but
also boost the reasoning capabilities of the model [41]. 2)
Entity and Style Consistency: The entity and subject styles
of the generated illustrated images are inconsistent. As illustrated in Figure 1(b), the style of the blue-gray sofa image

1. Introduction
Interleaved image-text generation has burgeoned as an
emerging multimodal task, striving to imitate the human* Equal contribution. Work was done when Wei Chen interned in
Kuaishou. † Corresponding authors.

8073

