This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Finding Local Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge using Kolmogorov-Arnold Network
Xingyu Qiu1 , Mengying Yang1 , Xinghua Ma1 , Fanding Li1 , Dong Liang1
Gongning Luo1∗ , Wei Wang2 , Kuanquan Wang1 , Shuo Li3
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, USA
luogongning@hit.edu.cn
FID

1. Introduction
Optimizing the diffusion path is a key to improve the image generation quality which is usually ignored. Recently,
numerous studies have focused on generating higher quality images from Gaussian noise in fewer steps. They try to
use different algorithmic frameworks to improve the gener-

Value

In image generation, Schrödinger Bridge (SB)-based methods theoretically enhance the efficiency and quality compared to the diffusion models by finding the least costly path
between two distributions. However, they are computationally expensive and time-consuming when applied to complex image data. The reason is that they focus on fitting
globally optimal paths in high-dimensional spaces, directly
generating images as next step on the path using complex
networks through self-supervised training, which typically
results in a gap with the global optimum. Meanwhile, most
diffusion models are in the same path subspace generated
by weights fA (t) and fB (t), as they follow the paradigm
(xt = fA (t)xImg + fB (t)ϵ). To address the limitations
of SB-based methods, this paper proposes for the first time
to find local Diffusion Schrödinger Bridges (LDSB) in the
diffusion path subspace, which strengthens the connection
between the SB problem and diffusion models. Specifically,
our method optimizes the diffusion paths using KolmogorovArnold Network (KAN), which has the advantage of resistance to forgetting and continuous output. The experiment shows that our LDSB significantly improves the quality and efficiency of image generation using the same pretrained denoising network and the KAN for optimising is
only less than 0.1MB. The FID metric is reduced by more
than 15%, especially with a reduction of 48.50% when NFE
of DDIM is 5 for the CelebA dataset. Code is available at
https://github.com/PerceptionComputingLab/LDSB.

Value

Diffusion Paths

Abstract

Time steps

Sample number

Figure 1. Adjusting the weights of image and noise (fA (t) and
fB (t)) in diffusion enhances image generation quality, as the presence of perturbation reduces the FID. This paper achieves optimization by solving a local diffusion Schrödinger bridge in the
diffusion path subspace generated by fA (t) and fB (t).

ality and efficiency of diffusion models, such as Langevin
dynamic sampling [8, 28, 30] and Continuous Normalizing
Flows (CNFs) [17, 20]. Specifically, they not only change
the training objectives of the denoising network, but also
the diffusion paths. In this paper, the diffusion path refers
to the transfer trajectory containing multiple states between
the prior distribution (Gaussian noise) and the target distribution (images). And the denoising network refers to the
model that separates the noise from the image in the diffusion path. The diffusion paths strongly influence the quality of image generation [4, 31], however, they are prede√
fined.
For instance, DDPM [8] and DDIM [28] use αt and
√
1 − αt as the weights for images x and Gaussian noise ϵ,
respectively, SGM [30] and NCSN [29] use weights of 1
and σt , and Flow Matching [17] and Rectified Flow[20] use
1 − t and t, where αt and σt are predefined functions of
t. In summary, their diffusion paths follow the paradigm
(xt = fA (t)xImg + fB (t)ϵ), and different methods assign
different weights to the image xImg and Gaussian noise ϵ,
as illustrated in Tab. 1. To further investigate the impact of
diffusion paths on image generation quality, a toy experiment introduces random noise into the weights of xImg and
ϵ. As shown in Fig. 1, the presence of some perturbations
does improve the quality of image generation. This paper
aims to find the diffusion paths that improve the image gen-

23227

