This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Free360: Layered Gaussian Splatting for Unbounded 360-Degree View Synthesis
from Extremely Sparse and Unposed Views
Chong Bao1§ Xiyu Zhang1 Zehao Yu3 Jiale Shi1 Guofeng Zhang1
Songyou Peng2 Zhaopeng Cui1†
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 2 ETH Zürich
3
University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center
Input: Extremely (3-4) Sparse Views

Iteratively Layered 360
Reconstruction & Generation

Layered
Reconstruction

Instantsplat [10]

Ground Truth

FSGS* [57]

Video
Generation

(a) Overview of Our Framework

ViewCrafter [51]
Ours Rendering
Our Surface Reconstruction
(b) Novel View Synthesis Comparisons and Our Surface Reconstruction

Figure 1. Free360. (a) We propose a novel Gaussian-based framework, which can reconstruct unbounded 360◦ scenes from extremely (3-4)
sparse views through an iterative fusion of layered reconstruction and generation. (b) Our method outperforms other state-of-the-art methods
in rendering quality and supports complete surface reconstruction.

Abstract
Neural rendering has demonstrated remarkable success in
high-quality 3D neural reconstruction and novel view synthesis with dense input views and accurate poses. However,
applying it to extremely sparse, unposed views in unbounded
360◦ scenes remains a challenging problem. In this paper, we
propose a novel neural rendering framework to accomplish
the unposed and extremely sparse-view 3D reconstruction
in unbounded 360◦ scenes. To resolve the spatial ambiguity inherent in unbounded scenes with sparse input views,
we propose a layered Gaussian-based representation to effectively model the scene with distinct spatial layers. By
employing a dense stereo reconstruction model to recover
coarse geometry, we introduce a layer-specific bootstrap
optimization to refine the noise and fill occluded regions
in the reconstruction. Furthermore, we propose an iterative fusion of reconstruction and generation alongside an
uncertainty-aware training approach to facilitate mutual
conditioning and enhancement between these two processes.

Comprehensive experiments show that our approach outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods in terms of rendering
quality and surface reconstruction accuracy. Project page:
https://zju3dv.github.io/free360/.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author.

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [18] has shown great success in achieving high efficiency and quality in 3D neural reconstruction and novel view synthesis with dense input views and accurate poses. With the development of
large reconstruction models [14, 50, 57] and generative models [24, 25, 36, 52], it even becomes feasible to recover 3D
objects or bounded scenes from sparse views.
Most sparse-view 3DGS approaches [4, 22, 58] rely on
precise camera poses and relatively sparse sets of views (typically more than 10). To handle pose-free scenarios, some
methods [10] tend to learn a 3DGS based on the point cloud
and camera poses obtained from dense stereo reconstruction
models [21, 40]; however, these stereo models often yield
noisy geometry in unbounded scenes, leading to more artifacts and corrupted structures at novel viewpoints. Other
methods [11, 41, 51, 52] tempt to fine-tune video diffusion

§ The work was partially done when visiting ETHZ.

16377

