This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MixerMDM: Learnable Composition of Human Motion Diffusion Models
Pablo Ruiz-Ponce1 , German Barquero2 , Cristina Palmero3 , Sergio Escalera2 , José Garcı́a-Rodrı́guez1
1

Universidad de Alicante, Spain
Universitat de Barcelona and Computer Vision Center, Spain
3
King’s College London, UK
pruiz@dtic.ua.es
https://pabloruizponce.com/papers/MixerMDM
2

Mixed Motion
Two persons are in an intense
boxing match while suddenly one
person throws a kick

Text Individual 1
An individual throws a
kick with his right leg
Mixing
Weight

Den

oisin

Text Interaction
Two persons are in an
intense boxing match

g Ste
p

Mixer

Mixing
Weight

Text Individual 2
An individual is boxing

Den

oisin

g Ste
p

Figure 1. We introduce MixerMDM, the first learnable model composition technique for combining pre-trained text-conditioned human
motion diffusion models. MixerMDM has demonstrated a consistent ability to generate highly controllable human interactions by combining a model that generates individual motions from textual descriptions with a model that creates human-human interactions.

Abstract
Generating human motion guided by conditions such as textual descriptions is challenging due to the need for datasets
with pairs of high-quality motion and their corresponding
conditions. The difficulty increases when aiming for finer
control in the generation. To that end, prior works have
proposed to combine several motion diffusion models pretrained on datasets with different types of conditions, thus
allowing control with multiple conditions. However, the
proposed merging strategies overlook that the optimal way
to combine the generation processes might depend on the
particularities of each pre-trained generative model and
also the specific textual descriptions. In this context, we introduce MixerMDM, the first learnable model composition
technique for combining pre-trained text-conditioned human motion diffusion models. Unlike previous approaches,
MixerMDM provides a dynamic mixing strategy that is
trained in an adversarial fashion to learn to combine the
denoising process of each model depending on the set of
conditions driving the generation. By using MixerMDM

to combine single- and multi-person motion diffusion models, we achieve fine-grained control on the dynamics of every person individually, and also on the overall interaction.
Furthermore, we propose a new evaluation technique that,
for the first time in this task, measures the interaction and
individual quality by computing the alignment between the
mixed generated motions and their conditions as well as the
capabilities of MixerMDM to adapt the mixing throughout
the denoising process depending on the motions to mix.

1. Introduction

12380

Creating synthetic human motion that closely mimics real
individuals is important for applications such as animation [44], virtual reality [32, 34], and robotics [45]. Human
motion generation techniques have experienced remarkable
progress in recent years [70]. However, unlike other generative fields such as image or text where data is abundant,
high-quality human motion data remains scarce and costly
to obtain and annotate. Currently, there exists a variety
of small, specialized datasets that focus on specific ranges
of motion over the entire human motion manifold (e.g.,

