This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Minority-Focused Text-to-Image Generation via Prompt Optimization
Soobin Um
Jong Chul Ye
Graduate School of AI
KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{sum,jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1. Example results from our minority generation approach using SDXL-Lightning. Our framework is designed to produce
unique minority samples w.r.t. user-provided prompts, which are rarely generated by standard samplers like DDIM [46]. Due to its
low-likelihood encouraging nature, our sampler often demonstrates counteracting results against demographic biases in text-to-image
models [13]. See the samples in the last row for instance, where our sampler mitigates prevalent age and racial biases (e.g., associating
“man” with “young” and “woman” with “white”) by modifying the demographic traits of the subjects.

Abstract
We investigate the generation of minority samples using pretrained text-to-image (T2I) latent diffusion models. Minority instances, in the context of T2I generation,
can be defined as ones living on low-density regions of
text-conditional data distributions. They are valuable for
various applications of modern T2I generators, such as
data augmentation and creative AI. Unfortunately, existing
pretrained T2I diffusion models primarily focus on highdensity regions, largely due to the influence of guided samplers (like CFG) that are essential for high-quality generation. To address this, we present a novel framework

to counter the high-density-focus of T2I diffusion models. Specifically, we first develop an online prompt optimization framework that encourages emergence of desired properties during inference while preserving semantic contents of user-provided prompts. We subsequently tailor this generic prompt optimizer into a specialized solver
that promotes generation of minority features by incorporating a carefully-crafted likelihood objective. Extensive
experiments conducted across various types of T2I models
demonstrate that our approach significantly enhances the
capability to produce high-quality minority instances compared to existing samplers. Code is available at https:
/ / github . com / soobin - um / MinorityPrompt.

20926

