This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-1-to-A: Zero-Shot One Image to Animatable Head Avatars Using Video
Diffusion
1

Zhenglin Zhou1,2 , Fan Ma2 , Hehe Fan2,† , Tat-Seng Chua3
State Key Laboratory of Brain-machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University
2
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University
3
National University of Singapore
{zhenglinzhou, mafan, hehefan}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

dcscts@nus.edu.sg

(a) Score-based Generation

(b) Symbiotic Generation

Animatable head avatar generation typically requires
extensive data for training. To reduce the data requirements, a natural solution is to leverage existing data-free
static avatar generation methods, such as pre-trained diffusion models with score distillation sampling (SDS), which
align avatars with pseudo ground-truth outputs from the
diffusion model. However, directly distilling 4D avatars
from video diffusion often leads to over-smooth results due
to spatial and temporal inconsistencies in the generated
video. To address this issue, we propose Zero-1-to-A, a robust method that synthesizes a spatial and temporal consistency dataset for 4D avatar reconstruction using the video
diffusion model. Specifically, Zero-1-to-A iteratively constructs video datasets and optimizes animatable avatars in a
progressive manner, ensuring that avatar quality increases
smoothly and consistently throughout the learning process.
This progressive learning involves two stages: (1) Spatial Consistency Learning fixes expressions and learns from
front-to-side views, and (2) Temporal Consistency Learning
fixes views and learns from relaxed to exaggerated expressions, generating 4D avatars in a simple-to-complex manner. Extensive experiments demonstrate that Zero-1-to-A
improves fidelity, animation quality, and rendering speed
compared to existing diffusion-based methods, providing a
solution for lifelike avatar creation. Code is publicly available at: https://github.com/ZhenglinZhou/Zero-1-to-A.

SDS

Avatar !

Video Diffusion ❄

Render

Reconstruct

Avatar !

Zero-1-to-A

Render

Video Diffusion ❄

Dataset !

Update

Figure 1. 4D Avatar generation with SDS loss [58] and our
Zero-1-to-A. Video diffusion often suffers from spatial and temporal inconsistencies. (a) The SDS loss, aligning avatar with output from video diffusion, produces over-smooth results. (b) Zero1-to-A addresses this issue by synthesizing spatially and temporally consistent datasets for avatar reconstruction. It introduces an
updatable dataset to cache video diffusion results and establishes
a mutually beneficial relationship between avatar generation and
dataset construction to further enhance consistency.

1. Introduction

Head avatar generation typically relies on large amounts
of real or synthetic human data [39, 74, 78, 79, 87, 89,
92, 94], which are not easy to collect. Recently, score
distillation-based methods [30, 35, 42, 45, 46, 49, 58,
70, 71, 77] have revolutionized this field by enabling the
3D/4D head avatar generation using pre-trained image diffusion models (e.g. Stable Diffusion [63]) without the need
of human data. Existing methods mostly focus on textconditioned generation, which is expressive but lacks the
precision and control of visual inputs [4, 23, 44, 69, 90].
Image inputs are critical for realistic 4D avatar generation
but are still underexplored.
Recent advances in video diffusion [6, 13, 53, 73] have
made it feasible to generate dynamic head avatars by distilling from video diffusion models. However, as shown in
Fig. 7, video diffusion suffers from spatial and temporal inconsistencies. Essentially, SDS aims to align the images
rendered by the 3D model with pseudo ground-truth outputs generated by the diffusion model [42]. Consequently,
this instability in the distillation process often leads to over-

Head avatars are lifelike digital representations of humans
created by computer graphics and deep learning. They can
mimic human expressions, movements, and interactions,
serving as speakers, assistants, characters, etc. in AR/VR,
films and games.
† Corresponding author.

15941

