This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bootstrap Your Own Views: Masked Ego-Exo Modeling
for Fine-grained View-invariant Video Representations
Jungin Park1

Jiyoung Lee2,3∗

Kwanghoon Sohn1,4∗

1

2
Yonsei University
Ewha Womans University
3
4
NAVER AI Lab
Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)

{newrun, khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr

lee.jiyoung@ewha.ac.kr

Abstract
View-invariant representation learning from egocentric
(first-person, ego) and exocentric (third-person, exo) videos
is a promising approach toward generalizing video understanding systems across multiple viewpoints. However, this
area has been underexplored due to the substantial differEgocentric (first-person) view Exocentric (third-person) view
ences in perspective, motion patterns, and context between
✓ Narrow FoV
✓ Wide FoV
ego and exo views. In this paper, we propose a novel masked
✓ Object-focusing
✓ Full context
ego-exo modeling that promotes both causal temporal dy✓ Fast changing
✓ Stable and
dynamic motion
centered-view
namics and cross-view alignment, called Bootstrap Your
patterns
motion patterns
Own Views (BYOV), for fine-grained view-invariant video
representation learning from unpaired ego-exo videos. We
Fine-grained View-invariant Latent Space
highlight the importance of capturing the compositional naFigure 1. Challenges for view-invariant video representation
ture of human actions as a basis for robust cross-view unlearning from unpaired ego and exo videos. There is a fundamenderstanding. Specifically, self-view masking and cross-view
tal gap between ego-exo views, such as perspective differences
masking predictions are designed to learn view-invariant
following the camera angle, context cues, scale and depth variaand powerful representations concurrently. Experimental
tions, and different motion patterns even when doing the activity.
✓ Narrow
FoVour BYOV significantly
✓ Wide
FoV
results demonstrate
that
surpasses
✓ Object-focusing
✓ Full context
existing approaches
with notable gains across all
metrics in
✓ Fast changing dynamic
✓ Stable and centered-view
four downstream
ego-exo
video
tasks.
The
code
is
available
nize the same action across different viewpoints is a crucial
motion patterns
motion
patterns
at https://github.com/park-jungin/byov.
requirement in practice applications including robotics and
augmented reality. For instance, it allows robots to understand human actions from various angles, and enables better
1. Introduction
human-robot interaction.
However, learning view-invariant representations from
When babies observe the actions of others −such as parents,
both
ego and exo videos poses significant challenges for
siblings, or caregivers−, they try to replicate those actions
the
following
reasons; 1) The action videos taken simulEgocentric
(first-person)
view
Exocentric
(third-person)
view
from their own perspective. It is a fundamental capabiltaneously
with
ego-exo views are hard to control and colity of the human cognitive system [35, 37], known as oblect,
often
impractical
in real-world settings. Therefore, we
servational learning. This learning arises from the recogmight
use
unpaired
ego-exo
videos for flexible data colnition of natural action changes from an exocentric (i.e.,
lection.
2)
There
are
fundamental
differences in ego-exo
third-person, shortly exo) perspective to an egocentric (i.e.,
videos
in
field-of-view
(FoV)
and
scale
variations, differfirst-person, shortly ego) perspective. The skill to recogLatent space
ent focal points and motion patterns, and context about the
∗ Corresponding authors.
environment, as illustrated in Fig. 1. In ego views, objects
This work was partly supported by the National Research Foundation of
or actions occur closer to the camera, views are dynamiKorea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. RScally changing, and the subject often focuses on what they
2025-00515741) and the Yonsei Signature Research Cluster Program of
2024 (2024-22-0161).
are directly interacting with. However, exo views are typ-

13661

