This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeClotH: Decomposable 3D Cloth and Human Body Reconstruction
from a Single Image
Hyeongjin Nam1,3
1

Donghwan Kim1

Jeongtaek Oh2

Kyoung Mu Lee1,2

Dept. of ECE&ASRI, 2 IPAI, Seoul National University, 3 KRAFTON
{namhjsnu28, dh971106, ohjtgood, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr
https://hygenie1228.github.io/DeClotH/

Abstract
Most existing methods of 3D clothed human reconstruction from a single image treat the clothed human as a single object without distinguishing between cloth and human
body. In this regard, we present DeClotH, which separately
reconstructs 3D cloth and human body from a single image. This task remains largely unexplored due to the extreme occlusion between cloth and the human body, making it challenging to infer accurate geometries and textures.
Moreover, while recent 3D human reconstruction methods
have achieved impressive results using text-to-image diffusion models, directly applying such an approach to this
problem often leads to incorrect guidance, particularly in
reconstructing 3D cloth. To address these challenges, we
propose two core designs in our framework. First, to alleviate the occlusion issue, we leverage 3D template models
of cloth and human body as regularizations, which provide
strong geometric priors to prevent erroneous reconstruction
by the occlusion. Second, we introduce a cloth diffusion
model specifically designed to provide contextual information about cloth appearance, thereby enhancing the reconstruction of 3D cloth. Qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate that our proposed approach is highly effective in reconstructing both 3D cloth and the human body.

Figure 1. Overview of DeClotH. Given a single image, our framework reconstructs 3D cloth and human body based on the 3D cloth
and body templates.

rately reconstructing the 3D cloth and human body directly
from a single image, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Despite the potential applications of decomposable 3D
cloth and human body reconstruction, it has not been extensively explored. One major problem is severe occlusion
between the cloth and human body, with cloth covering substantial portions of the human body surface. Such an occlusion makes it difficult to infer the overall geometry and
texture of the invisible parts between 3D cloth and human
body. Additionally, image evidence (e.g., cloth silhouette)
of the input image is often imperfect due to occlusion, leading to reconstruction that can overfit to the imperfect evidence. For these reasons, the reconstruction of decompos-

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D cloth and human body from a single image is an essential task for various applications including
virtual try-on and AR/VR. In recent years, numerous 3D
clothed human reconstruction methods [1, 17, 20, 56] have
emerged with the advent of diffusion models [18]. Although
these methods achieve impressive reconstruction quality,
they are inherently designed not to decompose the 3D cloth
and human body, limiting their downstream applications.
In this regard, we tackle the more challenging task of sepa-

5636

