This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

I NTER M IMIC: Towards Universal Whole-Body Control for Physics-Based
Human-Object Interactions
Sirui Xu1 Hung Yu Ling2 Yu-Xiong Wang1† Liang-Yan Gui1†
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Electronic Arts
†
Equal Advising
https://sirui-xu.github.io/InterMimic

Highly-Dynamic Interaction

Multi-Object Interaction

Scalable Interaction Skills
Lift the woodchair.

Humanoid Robot Interaction

MoCap Correction

Interaction Prediction

Text-to-Interaction

Figure 1. InterMimic enables physically simulated humans to perform interactions with dynamic and diverse objects. It supports highlydynamic, multi-object interactions and scalable skill learning (Top), making it adaptable for versatile downstream applications (Bottom): it
can translate whole-body loco-manipulation skills to a humanoid robot [24, 81], perfect interaction MoCap data, and bridge kinematic generation, e.g., predicting future interactions from past (InterDiff [101]) or generating interactions given text prompts (InterDreamer [102]).

Abstract
Achieving realistic simulations of humans interacting with
a wide range of objects has long been a fundamental
goal. Extending physics-based motion imitation to complex
human-object interactions (HOIs) is challenging due to intricate human-object coupling, variability in object geometries, and artifacts in motion capture data, such as inaccurate contacts and limited hand detail. We introduce InterMimic, a framework that enables a single policy to robustly
learn from hours of imperfect MoCap data covering diverse
full-body interactions with dynamic and varied objects. Our
key insight is to employ a curriculum strategy – perfect first,
then scale up. We first train subject-specific teacher policies
to mimic, retarget, and refine motion capture data. Next, we
distill these teachers into a student policy, with the teachers acting as online experts providing direct supervision,

as well as high-quality references. Notably, we incorporate RL fine-tuning on the student policy to surpass mere
demonstration replication and achieve higher-quality solutions. Our experiments demonstrate that InterMimic produces realistic and diverse interactions across multiple HOI
datasets. The learned policy generalizes in a zero-shot manner and seamlessly integrates with kinematic generators,
elevating the framework from mere imitation to generative
modeling of complex human-object interactions.

1. Introduction

12266

Animating human-object interactions is a challenging and
time-consuming task even for skilled animators. It requires
a deep understanding of physics and meticulous attention to
detail to create natural and convincing interactions. While

