This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Odd-One-Out: Anomaly Detection by Comparing with Neighbors
Ankan Bhunia

Changjian Li

Hakan Bilen

University of Edinburgh
https://github.com/VICO-UoE/OddOneOutAD

Input: Posed multi-view RGB images.
Task: To find odd-looking instance(s) in
the object set {𝒐! ,𝒐" , 𝒐# ,𝒐$ }.

𝑰" , 𝑷"
𝒐"

𝑰! , 𝑷!
(a)

𝒐#
𝑰# , 𝑷#
𝒐𝟒

𝒐!

𝒐"

… 𝒐#
𝒐!

𝒐%

𝒐#

Multi-object AD setting (ours)

(b)
(ambiguous; when definition
of ‘normality’ is unknown)

normal

anomaly

𝒐!

Standard AD setting

𝒐%

Generalization capability on unseen shapes

𝒐"
(c)

Multi-object scene

Fine-grained
cross-instance matching

Object-centric
prediction

Training on seen
categories

Testing on seen
categories

Testing on unseen
categories

Figure 1. (a) We propose a new anomaly detection task focused on identifying ‘odd-looking’ objects relative to other instances within a
scene. Inspired by real-world quality control in production environments, this task aims to detect subtle variations in geometry and texture,
including defects like cracks and fractures, in a group of manufactured samples. (b) Our setting is scene-specific, requiring a comparison of
object instances within the input scene, unlike the standard AD setting, which takes only a single object as input. (c) Our matching-based
paradigm enables cross-category performance.

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel anomaly detection (AD) problem aimed at identifying ‘odd-looking’ objects within a scene
by comparing them to other objects present. Unlike traditional AD benchmarks with fixed anomaly criteria, our
task detects anomalies specific to each scene by inferring a
reference group of regular objects. To address occlusions,
we use multiple views of each scene as input, construct
3D object-centric models for each instance from 2D views,
enhancing these models with geometrically consistent partaware representations. Anomalous objects are then detected
through cross-instance comparison. We also introduce two
new benchmarks, ToysAD-8K and PartsAD-15K as testbeds
for future research in this task. We provide a comprehensive
analysis of our method quantitatively and qualitatively on
these benchmarks.

ence of a previously unseen category [2, 10, 32] or low-level
ones such as defects and variations in the normal object shape
and texture [6, 9, 14]. These benchmarks typically assess
objects in isolation, disregarding inter-object relationships
and contextual dependencies. However, in many real-world
scenarios, ‘normality’ is often context-dependent. For instance, in a production line for blue-handled coffee cups,
a yellow handle is anomalous, and in a production line for
yellow-handled coffee cups, a blue handle is anomalous (see
Fig. 1(b)). Methods assuming a fixed standard of normality
cannot accommodate such context-dependent anomalies.

1. Introduction

Inspired by real-world visual inspection, where efficiency
in automatically processing large volumes of the same product is crucial, we introduce a new AD problem with along
two new benchmarks and a novel solution. Our setup (see
Fig. 1(a)) consists of scenes containing multiple instances of
the same object (e.g., coffee cup) including either all normal,
or a mix of normal and anomalous instances. Each scene
has at least two normal instances, which together serve as a
scene-specific reference for ‘normality’. The objective is to
detect anomalous instances while generalizing to previously
unseen scenes including unseen objects and layouts. This
approach facilitates cost-effective models that do not require
retraining for new products. Our task diverges from tradi-

Anomaly detection (AD) [11, 30] identifies patterns deviating from expected behavior. In standard vision AD benchmarks, anomalies arise from high-level factors such as pres-

20395

