This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reanimating Images using Neural Representations of Dynamic Stimuli
Jacob Yeung, Andrew F. Luo, Gabriel Sarch, Margaret M. Henderson, Deva Ramanan, Michael J. Tarr*
Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract

to process and represent the daily experience of naturally
motion-rich environments in ways that are both semantically grounded and behaviorally-relevant. For example,
a video of a person walking affords information not only
about the visual features of the walker, but also about motion patterns, context, intent, and relationships between the
different elements in the scene (e.g., sudden increase in gait
implies urgency). This interplay between spatial and temporal information is impossible to capture from static images;
accordingly, humans excel at inferring such high-level information from scene dynamics [5].

While computer vision models have made incredible strides
in static image recognition, they still do not match human
performance in tasks that require the understanding of complex, dynamic motion. This is notably true for real-world
scenarios where embodied agents face complex and motionrich environments. Our approach, BrainNRDS (Neural
Representations of Dynamic Stimuli), leverages state-ofthe-art video diffusion models to decouple static image representation from motion generation, enabling us to utilize fMRI brain activity for a deeper understanding of human responses to dynamic visual stimuli. Conversely, we
also demonstrate that information about the brain’s representation of motion can enhance the prediction of optical flow in artificial systems. Our novel approach leads
to four main findings: (1) Visual motion, represented as
fine-grained, object-level resolution optical flow, can be decoded from brain activity generated by participants viewing video stimuli; (2) Video encoders outperform imagebased models in predicting video-driven brain activity; (3)
Brain-decoded motion signals enable realistic video reanimation based only on the initial frame of the video; and (4)
We extend prior work to achieve full video decoding from
video-driven brain activity. BrainNRDS advances our understanding of how the brain represents spatial and temporal information in dynamic visual scenes. Our findings demonstrate the potential of combining brain imaging with video diffusion models for developing more robust and biologically-inspired computer vision systems. We
show additional decoding and encoding examples on this
site: https://brain-nrds.github.io/.

Recent advances have improved our understanding of
how visual information is represented in the brain through
computer vision models [6–8], yet a significant gap persists
in explaining how the brain processes dynamic visual stimuli. While some studies have started to explore the neural
representation of dynamic visual stimuli [3, 9, 10], there remains substantial potential to further harness modern computer vision techniques, especially video-based models.
There has also been little work demonstrating how insights
from human vision can be leveraged to build better computer vision systems. Here we address both challenges,
demonstrating that state-of-the-art video foundation models
can be used to robustly predict human brain responses to
dynamic visual inputs and that brain-decoded motion signals can help to reanimate videos based only on the first
frame of the video. Critically, our framework outperforms
prior work for both problems, achieving lower end point error (EPE) for motion decoding based on brain responses as
compared to [3] and better motion prediction based on initial static frames with brain data than without brain data.
In this paper, we present a framework for analyzing dynamic visual stimuli that explicitly separates the modeling
of static and motion-related image representations as they
are processed in the human brain: Neural Representations
of Dynamic Stimuli (“BrainNRDS”). By decoupling these
elements, BrainNRDS offers a targeted approach to understanding the distinct neural pathways used to process and
represent dynamic visual information in real-world scenes.
Better specified models of dynamic visual processing are
also critical for developing effective models of ecologically
critical domains such as social interaction [5], action rep-

1. Introduction
Human vision excels at understanding complex, dynamic
scenes, while computer vision offers powerful tools for data
processing and analysis. This work explores how insights
from human brain activity, specifically in response to dynamic visual stimuli, can enhance the ability of computer
vision systems to understand complex motion. Critically,
as inherently embodied systems, our brains have evolved
* Corresponding author: michaeltarr@cmu.edu

5331

