This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

POp-GS: Next Best View in 3D-Gaussian Splatting with P-Optimality
Joey Wilson
University of Michigan

Marcelino Almeida
Amazon Lab 126

Sachit Mahajan
Amazon Lab 126

wilsoniv@umich.edu

mmalmeid@amazon.com

msachit@amazon.com

Martin Labrie
Amazon Lab 126

Maani Ghaffari
University of Michigan

Omid Ghasemalizadeh
Amazon Lab 126

labrieml@amazon.com

maanigj@umich.edu

ghasemal@amazon.com

Min Sun
Amazon Lab 126

Cheng-Hao Kuo
Amazon Lab 126

Arnab Sen
Amazon Lab 126

aliensunmin@gmail.com

chkuo@amazon.com

senarnie@amazon.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel algorithm for quantifying uncertainty and information gained within 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3D-GS) through P-Optimality. While 3D-GS has
proven to be a useful world model with high-quality rasterizations, it does not natively quantify uncertainty or information, posing a challenge for real-world applications such
as 3D-GS SLAM. We propose to quantify information gain
in 3D-GS by reformulating the problem through the lens
of optimal experimental design, which is a classical solution widely used in literature. By restructuring information
quantification of 3D-GS through optimal experimental design, we arrive at multiple solutions, of which T-Optimality
and D-Optimality perform the best quantitatively and qualitatively as measured on two popular datasets. Additionally, we propose a block diagonal covariance approximation which provides a measure of correlation at the expense
of a greater computation cost.

(a) Uniform

(b) FisherRF

(c) Ours

(d) Ground Truth

Figure 1. We propose a novel method for calculating information
gain from image in 3D Gaussian Splatting. In the above images,
each method is provided a set of one hundred candidate views on
scenes from the Blender dataset, and selects ten views to train a
3D-GS model on. Compared to state-of-the-art, our method more
accurately estimate the information value of images to train a 3DGS model. In this figure we demonstrate block D-Optimality, however our derivation also provides multiple solutions discussed later.

1. Introduction

potential to function as a map [6, 23, 37, 42].
Given a set of views of a scene, 3D-GS learns to render novel views from any angle through gradient descent.
3D ellipsoids are iteratively fine-tuned, which can then be
rasterized to a 2D image at novel views. Several works
have shown that the 3D ellipsoids can be extended to include features beyond just color, such as the category of objects the ellipsoid represents, resulting in an improved level
of semantic scene understanding [30, 41]. However, 3D-GS
does not natively quantify uncertainty, which leads to issues
when determining whether an image has been seen before,

In order to operate in a novel environment, robots must be
capable of quantifying uncertainty in their surroundings due
to occlusions and unobserved regions, as well as quantifying information gained by exploring new areas. While
many prior methods for map representations were built on
a metric space with natural uncertainty quantification, such
representations result in discretization errors of the environment [38]. Recently, 3D-Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) was
proposed as a method for high-quality novel-view synthesis
[14], which captivated the attention of the robotics community due to its explicit world model representation, with the

3646

