This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Video Super-Resolution for Real-time Rendering
with Decoupled G-buffer Guidance
Mingjun Zheng∗ Long Sun∗ Jiangxin Dong Jinshan Pan†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{mingjunzheng, cs.longsun, jxdong, jspan}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

PSNR vs. Latency vs. Memory

30.0

Latency is a key driver for real-time rendering applications, making super-resolution techniques increasingly popular to accelerate rendering processes. In contrast to
existing methods that directly concatenate low-resolution
frames and G-buffers as input without discrimination, we
develop an asymmetric UNet-based super-resolution network with decoupled G-buffer guidance, dubbed RDG,
to facilitate the spatial and temporal feature exploration
for minimizing performance overheads and latency. We
first propose a dynamic feature modulator (DFM) to selectively encode the spatial information to capture precise
structural information. We then incorporate auxiliary Gbuffer information to guide the decoder to generate detailrich, temporally stable results. Specifically, we adopt a
high-frequency feature booster (HFB) to adaptively transfer the high-frequency information from the normal and
bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF) components of the G-buffer, enhancing the details of the generated results. To further enhance the temporal stability, we design a cross-frame temporal refiner (CTR) with
depth and motion vector constraints to aggregate the previous and current frames. Extensive experimental results
reveal that our proposed method is capable of generating
high-quality and temporally stable results in real-time rendering. The proposed RDG-s produces 1080P rendering
results on a RTX 3090 GPU with a speed of 126 FPS.
Our source codes and pre-trained models are available at:
https://github.com/sunny2109/RDG.

PSNR (dB)

29.0

BasicVSR++*

RDG

29.5

RDG-s

SAFMN
BasicVSR*

SMFANet

NSRR

28.5

28.0

27.5

FuseSR

# Memory

27.0
50M

26.5

26.0

NSRD
10

20

30

100M

200M
800M

40

50

Lantency (ms)

60

70

80

Figure 1. Comparisons of our proposed methods and state-of-theart ones in terms of accuracy, latency, and GPU consumption. Circle sizes indicate the usage of GPU memory. The proposed RDG
family obtain better trade-off between performance and efficiency.

1. Introduction

provements. However, it is still extremely challenging to
render high-quality, high-resolution images in real-time.
To meet this challenge, deep learning super-sampling
(DLSS) techniques [1, 3, 4] have been widely adopted in
the industry, which perform super-resolution (SR) on the
rendered low-resolution (LR) images to generate the corresponding high-resolution outputs in real time. Although
these methods effectively decrease rendering time, it remains open to strike a balance between latency and quality.
A number of approaches have been developed for the
above tasks, including video super resolution (VSR) [8, 9,
31, 40, 53] and efficient super resolution (ESR) [21, 34, 47,
48, 60]. While these methods have achieved impressive results, they cannot be directly used for real-time rendering.
For video super-resolution, there are three main reasons that
affect its application. First, most existing VSR methods rely
on bidirectional feature propagation, which conflicts with
the rendering process, as no future frame information can
be obtained. Next, feature warping operation for temporal
fusion requires time to estimate the optical flow, which increases considerably as the input resolution increases, thus
significantly limiting the inference efficiency of the model.

Real-time rendering is widely used in a variety of applications, such as video games, virtual reality, and movies, to
quickly produce high-quality and high-resolution images.
With the breakthrough development of graphics hardware,
real-time rendering technology has made remarkable im∗ Co-first authorship
† Corresponding author

11328

