This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified Model for Compressed Sensing MRI Across Undersampling Patterns
Armeet Singh Jatyani∗
Miguel Liu-Schiaffini

Jiayun Wang*
Aditi Chandrashekar
Zihui Wu
Bahareh Tolooshams
Anima Anandkumar
California Institute of Technology

{armeet,peterw,ajchandr,zwu2,mliuschi,btoloosh,anima}@caltech.edu

Abstract
Compressed Sensing MRI reconstructs images of the
body’s internal anatomy from undersampled measurements,
thereby reducing scan time—the time subjects need to remain
still. Recently, deep learning has shown great potential for
reconstructing high-fidelity images from highly undersampled measurements. However, one needs to train multiple
models for different undersampling patterns and desired output image resolutions, since most networks operate on a
fixed discretization. Such approaches are highly impractical
in clinical settings, where undersampling patterns and image
resolutions are frequently changed to accommodate different
real-time imaging and diagnostic requirements.
We propose a unified MRI reconstruction model robust
to various measurement undersampling patterns and image resolutions. Our approach uses neural operators—a
discretization-agnostic architecture applied in both image
and measurement spaces—to capture local and global features. Empirically, our model improves SSIM by 11% and
PSNR by 4 dB over a state-of-the-art CNN (End-to-End
VarNet), with 600× faster inference than diffusion methods. The resolution-agnostic design also enables zero-shot
super-resolution and extended field-of-view reconstruction,
offering a versatile and efficient solution for clinical MR
imaging. Our unified model offers a versatile solution for
MRI, adapting seamlessly to various measurement undersampling and imaging resolutions, making it highly effective for
flexible and reliable clinical imaging. Our code is available
at https://armeet.ca/nomri.

1. Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a popular noninvasive imaging technology, used in numerous medical and
scientific applications such as neurosurgery [38], clinical oncology [20], diagnostic testing [16], neuroscience [22], and
pharmaceutical research [36]. MRI is greatly limited by a
* Equal contribution.

slow data acquisition process, which sometimes requires patients to remain still for an hour [4, 39]. Hence, accelerating
MRI scan has garnered tremendous attention [11, 18, 28].
Compressed Sensing (CS) [9] enables MRI at subNyquist rates and reduces acquisition time for greater clinical
utility. This is framed as an ill-posed inverse problem [12],
where prior knowledge about MR images is crucial for reconstruction. Traditional Compressed Sensing MRI assumes
a sparse prior in a transform domain (e.g., wavelets [3]). Recent deep learning methods learn underlying data structures
to achieve superior performance [5, 40]. Current state-of-theart models establish an end-to-end mapping [15, 40] from
undersampled measurements to image reconstruction in both
image and frequency domains. However, these models often
struggle with generalization across varying resolutions, a
critical need in clinical practice where flexible resolution
adjustments are necessary. A unified model that is agnostic
to discretizations would greatly improve efficiency.
Neural Operators (NOs) [21] are a deep learning framework that learns mappings between infinite-dimensional
function spaces, making them agnostic to discretizations
(resolutions). This property makes them suitable for tasks
with data at varying resolutions, such as partial differential
equations (PDEs) [21, 25, 34] and PDE-related applications
[32, 35]. NOs could also be suitable for compressed sensing MRI due to measurements with multiple undersampling
patterns. Various NO architectures [24, 26, 34] have been
proposed. Recently, discrete-continuous (DISCO) convolutions [26, 31] have emerged as an efficient neural operator
that captures local features and leverages GPU acceleration
for standard convolutions. Due to the similarity to standard
convolutions, the building blocks of many existing MRI
deep learning models [5, 40], DISCO is a good candidate for
resolution-agnostic MRI reconstruction.
Our approach: We propose a unified model based on
NOs, that is robust to different undersampling patterns and
image resolutions in compressed sensing MRI (Fig. 1a). Our
model follows an unrolled network design [15, 40] with
DISCO [26, 31]. As the image resolution increases, DISCO
maintains a resolution-agnostic kernel with a consistent con-

26004

