This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DEAL: Data-Efficient Adversarial Learning for High-Quality Infrared Imaging
Zhu Liu† , Zijun Wang† , Jinyuan Liu‡ , Fanqi Meng† , Long Ma† , Risheng Liu† *
†

‡

School of Software Technology, Dalian University of Technology
School of Mechanical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology

liuzhu@mail.dlut.edu.cn,wzijun6@gmail.com, rsliu@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Thermal imaging is often compromised by dynamic, complex degradations caused by hardware limitations and unpredictable environmental factors. The scarcity of highquality infrared data, coupled with the challenges of dynamic, intricate degradations, makes it difficult to recover
details using existing methods. In this paper, we introduce
thermal degradation simulation integrated into the training
process via a mini-max optimization, by modeling these degraded factors as adversarial attacks on thermal images.
The simulation is dynamic to maximize objective functions,
thus capturing a broad spectrum of degraded data distributions. This approach enables training with limited data,
thereby improving model performance. Additionally, we introduce a dual-interaction network that combines the benefits of spiking neural networks with scale transformation
to capture degraded features with sharp spike signal intensities. This architecture ensures compact model parameters while preserving efficient feature representation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method not only
achieves superior visual quality under diverse single and
composited degradation, but also delivers a significant reduction in processing when trained on only fifty clear images, outperforming existing techniques in efficiency and
accuracy. The source code will be available at https:
//github.com/LiuZhu-CV/DEAL.

Unfortunately, infrared modality is inevitably characterized by complex degradation factors in real-world dynamic
and extreme imaging conditions [26, 32]. These corruptions
are naturally detrimental to visual human observation and
downstream semantic perception tasks. Recently, numerous
deep learning-based methods have been proposed, which
can be roughly divided into two typical methodologies:
multi-modality image fusion and single-image infrared enhancement. Various attempts for image fusion have been
made to design information measurements (e.g., salience
measuring [34], feature richness [31]) cross-modal attention [24], and correlation-driven fusion [25], thereby mitigating degradation through visible features. However, in
extreme scenes, degradation of visible light is severe.

1. Introduction

Specifically, in the realm of single-image infrared enhancement [4, 44, 45], numerical schemes are often based
on transformations, filtering, and histogram for specific deblurring and denoising tasks with huge burden. Learningbased methods targeting specific single degradations are
widely investigated, having achieved promising breakthroughs. For instance, Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [40] have garnered significant attention for infrared super-resolution, incorporating recursive attention
network [27], degradation model-guided learning [11], and
more. Introducing supplementary information (e.g., visible modality), and transfer learning strategies [15] have
been proposed for image super-resolution. Moreover, multiscale feature representations are widely utilized for infrared
stripe denoising [46]. Learning-based schemes mostly utilize the specific handcrafted instances with simple degradation for training, lacking the adaptation for complex corruptions. Furthermore, existing infrared datasets suffer from
the limited resolution and degradations (e.g., RoadScene
with 640 × 512 resolution and TNO with heavy noises).

Infrared imaging [1], as a robust and insensitive technique
for capturing thermal radiation with salient features, plays
a significant role in various visual perception tasks, such
as multi-modality image fusion [30], small target detection [38], and semantic segmentation [24]. Due to its ability
to effectively capture and convey temperature information,
infrared imagery demonstrates reliability and environmental adaptability in adverse conditions [41].
* Corresponding author.

28198

Two major obstacles hinder the advancement of infrared
enhancement research. (1) Scarcity of high-quality thermal
data: Infrared imaging is affected by dynamic changes due
to temperature-driven thermal radiation and inherent hardware limitations. Selecting appropriate models that can address various degradation factors and intensities is challeng-

