This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Test-Time Visual In-Context Tuning
Jiahao Xie1,2 , Alessio Tonioni3 , Nathalie Rauschmayr3 , Federico Tombari3 , Bernt Schiele1,2
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, SIC 2 VIA Research Center 3 Google
{jxie, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

NYUv2-C depth estimation
0.537
0.392

ADE20K-C semantic seg.
49.9

{alessiot, rauschmayr, tombari}@google.com

COCO-C panoptic seg.

SIDD-C denoising

43.4

Rain-C deraining

38.88

22.40

27.0

Original

29.3

28.2

26.4

26.9

26.8
25.3

23.08

25.8

23.22

23.12

16.94

19.92

24.56
0.365

LoL-C enhance.

29.49

16.15

17.97
17.79

17.77

15.93

15.90

0.205

Painter
VICT

0.080

zero-shot

one-shot

A.Rel

zero-shot
mIoU

one-shot

zero-shot

one-shot

zero-shot

PQ

PSNR

one-shot

zero-shot
PSNR

one-shot

zero-shot

one-shot

PSNR

Figure 1. Test-time visual in-context tuning (VICT) on six representative vision tasks under distribution shifts. We benchmark
the robustness of VICL with 15 common corruptions adopted in [23, 31], and report the averaged performance across all corruptions.
Existing VICL models like Painter exhibit poor generalization capability to unseen new domains when the task prompts come from the
training distribution (i.e., zero-shot). Performances are even worse when given task prompts from the test distribution (i.e., one-shot). By
performing VICT at test time, we can significantly improve Painter in both zero-shot and one-shot manners.

Abstract
Visual in-context learning (VICL), as a new paradigm in
computer vision, allows the model to rapidly adapt to various tasks with only a handful of prompts and examples.
While effective, the existing VICL paradigm exhibits poor
generalizability under distribution shifts. In this work,
we propose test-time Visual In-Context Tuning (VICT), a
method that can adapt VICL models on the fly with a single test sample. Specifically, we flip the role between the
task prompts and the test sample and use a cycle consistency loss to reconstruct the original task prompt output.
Our key insight is that a model should be aware of a new
test distribution if it can successfully recover the original
task prompts. Extensive experiments on six representative
vision tasks ranging from high-level visual understanding to
low-level image processing, with 15 common corruptions,
demonstrate that our VICT can improve the generalizability of VICL to unseen new domains. In addition, we show
the potential of applying VICT for unseen tasks at test time.
Code: https://github.com/Jiahao000/VICT.

by prompting in NLP that defines tasks using language sequences as a general interface, existing VICL works [5, 52]
use images themselves as a natural interface for generalpurpose visual perception. They formulate VICL as an image inpainting task, i.e., given an input-output example describing a specific task (i.e., the prompt) as well as an input image, they are assembled in a grid and the problem is
casted as inpainting the missing part of the grid (i.e., the prediction) consistently with the given task prompts. This enables adapting a pre-trained vision model to various downstream tasks with only a handful of prompts and examples.
By default, current VICL models are frozen during deployment. However, their performance might suffer in realworld deployment as the test distribution usually changes
and deviates from the training one. This naturally raises a
question: what is the generalizability of VICL models under distribution shifts? In this work, we investigate this aspect focusing on controllable shifts due to image corruptions. We observe that the existing VICL paradigm like
Painter [52] exhibits poor generalizability to unseen new
domains when the task prompt comes from the training distribution, as shown in Figure 1. Surprisingly, performances
are even worse when given input-output task prompts belonging to the same distribution as the test input.
Driven by this observation, we propose to rely on testtime visual in-context tuning (VICT) to adapt VICL models on the fly to unseen distributions using only the given
test sample. The motivation is that each test input offers a
hint about the test distribution. Thus, we modify the VICL

1. Introduction
Following the success of in-context learning (ICL) [2, 7, 21]
in natural language processing (NLP), visual in-context
learning (VICL) [5, 52] has shown promising performance
in developing generalist models for vision tasks. Inspired

19996

