This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improved Video VAE for Latent Video Diffusion Model
Pingyu Wu1 , Kai Zhu1,∗ , Yu Liu2 , Liming Zhao2 , Wei Zhai1, *, Yang Cao1 , Zheng-Jun Zha1
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Independent Researcher
{wpy364755620@mail., zkzy@mail., wzhai056@, forrest@, zhazj@}ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Variational Autoencoder (VAE) aims to compress pixel data
into low-dimensional latent space, playing an important
role in OpenAI’s Sora and other latent video diffusion generation models. While most existing video VAEs inflate
a pre-trained image VAE into the 3D causal structure for
temporal-spatial compression, this paper presents two astonishing findings: (1) The initialization from a well-trained
image VAE with the same latent dimensions is not an optimal scheme. (2) The adoption of causal reasoning leads
to unequal information interactions and unbalanced performance between frames. To alleviate these problems, we
propose a keyframe-based temporal compression (KTC) architecture and a group causal convolution (GCConv) module to further improve video VAE (IV-VAE). Specifically, the
KTC architecture divides the latent space into two branches,
in which one half completely inherits the compression prior
of keyframes from a lower-dimension image VAE while the
other half involves temporal compression through 3D group
causal convolution, reducing temporal-spatial conflicts and
accelerating the convergence speed of video VAE. The GCConv in the above 3D half uses standard convolution within
each frame group to ensure inter-frame equivalence, and
employs causal logical padding between groups to maintain
flexibility in processing variable frame video. Extensive experiments on five benchmarks demonstrate the SOTA video
reconstruction and generation abilities of our IV-VAE.

Latent Video Diffusion Models (LVDMs) [1, 10, 12, 32].
To achieve a bidirectional mapping between the highdimensional pixel space and the low-dimensional latent
space, Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [13] is employed to
encode the original video continuously into the latent space,
along with spatial and even temporal compression. The
compression rate and reconstruction quality of VAE directly
determine the information effectiveness of the video corpus,
playing an important role in the exploration of LVDMs.
As the most commonly used video VAE, SVD-VAE [1]
freezes the weights of the 2D encoder based on the image
VAE [19] and retrains a temporal decoder containing 3D
convolutional blocks, which enables the feature interaction
across different frames and significantly reduces flicker artifacts. Unfortunately, this method struggles to effectively
eliminate temporal redundancy, limiting the LVDMs to perceive and generate long sequences of video content.
To address the above problem, several works [6, 10, 18,
29, 37] have proposed to construct a 3D VAE with both
spatial and temporal compression capabilities, which can
be summarized in the following three points. In terms of
model structure, the UNet network [20] with strong pixelperception capabilities is still adopted, consistent with the
classic image VAE series (i.e., Stable Diffusion VAE). For
the operator implementation, most of the methods [6, 10,
18, 29] adopt 3D causal convolution with only forward sequence correlation, which can encode the image information independently [31] while ensuring the continuity of
the long sequence video encoding. During the optimization process, a well-trained 2D image VAE, focusing only
on spatial compression, is used as an initialization for 3D
video VAEs with the same structure and equivalent latent
channel number [6, 10, 18, 37], which can achieve better
results compared to training a temporal-spatial compressed
video VAE from scratch [30]. Although existing methods
achieve video reconstruction under 4× time compression,
we find that there remain deficiencies in the above three
key processes, limiting the improvement of the video quality and continuity in reconstruction results.
First, initialization from a well-trained image VAE with

1. Introduction
In recent years, video generation has made significant
advances in both academia and industry, showcasing
cinematic-level visuals and the potential of a world simulator (e.g., Sora [16]). In particular, diffusion optimization
methods on latent space have garnered widespread attention
and dominated the video generation field due to their high
efficiency and stability, resulting in a series of outstanding
* Kai Zhu and Wei Zhai are the corresponding authors.

18124

