This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Satellite to GroundScape - Large-scale Consistent Ground View Generation from
Satellite Views
Ningli Xu
The Ohio State University

Rongjun Qin
The Ohio State University

xu.3961@buckeyemail.osu.edu

qin.324@osu.edu

Abstract
Generating consistent ground-view images from satellite
imagery is challenging, primarily due to the large discrepancies in viewing angles and resolution between satellite
and ground-level domains. Previous efforts mainly concentrated on single-view generation, often resulting in inconsistencies across neighboring ground views. In this
work, we propose a novel cross-view synthesis approach
designed to overcome these challenges by ensuring consistency across ground-view images generated from satellite
views. Our method, based on a fixed latent diffusion model,
introduces two conditioning modules: satellite-guided denoising, which extracts high-level scene layout to guide the
denoising process, and satellite-temporal denoising, which
captures camera motion to maintain consistency across
multiple generated views. We further contribute a largescale satellite-ground dataset containing over 100,000 perspective pairs to facilitate extensive ground scene or video
generation. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing methods on perceptual and
temporal metrics, achieving high photorealism and consistency in multi-view outputs. The project page is at https:
//gdaosu.github.io/sat2groundscape.

1. Introduction
The growing availability of satellite imagery has unlocked
new opportunities for generating realistic ground scene representations from top-down satellite views, a process known
as cross-view synthesis. This capability holds significant
potential for applications like immersive 3D gaming and
large-scale urban modeling, providing a richer medium for
visualizing environments from the ground level [18, 23, 40].
However, the task of generating consistent ground-view images across multiple perspectives presents additional challenges, complicating an already intricate problem.
The key challenges stem from establishing a reliable
and stable mapping between the satellite and ground do-

Figure 1. Ground views generated by Sat2GroundScape. Using
satellite views as input, Sat2GroundScape generates a sequence
of ground views that exhibit photorealistic quality and maintain
consistent ground appearances across different perspectives.

mains. The generated ground views must not only adhere
to the scene layouts indicated by the satellite data but also
maintain consistency across multiple ground perspectives.
The substantial gap between satellite and ground imagery
(marked by nearly 90-degree differences in viewing angles
and a resolution disparity of almost ten times [39]) makes
it particularly challenging to establish such a stable connection between the satellite and ground domains.
Although recent approaches [23, 30, 38, 39] have made
significant progress in addressing these challenges, they
typically achieve impressive results in single-view synthesis. However, these results often lack consistency in appearance when applied to multi-view synthesis. This issue
arises because generative models, such as GANs and dif-

6068

