This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PTDiffusion: Free Lunch for Generating Optical Illusion Hidden Pictures with
Phase-Transferred Diffusion Model
Xiang Gao
Shuai Yang
Jiaying Liu*
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
{gaoxiang1102, williamyang, liujiaying}@pku.edu.cn

“forest path, painting”

“ruins”

“laboratory”

“desert”

“harbor, oil painting”

“music room, painting”

“stones”

“leaves”

reference

Figure 1. Taking the first image on the left as an example, what do you see at your first glance? A painting of a path through a forest (zoom
in for a detailed look), or a human face (zoom out for a more global view)? Based on the off-the-shelf text-to-image diffusion model,
we contribute a plug-and-play method that naturally dissolves a reference image (shown in the bottom-right corner) into arbitrary scenes
described by a text prompt, providing a free lunch for synthesizing optical illusion hidden pictures using diffusion model. Better zoom in.

Abstract
Optical illusion hidden picture is an interesting visual perceptual phenomenon where an image is cleverly integrated
into another picture. Established on the off-the-shelf textto-image (T2I) diffusion model, we propose a novel textguided image-to-image (I2I) translation framework dubbed
as Phase-Transferred Diffusion Model (PTDiffusion) for
hidden art syntheses, which harmoniously embeds an input reference image into arbitrary scenes described by the
text prompts. At the heart of our method is a plug-and-play
phase transfer mechanism that dynamically and progressively transplants diffusion features’ phase spectrum from
the denoising process to reconstruct the reference image
into the one to sample the generated illusion image, realizing deep fusion of the reference structural information and
the textual semantic information. Furthermore, we propose

asynchronous phase transfer to enable flexible control over
the degree of hidden content discernability. Our method
bypasses any model training and fine-tuning process, all
while substantially outperforming related methods in image quality, text fidelity, visual discernibility, and contextual
naturalness for illusion picture synthesis, as demonstrated
by extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments. Our
project is publically available at this web page.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.

As a special form of artistic design, optical illusion hidden
picture exploits human visual system’s tendency to perceive
patterns, shapes, and colors to conceal a secondary image
within the intricate details of a primary image. It has wide
applications across various fields, such as enhancing aesthetic appeal in fashion design, creating amusing content in
digital entertainment, attracting attention in marketing and

18240

