This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Probability Density Geodesics in Image Diffusion Latent Space
Qingtao Yu1 , Jaskirat Singh1 , Zhaoyuan Yang2 , Peter Henry Tu2 ,
Jing Zhang1 , Hongdong Li1 , Richard Hartley1 , Dylan Campbell1
1
Australian National University 2 GE Research
{terry.yu,jaskirat.singh,jing.zhang,hongdong.li,richard.hartley,dylan.campbell}@anu.edu.au
{peter.tu,zhaoyuan.yang}@ge.com

Abstract
Diffusion models indirectly estimate the probability density over a data space, which can be used to study its structure. In this work, we show that geodesics can be computed
in diffusion latent space, where the norm induced by the
spatially-varying inner product is inversely proportional to
the probability density. In this formulation, a path that traverses a high density (that is, probable) region of image latent space is shorter than the equivalent path through a low
density region. We present algorithms for solving the associated initial and boundary value problems and show how
to compute the probability density along the path and the
geodesic distance between two points. Using these techniques, we analyze how closely video clips approximate
geodesics in a pre-trained image diffusion space. Finally,
we demonstrate how these techniques can be applied to
training-free image sequence interpolation and extrapolation, given a pre-trained image diffusion model.

(a)

(b)

(c)

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Given a probability density and initial or boundary conditions (here, the position of two points A and B), geodesics can
be computed in this space. If the norm is chosen to be inversely
proportional to the probability density, these geodesics preferentially traverse high density regions of the space. For an image data
space, these correspond to plausible, realistic images according to
the probability density, such as that learned by an image diffusion
model. Here, we show the outputs of our boundary value problem
(BVP) solver that computes a geodesic between endpoints A and
B on a toy 2D example. (a) The geodesic and straight-line trajectories between A and B, given the underlying visualized probability
density field (contours) and its gradient (arrows). (b) Probability
density curves for both trajectories, showing that the straight-line
path drops to zero probability very rapidly whereas the geodesic
remains in higher probability regions. (c) Images corresponding to
points along a geodesic in Stable Diffusion [37] latent space, given
the left and right endpoints, computed using our BVP solver.

When trained over a data space, a diffusion model [43–46]
can tell us the direction in which a data point of that space
should move in order to increase its likelihood. That is, it
learns a vector field corresponding to the gradient of the logprobability of the data (the Stein score function [47]). This
is sufficient information to define a Riemannian manifold in
this space, where the norm induced by a spatially-varying
inner product is chosen to be inversely proportional to the
probability density. This has the effect that geodesics—
loosely, shortest paths—on this manifold ‘prefer’ to traverse
high-density regions, which can be thought of as shortcuts
in the space. In the context of image latent diffusion models [37], these regions correspond to the latent vectors of
probable images, while low-density regions correspond to
unrealistic image latents. By computing geodesics in this
space, we can find shortest paths between images and study
the structure of the learned space.

27989

In this work, we outline the relevant theory needed for
computing probability density geodesics in diffusion latent space and present algorithms for solving the associated initial and boundary value problems. A 2D toy
example of the boundary value problem (BVP) is presented in Fig. 1, alongside image outputs from the BVP
solved in the 16384-D latent space of Stable Diffusion [37].
We address several challenges associated with computing

