This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain Adaptive Diabetic Retinopathy Grading with Model
Absence and Flowing Data
Wenxin Su1 , Song Tang* 1,2,3 , Xiaofeng Liu4 , Xiaojing Yi5 , Mao Ye6 ,
Chunxiao Zu1 , Jiahao Li7 , and Xiatian Zhu8
1

4

University of Shanghai for Science and Technology 2 Universität Hamburg, 3 ComOriginMat Inc.
Yale University 5 Sichuan Eye Hospital 6 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
7
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College 8 University of Surrey
steventangsong@gmail.com

Abstract

Accumulated data

(a) SFDA
Attack
Offline

Domain shift (the difference between source and target domains) poses a significant challenge in clinical applications, e.g., Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) grading. Despite
considering certain clinical requirements, like source data
privacy, conventional transfer methods are predominantly
model-centered and often struggle to prevent model-targeted
attacks. In this paper, we address a challenging Online
Model-aGnostic Domain Adaptation (OMG-DA) setting,
driven by the demands of clinical environments. This setting is characterized by the absence of the model and the
flow of target data. To tackle the new challenge, we propose a novel approach, Generative Unadversarial ExampleS
(GUES), which enables adaptation from a data-centric perspective. Specifically, we first theoretically reformulate conventional perturbation optimization in a generative way—
learning a perturbation generation function with a latent
input variable. During model instantiation, we leverage
a Variational AutoEncoder to express this function. The
encoder with the reparameterization trick predicts the latent input, whilst the decoder is responsible for the generation. Furthermore, the saliency map is selected as pseudoperturbation labels. Because it not only captures potential
lesions but also theoretically provides an upper bound on
the function input, enabling the identification of the latent
variable. Extensive experiments on DR benchmarks with
both frozen pre-trained models and trainable models demonstrate the superiority of GUES, showing robustness even with
small batch size. The source code and data are available at
https://github.com/tntek/GUES.

* Corresponding author

No protection
Accessible models

Flowing data

(b) OMG-DA

Online

Model
privacy
Unseen models

Figure 1. Comparison between the OMG-DA and SFDA settings.
(a) In SFDA, adaptation builds upon the accumulated data, which
demands significant storage resources in the hospital. Additionally,
the models’ architecture and parameters are accessible, exposing
them to potential attacks. (b) OMG-DA provides a practical scenario: Flowing data mimic the patients’ arrival in a stream way,
and the models are unseen (strictly controlled) before using them,
avoiding attacks like membership inference attacks [26].

1. Introduction
Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) is a significant health concern,
ranking among the leading causes of blindness and affecting millions of people worldwide [3]. Early-stage intervention for DR is crucial to preserve vision, highlighting the
importance of timely diagnosis [27]. Although deep learning (DL) has demonstrated promising results in automating
the grading of DR [6, 8, 36], deploying DL models in realworld clinical settings remains challenging. For example, DL
models often struggle to generalize effectively to complex
scenarios, such as variations in imaging equipment, ethnic
groups, or temporal factors, leading to different data distributions, a challenge known as domain shift [11]. This issue
significantly hampers the widespread adoption and success
of DL-based diagnostic tools in clinical practice [14].
Recently, many adaptation methods for grading diabetic

28337

