This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C OMP GS: Unleashing 2D Compositionality for Compositional Text-to-3D via
Dynamically Optimizing 3D Gaussians
Chongjian Ge1,2,3 Chenfeng Xu1 Yuanfeng Ji2 Chensheng Peng1
Masayoshi Tomizuka1 Ping Luo2 Mingyu Ding1,4 * Varun Jampani5→ Wei Zhan1
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
Adobe Research 4 UNC-Chapel Hill 5 Stability AI
Single 3D Generation

Compositional 3D Generation

a beautiful butterfly

a footballer is kicking a
soccer ball

a bird is drinking water
from a cup

a photographer is capturing a
beautiful butterfly with camera

an owl

an owl perches on a
branch

an owl perches on a
branch near a pinecone

an owl perches on a branch near a
pinecone, with a rat below the
branch

…

“an owl perches on a branch near a pinecone”

Gaussians Initialization with 2D Compositionality

1K iterations

4K iterations

Rendered Images

Figure 1. Illustration of compositional 3D Generation and C OMP GS. All the contents are generated by C OMP GS. Top row: C OMP GS is
capable of generating either a single object (e.g., a butterfly) or generating compositional objects with reasonable interactions (e.g., the
rightmost figure in the top row). Middle row: Beyond text-to-3D generation, C OMP GS can be easily extend to 3D editing by progressively
adding objects. The colored texts (e.g., ‘a branch’, ‘a pinecone’, ‘a rat’ in the rightmost figure) denote the added part compared to its
previous asset. Bottom row: C OMP GS achieves compositional text-to-3D by transferring 2D compositionality to initialize 3D Gaussians.
C OMP GS is further trained with dynamic SDS optimization to produce plausible results.

Abstract
Recent breakthroughs in text-guided image generation have
significantly advanced the field of 3D generation. While generating a single high-quality 3D object is now feasible, generating multiple objects with reasonable interactions within a
3D space, a.k.a. compositional 3D generation, presents substantial challenges. This paper introduces C OMP GS, a novel
generative framework that employs 3D Gaussian Splatting
(GS) for efficient, compositional text-to-3D content generation. To achieve this goal, two core designs are proposed:

(1) 3D Gaussians Initialization with 2D compositionality:
We transfer the well-established 2D compositionality to initialize the Gaussian parameters on an entity-by-entity basis,
ensuring both consistent 3D priors for each entity and reasonable interactions among multiple entities; (2) Dynamic
Optimization: We propose a dynamic strategy to optimize
3D Gaussians using Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) loss.
C OMP GS first automatically decomposes 3D Gaussians into
distinct entity parts, enabling optimization at both the entity
and composition levels. Additionally, C OMP GS optimizes
across objects of varying scales by dynamically adjusting the

18509

