This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Extrapolating and Decoupling Image-to-Video Generation Models:
Motion Modeling is Easier Than You Think

1

Jie Tian1†* Xiaoye Qu1† Zhenyi Lu1† Wei Wei1B Sichen Liu1 Yu Cheng2
School of Computer Science & Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Motion Score : 16.2

Image-to-Video (I2V) generation aims to synthesize a
video clip according to a given image and condition (e.g.,
text). The key challenge of this task lies in simultaneously
generating natural motions while preserving the original
appearance of the images. However, current I2V diffusion models (I2V-DMs) often produce videos with limited
motion degrees or exhibit uncontrollable motion that conflicts with the textual condition. To address these limitations, we propose a novel Extrapolating and Decoupling
framework, which introduces model merging techniques to
the I2V domain for the first time. Specifically, our framework consists of three separate stages: (1) Starting with
a base I2V-DM, we explicitly inject the textual condition
into the temporal module using a lightweight, learnable
adapter and fine-tune the integrated model to improve motion controllability. (2) We introduce a training-free extrapolation strategy to amplify the dynamic range of the
motion, effectively reversing the fine-tuning process to enhance the motion degree significantly. (3) With the above
two-stage models excelling in motion controllability and degree, we decouple the relevant parameters associated with
each type of motion ability and inject them into the base
I2V-DM. Since the I2V-DM handles different levels of motion controllability and dynamics at various denoising time
steps, we adjust the motion-aware parameters accordingly
over time. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments have been conducted to demonstrate the superiority
of our framework over existing methods. Code is available
at https://github.com/Chuge0335/EDG

Prior

Abstract

Ours

Motion Score : 68.3

Input Image

frame 4

frame 8

frame 12

frame 16

Ours

Prior

Text Prompt: A car driving down.

Input Image

frame 4

frame 8

frame 12

frame 16

Text Prompt: Camera zooms out.

Figure 1. In the first example, ConsistI2V [27] yields a video with
limited motion. In the second, DynamiCrafter [40] fails to follow
the text condition and lacks controllability. Our method, however,
achieves improved motion degree and better controllability.

1. Introduction

age and a text condition, it aims to convert the still image
into videos that conform to text instruction while preserving
the original appearance of the images. This paper focuses
on open-domain images and supports free text as guidance,
rather than limited class labels. This conditioned I2V task is
substantially challenging as it struggles with simultaneously
maintaining appearance consistency and producing natural
motions in the generated frames.
Unlike image synthesis, motion plays a significantly crucial role in image-to-video generation. However, most existing works lack effective motion modeling when generating videos. For instance, ConsistI2V [27] enhances the first
frame conditioning through spatiotemporal attention, leading to limited expression ability for modeling motion degree as the model tends to over-rely on the conditional im-

Recently, Image-to-Video generation (I2V) [11, 23, 40, 45,
46] has attracted increasing attention. Given a single im† Equal contribution; * Work done during an internship at Shanghai
AI Laboratory; B corresponding authors.

12512

