This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tightening Robustness Verification of MaxPool-based Neural Networks via
Minimizing the Over-Approximation Zone
Yuan Xiao1,3 ,Yuchen Chen1 , Shiqing Ma2 , Chunrong Fang1,3 *, Tongtong Bai1 , Mingzheng Gu1 ,
Yuxin Cheng1 , Yanwei Chen1 , Zhenyu Chen1,3∗
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
University of Massachusetts Amherst, United States
3
Shenzhen Research Institute, Nanjing University, China

Abstract
The robustness of neural network classifiers is important
in the safety-critical domain and can be quantified by robustness verification. At present, efficient and scalable verification techniques are always sound but incomplete, and
thus, the improvement of verified robustness results is the
key criterion to evaluate the performance of incomplete verification approaches. The multi-variate function MaxPool
is widely adopted yet challenging to verify. In this paper,
we present Ti-Lin, a robustness verifier for MaxPool-based
CNNs with Tight Linear Approximation. Following the sequel of minimizing the over-approximation zone of the nonlinear function of CNNs, we are the first to propose the provably neuron-wise tightest linear bounds for the MaxPool
function. By our proposed linear bounds, we can certify
larger robustness results for CNNs. We evaluate the effectiveness of Ti-Lin on different verification frameworks with
open-sourced benchmarks, including LeNet, PointNet, and
networks trained on the MNIST, CIFAR-10, Tiny ImageNet
and ModelNet40 datasets. Experimental results show that
Ti-Lin significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods across all networks with up to 78.6% improvement in
terms of the certified accuracy with almost the same time
consumption as the fastest tool. Our code is available at
https://github.com/xiaoyuanpigo/Ti-LinHybrid-Lin.

ial perturbation is extremely imperceptible and harmful and
may cause disastrous consequences. Therefore, there is an
urgent need to certify model robustness guarantees against
adversarial attacks, which can provide certified defense
against any possible attacks [5, 14, 51]. Mathematically,
verifiers aim to prove or disprove the correctness of the output neurons in response to input values with minor perturbations.

1. Introduction

The methodology of robustness verification can be divided into complete verifiers and incomplete verifiers. As
complete verification is NP-complete even for the simple
ReLU-based fully-connected networks [31], it is necessary
to risk some verification precision loss to improve efficiency [16, 29, 60]. State-of-the-art verifiers use advanced
branching [17, 45, 59] and relaxation techniques [27, 53,
57, 58] to reduce the precision loss while maintaining efficiency and scalability. Linear approximation is an efficient relaxation technique that can be used to handle
complex functions beyond univariate functions, such as
Sigmoid(x)T anh(y), x · Sigmoid(y) [14, 33, 47] and
MaxPool [5, 26, 38, 53]. Furthermore, the flexibility of
this technique allows it to be combined with other incomplete or complete verification algorithms [49, 59, 67]. Linear approximation, in essence, provides a pair of upper and
lower linear constraints u(x), l(x) to bound the output of
the network’s non-linear layer f (x) according to the layer’s
input region {x|x ∈ [l, u]}. Considerable efforts have
been devoted to tightening linear approximation for various
non-linear functions [27, 38, 39, 47, 63, 67], which have
proven successful in certifying more precise results. Some
of these works propose the linear bounds that can produce
the smallest over-approximation zone, a.k.a., the neuronwise tightest linear bounds [72], for the S-shaped [27],
Sigmoid(x)·T anh(y), x·Sigmoid(y) [33, 47], and ReLU
functions [5, 53]. These neuron-wise tightest linear bounds
can empirically give rise to certified robustness results
and stand for the highest precision among other relevant

Although neural networks achieve remarkable success in
many difficult classification tasks, researchers discover nonrobust neural networks are vulnerable to perturbation from
the environment and adversarial attacks [28, 43, 55, 73].
In some safety-critical domains, such as autonomous driving [22] and face recognition [23], some subtle adversar* Chunrong Fang and Zhenyu Chen are the corresponding authors.

20695

