This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Segment Any-Quality Images with Generative Latent Space Enhancement
Guangqian Guo1,2 Yong Guo2 Xuehui Yu3 Wenbo Li4 Yaoxing Wang1 Shan Gao1
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Huawei 3 Tencent 4 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{guogq21, wangyx24}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn {guoyongcs, fenglinglwb}@gmail.com
xuehuiyu@tencent.com gaoshan@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract

Qualitative Comparison

Imgs w/ various quality

√

Despite their success, Segment Anything Models (SAMs)
experience significant performance drops on severely degraded, low-quality images, limiting their effectiveness in
real-world scenarios. To address this, we propose GleSAM, which utilizes Generative Latent space Enhancement
to boost robustness on low-quality images, thus enabling
generalization across various image qualities. Specifically,
we adapt the concept of latent diffusion to SAM-based segmentation frameworks and perform the generative diffusion process in the latent space of SAM to reconstruct
high-quality representation, thereby improving segmentation. Additionally, we introduce two techniques to improve
compatibility between the pre-trained diffusion model and
the segmentation framework. Our method can be applied to
pre-trained SAM and SAM2 with only minimal additional
learnable parameters, allowing for efficient optimization.
We also construct the LQSeg dataset with a greater diversity
of degradation types and levels for training and evaluating
the model. Extensive experiments demonstrate that GleSAM
significantly improves segmentation robustness on complex
degradations while maintaining generalization to clear images. Furthermore, GleSAM also performs well on unseen
degradations, underscoring the versatility of our approach
and dataset.

√

√

√

√

Clear

+ Gaussian N.

√

+ Re-sam. N.

√

+ Noise degree

SAM

RobustSAM

GleSAM (Ours)

Figure 1. The comparison of qualitative results on low-quality
images with varying degradation levels from an unseen dataset.
To generate images with different degradation levels, we progressively added Gaussian Noise, Re-sampling Noise, and more severe Gaussian noise to an image. Results indicate that the baseline
SAM [27] shows limited robustness to degradation. Although RobustSAM [8] retains some resilience against simpler degradations,
it struggles with more complex and unfamiliar degradations. In
contrast, our method consistently demonstrates strong robustness
across images of varying quality.

1. Introduction
Accurate object detection and segmentation [3, 12, 15, 16,
18, 26, 51, 55] in diverse scenarios is a fundamental task
for various high-level visual applications, such as robotics
and autonomous driving. The recently developed Segment
Anything Models (SAMs), including SAM [27] and SAM2
[44], serving as a foundational model, have gained significant influence within the community [4, 5, 10, 16, 36, 37]
due to their outstanding zero-shot segmentation abilities.

Despite their success, SAMs perform poorly on common low-quality images, such as those degraded by noise,
blur, and compression artifacts [22, 42, 47, 56], which
are often encountered in real-world scenarios [19, 34, 35].
Previous methods [8, 11] have employed distillation-based
consistent learning to enhance degradation-robust features.

* This work was done during Guangqian Guo’s internship at Huawei,
supervised by Yong Guo. The first two authors contribute equally.
† Corresponding author: Shan Gao

2366

