This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inst3D-LMM: Instance-Aware 3D Scene Understanding
with Multi-modal Instruction Tuning
Hanxun Yu1 *, Wentong Li2 *, Song Wang1 , Junbo Chen3†, Jianke Zhu1†
1
Zhejiang University 2 Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics 3 Udeer.ai
{hanxun.yu, songw, jkzhu}@zju.edu.cn, wentong li@nuaa.edu.cn, junbo@udeer.ai

Abstract
Despite encouraging progress in 3D scene understanding,
it remains challenging to develop an effective Large Multimodal Model (LMM) that is capable of understanding and
reasoning in complex 3D environments. Most previous
methods typically encode 3D point and 2D image features
separately, neglecting interactions between 2D semantics
and 3D object properties, as well as the spatial relationships within the 3D environment. This limitation not only
hinders comprehensive representations of 3D scene, but
also compromises training and inference efficiency. To
address these challenges, we propose a unified Instanceaware 3D Large Multi-modal Model (Inst3D-LMM) to deal
with multiple 3D scene understanding tasks simultaneously.
To obtain the fine-grained instance-level visual tokens,
we first introduce a novel Multi-view Cross-Modal Fusion
(MCMF) module to inject the multi-view 2D semantics into
their corresponding 3D geometric features. For scene-level
relation-aware tokens, we further present a 3D Instance
Spatial Relation (3D-ISR) module to capture the intricate
pairwise spatial relationships among objects. Additionally,
we perform end-to-end multi-task instruction tuning simultaneously without the subsequent task-specific fine-tuning.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods across 3D scene understanding, reasoning and grounding tasks. Source code
is available at: https://github.com/hanxunyu/Inst3D-LMM.

object locations based on human instructions.
Traditional 3D scene understanding methods [30, 46]
are typically tailored for individual downstream tasks, such
as 3D Visual Grounding (3D-VG), 3D Question Answering (3D-QA) and 3D Dense Captioning (3D-DC). In contrast, LMMs are able to handle various 3D perception tasks
within a single model. Some methods [16, 43] primarily focus on translating 3D points into the space of 2D Vision
Language Models (VLMs) or directly leveraging multiview 2D features as 3D representations. Alternatively, other
approaches [6, 45, 58] directly encode the features of 3D
points and facilitate alignment with LLM using 3D-text
instruction data. However, they often require multi-stage
alignment or language-scene pre-training, complicating the
development of a versatile model capable of handling multiple tasks. To enable a unified 3D LMM framework, recent
work [19] decomposes the input 3D scene into a set of individual object proposals, each identified by unique tokens
to explicitly capture 3D object features at the instance level.
While this approach exhibits promising results, it neglects
the interactions between the 2D semantic features and the
properties of 3D objects, as well as the spatial relationship
modeling among objects in 3D environments. This oversight further results in substantial token costs for the LLM,
thus hindering both training and inference efficiency.
In this paper, we propose Inst3D-LMM, an effective
Instance-aware 3D Large Multi-modal Model that tackles multiple 3D-language tasks without resorting to taskspecific fine-tuning. Our approach fully leverages the powerful 2D Vision Foundation Models (VFMs) and 3D specialist models to extract enriched 2D and 3D features at
the instance level, respectively. As shown in Figure 1, in
contrast to previous methods, our approach is able to generate fine-grained instance-level representations that encapsulate both geometric and semantic properties, and scenelevel representations that capture intricate pairwise spatial
relationships among objects in a 3D scene. Moreover, our
method results in minor token costs for LLM, thereby enhancing both training and inference efficiency. By leveraging this instance-aware methodology, our Inst3D-LMM

1. Introduction
Building Large Multi-modal Models (LMMs) for 3D
scene understanding becomes an emerging research topic
with significant potential for advancing autonomous
robotics [36].
For example, interactive embodied
agents [39] are expected to interpret 3D layouts and predict
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

14147

