This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pay Attention to the Foreground in Object-Centric Learning
Pinzhuo Tian1 , Shengjie Yang1 , Hang Yu1∗ , Alex Kot2
1
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, China
2
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{pinzhuo, sjyang, yuhang}@shu.edu.cn, eackot@ntu.edu.sg

1. Introduction
In perceiving the surrounding environment, humans typically divide it into distinct objects, subsequently understanding the scene through the relationships and connections among these objects [20, 25]. Thus, enabling our
model to decompose the visual scene into different objects

SA
Encoder
Slot3

Fusion

The slot attention-based method is widely used in unsupervised object-centric learning, aiming to decompose scenes
into interpretable objects and associate them with slots.
However, complex backgrounds in the real images can
disrupt the model’s focus, leading it to excessively segment background stuff into different regions based on lowlevel information such as color or texture variations. As
a result, the detailed segmentation of foreground objects,
which requires shape or geometric information, is often neglected. To address this issue, we introduce a contrastive
learning-based indicator designed to differentiate between
foreground and background. Integrating this indicator into
the existing slot attention-based method enables the model
to focus more on segmenting foreground objects while minimizing background distractions. During the testing phase,
we utilize a spectral clustering mechanism to refine the results based on the similarity between the slots. Experimental results show that incorporating our method with various state-of-the-art models significantly improves their performance on both simulated data and real-world datasets.
Furthermore, multiple sets of ablation experiments confirm the effectiveness of each proposed component. The
source code is available at https://github.com/
sjyjs09/FG-BG_Indicator.

*Corresponding author.
This work is supported by projects of the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No.62206166, No.62302287), Shanghai Sailing Program (Grant No.23YF1413000), and Shanghai Committee of Science and Technology (Grant No.23ZR1423500).

Slot2

Slot1

Abstract

Slot1

/

Background
Foreground
Push-away

FG-BG
Indicator

Slot2

Slot3

Figure 1. The overview of our method. The background stuff in the
complex scenes can influence the process of slot binding. Variations in color or texture within the background may cause the slot
to incorrectly segment the background into different regions while
neglecting the foreground (shown in the above branch). In our
method, we integrate information from our indicator to enhance
the distinction between foreground and background areas and mitigate changes in background region, enabling the slot attention
method to focus more effectively on foreground object segmentation (shown in the below branch).

is highly meaningful and lays the foundation for reasoning
[24]. Unsupervised object-centric learning [12] is an approach designed to address this challenge, aiming to represent a scene as a composition of distinct objects using only
visual information.
After significant development, the slot attention-based
method [23] has become the mainstream framework in the
field. This kind of method can be divided into two primary
stages: the binding stage and the reconstruction stage. In the
binding stage, an attention-based mechanism is used to assign different areas of the image to distinct slots. The reconstruction stage then involves rebuilding the input based on
information derived from these slots, ensuring that each slot
accurately represents an individual object within the image.
These two stages enable the slot attention-based method to
achieve impressive results in various areas, such as [27, 38].
However, current slot attention-based methods do not
distinguish between foreground objects and background
stuff. When applied to complex scenes, variations in color

30281

