This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP is Almost All You Need:
Towards Parameter-Efficient Scene Text Retrieval without OCR
Xugong Qin1 , Peng Zhang1,5, *, Jun Jie Ou Yang3 , Gangyan Zeng1 , Yubo Li2 , Yuanyuan Wang1 ,
Wanqian Zhang2 , Pengwen Dai4
1
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Southern California, 4 Sun Yat-sen University
5
Laboratory for Advanced Computing and Intelligence Engineering
qinxugong@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Scene Text Retrieval (STR) seeks to identify all images containing a given query string. Existing methods typically
rely on an explicit Optical Character Recognition (OCR)
process of text spotting or localization, which is susceptible to complex pipelines and accumulated errors. To settle this, we resort to the Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) models, which have demonstrated the capacity to perceive and understand scene text, making it possible to achieve strictly OCR-free STR. From the perspective of parameter-efficient transfer learning, a lightweight
visual position adapter is proposed to provide a positional
information complement for the visual encoder. Besides,
we introduce a visual context dropout technique to improve
the alignment of local visual features. A novel, parameterfree cross-attention mechanism transfers the contrastive relationship between images and text to that between visual
tokens and text, producing a rich cross-modal representation, which can be utilized for efficient reranking with
a linear classifier. The resulting model, CAYN, which
proves that CLIP is Almost all You Need for STR with no
more than 0.50M additional parameters required, achieves
new state-of-the-art performance on the STR task, with
92.46%/89.49%/85.98% mAP on the SVT/IIIT-STR/TTR
datasets. Our findings demonstrate that CLIP can serve as
a reliable and efficient solution for OCR-free STR.

Figure 1. Illustration of the trade-off between accuracy (mAP) and
inference speed (FPS) on the SVT dataset. The proposed CAYN
achieves a better balance than existing methods.

1. Introduction

these fundamental tasks, scene text retrieval (STR) [35, 43]
aims to find all the images containing the given text query
from a gallery, which receives great attention due to its practical applications in content retrieval and information security, e.g., product retrieval [1], electronic book archives
management [42], and video key frame extraction [36].
As a pioneer work, Mishra et al. [25] define STR as
a text-to-image retrieval problem and point out the inefficiency of imposing an exact localization-and-recognition
(spotting) pipeline. To solve it, they propose a query-driven
search approach where approximate locations of characters in the text query are first found, then the images are
ranked with the likelihood of containing characters from
the query text for matching, and finally, spatial constraints
are imposed for re-ranking to generate a ranked list of images. The method sets up a standard localization-based
pipeline for STR, which outperforms spotting-based methods [8, 12, 20, 21] in terms of both speed and accuracy [11].
For this reason, a detection or segmentation head has been a
common component in subsequent research [7, 39, 41, 49].

Scene text extraction and understanding [27–32, 38, 47, 48]
have received significant attention in recent years due to the
important role of text as an information carrier. Among
* Corresponding author.

24873

