This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AIM-Fair: Advancing Algorithmic Fairness via Selectively Fine-Tuning Biased
Models with Contextual Synthetic Data
Zengqun Zhao
Ziquan Liu
Yu Cao
Shaogang Gong
Ioannis Patras
Centre for Multimodal AI, Queen Mary University of London
{zengqun.zhao, ziquan.liu, yu.cao, s.gong, i.patras}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent advances in generative models have sparked research on improving model fairness with AI-generated data.
However, existing methods often face limitations in the diversity and quality of synthetic data, leading to compromised fairness and overall model accuracy. Moreover,
many approaches rely on the availability of demographic
group labels, which are often costly to annotate. This paper proposes AIM-Fair, aiming to overcome these limitations and harness the potential of cutting-edge generative
models in promoting algorithmic fairness. We investigate
a fine-tuning paradigm starting from a biased model initially trained on real-world data without demographic annotations. This model is then fine-tuned using unbiased synthetic data generated by a state-of-the-art diffusion model
to improve its fairness. Two key challenges are identified
in this fine-tuning paradigm, 1) the low quality of synthetic data, which can still happen even with advanced
generative models, and 2) the domain and bias gap between real and synthetic data. To address the limitation
of synthetic data quality, we propose Contextual Synthetic
Data Generation (CSDG) to generate data using a text-toimage diffusion model (T2I) with prompts generated by a
context-aware LLM, ensuring both data diversity and control of bias in synthetic data. To resolve domain and bias
shifts, we introduce a novel selective fine-tuning scheme in
which only model parameters more sensitive to bias and
less sensitive to domain shift are updated. Experiments
on CelebA and UTKFace datasets show that our AIMFair improves model fairness while maintaining utility, outperforming both fully and partially fine-tuned approaches
to model fairness. The code is available at https://
github.com/zengqunzhao/AIM-Fair.

Target
Sensitive
Group Label

Smiling
Male
Minority

Smiling
Female
Majority

Non-Smiling Non-Smiling
Male
Female
Majority
Minority

High Accuracy
Good Fairness
High Accuracy
Poor Fairness

Lower Accuracy
Good Fairness

Figure 1. Facial attributes classification (FAC) on the CelebA
dataset based on different training strategies, in which Smiling
is the target attribute and Gender is the protected attribute. This
shows different learning strategies result in variable model utility (Overall Accuracy) vs. model fairness (Worst Group Accuracy
and Equalized Odds) on demographic groups. A model trained
solely on real data if biased exhibits high accuracy but poor fairness scores. Conversely, models trained on balanced synthetic
data show better fairness but poorer accuracy due to a “domain
gap” between the real and synthetic data, and a lack of selective
model fine-tuning when synthetic data is deployed. Strategies to
repair imbalances in real data [9, 56] or to supplement real data
with synthetic data [47] marginally increase accuracy but do little to improve fairness. Our method for selective fine-tuning of a
pre-trained (biased) model with synthetic data not only preserves
model accuracy but also substantially improves fairness, outperforming fully fine-tuning (FFT) in both model utility and fairness.

1. Introduction

els often demonstrate varying performance across different
demographic groups, leading to unfair outcomes. To mitigate the spurious correlation caused by learning from imbalanced (biased) data, regularizations were used as optimization objectives [1, 10, 12, 23]. Methods like distributionally robust optimization (DRO) [12] optimizes the worstcase performance, while invariant risk minimization (IRM)
[1] learns unbiased representations with invariance to different environments. Influenced by the success of repre-

Recent research has raised significant concerns about fairness and bias in machine learning models [30]. These modCorresponding author: Ziquan Liu {ziquan.liu@qmul.ac.uk}.

28748

