This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ChatHuman: Chatting about 3D Humans with Tools
Jing Lin3,4,⋆ Yao Feng2,3,⋆ Weiyang Liu1,5 Michael J. Black1
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 2 Stanford University
3
Meshcapade 4 Tsinghua University 5 University of Cambridge
chathuman.github.io
Body Shape Measurement & Animation

Tools

Reasoning-based Pose Estimation
The man in the dark blue shirt
is preparing to sit down. Please
find him out and estimate his
3d human pose.

LLaVA

HMR 2.0

…
DECO

DECA

PoseScipt

I want to make a film about a sumor
wrestler undergoing a weight loss journey.
Please help me generate an image of the
protagonist.

CLIFFBEDLAM

man

GD

Here is the image of the protagonist:
SAM

SD

I need to customize clothing for him.
Estimate the body measurements of the
man in the generated image.

Human-Object Interaction Understanding
Please describe the humanobject interaction regions of
the person in the image.
The person is crouching with his
left hand touching the ball on the
ground and his right hand holding
a tennis racket. Both feet are in
contact with the ground.

Tool-Conditioned
Transform

Tool
Docs

? +

User
Query

LLM

The weight of the person is 172 kg,
height is 1.71 m, chest circumference is
1.58 m, waist circumference is 1.57 m,
hip circumference is 1.26 m.

Response

ChatHuman

Pose Estimation

Prev. SOTA

Tool
Usage

Pose
Generation
30
%

15
%

0
%

Shape
Measurement

HOI Detection

Relative improvements of ChatHuman
compared with previous SOTA methods.

Please recommend an exercise for losing
weight and animate the motion.
Running and boxing is beneficial for
losing weight. Here is the animation:

ChatHuman

Figure 1. ChatHuman is a LLM-based agent that uses a multimodal LLM to exploit and combine tools, discriminate their results, and integrate

the results to solve tasks related to 3D Humans.

Abstract

specialized 3D outputs into comprehensible formats. Experiments demonstrate that ChatHuman surpasses existing models in both tool selection accuracy and overall performance
across various 3D human tasks, and it supports interactive
chatting with users. ChatHuman represents a significant
step toward consolidating diverse analytical methods into a
unified, robust system for 3D human tasks. Code and data
are available at chathuman.github.io.

Numerous methods have been proposed to detect, estimate,
and analyze properties of people in images, including 3D
pose, shape, contact, human-object interaction, and emotion. While widely applicable in vision and other areas, such
methods require expert knowledge to select, use, and interpret the results. To address this, we introduce ChatHuman,
a language-driven system that integrates the capabilities
of specialized methods into a unified framework. ChatHuman functions as an assistant proficient in utilizing, analyzing, and interacting with tools specific to 3D human tasks,
adeptly discussing and resolving related challenges. Built on
a Large Language Model (LLM) framework, ChatHuman is
trained to autonomously select, apply, and interpret a diverse
set of tools in response to user inputs. Our approach overcomes significant hurdles in adapting LLMs to 3D human
tasks, including the need for domain-specific knowledge and
the ability to interpret complex 3D outputs. The innovations
of ChatHuman include leveraging academic publications
to instruct the LLM on tool usage, employing a retrievalaugmented generation model to create in-context learning
examples for managing new tools, and effectively discriminating between and integrating tool results by transforming

1. Introduction
Research on 3D humans has progressed rapidly, resulting in the creation of many tools that can perform tasks
like estimating a human’s 3D pose from a single image [18, 25, 27, 36, 37], predicting face/body shapes [8, 15],
capturing emotions [9, 15], and identifying regions of
touch/contact [46, 68], generating human poses from text
descriptions [10], and animating human images [84]. Each
of these tools, however, focuses on a specific problem, functioning as isolated “specialists”. Moreover, these separate
tools cannot benefit from the expertise of others, and combining them to solve more complex tasks requires significant
domain expertise. Ideally, we would have a single model that
can adaptively leverage different tools to solve complex 3D
human-related problems while offering intuitive user interaction through natural language input. Recent work such as
ChatPose [16] has taken initial steps in this direction, unify-

⋆ Equal contribution. This work was done while YF and JL were at
Meshcapade.

8150

