This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stacking Brick by Brick: Aligned Feature Isolation for
Incremental Face Forgery Detection
Jikang Cheng1 ,* Zhiyuan Yan2∗ , Ying Zhang3 , Li Hao2 , Jiaxin Ai1 , Qin Zou1 , Chen Li3 , Zhongyuan Wang1†
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School2
WeChat Vision, Tencent Inc.3
ChengJiKang@whu.edu.cn

Task 1

Abstract

Real

The rapid advancement of face forgery techniques has introduced a growing variety of forgeries. Incremental Face
Forgery Detection (IFFD), involving gradually adding new
forgery data to ﬁne-tune the previously trained model, has
been introduced as a promising strategy to deal with evolving
forgery methods. However, a naively trained IFFD model
is prone to catastrophic forgetting when new forgeries are
integrated, as treating all forgeries as a single “Fake” class
in the Real/Fake classiﬁcation can cause different forgery
types overriding one another, thereby resulting in the forgetting of unique characteristics from earlier tasks and limiting
the model’s effectiveness in learning forgery speciﬁcity and
generality. In this paper, we propose to stack the latent feature distributions of previous and new tasks brick by brick,
i.e., achieving aligned feature isolation. In this manner, we
aim to preserve learned forgery information and accumulate new knowledge by minimizing distribution overriding,
thereby mitigating catastrophic forgetting. To achieve this,
we ﬁrst introduce Sparse Uniform Replay (SUR) to obtain
the representative subsets that could be treated as the uniformly sparse versions of the previous global distributions.
We then propose a Latent-space Incremental Detector (LID)
that leverages SUR data to isolate and align distributions.
For evaluation, we construct a more advanced and comprehensive benchmark tailored for IFFD. The leading experimental results validate the superiority of our method. Code
is available at https://github.com/beautyremain/SUR-LID.

1. Introduction
The rise of face forgery techniques poses substantial threats
to society, drawing increased attention from researchers who
study the risks of misuse, particularly in identity theft, mis* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Task 3

Task 2

Fake

Task New

Real

Fake

,QFUHPHQWLQJ

Feature
Overriding

Naïve Binary Classification (Previous Approaches)
Real

Real

Fake

Fake

,QFUHPHQWLQJ

Feature
Accumulating

Stacking Brick by Brick (Ours)

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed aligned feature isolation in the
latent space. Previous approaches (top) typically treat all forgeries,
both old and new, as a single “Fake” class during incremental
learning, causing feature distributions to override each other and
limiting their ability to learn forgery speciﬁcity and generality.
In contrast, we (bottom) propose incrementally adding new task
distributions with isolation and alignment, akin to stacking new
tasks “brick by brick” to the previous ones in the latent space. See
Fig. 4 for the experimental results of latent space distribution.

information, and violations of privacy. Hence, developing
effective detection methods is essential to safeguard personal
security and maintain public trust in digital interactions. Existing methods [4, 5, 15, 36, 44] predominantly focus on
training a generalized face forgery detector with a limited
number of training data. However, given the ever-increasing
diversity of face forgery techniques in the real world, it is
somewhat idealistic to expect a generalized model to effectively detect all types of forgery solely relying on limited
training data [4]. Concurrently, training a new model with
all available data whenever a new forgery emerges can lead
to signiﬁcant issues of computational expenses, storage lim-

13927

