This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProAPO: Progressively Automatic Prompt Optimization for Visual Classiﬁcation
Xiangyan Qu12
Kun Song4
1

Gaopeng Gou12† Jiamin Zhuang12 Jing Yu3
Qihao Wang12 Yili Li12 Gang Xiong12

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3

School of Information Engineering, Minzu University of China

2

School of Cyber Security, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4

University of Science and Technology Beijing

{quxiangyan, gougaopeng, zhuangjiamin}@iie.ac.cn, jing.yu@muc.edu.cn
songkun@xs.ustb.edu.cn, wangqihao22@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {liyili, xionggang}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
Vision-language models (VLMs) have made signiﬁcant
progress in image classiﬁcation by training with large-scale
paired image-text data. Their performances largely depend on the prompt quality. While recent methods show
that visual descriptions generated by large language models (LLMs) enhance the generalization of VLMs, classspeciﬁc prompts may be inaccurate or lack discrimination
due to the hallucination in LLMs. In this paper, we aim to
ﬁnd visually discriminative prompts for ﬁne-grained categories with minimal supervision and no human-in-the-loop.
An evolution-based algorithm is proposed to progressively
optimize language prompts from task-speciﬁc templates to
class-speciﬁc descriptions. Unlike optimizing templates,
the search space shows an explosion in class-speciﬁc candidate prompts. This increases prompt generation costs, iterative times, and the overﬁtting problem. To this end, we
ﬁrst introduce several simple yet effective edit-based and
evolution-based operations to generate diverse candidate
prompts by one-time query of LLMs. Then, two sampling
strategies are proposed to ﬁnd a better initial search point
and reduce traversed categories, saving iteration costs.
Moreover, we apply a novel ﬁtness score with entropy constraints to mitigate overﬁtting. In a challenging one-shot
image classiﬁcation setting, our method outperforms existing textual prompt-based methods and improves LLMgenerated description methods across 13 datasets. Meanwhile, we demonstrate that our optimal prompts improve
adapter-based methods and transfer effectively across different backbones. Our code is available at here.

1. Introduction
In recent years, vision-language models (VLMs) [1, 27, 33,
43, 55, 64, 72, 73] pre-trained on large-scale paired imagetext data, such as CLIP [55], have shown strong generalization on various image classiﬁcation tasks. These mod† Corresponding author

els classify images by computing the similarity between the
image and the prompt (a human-readable natural language)
associated with a category. The prediction is the category
with the highest similarity to the query image. Their performance highly relies on prompt quality, especially in ﬁnegrained categories. Finding the optimal prompts for the
downstream task becomes an urgent challenge [36, 52, 77].
Recent works have made efforts to improve prompt quality [4, 16, 55]. Manual prompt engineering [8, 55, 71]
is a standard approach, writing several templates to include task-speciﬁc information, e.g., “a photo of a
{class}, a type of bird.” for bird recognition.
However, designing templates requires domain expertise,
making it costly and challenging to scale [36, 39, 40, 52,
77]. Moreover, the template may lack details to recognize ﬁne-grained categories as only the class name provides
the distinct information in prompts [39, 52, 77]. Prompt
tuning methods [6, 76, 77, 79] introduce a set of learnable tokens in the prompt to represent task-speciﬁc context, optimizing through gradient updates. While improving
the performance of VLMs, they require additional training
and lack interpretability [36, 40, 58]. In contrast, LLMgenerated description methods [39, 40, 52, 57, 68, 81]
leverage the implicit knowledge of large language models
(LLMs) [4, 48] to generate descriptions with class-speciﬁc
details, enhancing generalization ability of VLMs. However, due to the hallucination in LLMs [25, 56], generated
descriptions are suboptimal due to inaccurate, e.g., “feet”
for the food Peking Duck, or lack discrimination for ﬁnegrained recognition, e.g., the same descriptions “hooked
bill” and “webbed feet” appear in Laysan Albatross
and Sooty Albatross (see Fig. 1(a)), or exhibit non-visual
descriptions, e.g., “strong smell” for Jackfruit. To this
end, we propose the following key questions:
How can we ﬁnd the optimal class-speciﬁc prompts that
are visually discriminative for ﬁne-grained categories with
minimal supervision and no human intervention?
Inspired by recent automatic prompt optimization (APO)
methods [18, 53, 60, 78] in language tasks, we aim to opti-

25145

