This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Period-LLM: Extending the Periodic Capability of
Multimodal Large Language Model
Yuting Zhang1∗ , Hao Lu1,2∗ , Qingyong Hu2 , Yin Wang3 , Kaishen Yuan1 , Xin Liu4 , Kaishun Wu1‡
1
The Hong Kong University of Science & Technology (Guangzhou),
2
The Hong Kong University of Science & Technology, 3 Zhejiang University,
4
Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology
{yzhang430, hlu585}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, wuks@hkust-gz.edu.cn
∗
Equal contribution, ‡ Corresponding author
WĞƌŝŽĚŝĐdĂƐŬƐ
How many times did the person in the
video repeat running on the treadmill?

'WdͲϰ

DŽƚŝŽŶ
ŽƵŶƚŝŶŐ

dƌĂĨĨŝĐ
&ůŽǁ

tĞĂƚŚĞƌ
&ŽƌĞĐĂƐƚ

ZĞŵŽƚĞ,ĞĂůƚŚ
ĂƌĞ

The analysis did not detect any clear
repetitions in the video based on the
,ĂƌĚƚŽĂŶĂůǇƐĞ
motion patterns.

sŝĚĞŽͲ>>ĂD

The person in the video repeated running
5 times.
tƌŽŶŐŶƵŵďĞƌ

WĞƌŝŽĚͲ>>D

The repetitive motion in the video is
running on the treadmill 14 times.

Figure 1. Existing multimodal models may fail to analyze periodic tasks, such as motion counting, trafﬁc ﬂow, weather forecasting, and
remote health care. For example, GPT-4 fails to detect clear repetitions due to the difﬁculty in analyzing motion patterns, and VideoLLaMA incorrectly counts the repetitions. In contrast, Period-LLM accurately analyzes the actions and provides correct repetition count.

Abstract
Periodic or quasi-periodic phenomena reveal intrinsic characteristics in various natural processes, such as
weather patterns, movement behaviors, trafﬁc ﬂows, and
biological signals. Given that these phenomena span multiple modalities, the capabilities of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) offer promising potential to effectively capture and understand their complex nature. However, current MLLMs struggle with periodic tasks due to
limitations in: 1) lack of temporal modelling and 2) conﬂict between short and long periods. This paper introduces
Period-LLM, a multimodal large language model designed
to enhance the performance of periodic tasks across various modalities, and constructs a benchmark of various difﬁculty for evaluating the cross-modal periodic capabilities
of large models. Specially, We adopt an “Easy to Hard
Generalization” paradigm, starting with relatively simple
text-based tasks and progressing to more complex visual
and multimodal tasks, ensuring that the model gradually
builds robust periodic reasoning capabilities. Additionally, we propose a “Resisting Logical Oblivion” optimization strategy to maintain periodic reasoning abilities dur-

ing semantic alignment. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the superiority of the proposed Period-LLM over existing
MLLMs in periodic tasks. The code is available at https:
//github.com/keke-nice/Period-LLM .

1. Introduction
Periodic tasks refer to activities performed at ﬁxed or predictable intervals, encompassing a wide range of applications. At a macro level, this includes repetitive motions
in human daily life, such as step counts and the number
of times one jumps rope [7, 10, 50], as well as the periodic analysis of meteorological data, where scientists can
identify various weather patterns and trends, forecast future
weather conditions [1, 35, 37], and issue timely warnings.
At a micro level, in health monitoring, by capturing and
analyzing subtle chromatic changes in facial videos, physiological signals such as heart rate, blood pressure, and respiratory rate can be extracted [22, 25, 45, 51] . The periodic
ﬂuctuations of these signals reﬂect the physiological state
of human. Effectively handling periodic tasks can signiﬁcantly enhance various aspects of human life, from predicting weather patterns to monitoring health conditions.

29237

