This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V2V3D: View-to-View Denoised 3D Reconstruction for Light-Field Microscopy
Jiayin Zhao1,2 * , Zhenqi Fu1 * , Tao Yu1† , Hui Qiao1,2†
1
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, China
zhao-jy23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {fuzhenqi, ytrock, qiaohui}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Light field microscopy (LFM) has gained significant attention due to its ability to capture snapshot-based, largescale 3D fluorescence images. However, existing LFM
reconstruction algorithms are highly sensitive to sensor
noise or require hard-to-get ground-truth annotated data
for training. To address these challenges, this paper introduces V2V3D, an unsupervised view2view-based framework that establishes a new paradigm for joint optimization of image denoising and 3D reconstruction in a unified architecture. We assume that the LF images are derived from a consistent 3D signal, with the noise in each
view being independent. This enables V2V3D to incorporate the principle of noise2noise for effective denoising. To enhance the recovery of high-frequency details, we
propose a novel wave-optics-based feature alignment technique, which transforms the point spread function, used for
forward propagation in wave optics, into convolution kernels specifically designed for feature alignment. Moreover,
we introduce an LFM dataset containing LF images and
their corresponding 3D intensity volumes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves high computational efficiency and outperforms the other state-of-theart methods. These advancements position V2V3D as a
promising solution for 3D imaging under challenging conditions. Our code and dataset will be publicly accessible at
https://joey1998hub.github.io/V2V3D/.

Figure 1. Background and concept of V2V3D. (a) Previous
methods, such as VCDNet [42] and DINER [52], directly apply
all views for reconstruction and lack physical priors in feature
representation. Therefore, when reconstructing real-world noisy
scenes, these methods usually generate results with conspicuous
artifacts and blurriness. (b) The proposed method divides the noisy
views into two non-overlapping subsets and employs two networks
to generate the corresponding volumes. Additionally, we incorporate PSF priors for feature alignment, thereby enhancing feature
aggregation across views. (c) Through the aforementioned custom
designs, our method achieves state-of-the-art performance.

is particularly useful in dynamic biological processes where
depth and temporal resolution are both crucial [7, 11, 47].

1. Introduction
Light field microscopy (LFM) has emerged as an critical
technology in a diverse array of biomedical applications,
due to its unparalleled ability to capture high-resolution,
three-dimensional microscopic scenes with exceptional precision and efficiency [35, 44]. The ability of simultaneously recording both spatial and angular information from
the sample allows LFM to generate volumetric data, which

The most classical LFM reconstruction methods can
generally be divided into two main categories: RichardLucy deconvolution-based (RLD-based) approaches and
learning-based solutions. Specifically, RLD-based methods [18, 29] rely on a computationally expensive and iterative recovery process, which severely limits the overall
throughput of LFM reconstruction. This limitation makes
them less suitable for long-duration or real-time applications. With the rapid progress of deep learning, learningbased algorithms [26, 42, 52], predominantly supervised
learning methods, have emerged to enhance the speed and

* Co-first author
† Corresponding author

26451

