This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pattern Analogies: Learning to Perform Programmatic Image Edits by Analogy
Aditya Ganeshan∗
Brown University

Thibault Groueix
Adobe Research

Paul Guerrero
Adobe Research

Matthew Fisher
Adobe Research

Radomı́r Měch
Adobe Research

Daniel Ritchie
Brown University

Figure 1. Our system performs programmatic edits on pattern images without inferring their underlying programs. (Left) Desired edits,
expressed with a pair of patterns (A, A ), are executed on a target pattern B by a generative model to produce B  . (Right) Parametric
changes A → A enabled by our domain-specific pattern language induce corresponding changes to the more complex pattern B.

Abstract
Pattern images are everywhere in the digital and physical worlds, and tools to edit them are valuable. But editing
pattern images is tricky: desired edits are often programmatic: structure- aware edits that alter the underlying program which generates the pattern. One could attempt to
infer this underlying program, but current methods for doing so struggle with complex images and produce unorganized programs that make editing tedious. In this work, we
introduce a novel approach to perform programmatic edits on pattern images. By using a pattern analogy—a pair
of simple patterns to demonstrate the intended edit—and
a learning- based generative model to execute these edits,
our method allows users to intuitively edit patterns. To enable this paradigm, we introduce S PLIT W EAVE, a domainspecific language that, combined with a framework for sampling synthetic pattern analogies, enables the creation of
a large, high- quality synthetic training dataset. We also
present T RI F USER, a Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) designed to overcome critical issues that arise when naively

deploying LDMs to this task. Extensive experiments on realworld, artist- sourced patterns reveals that our method faithfully performs the demonstrated edit while also generalizing
to related pattern styles beyond its training distribution.

1. Introduction
Visual pattern designs enhance digital media such as presentations, website themes, and user interfaces, and they
are woven into the physical world through textiles, wallpapers, and product designs like hardware covers. Given the
ubiquity of patterns, methods for editing them are essential:
designers should be able to quickly experiment with variations, customize designs to meet specific needs, and adapt
existing patterns to align with evolving trends.
Editing pattern images is not straightforward, as patterns
are inherently structured, defined by rules that govern their
layout and composition: tiling patterns adhere to principles
of alignment and repetition (see Figure 1: top left), while
retro-style designs rely on spatial divisions and fills (see
Figure 1: bottom center). The edits that designers desire
* Work performed during an internship at Adobe Research

28715

