This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Visual Discrimination and Reasoning of Real-World Physical Dynamics:
Physics-Grounded Anomaly Detection
Wenqiao Li1∗ Yao Gu1∗ Xintao Chen1∗ Xiaohao Xu2† Ming Hu3 Xiaonan Huang2 Yingna Wu1†
1 ShanghaiTech University
2 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
3 Monash University
(a) Object

(b) Interaction

Rubber Band

Gear Assembly

Bottled Water

Abnormal Normal Abnormal Normal Abnormal Normal

0

(c) Video with Physical Dynamics

t

Water
Leak

Misalignment

Crack

Figure 1. Towards visual discrimination of physical dynamics in real-world industrial object anomaly detection. We illustrate objects,
interactions, and time-sequenced videos from the Physics-Grounded Anomaly Detection dataset: (a) Object; (b) Interaction: Applied
actions shown with directional arrows; (c) Video with Physical Dynamics: Temporal sequences showing normal and abnormal states,
highlighting anomalies like leaks, misalignments, and cracks. By focusing on the dynamic behaviors of complex objects, we enhance
understanding of interactions and failure modes in real-world settings, where both structure and motion contribute to anomaly detection.

Abstract
Humans detect real-world object anomalies by perceiving,
interacting, and reasoning based on object-conditioned physical knowledge. The long-term goal of Industrial Anomaly
Detection (IAD) is to enable machines to autonomously replicate this skill. However, current IAD algorithms are largely
developed and tested on static, semantically simple datasets,
which diverge from real-world scenarios where physical
understanding and reasoning are essential. To bridge this
gap, we introduce the Physics Anomaly Detection (Phys-AD)
dataset, the first large-scale, real-world, physics-grounded
video dataset for industrial anomaly detection. Collected
using a real robot arm and motor, Phys-AD provides a diverse

set of dynamic, semantically rich scenarios. The dataset includes more than 6400 videos across 22 real-world object categories, interacting with robot arms and motors, and exhibits
47 types of anomalies. Anomaly detection in Phys-AD requires visual reasoning, combining both physical knowledge
and video content to determine object abnormality. We benchmark state-of-the-art anomaly detection methods under three
settings: unsupervised AD, weakly-supervised AD, and videounderstanding AD, highlighting their limitations in handling
physics-grounded anomalies. Additionally, we introduce the
Physics Anomaly Explanation (PAEval) metric, designed to
assess the ability of visual-language foundation models to not
only detect anomalies but also provide accurate explanations
for their underlying physical causes. Our project is available
at https://guyao2023.github.io/Phys-AD/.

∗ Equally contribute to this work.
† Corresponding authors

30409

