This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreqDebias: Towards Generalizable Deepfake Detection via Consistency-Driven
Frequency Debiasing
Hossein Kashiani

Niloufar Alipour Talemi
Clemson University

Fatemeh Afghah

{hkashia, nalipou, fafghah}@clemson.edu

Abstract
Deepfake detectors often struggle to generalize to novel
forgery types due to biases learned from limited training
data. In this paper, we identify a new type of model bias
in the frequency domain, termed spectral bias, where detectors overly rely on specific frequency bands, restricting
their ability to generalize across unseen forgeries. To address this, we propose FreqDebias, a frequency debiasing
framework that mitigates spectral bias through two complementary strategies. First, we introduce a novel Forgery
Mixup (Fo-Mixup) augmentation, which dynamically diversifies frequency characteristics of training samples. Second, we incorporate a dual consistency regularization (CR),
which enforces both local consistency using class activation
maps (CAMs) and global consistency through a von MisesFisher (vMF) distribution on a hyperspherical embedding
space. This dual CR mitigates over-reliance on certain frequency components by promoting consistent representation
learning under both local and global supervision. Extensive
experiments show that FreqDebias significantly enhances
cross-domain generalization and outperforms state-of-theart methods in both cross-domain and in-domain settings.

DeepFake

Face2Face

NeuralTextures

Figure 1. Visualization of certain frequency bands overly relied
upon by the vanilla deepfake detector. The dominant frequency
bands, highlighted in binary masks B, are restricted to specific
bands and also driven by the forgery type. Further details are provided in the supplementary material.

the best of our knowledge, imperceptible model bias in the
frequency domain remains unexplored. An analysis in this
domain can provide insights into the causes of this bias and
support mitigation efforts to enhance generalization.
In this paper, we investigate model bias in the frequency
domain and evaluate its impact on the generalization capabilities of deepfake detectors. To this end, we design a
spectral bias experiment to identify the range of frequency
bands that a standard deepfake detector pays attention to
during classification. Our analysis reveals that detectors
often over-rely on certain frequency bands, termed dominant frequency components, while failing to capture general
forgery artifacts that may be spread across wider frequency
bands. These components are defined as bands whose exclusion leads to the largest increase in classification loss,
indicating the detector’s critical dependence. As shown in
Fig. 1, these dominant frequency components are primarily
driven by the forgery type, each exhibiting unique statistical patterns and typically confined to specific frequency
bands. This over-reliance limits the generalization capac-

1. Introduction
Recent advances in face forgery enable malicious users
to create ultrarealistic facial images that appear genuine,
which poses threats to societal trust and security [1, 14,
27, 33]. While detection methods have shown progress,
they often struggle to generalize beyond specific in-domain
forgery types, limiting their effectiveness in detecting outof-distribution samples [6, 7, 12, 15, 24, 30, 34, 38, 49, 71].
This limitation arises from model bias, where detectors
overly rely on spurious correlations, such as identity [24],
background [34], specific-forgery [63, 65], or structural information [9], rather than common forgery features shared
across various forgeries. While recent studies [9, 13, 24, 63,
65] have focused on addressing human-perceptible bias, to

8775

