This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint Optimization of Neural Radiance Fields and Continuous Camera
Motion from a Monocular Video
Hoang Chuong Nguyen1
Wei Mao
Jose M. Alvarez2
Miaomiao Liu1
1
2
Australian National University
NVIDIA
{hoangchuong.nguyen, miaomiao.liu}@anu.edu.au

josea@nvidia.com

Figure 1. Comparison with previous works [2, 6]. Our method achieves superior performance in camera pose estimation (side),
depth estimation (bottom) and novel-view synthesis (top).

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) has demonstrated its superior capability to represent 3D geometry but require
accurately precomputed camera poses during training.
To mitigate this requirement, existing methods jointly
optimize camera poses and NeRF often relying on good
pose initialisation or depth priors. However, these approaches struggle in challenging scenarios, such as
large rotations, as they map each camera to a world coordinate system. We propose a novel method that eliminates prior dependencies by modeling continuous camera motions as time-dependent angular velocity and velocity. Relative motions between cameras are learned
first via velocity integration, while camera poses can be
obtained by aggregating such relative motions up to a
world coordinate system defined at a single time step
within the video. Specifically, accurate continuous camera movements are learned through a time-dependent
NeRF, which captures local scene geometry and motion by training from neighboring frames for each time

step. The learned motions enable fine-tuning the NeRF
to represent the full scene geometry. Experiments on
Co3D and Scannet show our approach achieves superior camera pose and depth estimation and comparable novel-view synthesis performance compared to stateof-the-art methods. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/HoangChuongNguyen/cope-nerf.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF)
[20, 29, 33] have demonstrated impressive performance
in synthesizing photorealistic images and representing
3D scenes. The training process of these models requires known camera poses for training images, which
are usually obtained using Structure-from-Motion methods such as COLMAP [26]. However, this process introduces additional computation, lacks differentiability,
and is sensitive to hand-crafted features [1, 17].
To remove its reliance on COLMAP, existing meth-

11472

