This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RNG: Relightable Neural Gaussians
Jiahui Fan1 , Fujun Luan2 , Jian Yang1 * Miloš Hašan2 , and Beibei Wang3∗
1
PCA Lab †, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Adobe Research 3 Nanjing University
{fjh, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, fluan@adobe.com, milos.hasan@gmail.com, beibei.wang@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has shown impressive results for the novel view synthesis task, where lighting is
assumed to be fixed. However, creating relightable 3D
assets, especially for objects with ill-defined shapes (fur,
fabric, etc.), remains a challenging task. The decomposition between light, geometry, and material is ambiguous,
especially if either smooth surface assumptions or surfacebased analytical shading models do not apply. We propose
Relightable Neural Gaussians (RNG), a novel 3DGS-based
framework that enables the relighting of objects with both
hard surfaces or soft boundaries, while avoiding assumptions on the shading model. We condition the radiance
at each point on both view and light directions. We also
introduce a shadow cue, as well as a depth refinement
network to improve shadow accuracy. Finally, we propose a hybrid forward-deferred fitting strategy to balance
geometry and appearance quality. Our method achieves
significantly faster training (1.3 hours) and rendering (60
frames per second) compared to a prior method based on
neural radiance fields and produces higher-quality shadows
than a concurrent 3DGS-based method. Project page:
whois-jiahui.fun/project_pages/RNG.

1. Introduction
Creating 3D assets from multi-view captures of the real
world is an effective way for content creation, avoiding
manual modeling labor. The resulting 3D assets can be
objects with well-defined surfaces or ill-defined shapes
(e.g., fur, fabric, grass, etc.), as both are important in many
applications. Unfortunately, if we want the resulting assets
to be relightable, the task is still challenging because of the
ill-posed nature of the decomposition between light, materials, and geometry. This is especially true for complex non* Corresponding authors.
† PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-

Dimensional Information, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China.

smooth materials, which raise difficulties in decomposition,
as surface-specific constraints or surface-based analytical
shading models cannot be leveraged. In this paper, we
aim to relight objects with clear surfaces or soft boundaries
given multi-view captured images with varying illumination, simultaneously achieving high-quality relighting and
shortening training/rendering times.
After ground-breaking view-synthesis work on Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [20] and 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [15], extensive efforts have focused on reconstructing relightable 3D assets [9, 13, 14, 17–19, 24]. However,
these methods mostly rely on surface shading models and
introduce surface constraints (including the assumption of
valid normals), preventing them from reconstructing objects with soft boundaries and/or materials that are not
well represented with simple analytic models. Recently,
NRHints [27] enabled relightable capture of both smooth
surfaces and objects with soft boundaries by using input
views with a moving point light and a neural appearance
model. Being based on a NeRF framework, NRHints
suffers from high training/rendering time costs and some
over-smoothing of detail. The concurrent work GS3 [2]
uses the same capture setup but instead uses 3DGS as the
underlying framework, which is more efficient in training
and rendering, and captures finer details. With the less
accurate geometry obtained from 3DGS, GS3 has relatively
lower shadow quality.
In this paper, we propose Relightable Neural Gaussians
(RNG), a novel 3DGS-based framework for relighting objects with both clear surfaces and soft boundaries. We
implicitly model the radiance of objects by learning latent
(feature) vectors at each neural Gaussian. To interpret
neural Gaussians, we use the neural Gaussian decoder
network, and condition it on the view and light directions.
Analytical assumptions in shading models and surface constraints are avoided in our neural representation, making
it capable of learning appearances that do not fit well into
those constraints.
Following prior work [27], we utilize views with a moving point light, to observe many view/light combinations

26525

