This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FoundationStereo: Zero-Shot Stereo Matching
Bowen Wen

Matthew Trepte
Orazio Gallo

Joseph Aribido
Stan Birchfield

Jan Kautz

NVIDIA

Figure 1. Zero-shot prediction on in-the-wild images. Our method generalizes to diverse scenarios (indoor / outdoor), objects of challenging properties
(textureless / reflective / translucent / thin-structured), complex illuminations (shadow / strong exposure), various viewing perspectives and sensing ranges.

Abstract

Recent stereo algorithms can achieve amazing results, almost saturating the most challenging benchmarks—thanks
to the proliferation of training datasets and advances in deep
neural network architectures. Yet, fine-tuning on the dataset
of the target domain is still the method of choice to get competitive results. Given the zero-shot generalization ability
shown on other problems within computer vision via the
scaling law [32, 46, 77, 78], what prevents stereo matching
algorithms from achieving a similar level of generalization?
Leading stereo networks [11, 41, 53, 54, 72, 79] construct cost volumes from the unary features and leverage 3D CNNs for cost filtering. Refinement-based methods [14, 21, 27, 34, 36, 60, 66, 85] iteratively refine the
disparity map based on recurrent modules such as Gated
Recurrent Units (GRU). Despite their success on public
benchmarks under per-domain fine-tuning setup, however,
they struggle to gather non-local information to effectively
scale to larger datasets. Other methods [35, 67] explore
transformer architectures for unary feature extraction, while
lacking the specialized structure afforded by cost volumes
and iterative refinement to achieve high accuracy.
Such limitations have, to date, hindered the development
of a stereo network that generalizes well to other domains.
While it is true that cross-domain generalization has been
explored by some prior works [10, 17, 37, 49, 81, 83], such

Tremendous progress has been made in deep stereo matching to excel on benchmark datasets through per-domain
fine-tuning. However, achieving strong zero-shot generalization — a hallmark of foundation models in other computer vision tasks — remains challenging for stereo matching. We introduce FoundationStereo, a foundation model
for stereo depth estimation designed to achieve strong zeroshot generalization. To this end, we first construct a largescale (1M stereo pairs) synthetic training dataset featuring
large diversity and high photorealism, followed by an automatic self-curation pipeline to remove ambiguous samples.
We then design a number of network architecture components to enhance scalability, including a side-tuning feature backbone that adapts rich monocular priors from vision foundation models to mitigate the sim-to-real gap, and
long-range context reasoning for effective cost volume filtering. Together, these components lead to strong robustness and accuracy across domains, establishing a new standard in zero-shot stereo depth estimation. Project page:
https:// nvlabs.github.io/ FoundationStereo/

1. Introduction
Since the advent of the first stereo matching algorithm
nearly half a century ago [42], we have come a long way.

5249

