This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The PanAf-FGBG Dataset:
Understanding the Impact of Backgrounds in Wildlife Behaviour Recognition
Otto Brookes1,2†∗ , Maksim Kukushkin3,4∗ , Majid Mirmehdi1 , Colleen Stephens5 , Paula Dieguez5 ,
Thurston C. Hicks6 , Sorrel Jones5 , Kevin Lee5 , Maureen S. McCarthy5 , Amelia Meier5 ,
Emmanuelle Normand2 , Erin G. Wessling7 , Roman M.Wittig5,8 , Kevin Langergraber9 ,
Klaus Zuberbühler10 , Lukas Boesch2 , Thomas Schmid3,11 , Mimi Arandjelovic5 ,
Hjalmar Kühl5,12 , Tilo Burghardt1
1

University of Bristol, 2 Wild Chimpanzee Foundation, 3 Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg,
Leipzig University, 5 Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, 6 University of Warsaw,
7
Harvard University, 8 University of Lyon, 9 Arizona State University, 10 University of St Andrews,
11
Lancaster University in Leipzig, 12 Senckenberg Museum of Natural History

4

Abstract
Computer vision analysis of camera trap video footage
is essential for wildlife conservation, as captured behaviours offer some of the earliest indicators of changes
in population health. Recently, several high-impact animal behaviour datasets and methods have been introduced
to encourage their use; however, the role of behaviourcorrelated background information and its significant effect
on out-of-distribution generalisation remain unexplored. In
response, we present the PanAf-FGBG dataset, featuring 21
hours of wild chimpanzee behaviours, recorded at 389 individual camera locations. Uniquely, it pairs every video
with a chimpanzee (referred to as a foreground video) with
a corresponding background video (with no chimpanzee)
from the same camera location. We present two views of
the dataset: one with overlapping camera locations and
one with disjoint locations. This setup enables, for the
first time, direct evaluation of in-distribution and out-ofdistribution conditions, and for the impact of backgrounds
on behaviour recognition models to be quantified. All clips
have rich behavioural annotations and metadata, including
unique camera IDs. Additionally, we establish several baselines and present a highly effective latent-space normalisation technique that boosts out-of-distribution performance
by +5.42% mAP for convolutional and +3.75% mAP for
transformer-based models. Finally, we provide an in-depth
analysis on the role of backgrounds in out-of-distribution
behaviour recognition, including the so far unexplored impact of background durations. (i.e., the count of background
frames within foreground videos). The dataset is available
at https://obrookes.github.io/panaf-fgbg.github.io/.

Figure 1. Conceptual Overview. The PanAf-FGBG dataset
comprises >20 hours of paired and richly annotated foregroundbackground camera trap videos of wild chimpanzees. The dataset
unlocks systematic analyses of the impact of background information on wildlife behaviour recognition. We provide baselines,
quantify the background impact on performance, and demonstrate
that utilising background information in latent space (see blue data
point) can significantly improve recognition performance in this
challenging domain.

†Corresponding author, *Equal technical contribution

5433

