This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GEM: A Generalizable Ego-Vision Multimodal World Model for Fine-Grained
Ego-Motion, Object Dynamics, and Scene Composition Control
Mariam Hassan?1 , Sebastian Stapf?2 , Ahmad Rahimi?1 , Pedro M B Rezende?2 , Yasaman Haghighi⌃1 ,
David Brüggemann⌃3 , Isinsu Katircioglu⌃3 , Lin Zhang⌃3 , Xiaoran Chen⌃3 , Suman Saha⌃3 ,
Marco Cannici⌃4 , Elie Aljalbout⌃4 , Botao Ye⌃5 , Xi Wang⌃5 , Aram Davtyan2 ,
Mathieu Salzmann1,3 , Davide Scaramuzza4 , Marc Pollefeys5 , Paolo Favaro2 , Alexandre Alahi1
1

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 2 University of Bern,
3
Swiss Data Science Center, 4 University of Zurich, 5 ETH Zurich

Move Objects

Insert Objects

Output

Input

Input

Change Ego Trajectory

Output

Input

Output

Change Human Poses

Multimodal

Multidomain

Not Moving

RGB Output

Drone Flights

Moving

Depth Output

Human Egocentric Activities

Figure 1. Overview of the capabilities of our proposed world model. GEM enables a range of features, including object manipulation
(move, and insert objects), dynamic ego-trajectory adjustments, human poses changes and adaptability to multimodal outputs (i.e., images
and depth maps) and multiple domains (i.e., drones and human egocentric activities). All images are generated by GEM.

Abstract
We present GEM, a Generalizable Ego-vision Multimodal
world model that predicts future frames using a reference
frame, sparse features, human poses, and ego-trajectories.
Hence, our model has precise control over object dynamics,
ego-agent motion and human poses. GEM generates paired
RGB and depth outputs for richer spatial understanding.
We introduce autoregressive noise schedules to enable stable long-horizon generations. Our dataset is comprised of
4000+ hours of multimodal data across domains like autonomous driving, egocentric human activities, and drone
flights. Pseudo-labels are used to get depth maps, egotrajectories, and human poses. We use a comprehensive

evaluation framework, including a new Control of Object
Manipulation (COM) metric, to assess controllability. Experiments show GEM excels at generating diverse, controllable scenarios and temporal consistency over long generations. Code, models, and datasets are fully open-sourced1 .

1. Introduction

? Main Contributors, ⌃ Data Contributors

Different ego-vision tasks, such as autonomous driving,
egocentric human activities, and drone navigation, share a
common set of challenges centered around understanding
and interacting with the environment from a first-person
perspective. Whether it is a car moving, a drone flying, or
1 https://vita-epfl.github.io/GEM.github.io/

22404

