This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distribution Prototype Diffusion Learning for Open-set Supervised
Anomaly Detection
Fuyun Wang1 , Tong Zhang1 *, Yuanzhi Wang1 , Yide Qiu1 , Xin Liu2 , Xu Guo1 , Zhen Cui3 *
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China.
2
Nanjing SeetaCloud Technology, China. 3 Beijing Normal University, China
{fyw271828, tong.zhang, yuanzhiwang, 121106010824, guo.xu}@njust.edu.cn
xin.liu@seetacloud.com, zhen.cui@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract
In Open-set Supervised Anomaly Detection (OSAD), the
existing methods typically generate pseudo anomalies to
compensate for the scarcity of observed anomaly samples,
while overlooking critical priors of normal samples, leading to less effective discriminative boundaries. To address
this issue, we propose a Distribution Prototype Diffusion
Learning (DPDL) method aimed at enclosing normal samples within a compact and discriminative distribution space.
Specifically, we construct multiple learnable Gaussian prototypes to create a latent representation space for abundant and diverse normal samples and learn a Schrödinger
bridge to facilitate a diffusive transition toward these prototypes for normal samples while steering anomaly samples away. Moreover, to enhance inter-sample separation, we design a dispersion feature learning way in hyperspherical space, which benefits the identification of out-ofdistribution anomalies. Experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness and superiority of our proposed DPDL,
achieving state-of-the-art performance on 9 public datasets.

ating normal from anomaly instances. On the contrary, supervised anomaly detection (SAD) [2, 20, 47] leverages a
limited subset of anomaly samples as prior knowledge, improving detection performance. However, this reliance on
seen anomalies poses a risk of overfitting and hampers generalization to unseen anomalies in real-world settings.

1. Introduction

To mitigate the challenge of limited generalization inherent in closed-set training, we focus on open-set supervised anomaly detection (OSAD) [1, 27, 51, 52], which
utilizes a small set of known anomaly classes during training to identify unseen anomalies from open-set classes. By
leveraging prior knowledge from observed samples, OSAD
methods could reduce false positive errors. To improve the
generalized detection of unseen anomalies, DRA [9] leverages data augmentation and outlier exposure to learn a decomposed anomaly representation comprising seen anomalies, pseudo-anomalies, and potential residual anomalies.
BGAD [47] leverages decision boundaries derived from
normalized flow models to capture and model anomaly information. Recently, AHL [51] simulates heterogeneous
anomaly distributions and performs collaborative differentiable learning to further enhance the model’s generality.

Anomaly detection (AD) [15, 21, 48, 50] aims to identify outliers significantly diverging from the prevailing samples in a dataset, and has a wide range of applications like
industrial inspection, medical image analysis, and scientific discovery, etc. Recently, unsupervised anomaly detection (UAD) [6, 11, 26, 28] and few-shot anomaly detection (FSAD) [12, 21, 22] have emerged as prominent
research paradigms, emphasizing the modeling of normal
sample distributions to discern anomalies effectively. Yet,
these methods often neglect prior knowledge from limited
anomaly samples, resulting in imprecise delineation of normal sample boundaries and reduced efficacy in differenti-

While data augmentation and outlier exposure techniques [9, 19, 34] have demonstrated considerable success
in anomaly detection, they fall short in generating comprehensive pseudo anomalies, capturing only a fraction of
potential unseen anomalies. This limitation arises from
overlooking the intricate nature of real-world anomaly distributions, thereby hindering the model’s ability to generalize to novel anomaly types. Although AHL [51] has
made strides in addressing this issue by simulating heterogeneous anomaly distributions, it still relies on approximating unknown out-of-distribution anomalies using known indistribution anomalies for generalization. Yet, three critical
issues persist: i) the simulation mechanism cannot cover all
anomaly distribution patterns due to the varied scales and
structures of anomaly distributions; ii) simulated anoma-

* Corresponding authors: Tong Zhang, Zhen Cui

20416

