This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Scalable Human-aligned Benchmark for Text-guided Image Editing
Suho Ryu,* Kihyun Kim,* Eugene Baek,* Dongsoo Shin, Joonseok Lee†
Graduate School of Data Science, Seoul National University
{jmhera2007,ki5477,eugene0103,dongsoo,joonseok}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
A variety of text-guided image editing models have been
proposed recently. However, there is no widely-accepted
standard evaluation method mainly due to the subjective
nature of the task, letting researchers rely on manual user
study. To address this, we introduce a novel Human-Aligned
benchmark for Text-guided Image Editing (HATIE). Providing a large-scale benchmark set covering a wide range
of editing tasks, it allows reliable evaluation, not limited
to specific easy-to-evaluate cases. Also, HATIE provides
a fully-automated and omnidirectional evaluation pipeline.
Particularly, we combine multiple scores measuring various
aspects of editing so as to align with human perception. We
empirically verify that the evaluation of HATIE is indeed
human-aligned in various aspects, and provide benchmark
results on several state-of-the-art models to provide deeper
insights on their performance.

ground truth, it is crucial to have a proper metric to measure the deviation between the edited image and the ground
truth. Unlike traditional machine learning problems where
we can easily measure the deviation using a simple distance
metric like L2 , it is well-known that image distance cannot be simply measured by pixel-level distances. Thus, it
is essential to have human-like high-level understanding to
measure the relevance with human perception to properly
evaluate the quality of edited images. For this, model-based
metrics such as CLIP [24] similarity or LPIPS [35] distance
has been used. Also, large language models (LLM) or vision language models (VLM) have been widely adopted recently. Relying on a particular model, however, sacrifices
reliability and reproducibility of evaluation results.

1. Introduction

In addition, there are multiple aspects to consider when
we evaluate the edited images. First of all, the edited image itself should be realistic and feasible. The overall configuration and specific details of each object in the image
should be consistent with our common knowledge. Second, the output image should correctly reflect the instructed
change. At the same time, it is expected not to alter unintended aspects in the instruction. For instance, if an image
shows a person and the task is to make her smile, the identity of the person should not change after editing (Fig. 1).
Due to these multi-faceted aspects of image editing, a crude
evaluation would be insufficient to assess detailed quality of
the edit. As it is unclear how to automate this overall evaluation, most previous research have relied on user study,
which is fundamentally limited to scale and reproduce.

With recent advances in diffusion-based image generation
models [25–27], text-guided image editing has been prominently developed. For example, Imagic [15], Prompt-toPrompt [10], and SDEdit [20] have pioneered this direction
in early years, and recent models [9, 13, 34] have remarkably improved the performance.
However, there is no widely-accepted standard evaluation methodology to accurately and objectively assess these
models. This partly comes from the nature of the editing task that there can be multiple correct outputs for each
instance. For example, “adding a table in a living room
scene” can be satisfied with many different shapes of the table. Even for a more specific query like “a circular wooden
tea table with three legs”, the pixel-level details can be infinitely diverse. This becomes even worse when the query
is more ambiguous.
This inherent nature of text-driven image editing causes
difficulties in evaluation. Due to the lack of a ‘golden’
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding author

There have been a few notable attempts to automate evaluation of image editing, listed in Tab. 1. Kawar et al. [15]
and Wang et al. [30] presented a benchmark guideline and
an image set. Due to their small scale of the benchmark set,
however, this work is insufficient to perform robust evaluation, and thus they also have relied on user study. Shi et al.
[28] provided a set of editing requests with ground truth result image for automated evaluation. However, their editing
tasks are quite limited to those where a clear ground truth
can be obtained at almost pixel-level, e.g., gray scaling an
image. Aiming at a similar goal to ours, Basu et al. [2] diversified editing tasks and target objects to cover a wider

18292

