This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reward Fine-Tuning Two-Step Diffusion Models via Learning Differentiable
Latent-Space Surrogate Reward
Zhiwei Jia, Yuesong Nan, Huixi Zhao, Gengdai Liu
Zoom Communications
{firstname.lastname}@zoom.com

Abstract
Recent research has shown that fine-tuning diffusion
models (DMs) with arbitrary rewards, including nondifferentiable ones, is feasible with reinforcement learning
(RL) techniques, enabling flexible model alignment. However, applying existing RL methods to step-distilled DMs is
challenging for ultra-fast (≤ 2-step) image generation. Our
analysis suggests several limitations of policy-based RL
methods such as PPO or DPO toward this goal. Based on
the insights, we propose fine-tuning DMs with learned differentiable surrogate rewards. Our method, named LaSRO,
learns surrogate reward models in the latent space of SDXL
to convert arbitrary rewards into differentiable ones for effective reward gradient guidance. LaSRO leverages pretrained latent DMs for reward modeling and tailors reward optimization for ≤ 2-step image generation with efficient off-policy exploration. LaSRO is effective and stable
for improving ultra-fast image generation with different reward objectives, outperforming popular RL methods including DDPO [2] and Diffusion-DPO [71]. We further show
LaSRO’s connection to value-based RL, providing theoretical insights. See our webpage here.

[59]) usually incorporate a fine-tuning stage that guides
the model’s behavior towards specific human preferences
(aesthetics, debiased, etc.) This is achieved either by supervised learning (SFT) with curated human preference
datasets [26, 75, 78] or through reinforcement learning (RL)
to leverage a diverse set of reward signals, including those
not naturally differentiable such as incompressibility, or potentially the ones involving large language models (LLMs)
or vision-language models (VLMs) [21, 41, 69].
However, it is non-trivial to fine-tune time-distilled DMs
for ≤ 2-step image generation with policy-based RL (e.g.,
PPO [60] or DPO [51]). We detailedly analyze the emerged
optimization challenges negligible for non-distilled DMs.
Most RL objectives are ineffective for ≤ 2-step DMs due to
the deterministic 2nd sampling step. The mapping of the distilled 2-step sampler from noisy images to clean ones (and
thus to most reward signals) is highly non-smooth, making policy gradient estimation challenging. RL methods
relying on the denoising diffusion loss (such as DiffusionDPO [71]) are incompatible with such a property, leading to
blurred images. Moreover, the 2-step mapping lacks enough
stochasticity, posing a hard exploration problem. These
conditions make most RL methods infeasible or ineffective
for fine-tuning two-step DMs.
To address these limitations, we propose to learn a surrogate reward model in the latent space (of SDXL [47]) that
converts an arbitrary reward signal into a differentiable one.
Reward fine-tuning with this learned surrogate avoids policy gradient estimation as it directly and efficiently provides
reward gradient guidance. Specifically, we propose to use
a pre-trained latent diffusion model as the backbone of the
surrogate model, which shows superior memory & speed efficiency and better generalizability compared to the alternatives based on VLMs (CLIP [50] and BLIP [32]). Additionally, our method achieves efficient exploration for 2-step
image DMs with off-policy samples. The overall pipeline
consists of two stages: the pre-training stage for learning
the surrogate reward and the reward optimization stage that
alternates between improving the DMs and online adapting
the surrogate. We call our method LaSRO, i.e., Latent-

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) [17, 61, 63, 64] have significantly
transformed generative modeling for continuous data, delivering remarkable results across various data modalities.
In particular, recent advances [53, 54, 56] demonstrate their
capabilities of generating diverse and high-fidelity images
according to free-form input text prompts, albeit at the
cost of a slow iterative sampling process. Various methods are proposed to accelerate such a sampling process
[36, 38, 40, 62], with the most recent distillation-based
methods [39, 57, 58, 65] pushing the envelope to achieve
extreme few-step generation (≤ 2 steps).
On the other hand, state-of-the-art image diffusion models pre-trained on Internet-scale datasets (e.g. LAION-5B

12912

