This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiSRT-In-Bed: Diffusion-Based Sim-to-Real Transfer Framework for In-Bed
Human Mesh Recovery
Jing Gao

Ce Zheng
Laszlo A. Jeni
Carnegie Mellon University

Zackory Erickson

{jinggao2, cezheng, laszlojeni, zerickso}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

Sim+100%Real

In-bed human mesh recovery can be crucial and enabling
for several healthcare applications, including sleep pattern
monitoring, rehabilitation support, and pressure ulcer prevention. However, it is difficult to collect large real-world
visual datasets in this domain, in part due to privacy and
expense constraints, which in turn presents significant challenges for training and deploying deep learning models.
Existing in-bed human mesh estimation methods often rely
heavily on real-world data, limiting their ability to generalize across different in-bed scenarios, such as varying coverings and environmental settings. To address this, we propose a Sim-to-Real Transfer Framework for in-bed human
mesh recovery from overhead depth images, which leverages large-scale synthetic data alongside limited or no realworld samples. We introduce a diffusion model that bridges
the gap between synthetic data and real data to support
generalization in real-world in-bed pose and body inference
scenarios. Extensive experiments and ablation studies validate the effectiveness of our framework, demonstrating significant improvements in robustness and adaptability across
diverse healthcare scenarios. Project page can be found at
https://jing-g2.github.io/DiSRT-In-Bed/.

Sim+11%Real

Sim+100%Real

Sim+11%Real

Large
Accuracy
Drop

Less
Accuracy
Drop

Previous Work:
BodyMAP

Ours:
DiSRT-In-Bed

Figure 1. Impact of real-world data scarcity on in-bed human mesh
recovery. BodyMAP shows significant performance degradation
when trained with limited real-world data, while our method maintains robust accuracy. ‘Sim’ indicates training with all synthetic
data and ‘n%Real’ indicates training with n% of the real data from
the training dataset.

sensitive to environmental factors. In addition, both RGB
cameras and thermal sensors often struggle with occlusions
in bed, such as blankets. Given these limitations, depth
cameras emerge as a practical solution, offering a balance of
accuracy, affordability, and privacy protection, while avoiding the drawbacks of other sensor types.
Furthermore, general human mesh recovery tasks benefit from abundant real-world data featuring individuals in
standing or active poses [7, 37]. Such dependence on
large-scale real-world data limits the adaptability and performance of deep learning models for human mesh prediction in clinical settings, where data collection is challenging
and often privacy-constrained.
To address the challenge of limited training data, utilizing synthetic data presents a promising solution. Largescale simulated depth datasets can be efficiently generated
without preserving any personally identifiable information,
eliminating the need for sensitive real-world data. Building on this strategy, prior work [3, 4, 36] has demonstrated
good performance in the in-bed human mesh recovery task.
However, they struggle to effectively bridge the domain gap
between synthetic and real-world data, leading to significant performance degradation when the proportion of realworld data in the training set is low, as shown in Fig. 1.
Thus, to further enhance generalization, we propose a novel

1. Introduction
Human mesh recovery, the process of estimating 3D human body shapes and poses from camera or sensor data, is a
challenging problem with significant applications in healthcare. In-bed human mesh recovery, in particular, plays a
vital role in assessing patient well-being, monitoring mobility, and detecting health risks, such as pressure ulcers.
However, collecting labeled real-world data in healthcare
settings is costly, time-consuming, and often constrained
by privacy concerns. Alternative sensing technologies, like
pressure sensing mats, are expensive, require direct patient
contact, and can lose calibration over time, limiting their
reliability. Thermal sensors, while contact-free, are highly

1829

