This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Descriptor-In-Pixel : Point-Feature Tracking for Pixel Processor Arrays
Laurie Bose1,2 Jianing Chen1,2 Piotr Dudek1,2
1
The University of Manchester, Department of EEE, Manchester, United Kingdom
2
Visionchip Limited, Manchester, United Kingdom
https://lauriebose.github.io/DIP

Abstract
This paper presents a novel approach for joint pointfeature detection and tracking, designed specifically for
Pixel Processor Array (PPA) vision sensors. Instead of
standard pixels, PPA sensors consist of thousands of “pixelprocessors”, enabling massive parallel computation of visual data at the point of light capture. Our approach performs all computation entirely in-pixel, meaning no raw image data need ever leave the sensor for external processing.
We introduce a Descriptor-In-Pixel paradigm, in which a
feature descriptor is held within the memory of each pixelprocessor. The PPA’s architecture enables the response of
every processor’s descriptor, upon the current image, to be
computed in parallel. This produces a“descriptor response
map” which, by generating the correct layout of descriptors across the pixel-processors, can be used for both pointfeature detection and tracking. This reduces sensor output
to just sparse feature locations and descriptors, read-out
via an address-event interface, giving a greater than 1000×
reduction in data transfer compared to raw image output.
The sparse readout and complete utilization of all pixelprocessors makes our approach very efficient. Our implementation upon the SCAMP-7 PPA prototype runs at over
3000 FPS (Frames Per Second), tracking point-features reliably under violent motion. This is the first work performing point-feature detection and tracking entirely in-pixel. 1

Figure 1. A smartphone and SCAMP-7 PPA are strapped together
and shaken violently. The frames are not fully synchronised, but it
is clear the smartphone’s 60 FPS image is unusable, while at 3000
FPS our approach continues tracking features without issue.

bile systems such as virtual-reality headsets and unmanned
aerial vehicles rely extensively on point-features, often from
multiple cameras, to continuously estimate the system’s
pose. Such systems have limited on-board computational
power, limited battery life, and often require low-latency
response due to rapid motion. This has pushed the need for
computational efficiency, but despite many advancements,
the basic task of image transfer from sensor to processor
remains a significant time and power bottleneck.
This issue ultimately reflects the dominant paradigm in
electronic imaging, where sensors are primarily built to capture images for a human observer, rather than efficient visual computing. In the context of point-feature detection
and tracking, whole images are distilled down to a sparse
handful of key-points and descriptors. This is a tiny amount
of data compared to the original image, yet standard cameras must still transfer whole images to external processing, repeatedly every frame. This paper presents an alternative, a novel implementation of point-feature detection
and tracking for an emerging sensor paradigm, the PixelProcessor Array (PPA) [9]. Traditional cameras consist of
an array of light capture elements, while PPAs are an array of programmable pixel-processors or “Processing Elements” (PEs). Each of these processors has its own local memory on which it can perform various computations,
and communication with neighbouring processors enabling

1. Introduction
Point-features are distinct points within an image, chosen to
be clearly identifiable within multiple images of the same
scene, even under changes such as scale, lighting, and perspective. The various methods of point-feature detection
and tracking are some of the most widespread tools in computer vision, playing a vital role in Visual Odometry and Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping (SLAM). Many mo1 This work has been funded in part by EPSRC, grant number
EP/Y023048/1.

5392

