This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tuning the Frequencies: Robust Training for Sinusoidal Neural Networks
Tiago Novello1,2,∗ Diana Aldana1,∗
2

Google DeepMind

Abstract

FFM

ReLU

TUNER (ours)

1000 epochs

100 epochs

Sinusoidal neural networks have been shown effective as
implicit neural representations (INRs) of low-dimensional
signals, due to their smoothness and high representation capacity. However, initializing and training them remain empirical tasks which lack on deeper understanding to guide
the learning process. To fill this gap, our work introduces a
theoretical framework that explains the capacity property of
sinusoidal networks and offers robust control mechanisms
for initialization and training. Our analysis is based on a
novel amplitude-phase expansion of the sinusoidal multilayer perceptron, showing how its layer compositions produce a large number of new frequencies expressed as integer combinations of the input frequencies. This relationship
can be directly used to initialize the input neurons, as a form
of spectral sampling, and to bound the network’s spectrum
while training. Our method, referred to as TUNER (TUNing sinusoidal nEtwoRks), greatly improves the stability and
convergence of sinusoidal INR training, leading to detailed
reconstructions, while preventing overfitting.

SIREN

×10-3

BACON

2

TUNER (ours)

ReLU
SIREN
FFM

loss

TUNER
(Ours)

Small bandlimit

IMPA

Luiz Velho1

0

1. Introduction

0

Sinusoidal multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) emerged as
powerful implicit neural representations (INRs) for lowdimensional signals [3, 11, 26, 35]. In this context, the INR
f should fit the input data {xi , fi } as close as possible, i.e.
f (xi ) ≈ fi , without overfitting, thus encoding the signal
implicitly in the MLP parameters. Therefore, two major
properties are required: (1) f needs high representation
capacity to fit {xi , fi }; (2) f should have bandlimit control to avoid frequencies bypassing the sampling rate.
Training sinusoidal MLPs to satisfy the above properties
is challenging, as their initialization and optimization process often lead to undesirable local minima [15]. Recent
work made strides towards more effective learning of these
models. For example, SIREN [26] proposed an initialization by projecting the input coordinates to a list of sines
with frequencies randomly chosen in a range, similar to the
Fourier feature mapping (FFM) approach [28]. This way,
the model can reach high capacity, but may lead to over-

epochs

Initialization

103

Medium bandlimit

1

Andre Araujo2

Bounding

Figure 1. We present TUNER, a robust and theoretically grounded
training technique for sinusoidal MLPs, overcoming challenges in
initialization and enabling bandlimiting control. Our experiments
showcase TUNER’s strong initialization results against ReLU,
FFM [28], and SIREN [26] (top), where all models use the same
size and training conditions. TUNER achieves both fast and stable
convergence (bottom-left) while reconstructing gradients without
noise. We also compare with BACON [10] across two bandlimits
(bottom-right), enhancing quality and avoiding ringing artifacts.

fitting with high frequencies resulting in noisy reconstructions. Defining an effective range for the bandlimit initialization remains mostly empirical and often results in noise,
as the role of layer composition in generating frequencies
is not fully understood. Additionally, uniform initialization may introduce undesired high frequencies and make it
harder to model lower ones. More recently, BACON [10]
proposes tighter bandlimit control by applying multiplicative filter networks (MFNs) [7] to limit the signal spectrum

∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

3071

