This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RainyGS: Efficient Rain Synthesis with Physically-Based Gaussian Splatting
Qiyu Dai1*
Wenzheng Chen4,5†
1

Xingyu Ni2*
Qianfan Shen3
Baoquan Chen1,6†
Mengyu Chu1,6†

School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University 2 School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
School of EECS, Peking University 4 Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
5
State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University
6
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

(a) Multi-view Rain Free Inputs

(b) Rainy Novel View Synthesis

(c) Rain Intensity Control

Figure 1. Using multi-view images as input (a), RainyGS constructs 3D scenes with physically-based Gaussian Splatting techniques to
enable efficient and photorealistic rain synthesis (b). Our approach provides users with flexible control over rain intensity, from light drizzle
to heavy downpour (c), achieving high-quality, realistic rain effects in a computationally efficient manner. Zoom in for better visual effects.

Abstract
We consider the problem of adding dynamic rain effects to in-the-wild scenes in a physically-correct manner. Recent advances in scene modeling have made significant progress, with NeRF and Gaussian Splatting techniques emerging as powerful tools for reconstructing complex scenes. However, while effective for novel view synthesis, these methods typically struggle with challenging scene
editing tasks, such as physics-based rain simulation. In
contrast, traditional physics-based simulations can generate realistic rain effects, such as raindrops and splashes,
but they often rely on skilled artists to carefully set up highfidelity scenes. This process lacks flexibility and scalability, limiting its applicability to broader, open-world environments. In this work, we introduce RainyGS, a novel approach that leverages the strengths of both physics-based
modeling and Gaussian Splatting to generate photorealistic, dynamic rain effects in open-world scenes with phys* Joint first authors.
† Corresponding authors.

ical accuracy. At the core of our method is the integration of physically-based raindrop and shallow water simulation techniques within the fast Gaussian Splatting rendering framework, enabling realistic and efficient simulations of raindrop behavior, splashes, and reflections. Our
method supports synthesizing rain effects at over 30 fps, offering users flexible control over rain intensity—from light
drizzles to heavy downpours. We demonstrate that RainyGS
performs effectively for both real-world outdoor scenes and
large-scale driving scenarios, delivering more photorealistic and physically-accurate rain effects compared to stateof-the-art methods. Project page can be found at https:
//pku-vcl-geometry.github.io/RainyGS/.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we investigate how to add photorealistic rain
effects to in-the-wild scenes, i.e., given multi-view images
of an open-world scene captured under sunny or cloudy
conditions, we aim to synthesize its corresponding rainy

16153

