This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Coherent 3D Portrait Video Reconstruction via Triplane Fusion
Shengze Wang1 * Xueting Li2

Chao Liu2 Matthew Chan2 Michael Stengel2 Henry Fuchs1
Shalini De Mello2† Koki Nagano2†
1
UNC Chapel Hill 2 NVIDIA † Equal Contribution
https://research.nvidia.com/labs/amri/projects/coherent3d/

Abstract

telepresence accessible to anyone [48].

Recent breakthroughs in single-image 3D portrait reconstruction have enabled telepresence systems to stream 3D
portrait videos from a single camera in real-time, democratizing telepresence. However, per-frame 3D reconstruction exhibits temporal inconsistency and forgets the user’s
appearance. On the other hand, self-reenactment methods
can render coherent 3D portraits by driving a 3D avatar
built from a single reference image but fail to faithfully preserve the user’s per-frame appearance (e.g., instantaneous
facial expressions and lighting). As a result, neither of these
two frameworks is an ideal solution for democratized 3D
telepresence. In this work, we address this dilemma and
propose a novel solution that maintains both coherent identity and dynamic per-frame appearance to enable the best
possible realism. To this end, we propose a new fusionbased method that takes the best of both worlds by fusing
a canonical 3D prior from a reference view with dynamic
appearance from per-frame input views, producing temporally stable 3D videos with faithful reconstruction of the
user’s per-frame appearance. Trained only using synthetic
data produced by an expression-conditioned 3D GAN, our
encoder-based method achieves both state-of-the-art 3D reconstruction and temporal consistency on in-studio and inthe-wild datasets.

1. Introduction
Telepresence aims at bringing distant people face-to-face
and stands out as a particularly compelling application of
computer vision and graphics. Over the last decades, various successful telepresence systems [19, 21, 21, 25, 31,
33, 37, 43] have been developed. However, most employ
bulky multi-view 3D scanners or depth sensors to ensure
high-quality volumetric per-frame reconstruction. Unlike
these classical 3D/4D reconstruction methods, recent AIbased feed-forward 3D lifting techniques [2, 52] can lift a
single RGB image from an off-the-shelf webcam into a neural radiance field (NeRF) representation encoded into a set
of triplanes in real time, paving the way towards making 3D
* Shengze Wang was an intern at NVIDIA during the project

Figure 1. Comparisons. Given a single reference image and a
single-view video frame, our method reconstructs the authentic
dynamic appearance of the user (e.g., facial expressions and lighting) while producing a temporally coherent 3D video. A previous
single-view 3D lifting method (LP3D) that reconstructs the avatar
from the video frame on a per-frame basis suffers from distortions
and temporal inconsistency. A portrait reenactment method (GPAvatar) drives the identity in the reference image using the video
frame, but fails to capture accurate facial expressions (e.g., smile)
and per-frame appearance (e.g., lighting). The output should be
compared to the appearance of the input video frame (green box).

Currently, there are two major paradigms in democratized 3D telepresence solutions from a single-view video:
(1) single-view per-frame 3D lifting methods and (2) 3D
portrait reenactment, which drives an identity from a reference image using another driving frame, but none of them
is an ideal solution. For (1), single-frame-based lifting techniques such as LP3D [52], have the advantage of faithfully
preserving the instantaneous dynamic conditions present in
an input video, e.g. lighting, expressions, and posture, all

10712

