This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SphereUFormer: A U-Shaped Transformer for Spherical 360 Perception
Yaniv Benny
Tel Aviv University

Lior Wolf
Tel Aviv University

Abstract

resent the data by projecting it to a 2D plane in different
ways, usually equirectangular projection [30], cube mapping [26], or patch cropping. Each approach has its advantages and disadvantages, but the common motivation is
to represent the image in a grid formation. This enables
grid architectures, such as Convolutional Neural Networks
or Vision Transformers to easily be applied. This comes
at a cost of distortions, irregularities, or limited FOV, that
are caused by the selected projection. A less common alternative representation that has been proposed is to represent
the image in its original sphere domain by discretizing the
sphere surface in some manner [6, 14, 17, 24]. The motivation is to maintain an undistorted representation of the
360◦ image. However, this representation formed architectural challenges that require novel solutions. Some previous
works [8, 12, 27, 46, 49, 50] addressed these challenges in
various manners, but they fail to compete with current stateof-the-art solutions that follow a grid representation.

This paper proposes a novel method for omnidirectional
360◦ perception. Most common previous methods relied
on equirectangular projection. This representation is easily applicable to 2D operation layers but introduces distortions into the image. Other methods attempted to remove the distortions by maintaining a sphere representation but relied on complicated convolution kernels that
failed to show competitive results. In this work, we introduce a transformer-based architecture that, by incorporating a novel “Spherical Local Self-Attention” and other
spherically-oriented modules, successfully operates in the
spherical domain and outperforms the state-of-the-art in
360◦ perception benchmarks for depth estimation and semantic segmentation. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/yanivbenny/sphere_uformer.

In this work, we tackle the drawbacks of spherical representations. Specifically, we introduce SphereUFormer,
which is a novel U-Shaped Transformer architecture tailored for spherical 360◦ perception. By directly operating on a spherical domain without distortion-inducing
projections, SphereUFormer addresses the core challenges
of omnidirectional perception. Our approach builds on
the strengths of transformer models, incorporating modifications that allow it to efficiently process and understand spherical data. This includes the development of
spherical-specific operations such as localized self-attention
mechanism that respects the geometry of the sphere, innovative up/downsampling techniques that maintain the integrity of spherical data throughout the model, and positional encoding scheme that matches the domain properties.
SphereUFormer outperforms the state of the art in the field
of 360◦ perception, providing a robust and efficient tool for
a wide range of applications that require comprehensive understanding of spherical environments. In Sec. 3 we describe this representation in detail. We then further describe
a new method in Sec. 4, which utilizes this representation
and performs 360◦ perception on spherical representations,
and in Sec. 5, we analyze and compare its results.

1. Introduction
Monocular omnidirectional 360◦ perception is an important
setting, as it allows for a full field-of-view (FOV) receptive field for the underlying model. Consequently, an entire
room layout can be inferred, for example. In contrast to
regular images, a 360◦ image has no boundaries. Instead,
the image is horizontally cyclical, and converges to singular
points at the vertical extreme points. This suggests that this
domain requires a different treatment, and that best practices that work well with regular images might not have the
same effect on 360◦ images. To tackle this task, multiple
topics need to be considered.
How should the data be represented? What kind of distortions and irregularities are created by this representation? How will a model process this representation? How
to deal with these distortions and irregularities?
These questions have attracted researchers to construct
multiple datasets [3, 4, 9, 53] where depth estimation and
semantic segmentation are the main tasks, and to formulate many solutions [20, 23, 28, 32, 35, 36, 38, 42, 43, 47,
48, 51], which propose novel approaches to solving these
tasks. A common pattern in previous works is that they rep-

940

