This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-modal Topology-embedded Graph Learning for Spatially Resolved Genes
Prediction from Pathology Images with Prior Gene Similarity Information

1

Hang Shi1,2 , Changxi Chi1 , Peng Wan1,2 , Daoqiang Zhang1,2 , Wei Shao1,2 *
The College of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
The Key Laboratory of Brain-Machine Intelligence Technology, Ministry of Education
shaowei20022005@nuaa.edu.cn
(a) Traditional method

Abstract

Code and Dataset is available at: github.com/shihangjs/M2TGLGO

⋯

Patch
(b) Our method

Multi-modal features

Gene-Gene correlations

Deep features
Morphology
Topology

Patch

⋯

* Corresponding author.

Predicted gene expression

DNN

M2TGLGO

The rapid development of spatial transcriptomics (ST) allows researchers to measure the spatial-level gene expression in tissues. Although powerful, the cost for collecting the ST data is expensive, and thus several studies aim
to predict gene expression in ST by utilizing their corresponding H/E stained pathology images. The existing ST
based gene expression prediction models either adopt the
pre-trained networks or rely on the handcrafted features to
describe the pathology images, which still lack a systematic
way to combine them together to define a spot-level representation that can reflect the topological profiles of different spots. On the other hand, all the ST based gene prediction models treat the prediction task for each gene independently, which overlook the fact that the exploration of
potential interrelationships among them can help improve
the prediction performance for individual genes. To address the above issues, we propose a multi-modal topologyembedded graph learning algorithm guided by prior Gene
Ontology similarity information (i.e., M2TGLGO) to predict the spatial resolved genes from pathology images.
Specifically, M2TGLGO co-learns the image representation
of different spots from both deep and handcrafted features
by considering the within-modal and inter-modal interactions. Next, to keep the topological structure among different spots, a spatial-oriented ranking module is also incorporated to preserve their neighborhood similarity information. Finally, we present a Gene Ontology knowledge
guided graph neural network for simultaneously predicting
multiple gene expressions by considering their functional
associations. We evaluate our method on three public available ST datasets, the experimental results show the effectiveness of our M2TGLGO in comparison with the existing
studies.

location

Figure 1. (a) Traditional ST based genes prediction models rely on
single type of image feature (e.g., deep feature) and treat the prediction task on each gene independently. (b) Our M2TGLGO combines multi-modal image features for the spatial resolved genes
prediction by considering their biological similarities.

1. Introduction
Spatial transcriptomics (ST) is a cutting-edge technology
that enables the measurement of gene expression at spatial
resolution, making it possible to examine how gene expression varies across different spots as well as offering insights
into the relationships between molecular activity and tissue structure [16][30]. Although powerful, the high cost of
collecting ST data limits its widespread use in clinical applications [35][44][28], while their matched pathology images are cheap and easy to acquire. Hence, it has become
a research hotspot to link the tissue structure of pathology
images with the gene expression patterns that can help researchers infer molecular information of ST data in a more
cost-effective and scalable way [39][43].
Recently, the rapid advancements in artificial intelligence and image-based technologies have shown their great
potential in healthcare research [25], and several algorithms
have been proposed to predict gene expression of ST from

20810

