This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Motion Modes: What Could Happen Next?
Karran Pandey1

Yannick Hold-Geoffroy2
Karan Singh1
1

University of Toronto

2

Matheus Gadelha2
Paul Guerrero2
Adobe Research

3

Niloy J. Mitra2,3
UCL

motionmodes.github.io

Abstract
Predicting diverse object motions from a single static
image remains challenging, as current video generation
models often entangle object movement with camera motion and other scene changes. While recent methods can
predict specific motions from motion arrow input, they rely
on synthetic data and predefined motions, limiting their application to complex scenes. We introduce Motion Modes,
a training-free approach that explores a pre-trained imageto-video generator’s latent distribution to discover various
distinct and plausible motions focused on selected objects in
static images. We achieve this by employing a flow generator
guided by energy functions designed to disentangle object
and camera motion. Additionally, we use an energy inspired
by particle guidance [8] to diversify the generated motions,
without requiring explicit training data. Experimental results demonstrate that Motion Modes generates realistic and
varied object animations, surpassing previous methods and
even human predictions regarding plausibility and diversity.

Figure 1. Could you imagine how the scene evolves in each case?
See Fig. 2 for plausible yet distinct motion videos predicted by our
training-free approach Motion Modes.

given arrows. However, such methods are trained on synthetic data and do not generalize to complex motions, such
as the breaking ocean wave in Fig. 1. More importantly, they
require motions to be given, rather than predicting them. In
many scenarios, such as the roaring lion in Fig. 1, imagining a diverse set of motions and then conveying them with
multiple corresponding motion arrows itself, can be very
challenging. The ability to automatically discover diverse
yet plausible object motions can thus assist users in cinematic
exploration, motion illustration, and image/video editing.
The latest image-to-video generators provide this opportunity. Having been trained on a large variety of diverse
data, such generators, conditioned on static images, encode
distributions over plausible animations for scene objects and
other scene properties. Our paper subsequently asks and
affirmatively answers the research question: is it possible to
probe such a latent distribution to discover possible motions
for a given object in a static image?
Directly sampling these generators, conditioned on a starting image, produces random videos, some of which may
include a motion of the selected object. Still, most will consist of motions pertaining to other random objects, camera
motion, lighting, and other changes to scene appearance.
Hence, the main challenges are to discover the motions of
an object in such a distribution that (i) disentangle motions

1. Introduction
Prediction is very difficult, especially if it’s about the future.
Niels Bohr

Consider Fig. 1. Can you imagine what could happen next
in each case? Humans are good at imagining multiple ways
the objects could move, even from single (image) snapshots.
While we can train networks to predict videos starting from
a conditioning text or image [4], most generated videos
entangle camera motion, object motion, and other scene
changes – predicting a diverse set of motions for a given
object still remains an open challenge.
Authoring plausible animations for objects in a static
image can be daunting. Researchers have recently been
able to train networks to predict cyclic and small-scale motions [2, 22]. Another family of methods [20, 28] simplify
this task by taking input motion arrows along with the starting image to predict videos with motions that follow the

2030

