This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MammAlps: A multi-view video behavior monitoring dataset of wild mammals
in the Swiss Alps
Valentin Gabeff1

Haozhe Qi1

Brendan Flaherty1

Gencer Sumbül1

Alexander Mathis1

Devis Tuia1

alexander.mathis@epfl.ch

devis.tuia@epfl.ch

1

Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland

(a) Data Acquistion and Individual Annotations

(b) Multimodal species and behavior recognition
Video
clip

Reference scene
segmentation map clip

Audio
spectrogram

Recognition
Tasks
Species

CAM 3

Activity
Site 2

Actions

x3

(c) Multi-view long-term event understanding
15:13:08 15:16:32

Recognition
Tasks

CAM 1
Site 1

x3

15:04:54

CAM 2

Species

15:12:42

Activities
CAM 2
15:15:56

Site 3

x3

CAM 3
CAM 1

Event time

Number of
individuals
Meteorological
condition

Figure 1. MammalAlps: Overview of the data and proposed benchmarks. (a) Nine camera traps were installed at three different
sites in the Swiss National Park and recorded video and audio of animal activity for six weeks. (b) We propose a multimodal species and
hierarchical behavior recognition benchmark for wildlife based on video, audio and segmentation maps. (c) We propose the first multiview, long-term event understanding benchmark that aims at summarizing long-term ecological events into meaningful information for
behavioral ecology.

Abstract
Monitoring wildlife is essential for ecology and ethology, especially in light of the increasing human impact on
ecosystems. Camera traps have emerged as habitat-centric
sensors enabling the study of wildlife populations at scale
with minimal disturbance. However, the lack of annotated
video datasets limits the development of powerful video understanding models needed to process the vast amount of
fieldwork data collected. To advance research in wild animal behavior monitoring we present MammAlps, a multimodal and multi-view dataset of wildlife behavior monitoring from 9 camera-traps in the Swiss National Park. MammAlps contains over 14 hours of video with audio, 2D seg-

mentation maps and 8.5 hours of individual tracks densely
labeled for species and behavior. Based on 6‘135 single
animal clips, we propose the first hierarchical and multimodal animal behavior recognition benchmark using audio, video and reference scene segmentation maps as inputs.
Furthermore, we also propose a second ecology-oriented
benchmark aiming at identifying activities, species, number of individuals and meteorological conditions from 397
multi-view and long-term ecological events, including false
positive triggers. We advocate that both tasks are complementary and contribute to bridging the gap between machine learning and ecology. Code and data are available at
https://github.com/eceo-epfl/MammAlps.

13854

