This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AeSPa : Attention-guided Self-supervised Parallel imaging for MRI
Reconstruction
Jinho Joo1 * Hyeseong Kim1,2 * Hyeyeon Won1
1

Yonsei University

2

Deukhee Lee1,2

Taejoon Eo1† Dosik Hwang1,2†

Korea Institute of Science and Technology

{jinho381, hyeseongkim, dosik.hwang}@yonsei.ac.kr
hywon4825@gmail.com dkylee@kist.re.kr ship9136@naver.com

Abstract
This study introduces a novel zero-shot scan-specific selfsupervised reconstruction method for magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) to reduce scan times. Conventional supervised reconstruction methods require large amounts of
fully-sampled reference data, which is often impractical
to obtain and can lead to artifacts by overly emphasizing
learned patterns. Existing zero-shot scan-specific methods have attempted to overcome this data dependency but
show limited performance due to insufficient utilization of
k-space information and constraints derived from MRI forward model. To address these limitations, we introduce a
framework utilizing all acquired k-space measurements for
both network inputs and training targets. While this framework suffers from training instability, we resolve these challenges through three key components: an Attention-guided
K-space Selective Mechanism (AKSM) that provides indirect constraints for non-sampled k-space points, Iterationwise K-space Masking (IKM) that enhances training stability, and a robust sensitivity map estimation model utilizing cross-channel constraint that performs effectively even
at high reduction factors. Experimental results on the
FastMRI knee and brain datasets with reduction factors of
4 and 8 demonstrate that the proposed method achieves superior reconstruction quality and faster convergence compared to existing zero-shot scan-specific methods, making
it suitable for practical clinical applications. The implementation of our proposed method is publicly available at
https://github.com/joojinho97/AeSPa.git.

Figure 1. Experimental results on the FastMRI knee dataset
using 1D Gaussian sampling with R = 8 with 16 ACS lines.

tient safety and comfort. However, long scan times remain a major challenge in MRI, often resulting in patient
discomfort and degraded image quality due to motion artifacts or contrast washout [14, 22]. To address this limitation, k-space undersampling has emerged as an effective approach, although this incomplete data acquisition inevitably
leads to aliasing artifacts and degraded image quality. To
overcome these reconstruction challenges, various methods
have been proposed, ranging from conventional compressed
sensing (CS) or parallel imaging [5, 9, 19, 23, 25, 27, 32]
to deep learning approaches [3, 11, 18, 20, 21, 26, 35].
Deep learning-based methods have emerged as the state-ofthe-art, typically combining image priors, learned through
training, with data consistency to solve the ill-posed inverse
problem [7, 16, 17]. For instance, Supervised U-Net [39]
implements an image-to-image framework with a data consistency layer, while KIKI-Net [6], Deep Cascade [30], and
E2E-VarNet [33] employ multiple iterations of reconstruction refinement with repeated data consistency steps.

1. Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) has transformed medical imaging and diagnostics by providing detailed anatomical visualization without radiation exposure, ensuring pa* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

5217

