This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attention Distillation: A Uniﬁed Approach to Visual Characteristics Transfer
Yang Zhou
Xu Gao
Zichong Chen
Hui Huang*
Visual Computing Research Center, CSSE, Shenzhen University
Style-specific T2I Generation

Appearance Transfer

Artistic Style Transfer

Structure

Content

Appearance

A deer

Content

Content

Content

Style

Style

Style

Structure

Appearance

A butterfly surrounded by flowers

A dragon

Controlled Texture Synthesis
Texture

Texture

Layout

Annotation

Texture Expansion
Example

Result (512x4096)

Figure 1. Given a reference image, our approach can faithfully reproduce its visual characteristics in synthesis, providing a uniﬁed
framework for a wide range of example-based image synthesis applications, such as artistic style transfer, appearance transfer, stylespeciﬁc text-to-image generation, and various texture synthesis tasks.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Recent advances in generative diffusion models have shown
a notable inherent understanding of image style and semantics. In this paper, we leverage the self-attention features from pretrained diffusion networks to transfer the visual characteristics from a reference to generated images.
Unlike previous work that uses these features as plug-andplay attributes, we propose a novel attention distillation
loss calculated between the ideal and current stylization
results, based on which we optimize the synthesized image via backpropagation in latent space. Next, we propose an improved Classiﬁer Guidance that integrates attention distillation loss into the denoising sampling process,
further accelerating the synthesis and enabling a broad
range of image generation applications. Extensive experiments have demonstrated the extraordinary performance
of our approach in transferring the examples’ style, appearance, and texture to new images in synthesis. Code
is available at https://github.com/xugao97/
AttentionDistillation.
* Corresponding author.

Synthesizing new images with visual elements, such as the
style or texture, of an example image, is a long-standing yet
challenging problem in computer graphics and vision. The
key challenge lies in properly representing images’ texture
or style features. Traditional methods [6, 11, 15, 34, 37,
38, 42, 67] usually deﬁne textures as repeated local patterns
and synthesize new textures by copying local patches from
the source image. When it comes to style, an extensive yet
more abstract visual characteristic than texture, new representations are required.
Thanks to the deep learning revolution, neural representations of visual features have emerged. One group of
approaches performs texture or style-speciﬁc synthesis by
matching the global distribution of deep features between
the reference and the output. For example, the seminal work
Gram loss [21, 22] regards the feature maps’ statistics as
the texture/style representation. Some other work optimizes
deep features by minimizing Wassertein distance [24] or adversarial discrimination loss [51, 52, 68]. However, matching global distributions lacks local perception, usually leading to conspicuous detail artifacts. Another group retakes

18270

