This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot Blind-spot Image Denoising via Implicit Neural Sampling
Yuhui Quan1
1

Tianxiang Zheng1

Zhiyuan Ma2

Hui Ji2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
2
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, 119076, Singapore

csyhquan@scut.edu.cn, cszhengtx@mail.scut.edu.cn, e0983565@u.nus.edu, matjh@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
The blind-spot principle has been a widely used tool in
zero-shot image denoising but faces challenges with realworld noise that exhibits strong local correlations. Existing
methods focus on reducing noise correlation, which also
weaken the pixel correlations needed for accurately estimating missing pixels. In this paper, we first present a
rigorous analysis of how noise correlation and pixel correlation impact the statistical risk of a linear blind-spot
denoiser. We then propose using an implicit neural representation to resample noisy pixels, effectively reducing
noise correlation while preserving the essential pixel correlations for successful blind-spot denoising. Extensive experiments show our method surpasses existing zero-shot denoising techniques on real-world noisy images.

1. Introduction
Image denoising, which restores a clean image from its
noisy measurement, is a fundamental task in many low-level
vision applications. In recent years, deep learning is the
main driving force in this field, with many approaches primarily relying on supervised learning [5, 25, 32, 38, 39, 47–
49, 51, 52]. These supervised methods train neural networks (NNs) on paired datasets, which often is synthesized
w.r.t. Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN). However,
Denoising NNs trained on such synthetic noise often fail to
perform well (e.g., [2]) on real-world data due to significant
differences of AWGN and real-world noise.
Efforts to bridge the gap between synthesized and realworld data have led to the creation of datasets with realworld paired data, such as Smartphone Image Denoising
Dataset (SIDD) [1] for camera photographs and Fluorescence Microscopy Denoising (FMD) dataset [54] for fluorescence microscopy images. Note that the creation of such
datasets is labor-intensive and often fails to cover the full
spectrum of real-world noise. Also, ground-truth (GT) images are difficult to obtain in fields like medical or scientific
imaging. The issues caused by the independence of image

pairs remain for supervised denoising NNs. To alleviate the
dependence on image pairs with truth images, some methods propose to train denoising NNs using unpaired noisy
and clean images [4, 14], or multiple noisy images of the
same scene [22, 60]. However, these methods either require
clean images or depend on precise image alignment, a challenging task for real-world images.

1.1. Learning denoising NN without truth images
To reduce the reliance on truth images in supervised learning methods, considerable efforts have been made to develop truth-free deep learning approaches for denoising.
Self-supervised denoising using only noisy images: Selfsupervised learning, sometimes also called unsupervised
learning in the context of image denoising, aims to train
a denoising NN using only noisy images, without requiring
clean ones. There is an abundant literature on it. Some generate pseudo-pair data to define self-supervised loss functions (see e.g. [13, 22, 29, 40, 57]). One of the popular
and effective techniques is the blind-spot principle [3, 19],
which trains the NN to approximate noisy pixel-values of
visible pixels by using their neighboring invisible pixels.
Zero-shot denoising at test time: While self-supervised
methods trains denoising models on external datasets with
only noisy data , zero-shot methods directly adapts an untrained NN to each noisy image at test time, which make it
highly adaptable to specific images or noise types. Also, it
suites well in on-line setting, where accessing large datasets
is not desired. Such data-independence make it a valuable
option in certain cases. Deep Image Prior (DIP) [37] is a
pioneering work on zero-shot denoising, leveraging the inductive biases of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to
fit natural images more rapidly than random noise. The concept of the blind-spot principle can also be extended to zeroshot denoising at test time (e.g., [8, 9, 21, 31, 34, 55, 58]),
demonstrating promising performance.

1.2. Discussions on blind-spot denoising
The practical value of zero-shot denoising and the potential of blind-spot techniques motivate us to study blind-spot

7502

