This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

4D LangSplat: 4D Language Gaussian Splatting via Multimodal Large
Language Models
Wanhua Li1,∗ ,

Renping Zhou1,2,∗ , Jiawei Zhou3 , Yingwei Song1,4 , Johannes Herter1,5 ,
Minghan Qin2 , Gao Huang2, , Hanspeter Pfister1,
1
2
Harvard University Tsinghua University 3 Stony Brook University 4 Brown University 5 ETH Zürich
https://4d-langsplat.github.io/

4D Field

RGB

4D Field

RGB

Project page:

Figure 1. Visualization of the learned language features of our 4D LangSplat. We observe that 4D LangSplat effectively learns dynamic
semantic features that change over time, such as the gradual diffusion of coffee shown in the first two rows, and the “chicken” toggling
between open and closed states in the latter two rows. Additionally, our semantic field captures consistent features for semantics that
remain unchanged over time, with the clear object boundaries in the visualization demonstrating the precision of our semantic field.

Abstract
Learning 4D language fields to enable time-sensitive, openended language queries in dynamic scenes is essential for
many real-world applications. While LangSplat successfully grounds CLIP features into 3D Gaussian representations, achieving precision and efficiency in 3D static scenes,
it lacks the ability to handle dynamic 4D fields as CLIP,

designed for static image-text tasks, cannot capture temporal dynamics in videos. Real-world environments are inherently dynamic, with object semantics evolving over time.
Building a precise 4D language field necessitates obtaining pixel-aligned, object-wise video features, which current vision models struggle to achieve. To address these
challenges, we propose 4D LangSplat, which learns 4D
language fields to handle time-agnostic or time-sensitive
open-vocabulary queries in dynamic scenes efficiently. 4D

∗ Equal contribution.

Corresponding authors.

22001

