This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Accurate Scene Text Recognition with Efficient Model Scaling and Cloze
Self-Distillation
Andrea Maracani1 * Savas Ozkan1† Sijun Cho2 Hyowon Kim2 Eunchung Noh2
Jeongwon Min2 Cho Jung Min 2 Dookun Park2 Mete Ozay1
1
Samsung R&D Institute UK 2 Samsung Electronics
Abstract
Scaling architectures have been proven effective for improving Scene Text Recognition (STR), but the individual contribution of vision encoder and text decoder scaling remain
under-explored. In this work, we present an in-depth empirical analysis and demonstrate that, contrary to previous
observations, scaling the decoder yields significant performance gains, always exceeding those achieved by encoder
scaling alone. We also identify label noise as a key challenge in STR, particularly in real-world data, which can
limit the effectiveness of STR models. To address this, we
propose Cloze Self-Distillation (CSD), a method that mitigates label noise by distilling a student model from contextaware soft predictions and pseudolabels generated by a
teacher model. Additionally, we enhance the decoder architecture by introducing differential cross-attention for STR.
Our methodology achieves state-of-the-art performance on
10 out of 11 benchmarks using only real data, while significantly reducing the parameter size and computational costs.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Average word accuracy (%) on 11 STR benchmarks
for the models with ViT-T, ViT-S and ViT-B vision encoders and
4 different decoder sizes (see Sec. 4.1). Results are compared
with the previous state-of-the-art model, CLIP4STR [54]. Results
using Real training dataset (3.3M images) are depicted with solid
lines and circle markers, while results using RBU training dataset
(6.5M images) are shown with dashed lines and diamond markers.
The x-axis represents the total number of model parameters (in
millions) on a logarithmic scale.

Scene Text Recognition (STR) aims to automatically transcribe text in natural scenes, enabling applications in autonomous driving [51], augmented reality [27], language
translation [43], and assistive technologies. Unlike traditional Optical Character Recognition (OCR), which typically works with clean or scanned documents, STR faces
unique challenges due to the diverse and uncontrolled nature of text in real-world environments. In particular, text
in these settings can vary significantly in orientation, font
style, shape, size, color, formatting, and aspect ratio. It often appears on complex backgrounds that may also include
reflections, transparency, or occlusions. Furthermore, images might have poor quality, suffering from issues such as
blurring, low resolution, and noise [23].
Recent research has led to notable performance improve-

ments in STR by enhancing training methods [15], deploying novel architectures [1, 54], and exploring the effects of
model scaling [31]. Despite these advancements, current
STR models still face important challenges that limit their
effectiveness. Our work is motivated by the following research question:
What are the primary bottlenecks currently limiting STR, and what strategies can be employed to
improve both accuracy and efficiency?

* Main Authorship. a.maracani@samsung.com
† Senior Authorship

Throughout our analysis, we identify three important limitations: (i) sub-optimal model scaling, (ii) noisy labels in
training data, and (iii) architectural limitations within current model designs.
Sub-optimal model scaling. Prior scaling analyses [31]
have explored scaling laws for STR, demonstrating that

14516

