This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging Viewpoint Gaps: Geometric Reasoning Boosts Semantic
Correspondence
Qiyang Qian1 Hansheng Chen2 Masayoshi Tomizuka1 Kurt Keutzer1
Qianqian Wang1 * Chenfeng Xu1 *
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Stanford University

Abstract
Finding semantic correspondences between images is a
challenging problem in computer vision, particularly under significant viewpoint changes. Previous methods rely
on semantic features from pre-trained 2D models like Stable Diffusion and DINOv2, which often struggle to extract
viewpoint-invariant features. To overcome this, we propose
a novel approach that integrates geometric and semantic
reasoning. Unlike prior methods relying on heuristic geometric enhancements, our framework fine-tunes DUSt3R
on synthetic cross-instance data to reconstruct distinct objects in an aligned 3D space. By learning to deform these
objects into similar shapes using semantic supervision, we
enable efficient KNN-based geometric matching, followed
by sparse semantic matching within local KNN candidates.
While trained on synthetic data, our method generalizes effectively to real-world images, achieving up to 7.4-point improvements in zero-shot settings on the rigid-body subset of
Spair-71K and up to 19.6-point gains under extreme viewpoint variations. Additionally, it accelerates runtime by
up to 40 times, demonstrating both its robustness to viewpoint changes and its efficiency for practical applications.
Code is available at https://github.com/QiyangQ/Bridge-Viewpoint-Gap.

standing of 3D geometry. This limitation makes it difficult
for these models to find accurate semantic correspondences
when there are substantial viewpoint changes.
To tackle this issue, previous work has attempted to incorporate geometric awareness into semantic features to
make representations more robust to viewpoint variations
and improve 3D understanding. For example, Telling Left
from Right [61] tries to incorporate perspective information by finetuning on some 2D direction basis like left and
right, but this is not sufficient to handle drastic 3D perspective changes. Spherical map [34] back-projects the 2D
features into a spherical space to guide the semantic correspondences. However, it requires supervised finetuning
on specific target domains. To achieve generalizability, Xu
et al. [58] try to directly inject the 3D awareness into Stable Diffusion by training a ControlNet on large-scale posed
videos. However, it can only accommodate minor viewpoint alterations. Moreover, finding the best correspondences on dense feature maps is computationally intensive,
thereby impeding their practical application.
To address these challenges, we are inspired by a fundamental principle: semantic correspondences exhibit geometric consistency in 3D space, regardless of viewpoint
variations in 2D images. Therefore, we propose a new
approach: instead of injecting geometric awareness when
learning the semantic features, we bridge the viewpoint gap
by first establishing coarse correspondences purely through
geometric reasoning then refining the correspondences using semantic alignment. Specifically, we make a novel use
of the advanced model, DUSt3R [54], a robust model originally designed for 3D reconstruction from two views.
Unlike conventional reconstruction tasks that rely on two
views of the same object, we fine-tune DUSt3R with crossinstance data to reconstruct two distinct 3D objects within
a unified 3D space. To accomplish this, we leverage the extensive synthetic data from ShapeNet [6], collecting crossinstance image pairs with significant viewpoint variations.
After finetuning on the synthetic data, DUSt3R is capable
of reconstructing two instances simultaneously with aligned
poses. Afterwards, we introduce a strategy for learning 3D

1. Introduction
Finding semantic correspondences aims at the identification of semantically similar points across different images.
Establishing these correspondences enables various applications, such as content editing, visual retrieval, and style
transfer, etc. The challenge of this task arises from both
the variations in appearance and the changes in viewpoint.
Recent vision representation models [5, 16, 42, 50] have
made significant strides in learning invariant representations
that are robust to changes in appearance. Yet, these models are primarily trained on 2D images and lack an under* Equally advising this project

11579

