This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiTCtrl: Exploring Attention Control in Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformer
for Tuning-Free Multi-Prompt Longer Video Generation
Minghong Cai1†

Xiaodong Cun2
Yong Zhang4
1

MMLab, CUHK
3
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG

Xiaoyu Li3 
Wenze Liu1
Ying Shan3
Xiangyu Yue1,5 
2
4

Zhaoyang Zhang3

GVC Lab, Great Bay University
5
Tencent AI Lab
SHIAE, CUHK

(a) "Athlete glides across ocean waters  snow mountain  sand dunes"

(b) "Frosty pine: close-up shot  medium shot  forest vista, cinematic"
Figure 1. Our method DiTCtrl takes multiple text prompts as input and demonstrates superior capability in generating longer videos with
multiple events, long-range coherence and smooth transitions as output.

Abstract

control across different prompts with attention sharing for
multi-prompt video generation. Based on our careful design, the video generated by DiTCtrl achieves smooth transitions and consistent object motion given multiple sequential prompts without additional training. Besides, we also
present MPVBench, a new benchmark specially designed
for multi-prompt video generation to evaluate the performance of multi-prompt generation. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance without additional training. Code is available at
https://github.com/TencentARC/DiTCtrl.

Sora-like video generation models have achieved remarkable progress with a Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformer (MM-DiT) architecture. However, the current video
generation models predominantly focus on single-prompt,
struggling to generate coherent scenes with multiple sequential prompts that better reﬂect real-world dynamic scenarios.
While some pioneering works have explored multi-prompt
video generation, they face signiﬁcant challenges including
strict training data requirements, weak prompt following,
and unnatural transitions. To address these problems, we
propose DiTCtrl, a training-free multi-prompt video generation method under MM-DiT architectures for the ﬁrst time.
Our key idea is to take the multi-prompt video generation
task as temporal video editing with smooth transitions. To
achieve this goal, we ﬁrst analyze MM-DiT’s attention mechanism, ﬁnding that the 3D full attention behaves similarly
to that of the cross/self-attention blocks in the UNet-like
diffusion models, enabling mask-guided precise semantic

1. Introduction
Text-to-video (T2V) generation has made remarkable
progress in the AIGC era [10, 44, 50], and breakthroughs
such as Sora [30] have demonstrated impressive capabilities
in generating longer videos through DiT [32] architecture
and large-scale per-taining. However, feeding sequential
prompts into current state-of-the-art text-to-video generation models (e.g., Kling [2], Gen3 [1], CogVideoX [48])
directly will produce isolated video sequences without natu-

† Work done during an internship at Tencent ARC Lab.
 Corresponding Author

7763

