This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-Shot Recognition via Stage-Wise Retrieval-Augmented Finetuning
Tian Liu1
1

Huixin Zhang1

Texas A&M University

2

Shubham Parashar1

University of Macau

3

Shu Kong2,3, *

Institute of Collaborative Innovation

website and code: https://tian1327.github.io/SWAT

Abstract
Few-shot recognition (FSR) aims to train a classification
model with only a few labeled examples of each concept concerned by a downstream task, where data annotation cost
can be prohibitively high. We develop methods to solve
FSR by leveraging a pretrained Vision-Language Model
(VLM). We particularly explore retrieval-augmented learning (RAL), which retrieves open data, e.g., the VLM’s pretraining dataset, to learn models for better serving downstream tasks. RAL has been studied in zero-shot recognition
but remains under-explored in FSR. Although applying RAL
to FSR may seem straightforward, we observe interesting
and novel challenges and opportunities. First, somewhat surprisingly, finetuning a VLM on a large amount of retrieved
data underperforms state-of-the-art zero-shot methods. This
is due to the imbalanced distribution of retrieved data and
its domain gaps with the few-shot examples in the downstream task. Second, more surprisingly, we find that simply
finetuning a VLM solely on few-shot examples significantly
outperforms previous FSR methods, and finetuning on the
mix of retrieved and few-shot data yields even better results.
Third, to mitigate the imbalanced distribution and domain
gap issues, we propose Stage-Wise retrieval-Augmented
fineTuning (SWAT), which involves end-to-end finetuning on
mixed data in the first stage and retraining the classifier on
the few-shot data in the second stage. Extensive experiments
on nine popular benchmarks demonstrate that SWAT significantly outperforms previous methods by >6% accuracy.

1. Introduction
Few-shot recognition (FSR) aims to train a model with
only a few examples per concept provided by a downstream
task, where data annotation can be costly. One motivational
application is to train machines for automated data annotation by learning from a few examples of each concept
provided by data annotation guidelines. Motivated by this
data annotation application, we focus on solving FSR, particularly by leveraging a foundational Vision-Language Model
* Corresponding author.

test accuracy (%)

mean accuracy over nine datasets

OpenCLIP [10]
REAL-Prompt [42]
REAL-Linear [42]
CrossModal LP [35]

CLAP [57]
FT on retrieved (ours)
FT on few-shot (ours)
SWAT (ours)

number of images (shots) per class
Figure 1. A summary of few-shot recognition (FSR) benchmarking results over nine datasets. Somewhat surprisingly, although
underexplored in the literature, finetuning the entire visual encoder
solely on few-shot annotated data (green line) already outperforms
previous methods [36, 59] by >3% accuracy! Yet, finetuning only
on retrieved data by retrieval augmented learning (RAL, orange
line) underperforms the state-of-the-art zero-shot methods [43].
This is due to that the retrieved data follows an imbalanced distribution and has domain gaps with the few-shot data (Fig. 3). By
addressing these issues, our SWAT performs the best (red line),
achieving >6% accuracy better than previous methods. Refer to
Appendix Fig. 5 for detailed results on each of the nine datasets.

(VLM) and its web-scale pretraining data.
Status Quo. In the literature, FSR has served as a proxy
task to study parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) [37, 54,
60, 68], and the robustness and generalization of pretrained
models [28, 83, 84], etc. Consequently, most FSR methods focus on learning a few parameters, such as a classifier
head [15, 36, 59, 62, 75, 78] or prompt tokens [8, 83] over
a frozen pretrained backbone (e.g., VLM’s visual encoder).
However, emphasizing learning fewer parameters without
prioritizing recognition accuracy limits the performance of
these methods in real-world applications such as automated
data annotation [38]. Importantly, recent works [36, 59]
show that the setup for a majority of FSR methods unreasonably assumes access to a much larger validation set for
hyperparameter tuning, hindering their practical utility. Our

15086

