This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Free Lunch Enhancements for Multi-modal Crowd Counting
Haoliang Meng1 , Xiaopeng Hong1,2 ,* Zhengqin Lai1,2 and Miao Shang1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, P. R. China 2 Pengcheng Laboratory, P. R. China
menghaoliang2002@163.com, hongxiaopeng@ieee.org, {quenlenu,miaos0522}@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper addresses multi-modal crowd counting with
a novel ‘free lunch’ training enhancement strategy that requires no additional data, parameters, or increased inference complexity. First, we introduce a cross-modal alignment technique as a plug-in post-processing step for the
pre-trained backbone network, enhancing the model’s ability to capture shared information across modalities. Second, we incorporate a regional density supervision mechanism during the fine-tuning stage, which differentiates
features in regions with varying crowd densities. Extensive experiments on three multi-modal crowd counting
datasets validate our approach, making it the first to achieve
an MAE below 10 on RGBT-CC. The code is available
at https://github.com/HenryCilence/FreeLunch-Multimodal-Counting.

1. Introduction
Multi-modal crowd counting [26, 34, 50] is the task of estimating crowd density and distribution by leveraging data
from multiple sensor modalities, such as RGB, thermal, and
depth. It aims to enhance the accuracy and robustness of
crowd counting models, especially in challenging environments where single-modal data may be insufficient. However, the task presents several challenges, primarily due to
the significant differences between these modalities. Each
modality captures different types of information, leading to
a substantial gap in their feature spaces. Effectively aligning
and fusing these distinct features is difficult, often resulting
in suboptimal performance.
Extensive research has been conducted on interacting
across modalities and generating high-quality fusion features. Some methods [50, 52] incorporate interaction modules between the backbone networks of the two modalities,
while others [26, 34, 63] use triple-branch structures, utilizing an additional branch to progressively refine and fuse
features. However, existing methods still face challenges in
* Corresponding author

two crucial aspects.
First, existing methods have yet to fully address the
modality alignment problem in multi-modal crowd counting.
Most approaches employ dual or triple-branch
backbone networks, like VGG [44] or ViT [5], which
share weights to extract features from different modalities.
These backbones, typically pre-trained using large visual
databases such as ImageNet [4], are fine-tuned on multimodal datasets [19, 26, 40]. But they are limited by their
initial single-modality pretext tasks (e.g. classification, segmentation), which generally lack cross-modal perception.
As a result, the network is heavily reliant on limited supervised signals from the multi-modal crowd counting datasets
to develop cross-modal perception capabilities.
Second, we observe that most multi-modal crowd counting approaches focus on cross-modal connections but overlook the critical spatial correlations required in crowd
counting. In highly congested scenes, severe occlusions
make it challenging to distinguish between the foreground
and background, especially when objects are small and
high-level features struggle to represent them. Traditional
point annotations provide fine-grained details but lack the
regional spatial context the model needs, because they provide only individual location information without capturing
the continuous density correlation across different regions.
Lacking spatially correlated signals makes it difficult for the
model to understand and distinguish the density distribution
between areas, especially in crowded scenes where local
density variations are crucial.
To solve these two problems, we propose a ‘free lunch’
enhancement strategy in this paper.
First, we propose a warming-up process to enhance the
relevance of modality features and mitigate the discrepancy
between the pre-trained weights and the cross-modal learning needs, as shown in Fig. 1. We perform upstream postpre-training cross-modal alignment (PPCA) on the backbone to enhance its multi-modal perception capabilities before supervised fine-tuning. This allows the model to start
gradient descent from an advantageous initial state, resulting in improved performance in downstream tasks. PPCA
leverages unsupervised cross-modal contrastive learning [9]

14013

