This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gaze-LLE: Gaze Target Estimation via Large-Scale Learned Encoders
Fiona Ryan1

Ajay Bati1 Sangmin Lee2 Daniel Bolya1 Judy Hoffman1∗ James M. Rehg3∗
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Sungkyunkwan University
3
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

{fkryan,abati7,dbolya,judy}@gatech.edu

sangmin.lee@skku.edu

Head
Position

Abstract

jrehg@illinois.edu

Head
Encoder

Prior Approaches

!

We address the problem of gaze target estimation, which
aims to predict where a person is looking in a scene. Predicting a person’s gaze target requires reasoning both about
the person’s appearance and the contents of the scene.
Prior works have developed increasingly complex, handcrafted pipelines for gaze target estimation that carefully
fuse features from separate scene encoders, head encoders,
and auxiliary models for signals like depth and pose. Motivated by the success of general-purpose feature extractors
on a variety of visual tasks, we propose Gaze-LLE, a novel
transformer framework that streamlines gaze target estimation by leveraging features from a frozen DINOv2 encoder.
We extract a single feature representation for the scene, and
apply a person-specific positional prompt to decode gaze
with a lightweight module. We demonstrate state-of-the-art
performance across several gaze benchmarks and provide
extensive analysis to validate our design choices. Our code
and models are available at: http://github.com/
fkryan/gazelle.

Scene
Encoder

Depth
Encoder

!

Pose
Encoder

MultiBranch
Fusion

Gaze
Decoder

!

!

...

Gaze-LLE
Frozen
Scene
Encoder

Gaze-LLE
Decoder

!
Positional
head prompt

Figure 1. Prior approaches for gaze target estimation carefully fuse
features from a separate head encoder, scene encoder, and auxiliary models for multimodal cues like depth and pose. We propose
Gaze-LLE, a novel, streamlined approach that uses a single feature
representation from a frozen image encoder and injects a personspecific positional prompt to decode gaze targets.

1. Introduction

cialized architectures and datasets for gaze target estimation. A key property of these architectures is a multi-branch
design, consisting of a head branch that extracts visual features from a crop of person’s head and a scene branch that
extracts features from the full image [4, 8, 9, 37, 51, 53,
61, 74]. More recent works incorporate additional modalities such as depth [2, 17, 22, 31, 43, 60, 64] and human
pose [2, 23]. While these models have achieved impressive performance, they are limited to training on small-scale
datasets obtained by asking human annotators to label gaze
targets in images. In contrast, tasks such as segmentation
and depth estimation have benefited substantially from selfsupervised foundation models trained on large-scale data. It
is thus natural to ask: Can gaze target estimation similarly
benefit from a foundation model-based approach?

Gaze is an important component of human behavior, giving
insight into how a person interacts with the world around
them. A person’s visual attention indicates intent during
daily activities [19, 29, 38, 70], and plays a key role in social interactions [14]. Humans can perform gaze-following,
which is the ability to assess where another person is looking. From childhood, we learn to follow the gaze of a social
partner to engage in joint attention [20, 44, 62]. In conversations, we use gaze to infer who someone is talking to, or
resolve what object they are talking about. Thus, the ability to estimate gaze targets is an essential building block for
developing systems that understand human behavior.
A significant number of prior works have proposed spe*Equal contribution.

In this paper, we demonstrate for the first time that
pretrained visual feature representations, produced by
transformer-based foundation models like DINOv2, can be

28874

