This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SLADE: Shielding against Dual Exploits in Large Vision-Language Models
Md Zarif Hossain, Ahmed Imteaj†
School of Computing, Southern Illinois University Carbondale, IL 62901, USA
Abstract
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have emerged as
transformative tools in multimodal tasks, seamlessly integrating pretrained vision encoders to align visual and textual modalities. Prior works have highlighted the susceptibility of LVLMs to dual exploits (gradient-based and
optimization-based jailbreak attacks), which leverage the
expanded attack surface introduced by the image modality. Despite advancements in enhancing robustness, existing methods fall short in their ability to defend against
dual exploits while preserving ﬁne-grained semantic details
and overall semantic coherence under intense adversarial
perturbations. To bridge this gap, we introduce SheiLding
against Dual Exploits (SLADE), a novel unsupervised adversarial ﬁne-tuning scheme that enhances the resilience
of CLIP-based vision encoders. SLADE’s dual-level contrastive learning approach balances the granular and the
holistic, capturing ﬁne-grained image details without losing
sight of high-level semantic coherence. Extensive experiments demonstrate that SLADE-equipped LVLMs set a new
benchmark for robustness against dual exploits while preserving ﬁne-grained semantic details of perturbed images.
Notably, SLADE achieves these results without compromising the core functionalities of LVLMs, such as instruction
following, or requiring the computational overhead (e.g.,
large batch sizes, momentum encoders) commonly associated with traditional contrastive learning methods.

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of large language models (LLMs)
[40, 45] in understanding and generating human-like text
has inspired researchers to extend their capabilities to the
visual domain. This effort has led to the development of
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) [1, 34], which
aim to bridge the gap between visual and textual information. These LVLMs frequently utilize pretrained vision encoders, such as CLIP [48], BEiT [7], and DINO
[10], to derive meaningful visual representations from images. LVLMs [2, 34] equipped with these vision encoders
demonstrate remarkable zero-shot performance in down-

stream tasks such as image captioning, and visual question
answering (VQA). Their promising capabilities and impact
on multimodal learning have led to a growing number of
LVLMs being publicly released. However, while this availability fosters research and application development, it also
introduces critical safety concerns that require careful attention. Recent studies [57, 63] highlight the high susceptibility of LVLMs to harmful exploits on text and image modalities. Notably, the addition of a vision modality increases the
model’s attack surface, making LVLMs even more vulnerable to manipulation compared to LLMs [9, 22]. Moreover,
the adversaries can use imperceptible gradient-based perturbations to create targeted attacks, generating malicious
outputs that evade detection [49]. Such targeted attacks are
particularly concerning due to their ability to manipulate
models toward speciﬁc, often harmful outputs. Additionally, the increasing deployment of LVLMs raises the potential for exploitation not only by adversaries but also by corporations aiming to leverage these models to promote their
products or agendas as shown in Figure 1. Recent studies
[43, 47] demonstrate that gradient-based perturbations can
be adapted in optimization-based jailbreak attacks to bypass
a model’s safety mechanisms, causing LVLMs to generate
harmful or undesirable content.
While existing methods [38, 50] made notable progress
in improving the robustness of vision encoders, particularly
CLIP, which is widely utilized across various applications,
critical challenges persist. For example, in downstream
tasks such as image captioning, these models successfully
capture high-level semantic meaning but often struggle to
preserve ﬁne-grained semantic details when faced with perturbed images. Consequently, their ability to generate accurate and contextually rich descriptions is compromised,
limiting their applicability and effectiveness in real-world
scenarios where precision and detail are paramount. To
address these concerns, we propose SLADE, an unsupervised adversarial ﬁne-tuning scheme that enhances the robustness of the widely used CLIP vision encoder’s embeddings against dual exploits: gradient-based attacks and
optimization-based Jailbreak attacks. SLADE combines
symmetric contrastive learning objectives at both the patch
level and the global level (on full image) to capture ﬁne-

24244

