This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PDFactor: Learning Tri-Perspective View Policy Diffusion Field
for Multi-Task Robotic Manipulation
Jingyi Tian1 Le Wang1∗ Sanping Zhou1 Sen Wang1 Jiayi Li1 Haowen Sun1 Wei Tang2
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
University of Illinois at Chicago

Abstract

High
Value

Low
Value

Parameterization 

Robotic manipulation based on visual observations and
natural language instructions is a long-standing challenge
in robotics. Yet prevailing approaches model action distribution by adopting explicit or implicit representations,
which often struggle to achieve a trade-off between accuracy and efficiency. In response, we propose PDFactor, a novel framework that models action distribution with
a hybrid triplane representation. In particular, PDFactor decomposes 3D point cloud into three orthogonal feature planes and leverages a tri-perspective view transformer
to produce dense cubic features as a latent diffusion field
aligned with observation space representing 6-DoF action
probability distribution at an arbitrary location. We employ
a small denoising network conceptually as both a parameterized loss function measuring the quality of the learned
latent features and an action gradient decoder to sample
actions from the latent diffusion field during inference. This
design enables our PDFactor to benefit from spatial awareness of explicit representation and arbitrary resolution of
implicit representation, rendering it with manipulation accuracy, inference efficiency, and model scalability. Experiments demonstrate that PDFactor outperforms state-of-theart approaches across a diverse range of manipulation tasks
in RLBench simulation. Moreover, PDFactor can effectively
learn multi-task policies from a limited number of human
demonstrations, achieving promising accuracy in a variety
of real-world manipulation tasks.

Regression

arg min E ( o, a )
a

Gaussian Mixture

(a) Explicit Policy

Categorical

(b) Implicit Policy

s ( a, o ) = a log p ( a | o )

(c) Hybrid Policy
Denoising MLP 

(x , y , z )
Indexing
&
Querying

z
z

s ( a, z ) = a log p ( a | z )

Figure 1. Policy Representations. (a) Explicit policy predicts a
specific action distribution along the 3D space. (b) Implicit policy, e.g., energy-based and diffusion-based models, defines action
distribution by parameterizing energy function or score function
of the action distribution. (c) The proposed hybrid policy learns a
latent diffusion field from visual observations and then leverages a
small network to decode corresponding action score gradient from
the latent diffusion field and iteratively transform noise to action.

1. Introduction

tential for end-to-end imitation learning that directly maps
visual observations to robot actions. However, these approaches often require training on extensive demonstrations
collected by humans and suffer from poor generalization.
To address these challenges, previous works have made
significant progress in learning multi-task robotic manipulation by predicting the best end-effector pose for the next
keyframe. These approaches can be categorized into explicit and implicit policies. For the first regard, explicit
policies [2, 43, 67, 73] predict an action distribution along
the 3D space which is often referred to as an action value
map or affordance map, where the agent learns to move the
end-effector to the location with the highest probability. To
model the multimodal action distribution that can be measured by a loss function and used to sample actions from, a
popular approach is to discretize the spatial space and pre-

Learning accurate and efficient visual manipulation policies
in complex 3D environments remains a fundamental challenge in the field of embodied AI and robotics. Recent approaches [4, 5, 33, 49, 56, 63] have showcased great po* Corresponding author.

15757

