This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SnapGen-V: Generating a Five-Second Video within Five Seconds on a Mobile
Device
Yushu Wu1,2† Zhixing Zhang1,3† Yanyu Li1†‡ Yanwu Xu1 Anil Kag1 Yang Sui1
Huseyin Coskun1 Ke Ma1 Aleksei Lebedev1 Ju Hu1 Dimitris N. Metaxas3
Yanzhi Wang2 Sergey Tulyakov1 Jian Ren1‡
2
3
1
Snap Inc.
Northeastern University
Rutgers University

Figure 1. Example generation results from our mobile text-to-video model. Our model can generate high-quality and motion consistent
5-second videos on a mobile device (e.g., iPhone 16 Pro Max) within 5 seconds.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recently, the rapid advancement of video diffusion models [4] inspires revolutions in content creation. With the
emergence of video models from industry [41] and research
community [67], content creators can animate a static image [3] or generate cinematic videos from arbitrary prompts
[55, 67, 78]. Video diffusion models also enable downstream applications like video editing [12, 20, 30], novel
view synthesis [25, 57], and multi-modal generation [56].
Despite the success in generation quality, the huge number of parameters and slow generation speed prohibit the
wide deployment of video diffusion models. For instance,
CogVideoX-5B [67] generates a video (49 frames at 8 fps,
720 × 480 resolution) in 5 minutes with 50 inference steps
on an NVIDIA A100 GPU. Compared to text-to-image diffusion models [45], video diffusion models require extra
parameters to model sophisticated motions [3, 13, 62]. In
addition, video data usually incurs higher spatial-temporal
resolution for UNet denoisers [3, 13], or equivalently more
tokens for DiT models [40], which adds up to the computation complexity. Recent works explore efﬁcient model architectures and attention mechanisms for image diffusion
models [8, 64, 70]. However, there is little effort in the literature dedicated to accelerating and deploying video models
at scale, especially for mobile devices.
In this work, we systematically investigate the redundancies in video diffusion models and propose a mobile

We have witnessed the unprecedented success of
diffusion-based video generation over the past year. Recently proposed models from the community have wielded
the power to generate cinematic and high-resolution videos
with smooth motions from arbitrary input prompts. However, as a supertask of image generation, video generation models require more computation and are thus hosted
mostly on cloud servers, limiting broader adoption among
content creators. In this work, we propose a comprehensive acceleration framework to bring the power of the largescale video diffusion model to the hands of edge users. From
the network architecture scope, we initialize from a compact
image backbone and search out the design and arrangement
of temporal layers to maximize hardware efﬁciency. In addition, we propose a dedicated adversarial ﬁne-tuning algorithm for our efﬁcient model and reduce the denoising steps
to 4. Our model, with only 0.6B parameters, can generate
a 5-second video on an iPhone 16 PM within 5 seconds.
Compared to server-side models that take minutes on powerful GPUs to generate a single video, we accelerate the
generation by magnitudes while delivering on-par quality.
Project page at https://snap-research.github.io/snapgen-v/.
† Equal contribution
‡ Corresponding authors

2479

