This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Universal Actions for Enhanced Embodied Foundation Models
Jinliang Zheng* 1,2,5 , Jianxiong Li* † 1 , Dongxiu Liu* 4,1 , Yinan Zheng1 ,
Zhihao Wang3,1 , Zhonghong Ou4 , Yu Liu2 , Jingjing Liu1 , Ya-Qin Zhang1 , Xianyuan Zhan‡ 1,5,6
1
AIR, Tsinghua University, 2 Sensetime Research, 3 Peking University
4
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 5 Shanghai AI Lab, 6 BAAI
{zhengjl23, li-jx21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
zhanxianyuan@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Training on diverse, internet-scale data is a key factor in
the success of recent large foundation models. Yet, using the
same recipe for building embodied agents has faced noticeable difﬁculties. Despite the availability of many crowdsourced embodied datasets, their action spaces often exhibit signiﬁcant heterogeneity due to distinct physical embodiment and control interfaces for different robots, causing substantial challenges in developing embodied foundation models using cross-domain data. In this paper, we
introduce UniAct, a new embodied foundation modeling
framework operating in a Universal Action Space. Our
learned universal actions capture the generic atomic behaviors across diverse robots by exploiting their shared structural features, and enable enhanced cross-domain data utilization and cross-embodiment generalizations by eliminating the notorious heterogeneity. The universal actions can
be efﬁciently translated back to heterogeneous actionable
commands by simply adding embodiment-speciﬁc details,
from which fast adaptation to new robots becomes simple and straightforward. Our 0.5B instantiation of UniAct reaches 14X larger SOTA embodied foundation models in extensive evaluations on various real-world and simulation robots, showcasing exceptional cross-embodiment
control and adaptation capability, highlighting the crucial beneﬁt of adopting universal actions. Project page:
https://2toinf.github.io/UniAct/

1. Introduction
In ﬁelds like natural language processing and computer vision, foundation models trained on vast and diverse data
sources have demonstrated remarkable success and strong
generalization ability, highlighting the beneﬁts of learn* Equal contribution
† Project Lead
‡ Corresponding author

Joint Toque
EEF Pos

Joint Pos

Navigation + EEF Pos
Navigation
High frequency

EEF Pos
EEF Pos
EEF Vel

Joint Pos

Universal Action Space
… ANY Robot, ANY Physical Meaning, ANY Controller …

Figure 1. Universal action space holds the potential to be versatile
to ANY domain-speciﬁc actions.

ing general-purpose models over task-speciﬁc counterparts
[1, 5, 40, 62]. Inspired by these successes, developing versatile embodied foundation models that are capable of handling cross-task, cross-environment, and cross-embodiment
generalization, offers a promising pathway towards building
general-purpose embodied agent [8, 17, 18, 28, 31, 61, 68].
However, signiﬁcant challenges arise from the substantial heterogeneity of embodied data [20, 49, 64]. Such heterogeneity is evident not only in visual discrepancies caused
by variations in camera placements (e.g., wrist or thirdperson view) and environmental conditions (e.g., lighting
or background variations), but more critically, in action
heterogeneity [17, 48, 65]. 1) Robots with different embodiment (e.g., different degrees of freedom or distinctions
across robotic arms, quadrupeds, and cars) possess entirely
distinct action spaces [68]. 2) Furthermore, the diversity
in control interfaces (e.g., end effector (EEF) position or
velocity controller for robotics arms) leads to fundamentally different physical meanings for action commands [49].
3) Even when actions are collected from the same robotic
platform but by different human manipulators, the multimodality in human behaviors also exacerbates such het-

22508

