This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SceneDiffuser++: City-Scale Traffic Simulation via a Generative World Model
Shuhan Tan2∗ John Lambert1 Hong Jeon1 Sakshum Kulshrestha1 Yijing Bai1
Jing Luo1 Dragomir Anguelov1 Mingxing Tan1 Chiyu Max Jiang1
1
Waymo LLC 2 UT Austin

Simulation Route

(a) Initial Scene Generation

(b) Long Simulation Rollout

(c) Final Destination

Figure 1. Overview. SceneDiffuser++ is a single unified, end-to-end trained generative world model that enables CitySim: city-scale traffic
simulation that takes in a large map region, start and end points, and simulates everything in between, from initial scene generation, agent
behavior prediction, occlusion reasoning, dynamic agent generation (spawning and removal) to environment simulation (traffic lights).

Abstract

and study its superior realism under long simulation conditions. We evaluate the simulation quality on an augmented
version of the Waymo Open Motion Dataset (WOMD) with
larger map regions to support trip-level simulation.

The goal of traffic simulation is to augment a potentially
limited amount of manually-driven miles that is available
for testing and validation, with a much larger amount of
simulated synthetic miles. The culmination of this vision
would be a generative simulated city, where given a map of
the city and an autonomous vehicle (AV) software stack, the
simulator can seamlessly simulate the trip from point A to
point B by populating the city around the AV and controlling
all aspects of the scene, from animating the dynamic agents
(e.g., vehicles, pedestrians) to controlling the traffic light
states. We refer to this vision as CitySim, which requires
an agglomeration of simulation technologies: scene generation to populate the initial scene, agent behavior modeling
to animate the scene, occlusion reasoning, dynamic scene
generation to seamlessly spawn and remove agents, and environment simulation for factors such as traffic lights. While
some key technologies have been separately studied in various works, others such as dynamic scene generation and
environment simulation have received less attention in the
research community. We propose SceneDiffuser++, the first
end-to-end generative world model trained on a single loss
function capable of point A-to-B simulation on a city scale
integrating all the requirements above. We demonstrate the
city-scale traffic simulation capability of SceneDiffuser++

1. Introduction
Imagine an ideal traffic simulation at the city-scale: Starting
from a logged or synthetic scene, we initiate the simulation.
The virtual world comes alive with agents behaving realistically: cars navigate roads, pedestrians cross streets, and
interactions unfold naturally. A pedestrian emerges from
behind a bus, prompting a reaction from the ego agent. Vehicles disappear and reappear as they become occluded and
disoccluded. Turning onto a new road reveals a fresh stream
of traffic. The ego vehicle responds to traffic signals, stopping at red lights and proceeding when they turn green. This
simulation persists for a long duration, allowing trip-level
evaluations of driving by generating a dynamically populated virtual city with continuous agent interactions.
We refer to such a city-scale closed-loop traffic simulation system as CitySim (See Fig. 1). CitySim can enable point-to-point driving simulation for obtaining triplevel statistics. This allows holistic driving assessment, for
instance trip-level travel time comparisons to average hu* Work done as an intern at Waymo.

1570

