This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rectification-specific Supervision and Constrained Estimator for Online Stereo
Rectification
Rui Gong1
1

Kim-Hui Yap1

Weide Liu1
2

Nanyang Technological University

Xulei Yang2

Jun Cheng2

Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR

{gong0084@e., ekhyap@, weide001@e.}ntu.edu.sg

{yang xulei, cheng jun}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
Online stereo rectification is critical for autonomous vehicles and robots in dynamic environments, where factors
such as vibration, temperature fluctuations, and mechanical
stress can affect rectification accuracy and severely degrade
downstream stereo depth estimation. Current dominant approaches for online stereo rectification involve estimating
relative camera poses in real time to derive rectification
homographies. However, they do not directly optimize for
rectification constraints. Additionally, the general-purpose
correspondence matchers used in these methods are not
trained for rectification, while training of these matchers
typically requires ground-truth correspondences which are
not available in stereo rectification datasets. To address
these limitations, we propose a matching-based stereo rectification framework that is directly optimized for rectification and does not require ground-truth correspondence annotations for training. We assume intrinsics are known as
they are generally available on modern devices and are relatively stable. Our framework incorporates a rectificationconstrained estimator and applies multi-level, rectificationspecific supervision that trains the matcher network for
rectification without relying on ground-truth correspondences. Additionally, we create a new rectification dataset
with ground-truth optical flow annotations, eliminating bias
from evaluation metrics used in prior work that relied on
pretrained keypoint matching or optical flow models. Extensive experiments show that our approach outperforms both
state-of-the-art matching-based and matching-free methods
in vertical flow metric by 10.7% on the Carla-Flowguided
dataset and 21.3% on the Semi-Truck Highway dataset, offering superior rectification accuracy.

Figure 1. Stereo depth estimation using images rectified with
offline-calibrated camera parameters may yield low-quality results
in challenging environments. Our proposed framework enhances
rectification precision and improves downstream stereo depth estimation accuracy compared to both offline calibration and other
online rectification methods.

1. Introduction

ing perfect stereo co-planarity in real-world camera setups
is challenging. Consequently, stereo rectification, which
projects a pair of images onto a common image plane using
two rectification homographies to simulate virtual stereo coplanarity [21], is a necessary preliminary step for accurate
depth estimation.
While offline stereo rectification can be reliably achieved
through stereo calibration, practical applications such as autonomous vehicles, large construction robots, and UAVs often encounter significant deviations from the calibrated geometry [24, 26]. Factors such as severe vibrations, temperature fluctuations, and mechanical stress can lead to deviations in calibration. Even minor errors in extrinsic calibration may result in significant inaccuracies in downstream
stereo depth estimation [13], as shown in Fig. 1.
The prevailing approach for online stereo rectification involves real-time estimation of relative camera poses, and
then deriving the rectification homographies from the estimated camera poses [11, 20, 30, 45]. Current state-of-theart methods for camera pose estimation fall into two categories: matching-based methods, which first extract correspondences from the images and then compute the camera
pose from these correspondences [8, 12, 14, 32, 39, 52, 54,
59], and matching-free methods, which directly regress the
camera pose using a neural network [7, 9, 15, 48, 63, 64].
The rectifying homographies can then be derived from the

Most existing stereo depth estimation algorithms assume
stereo co-planarity, which enables efficient matching by
eliminating disparity along one axis. However, achiev-

22348

