This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Segment Any Motion in Videos
Nan Huang1,2 Wenzhao Zheng1 Chenfeng Xu1
Kurt Keutzer1 Shanghang Zhang2 Angjoo Kanazawa1 Qianqian Wang1
1
UC Berkeley 2 Peking University

Abstract
Moving object segmentation is a crucial task for achieving
a high-level understanding of visual scenes and has numerous downstream applications. Humans can effortlessly segment moving objects in videos. Previous work has largely
relied on optical flow to provide motion cues; however,
this approach often results in imperfect predictions due to
challenges such as partial motion, complex deformations,
motion blur and background distractions. We propose a
novel approach for moving object segmentation that combines long-range trajectory motion cues with DINO-based
semantic features and leverages SAM2 for pixel-level mask
densification through an iterative prompting strategy. Our
model employs Spatio-Temporal Trajectory Attention and
Motion-Semantic Decoupled Embedding to prioritize motion while integrating semantic support. Extensive testing
on diverse datasets demonstrates state-of-the-art performance, excelling in challenging scenarios and fine-grained
segmentation of multiple objects. Our code is available at
https://motion-seg.github.io/.

Images Inputs

Long-range Tracks Inputs

Filtered Dynamic Tracks

Dynamic Masks

Figure 1. Our method is capable of handling challenging scenarios, including articulated structures, shadow reflections, dynamic
background motion, and drastic camera movements, while producing per object level fine-grained moving object masks.

nificant progress. Taking points, masks, or bounding boxes
as prompts, SAM2 [51] segments and tracks the associated
objects in videos effectively. However, SAM2 cannot natively handle MOS, as it has no mechanism to detect which
objects are moving.
We propose an innovative combination of long-range
tracks with SAM2 for moving object segmentation to exploit the capabilities of SAM2. First, point tracking captures valuable long-range pixel motion information which is
robust to deformation and occlusion, as shown in Fig. 2. At
the same time, we incorporate DINO feature [12, 45], to add
semantic context as a complementary source of information
to support motion-based segmentation. We depart from traditional MOS approaches by training a model on extensive
datasets that effectively combines motion and semantic information at a high level. Given a set of long-range 2D
tracks, our model is designed to identify those tracks that
correspond to moving objects. Once these dynamic tracks
are identified, we apply a sparse-to-dense mask densification strategy, which uses an Iterative Prompting method
in conjunction with SAM2 [51] to transform the sparse,
point-level mask into a pixel-level segmentation. Since the
primary objective is moving object segmentation, we em-

1. Introduction
Segmenting moving objects in videos is crucial for a range
of applications, including action recognition, autonomous
driving [10, 22, 65], and 4D reconstruction [58]. Many
prior works address this problem under terms such as Video
Object Segmentation (VOS) or motion segmentation. In
this paper, we define our task as moving object segmentation (MOS) – segmenting objects that exhibit observable
motion within the video. This definition differs from Video
Object Segmentation, which includes objects that have the
potential to move even if they remain static in the video, and
from motion segmentation, which may also capture background motion, such as flowing water. This task is challenging as it implicitly requires distinguishing between camera
motion and object motion, robustly tracking objects despite
deformations, occlusions, rapid or transient movement, and
segmenting them out with precise, clean masks.
Recently, promptable visual segmentation has made sig-

3406

