This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReRAW: RGB-to-RAW Image Reconstruction via Stratified Sampling for
Efficient Object Detection on the Edge
Radu Berdan1! Beril Besbinar1∗ Christoph Reinders2∗ Junji Otsuka3 Daisuke Iso1
1
Sony AI 2 Leibniz University Hannover 3 Sony Group Corporation
!
radu.berdan@sony.com ∗ Equal Contribution.

Abstract
Edge-based computer vision models running on compact,
resource-limited devices benefit greatly from using unprocessed, detail-rich RAW sensor data instead of processed
RGB images. Training these models, however, necessitates large labeled RAW datasets, which are costly and often impractical to obtain. Thus, converting existing labeled RGB datasets into sensor-specific RAW images becomes crucial for effective model training. In this paper, we
introduce ReRAW, an RGB-to-RAW conversion model that
achieves state-of-the-art reconstruction performance across
five diverse RAW datasets. This is accomplished through
ReRAW’s novel multi-head architecture predicting RAW image candidates in gamma space. The performance is further boosted by a stratified sampling-based training data
selection heuristic, which helps the model better reconstruct
brighter RAW pixels. We finally demonstrate that pretraining compact models on a combination of high-quality synthetic RAW datasets (such as generated by ReRAW) and
ground-truth RAW images for downstream tasks like object
detection, outperforms both standard RGB pipelines, and
RAW fine-tuning of RGB-pretrained models for the same
task. The code is available at: https://github.com/
SonyResearch/ReRAW

Figure 1. The conventional imaging pipeline involves an image
sensor capturing a scene into a RAW image, converting that image into standard RGB fit for human consumption, and running
computer vision tasks on these RGB images. The optimal pipeline
would involve performing high-level tasks directly on the RAW
images, on chip, and physically close to the image sensor.

1. Introduction

much smaller compressed size and compatibility with human vision, making them fast to transmit from device to device and convenient to store. However, unprocessed RAW
images retain more detail, have a larger dynamic range
(12-16 bits), and contain more information than their ISPprocessed RGB outputs (see Supplementary 1). This suggests that all else being equal, computer vision models such
as object detectors trained directly on RAW data could outperform those trained on RGB. Hence, when operating in
resource-constrained environments such as on the edge, the
reduction in model accuracy due to limited compute can be
mitigated by utilizing a richer signal source such as RAW
images, compared to RGB images. Additionally, bypassing
the ISP improves power consumption and speed, as in the
optimized pipeline in Fig. 1.
Nevertheless, RGB pre-trained object detectors perform
suboptimally on RAW images due to the domain gap [46].
Several approaches have attempted to bridge this gap with
learnable adapters [46, 62] or other non-linear scaling functions beyond standard ISP processing [21, 39] as well as
adopting traditional feature extraction methods, such as
Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) [68]. Although
end-to-end training of object detectors with these adaptations yields promising results, performance is still limited
by the additional computational burden and the scarcity of
labeled RAW datasets. Alternatively, a reverse ISP function that converts RGB images back to RAW sensor output could leverage widely available labeled RGB datasets.

The lifecycle of a digital image begins at the camera sensor,
where incoming light from a scene is converted into electrical signals to form a RAW image – a single-channel Bayerpattern array [36] where each pixel value corresponds linearly to the scene’s luminosity. These RAW images are then
processed locally through a camera-specific Image Signal
Processor (ISP), which applies multiple functions such as
demosaicking, white balancing, tone mapping etc., to yield
a compressed RGB image optimized for human perception,
as shown in the conventional pipeline of Fig. 1.
RGB images are preferred over RAW images due to their

11833

