This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReconDreamer: Crafting World Models for Driving Scene
Reconstruction via Online Restoration
Chaojun Ni* 1, 2 , Guosheng Zhao* 2, 3, 4 , Xiaofeng Wang* 2, 3, 4 , Zheng Zhu*† 2 ,
Wenkang Qin2 , Guan Huang2 , Chen Liu5 , Yuyin Chen5 , Yida Wang5 , Xueyang Zhang5 ,
Yifei Zhan5 , Kun Zhan5 , Peng Jia5 , Xianpeng Lang5 , Xingang Wang3 , Wenjun Mei†1
1
Peking University, China 2 GigaAI, China
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
5
Li Auto Inc., China

Original Trajectory

ReconDreamer with
DriveDreamer4D
Street Gaussians Street Gaussians with S3Gaussian

Novel Trajectory

Original View

Lane Shift @ 1.5m

Lane Shift @ 3m

Lane Shift @ 6m

Figure 1. Dynamic driving scene reconstruction methods, such as DriveDreamer4D [70] and Street Gaussians [60], encounter significant
challenges when performing larger maneuvers (e.g., multilane shifts). In contrast, the proposed ReconDreamer significantly improves
rendering quality via incrementally integrating world model knowledge.

Abstract

NeRF and 3DGS) reconstruct driving scenes based on conditions that closely mirror training data distributions. However, these methods struggle with rendering novel trajectory, such as lane changes. Recent works have demonstrated that integrating world model knowledge alleviates
these issues. Despite their efficiency, these approaches
still encounter difficulties in the accurate representation of

Closed-loop simulation is crucial for end-to-end autonomous driving. Existing sensor simulation methods (e.g.,
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors. zhengzhu@ieee.org, mei@pku.edu.cn.
‡ Project Page: https://recondreamer.github.io

1559

