This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniPre3D: Unified Pre-training of 3D Point Cloud Models with
Cross-Modal Gaussian Splatting
Ziyi Wang* Yanran Zhang∗ Jie Zhou Jiwen Lu†
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
{wziyi22, zhangyr21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

ℒ!"

Abstract
Enc

The scale diversity of point cloud data presents significant
challenges in developing unified representation learning
techniques for 3D vision. Currently, there are few unified
3D models, and no existing pre-training method is equally
effective for both object- and scene-level point clouds. In
this paper, we introduce UniPre3D, the first unified pretraining method that can be seamlessly applied to point
clouds of any scale and 3D models of any architecture. Our
approach predicts Gaussian primitives as the pre-training
task and employs differentiable Gaussian splatting to render images, enabling precise pixel-level supervision and
end-to-end optimization. To further regulate the complexity
of the pre-training task and direct the model’s focus toward
geometric structures, we integrate 2D features from pretrained image models to incorporate well-established texture knowledge. We validate the universal effectiveness of
our proposed method through extensive experiments across
a variety of object- and scene-level tasks, using diverse
point cloud models as backbones. Code is available at
https://github.com/wangzy22/UniPre3D.

Dec

(a) Point-level MAE-based Pre-train

Enc

Dec

ℒ!#$%&'(%

(b) Scene-level Contrastive-based Pre-train

Backbone

3DGS
Render

(c) Unified Generative Pre-train
Figure 1. Pre-training paradigm comparison. Existing objectlevel pre-training methods usually follow a generative masked
auto-encoding (MAE) paradigm. Their scene-level counterparts
mostly leverage the contrastive learning paradigm. We propose a
unified pre-training method that is applicable and effective to both
object- and scene-level point clouds and models.

1. Introduction
Recently, the unification of model architectures and learning mechanisms has become a prominent research focus, as
it represents a crucial milestone toward achieving Artificial
General Intelligence. Significant progress has been made in
the 2D vision domain, where unified models [28, 54, 73, 78]
have been developed for multi-modal data. However, in the
3D domain, only a few unified models [8, 76] have been
introduced, and their impact has not been as substantial as
that of unified image models. A key challenge lies in the
greater scale diversity of point clouds compared to images.
Images generally have a similar number of pixels and information density, whether depicting a single object or a complex scene. In contrast, scene-level point clouds can con-

tain hundreds of times more points than object-level point
clouds. As a result, point-based models [34, 35], which excel at capturing fine-grained local structures in object data,
often struggle to handle large-scale scene samples effectively. Conversely, voxel-based models [9, 33], while adept
at capturing long-range global relations in scene data, tend
to lose geometric details when processing object samples.
Given the distinct representation learning paradigms for
object and scene point clouds, existing 3D pre-training
methods are naturally divided into two streams based on
data scale, illustrated in Figure 1. For object point clouds,
generative masked auto-encoding (MAE) [16, 31] has been
widely adopted. However, this approach proves ineffective for scene samples, where the set-to-set Chamfer dis-

* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

1319

