This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-Modal Distillation for 2D/3D Multi-Object Discovery from 2D motion
Saad Lahlali *

Sandra Kara*
Hejer Ammar
Florian Chabot
Nicolas Granger
Hervé Le Borgne
Quoc-Cuong Pham
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, List, F-91120, Palaiseau, France
firstname.lastname@cea.fr

Abstract
Object discovery, which refers to the task of localizing objects without human annotations, has gained significant attention in 2D image analysis. However, despite this growing interest, it remains under-explored in 3D data, where
approaches rely exclusively on 3D motion, despite its several challenges. In this paper, we present a novel framework that leverages advances in 2D object discovery which
are based on 2D motion to exploit the advantages of such
motion cues being more flexible and generalizable and to
bridge the gap between 2D and 3D modalities. Our primary contributions are twofold: (i) we introduce DIOD-3D,
the first baseline for multi-object discovery in 3D data using 2D motion, incorporating scene completion as an auxiliary task to enable dense object localization from sparse
input data; (ii) we develop xMOD, a cross-modal training framework that integrates 2D and 3D data while always using 2D motion cues. xMOD employs a teacherstudent training paradigm across the two modalities to mitigate confirmation bias by leveraging the domain gap. During inference, the model supports both RGB-only and point
cloud-only inputs. Additionally, we propose a late-fusion
technique tailored to our pipeline that further enhances
performance when both modalities are available at inference. We evaluate our approach extensively on synthetic
(TRIP-PD) and challenging real-world datasets (KITTI and
Waymo). Notably, our approach yields a substantial performance improvement compared with the 2D object discovery state-of-the-art on all datasets with gains ranging from
+8.7 to +15.1 in F 1@50 score. The code is available at
https://github.com/CEA-LIST/xMOD

ization. Additionally, this setting is limited to detecting specific semantic categories, which poses challenges in identifying out-of-distribution instances and rare categories. Object discovery has thus emerged as an unsupervised alternative to the localization component of object detection. It focuses on localizing objects within images or videos without
explicit prior knowledge provided by human annotations.
Interest in this task continues to grow in the 2D modality
[2, 15, 28, 30] driven by the presence of object patterns for
free within low-level and automatically acquired modalities
(motion [1, 17], depth [10], etc), resulting in interesting performances. Moreover, the class-agnostic nature of object
discovery and its reliance on low-level signals allow for a
broader application, built around general definitions of objects, such as salient objects [31, 38] and objects that can
move [1]. These properties address the limitations of the
fully supervised setting. In contrast, these advances are not
mirrored enough in the 3D modality where only 3D motion
cues are explored despite being sparse and demanding extensive fine-tuning with changing domains.

1. Introduction

In this work, we show that 3D object discovery (3DOD)
can largely benefit from advancements achieved in the 2D
modality. Specifically, we adapt the recent motion-guided
2D object discovery (2DOD) approach in [15] to accommodate 3D data, using the same 2D motion masks. Object
discovery being unsupervised, it typically includes a reconstruction pretext task as a powerful regularization method.
In the real-world scenario, we discovered that the inherent
sparsity in LiDAR data (i.e. missing data points and poor
spatial resolution) makes 3DOD challenging, leading to incomplete object segments. We thus propose scene completion as a more suitable pretext task for 3DOD. Specifically,
we encourage the prediction of a denser point cloud, which
helps avoid propagating the input sparsity to the predicted
object masks.

Object detection has been extensively explored, leading to
fast, high-performance approaches [4, 26, 27]. However,
these methods adopt a fully supervised setting that suffers
from high annotation costs and makes them impractical for
scaling with the increasing data needed for better general-

Subsequently, we aim to ensure that the transition to 3D
is not disconnected from the 2D data, which is rich in complementary information such as colors and textures. To this
end, we propose bridging the two modalities by jointly optimizing the tasks of 2D and 3D object discovery, while al-

24529

