This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Large Scale Point Cloud Completion for Archaeological Site
Restoration
Aocheng Li1 , James R. Zimmer-Dauphinee2 , Rajesh Kalyanam1 ,
Ian Lindsay1 , Parker VanValkenburgh3 , Steven Wernke2 , Daniel Aliaga1
1
Purdue University, 2 Vanderbilt University, 3 Brown University
li3922@purdue.edu, james.r.zimmer-dauphinee@vanderbilt.edu, rkalyana@purdue.edu
ilindsay@purdue.edu, parker vanvalkenburgh@brown.edu, s.wernke@vanderbilt.edu, aliaga@purdue.edu

Figure 1. Restoration results of applying our method on a large structure consisting of 15 million points from Mawchu Llacta in Peru. The
structure is completed and displayed over the original site for visualization.

Abstract

plete and unbalanced archaeological structures in Peru.

Point cloud completion helps restore partial incomplete
point clouds suffering occlusions. Current self-supervised
methods fail to give high fidelity completion for large objects with missing surfaces and unbalanced distribution of
available points. In this paper, we present a novel method
for restoring large-scale point clouds with limited and unbalanced ground-truth. Using rough boundary annotations
for a region of interest, we project the original point clouds
into a multiple-center-of-projection (MCOP) image, where
fragments are projected to images of 5 channels (RGB,
depth, and rotation). Completion of the original point cloud
is reduced to inpainting the missing pixels in the MCOP images. Due to lack of complete structures and an unbalanced
distribution of existing parts, we develop a self-supervised
scheme which learns to infill the MCOP image with points
resembling existing ”complete” patches. Special losses are
applied to further enhance the regularity and consistency of
completed MCOP images, which is mapped back to 3D to
form final restoration. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the superiority of our method in completing 600+ incom-

1. Introduction

11759

Point clouds are important for a wide range of vision applications including autonomous driving, real-estate walkthroughs, pre/post-disaster understanding, and digital archaeology and historic preservation (e.g., [6, 13, 26, 35]).
Effective algorithms for learning and understanding point
clouds have been developed and validated on synthetic
clean shapes [27, 39, 45]. However, for modeling large outdoor real world objects raw point clouds are sparse, noisy,
and incomplete. The incompleteness stems from either occlusion (e.g., samples are behind a wall or tree) or missing surfaces (e.g., archaeological remains, post-disaster),
which results in different probability distributions of point
samples. Hence, point cloud completion for datasets that
include significant missing surfaces/areas of large objects,
and also lack ground-truth data, is a critical and necessary
task. Such 3D reconstructions are vital to understanding the
structuring of spaces within archaeological settlements and
for modeling social dynamics in the past.

