This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event fields: Capturing light fields at high speed, resolution, and dynamic range
Ziyuan Qu
Dartmouth College

Zihao Zou
UNC Chapel Hill

Vivek Boominathan
Rice University

Praneeth Chakravarthula
UNC Chapel Hill

Adithya Pediredla
Dartmouth College
Scene

Concept

Event

Slow motion refocus

Applications
Instant true depth est.

HDR light field

Light field

depth (inches)

70

Event field (ours)

60
50
40

Event field (ours)

30
20
10

Light field

Figure 1. We introduce Event Fields, a novel framework that leverages event cameras to capture light fields at high speed, resolution,
and dynamic range using innovative optical designs. Event fields integrate the unique advantages of event sensing—such as low latency,
data efficiency, and power-saving capabilities—with the detailed angular information provided by light field sensing. We demonstrate the
versatility of the event fields through three application scenarios: slow motion refocus (SloMoRF), instant true depth estimation, and high
dynamic range (HDR) light field imaging.

Abstract
Event cameras, which feature pixels that independently respond to changes in brightness, are becoming increasingly
popular in high- speed applications due to their lower latency, reduced bandwidth requirements, and enhanced dynamic range compared to traditional frame- based cameras.
Numerous imaging and vision techniques have leveraged
event cameras for high- speed scene understanding by capturing high- framerate, high- dynamic range videos, primarily utilizing the temporal advantages inherent to event cameras. Additionally, imaging and vision techniques have utilized the light field—a complementary dimension to temporal information—for enhanced scene understanding.
In this work, we propose “Event Fields”, a new approach
that utilizes innovative optical designs for event cameras to
capture light fields at high speed. We develop the underlying
mathematical framework for Event Fields and introduce two
foundational frameworks to capture them practically: spatial multiplexing to capture temporal derivatives and temporal multiplexing to capture angular derivatives. To realize these, we design two complementary optical setups—
one using a kaleidoscope for spatial multiplexing and another using a galvanometer for temporal multiplexing. We

evaluate the performance of both designs using a custombuilt simulator and real hardware prototypes, showcasing
their distinct benefits. Our event fields unlock the full advantages of typical light fields—like post- capture refocusing
and depth estimation—now supercharged for high- speed
and high- dynamic range scenes. This novel light- sensing
paradigm opens doors to new applications in photography,
robotics, and AR/VR, and presents fresh challenges in rendering and machine learning.

1. Introduction

26910

Capturing high-speed visual phenomena in real-time is essential for advancing science and engineering. Traditional
high-speed frame cameras like Phantom, Photron, and IDT
can achieve impressive frame rates (up to 100,000 fps) but
are bulky, have finite capture duration, and are expensive
(exceeding $100,000), restricting accessibility. In contrast,
event cameras offer a more affordable and efficient solution with high temporal resolution (down to 1µs) and continuous data acquisition, suitable for real-time applications.
Unlike traditional cameras, which require substantial bandwidth (e.g., 100,000 fps, HD capture requires 100 GBps),
event cameras capture only changes in the scene using asyn-

