This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StdGEN: Semantic-Decomposed 3D Character Generation from Single Images
Yuze He1,2† Yanning Zhou1 * Wang Zhao2 Zhongkai Wu1
Wei Yang1 Yong-Jin Liu2 * Xiao Han1
1
Tencent AI Lab 2 Tsinghua University

Kaiwen Xiao1

Figure 1. Our StdGEN generates high-quality, decomposed 3D characters from a single reference image.

Abstract
We present StdGEN, an innovative pipeline for generating
semantically decomposed high-quality 3D characters from
single images, enabling broad applications in virtual reality, gaming, and filmmaking, etc. Unlike previous methods which struggle with limited decomposability, unsatisfactory quality, and long optimization times, StdGEN features decomposability, effectiveness and efficiency; i.e., it
generates intricately detailed 3D characters with separated
semantic components such as the body, clothes, and hair,
in three minutes. At the core of StdGEN is our proposed
Semantic-aware Large Reconstruction Model (S-LRM), a
transformer-based generalizable model that jointly reconstructs geometry, color and semantics from multi-view images in a feed-forward manner. A differentiable multilayer semantic surface extraction scheme is introduced to
acquire meshes from hybrid implicit fields reconstructed
by our S-LRM. Additionally, a specialized efficient multi-

view diffusion model and an iterative multi-layer surface
refinement module are integrated into the pipeline to facilitate high-quality, decomposable 3D character generation. Extensive experiments demonstrate our state-of-theart performance in 3D anime character generation, surpassing existing baselines by a significant margin in geometry, texture and decomposability. StdGEN offers ready-touse semantic-decomposed 3D characters and enables flexible customization for a wide range of applications. Project
page: https://stdgen.github.io

1. Introduction

* Corresponding
Authors:
amandayzhou@tencent.com,
liuyongjin@tsinghua.edu.cn
† Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.

Generating high-quality 3D characters from single images
has widespread applications in virtual reality, video games,
filmmaking, etc. Beyond automatically creating a complete
3D character, there is an increasing demand for the ability
to produce decomposable characters, where distinct semantic components like the body, clothes, and hair are disentangled. This decomposition allows for much easier editing, control, and animation of characters, greatly enhancing
their usability across various downstream applications.

26345

