This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Physics-Based Full-Body Human Reaching and Grasping
from Brief Walking References
Yitang Li* 1,2,5 Mingxian Lin* 2,4
Zhuo Lin Yipeng Deng1,2 Yue Cao1,2 Li Yi† 1,3,2
1
Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 4 The University of Hong Kong
https://liyitang22.github.io/phys-reach-grasp/
1

5

Galbot

Abstract
Existing motion generation methods based on MoCap data
are often limited by data quality and coverage. In this work,
we propose a framework that generates diverse, physically
feasible full-body human reaching and grasping motions using only brief walking MoCap data. Based on the observation that walking data captures valuable movement patterns
transferable across tasks and, on the other hand, the advanced kinematic methods can generate diverse grasping
poses, which can then be interpolated into motions to serve
as task-specific guidance. Our approach incorporates an
active data generation strategy to maximize the utility of
the generated motions, along with a local feature alignment
mechanism that transfers natural movement patterns from
walking data to enhance both the success rate and naturalness of the synthesized motions. By combining the fidelity and stability of natural walking with the flexibility and
generalizability of task-specific generated data, our method
demonstrates strong performance and robust adaptability in
diverse scenes and with unseen objects.

Figure 1. In this work, we design a framework that generates diverse, physically feasible full-body human reaching and grasping
motions using only brief walking MoCap data.

1. Introduction

to replicate motions from a given dataset[23, 24, 29] or
employing explicit motion tracking to imitate real-world
data[16, 18, 20, 32, 35, 36]. Although these methods produce high-quality motions, they tend to generate motions
that closely follow the reference states [4], remaining restricted by the limitations of the MoCap dataset. However, human interactive skills are highly diverse, especially
in complex reaching and grasping involving intricate object
geometry and scene variations. Collecting motion capture
data for such tasks is significantly time- and labor-intensive,
often leading to limited motion samples and biased distributions. Therefore, instead of relying on extensive motion
data collections, we take a bold step by exploring the generation of diverse full-body reaching and grasping motions
using only brief, easily accessible walking references.
We observe that despite the dramatically different semantics and global movements between walking and fullbody reaching and grasping, walking motions encompass
diverse local motor patterns and balancing abilities (such as
lifting the right hand while extending the left foot) that are
universally applicable across different actions, providing a
valuable motion pattern reference. On the other hand, recent advanced kinematic methods can utilize pose priors to

Human-object interactions are central to our engagement
with the physical world. By naturally reaching for and
grasping diverse objects in complex scenes, we enable rich,
functional interactions for various tasks. Consequently,
generating realistic, physics-based full-body motions for
human reaching and grasping diverse objects in different
scenes has broad applications in animation and AR/VR, and
holds significant potential for advancing humanoid robotics.
Previous data-driven works[5, 16, 18, 20, 23, 24, 29,
32, 35, 36] have shown promising results in interactive
human motion generation, utilizing adversarial learning
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

27673

