This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Illumination Spectrum Estimation for Multispectral Images via Surface
Reflectance Modeling and Spatial-Spectral Feature Generation

1

Hyejin Oh1 Woo-Shik Kim2 Sangyoon Lee2 YungKyung Park3 Je-Won Kang1 *
Dept. of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Ewha W. University, Seoul, South Korea
2
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, South Korea
3
Dept.of Color Design, Ewha W. University, Seoul, South Korea

{hyejin5, yungkyung.park, jewonk}@ewha.ac.kr

{wooshik.kim, sangy00n.lee}@samsung.com

Abstract
Multispectral (MS) images contain richer spectral information than RGB images due to their increased number of channels and are widely used for various applications. However, achieving accurate estimation in MS images remains challenging, as previous studies have struggled with spectral diversity and the inherent entanglement
between the illuminant and surface reflectance spectra. To
tackle these challenges, in this paper, we propose a novel
Illumination spectrum estimation technique for MS images
via Surface reflectance modeling and Spatial-spectral feature generation (ISS). The proposed technique employs a
learnable spectral unmixing (SU) block to enhance surface
reflectance modeling, which was unattempted in the illumination spectrum estimation, and a feature mixing block
to fuse spectral and spatial features of MS images with
cross-attention. The features are refined iteratively and processed through a decoder to produce an illumination spectrum estimator. Experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed technique achieves state-of-the-art performance
in illumination spectrum estimation in various MS image
datasets. The code is available at https://github.
com/heyjinnii/ISS-MSI.git.

Figure 1. Our model synthesizes spectral features derived from
surface reflectance modeling with CNN features, iteratively refining the fused representation in an IRSS framework. The features
enhance the accuracy of illumination spectrum estimation by effectively accounting for the reflectance characteristics of objects
within the image, as demonstrated in the last column, in contrast
to the conventional deep features shown in the middle column.

becomes even more crucial than in the conventional RGB
imaging [14, 26, 28, 40, 54, 72], because MS images with
the increased number of channels are highly sensitive to illumination changes. The color constancy is achieved by
solving an illumination and reflectance spectra separation
(IRSS) problem [48], which is an underconstrained problem, requiring the simultaneous recovery of both the illumination spectrum and surface reflectance [72]. Accordingly,
achieving accurate estimation in MS images remains a challenge [9, 21, 72].
Recent advances in sensor technology have enabled
the acquisition of high-resolution, high-quality MS images
[14]. The separation is more challenging in the real-world
MS images, because both illumination and reflectance contribute more intricately to the observed spectrum and can
vary more dynamically over their channels [30, 31, 71].

1. Introduction
Multispectral (MS) imaging sensors capture a broader range
of spectral bands and provide richer information than in
RGB images [29, 35]. As these imaging sensors become
compact and cost-effective [14], they are actively used in
various image processing applications [3, 42, 44, 60, 70].
In computer vision, computational color constancy is used
to replicate the perceptual stability of the human visual system, enabling reliable color rendering under varying lighting conditions [7, 34]. In MS imaging, the color constancy
* Je-Won Kang is a corresponding author.

2215

