This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fast and Accurate Gigapixel Pathological Image Classification
with Hierarchical Distillation Multi-Instance Learning
Junjun Jiang1 *, Kui Jiang1 , Jiahan Li1 ,
Yongbing Zhang2 *
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, 2 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
Jiuyang Dong1 ,

{jiuyang.dong, jiahan.li}@stu.hit.edu.cn,
{jiangjunjun, jiangkui, ybzhang08}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

(a)

Although multi-instance learning (MIL) has succeeded in
pathological image classification, it faces the challenge of
high inference costs due to processing numerous patches
from gigapixel whole slide images (WSIs). To address
this, we propose HDMIL, a hierarchical distillation multiinstance learning framework that achieves fast and accurate classification by eliminating irrelevant patches. HDMIL consists of two key components: the dynamic multiinstance network (DMIN) and the lightweight instance
pre-screening network (LIPN). DMIN operates on highresolution WSIs, while LIPN operates on the corresponding
low-resolution counterparts. During training, DMIN are
trained for WSI classification while generating attentionscore-based masks that indicate irrelevant patches. These
masks then guide the training of LIPN to predict the relevance of each low-resolution patch. During testing, LIPN
first determines the useful regions within low-resolution
WSIs, which indirectly enables us to eliminate irrelevant regions in high-resolution WSIs, thereby reducing inference
time without causing performance degradation. In addition,
we further design the first Chebyshev-polynomials-based
Kolmogorov-Arnold classifier in computational pathology,
which enhances the performance of HDMIL through learnable activation layers. Extensive experiments on three public datasets demonstrate that HDMIL outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods, e.g., achieving improvements
of 3.13% in AUC while reducing inference time by 28.6%
on the Camelyon16 dataset. The project is available at
https://github.com/JiuyangDong/HDMIL.

(b)

1
0

relevant
instances

Figure 1. What makes inference slow? (a) Time-consuming
data pre-processing: After comparing the time required for data
pre-processing (WSI cropping, feature extraction) and MIL network classification, it is clear that data pre-processing is the main
speed bottleneck. (b) Redundant irrelevant patches: For example, in a randomly selected WSI, numerous instances have extremely low attention scores [19], indicating their minimal contribution, if any, to the bag-level classification.

1. Introduction

images (WSIs), demonstrating significant success in tasks
such as tumor detection, subtyping [10, 27, 34, 41, 47, 61],
tissue micro-environment quantification [13, 20, 35, 38, 44,
45], and survival prediction [6, 46, 57, 59].
To handle gigapixel WSIs, the MIL framework treats
each WSI as a bag, cropping it into thousands of patches,
each treated as an instance. Before being fed into the MIL
networks for classification, all patches need to undergo feature extraction. Considering that each WSI contains thousands of patches, the process of WSI cropping and feature
extraction can be very time-consuming. As shown in Fig. 1,
data pre-processing is the primary speed bottleneck, requiring hundreds of times more time than the MIL classifiers.
Moreover, WSIs often contain redundant patches with minimal contribution to the bag-level classification. For example, by adding up the attention scores of only a small frac-

Recently, multi-instance learning (MIL) has emerged as the
leading approach for analyzing pathological whole slide
* Corresponding authors: Junjun Jiang and Yongbing Zhang.

30818

