This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Video Propagation
Shaoteng Liu1,∗ , Tianyu Wang2 , Jui-Hsien Wang2 , Qing Liu2 , Zhifei Zhang2 ,
Joon-Young Lee2 , Yijun Li2 , Bei Yu1 , Zhe Lin2 , Soo Ye Kim2,† , Jiaya Jia3,4,†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Adobe Research
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 4 SmartMore

(e)

Multiple Edits

(d) Object & 

Effect Tracking

(c)

Object Insertion

(b) Background

Replacement

(a) Object &

Effect Removal

* Work done during an internship at Adobe. † Co-corresponding authors.

2
3

3
1

Original Frame #1

Input Video Frames (top) / Propagated by Ours (bottom)

Edited Frame #1

Figure 1. GenProp. We propose a generative video propagation framework (GenProp), which can seamlessly propagate any first frame
edit through the video. GenProp supports a wide range of video applications, including (a) complete object removal with effects such
as shadows and reflections, (b) background replacement with realistic effects, (c) object insertion where inserted objects have physically
plausible motion (i.e., blueberries falling while spoon goes up), (d) tracking of objects and their associated effects, and (e) multiple edits
(outpainting, insertion, removal) at a single inference run.

Abstract
Large-scale video generation models have the inherent ability to realistically model natural scenes. In this paper, we
demonstrate that through a careful design of a generative
video propagation framework, various video tasks can be
addressed in a unified way by leveraging the generative

power of such models. Specifically, our framework, GenProp, encodes the original video with a selective content
encoder and propagates the changes made to the first frame
using an image-to-video generation model. We propose a
data generation scheme to cover multiple video tasks based
on instance-level video segmentation datasets. Our model
is trained by incorporating a mask prediction decoder head

17712

