This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Simulator HC: Regression-based Online Simulation of Starting
Problem-Solution Pairs for Homotopy Continuation in Geometric Vision
Xinyue Zhang1
1

Zijia Dai1

Wanting Xu1

Laurent Kneip1

Mobile Perception Lab, ShanghaiTech University, China

Abstract
While automatically generated polynomial elimination
templates have sparked great progress in the field of 3D
computer vision, there remain many problems for which the
degree of the constraints or the number of unknowns leads
to intractability. In recent years, homotopy continuation has
been introduced as a plausible alternative. However, the
method currently depends on expensive parallel tracking of
all possible solutions in the complex domain, or a classification network for starting problem-solution pairs trained
over a limited set of real-world examples. Our innovation
lies in a novel approach to finding solution-problem pairs,
where we only need to predict a rough initial solution, with
the corresponding problem generated by an online simulator. Subsequently, homotopy continuation is applied to track
that single solution back to the original problem. We apply
this elegant combination to generalized camera resectioning, and also introduce a new solution to the challenging
generalized relative pose and scale problem. As demonstrated, the proposed method successfully compensates the
raw error committed by the regressor alone, and leads to
state-of-the-art efficiency and success rates.

1. Introduction
The solution of geometric camera calibration problems is a
crucial step in many Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [21, 52,
54, 55], Visual Odometry (VO) [46], and visual Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (SLAM) [43] frameworks.
Solvers developed over the years address camera resectioning [23, 29, 31, 65], two-view relative pose [30, 44, 58],
pose estimation from lines [15, 41], partially calibrated
cameras [64], generalized cameras [31, 41, 57, 60], rolling
shutter cameras [10, 51], and many other scenarios. The
problems often appear in the form of a polynomial equation
system, and special techniques from the field of algebraic
geometry have been used to solve them. Once an efficient
solver is found, it is typically embedded into a random sampling and consensus scheme [19, 48] in order to gain robust-

ness in the presence of outliers. Hence, there is a requirement for such solvers to be efficient and embeddable into
iterative schemes.
The dominant approaches to efficiently solve systems
of polynomial equations are given by the Gröbner basis
method and polynomial resultants [9, 59]. Based on the
Gröbner basis theory, Stewénius et al. [58] and Kukelova
et al. [33] demonstrate that the calculations required to
obtain a minimal set of ideal generators can be effectuated efficiently at the hand of a fixed elimination template.
Kukelova et al. [33] in particular propose a solver generator to automatically discover such elimination templates.
Later on, sparse resultant-based solvers [16] have been
demonstrated as a powerful alternative sometimes leading
to smaller elimination templates.
While polynomial elimination techniques have led to
significant progress in the solution of geometric vision
problems, the methods are limited as the complexity of
the template search grows uncontrollably with the degree
and dimensionality of the problem at hand. Furthermore,
owing to their failure to respect inequality constraints and
rule out practically infeasible solutions, high degrees or dimensionalities naturally lead to an elevated number of algebraically possible solutions and—assuming that it can be
found at all—large elimination templates [13, 14, 45, 63–
65]. This in turn causes problems in terms of numerical
stability [63]. In recent years, a different solution strategy
has therefore gained popularity: Homotopy Continuation
(HC) [4, 12, 61]. The method proceeds by starting from
a known problem-solution pair, and then tracks its roots to
the target problem at hand during a step-wise interpolation
of polynomial coefficients. The method has been used to
successfully solve challenging tri-focal relative pose problems [17]. While promising, HC remains expensive as it
generally requires the parallel continuation of many roots
in the complex domain in order to identify all real solutions
to a target problem, followed up by disambiguation.
Recently, Hruby et al. [25] propose an efficient, learningbased extension to the pure HC paradigm, which serves as

27103

