This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S4-Driver: Scalable Self-Supervised Driving Multimodal Large Language Model
with Spatio-Temporal Visual Representation
Yichen Xie1,†,∗ Runsheng Xu2,∗ Tong He2 Jyh-Jing Hwang2 Katie Luo3,†
Jingwei Ji2 Hubert Lin2 Letian Chen4,† Yiren Lu2 Zhaoqi Leng2
Dragomir Anguelov2 Mingxing Tan2
1
2
UC Berkeley, Waymo LLC, 3 Cornell University, 4 Georgia Institute of Technology

1.10

Abstract

MotionLM
Vanilla PaLI
MLLM
S4-Driver

bADE@5s

1.05

The latest advancements in multi-modal large language
models (MLLMs) have spurred a strong renewed interest
in end-to-end motion planning approaches for autonomous
driving. Many end-to-end approaches rely on human annotations to learn intermediate perception and prediction
tasks, while purely self-supervised approaches—which directly learn from sensor inputs to generate planning trajectories without human annotations—often underperform
the state of the art. We observe a key gap in the input representation space: end-to-end approaches built on
MLLMs are often pretrained with reasoning tasks in 2D
image space rather than the native 3D space in which autonomous vehicles plan. To this end, we propose S4-Driver,
a scalable self-supervised motion planning algorithm with
spatio-temporal visual representation, based on the popular PaLI [9] multimodal large language model. S4-Driver
uses a novel sparse volume strategy to seamlessly transform
the strong visual representation of MLLMs from perspective
view to 3D space without the need to finetune the vision encoder. This representation aggregates multi-view and multiframe visual inputs and enables better prediction of planning trajectories in 3D space. To validate our method, we
run experiments on both nuScenes and Waymo Open Motion Dataset (with in-house camera data). Results show
that S4-Driver performs favorably against existing supervised multi-task approaches while requiring no human annotations. It also demonstrates great scalability when pretrained on large volumes of unannotated driving logs.

1.00

Muti-Task CoT

0.95

Camera Images

Multi-task Results

0.90
0.85
0.80
w/o pretraining

half internal dataset

full internal dataset

(a) Pretraining data scaling-up of S4-Driver.

Camera Images

MLLM

MLLM

Muti-Task CoT

Pure Planning
Multi-task Results

(b) Multi-task learning framework.

Camera Images

Planning Results

(c) Self-supervised planning framework.

Figure 1. S4-Driver scaling up with abundant unlabeled driving logs (1a). Different from past efforts that improve MLLM
planning via multi-task learning and CoT reasoning (1b), S4Driver focuses on self-supervised motion planning (1c) without
human annotations.
While a vanilla PaLI approach with selfMLLM
supervised training achieves good performance, the full S4-Driver
Pure Planning
with
spatio-temporal
visual representation achieves the best perCamera Images
Planning Results
formance and scalability (1a).

directly predicts control signals or future waypoints based
on raw sensor inputs. Due to limited robustness, these early
attempts struggle in complex urban situations. Recent neural network capability advances have led to renewed interest
in this field [25, 28, 57], especially given the strong generalization ability of Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) [10, 42, 51].
However, vanilla application of MLLMs to end-to-end
motion planning can hardly exploit their strong visual understanding and reasoning capabilities given the significant
difference between motion planning and MLLM pretraining
tasks, resulting in inferior planning performance [53, 61].
To narrow this gap, as shown in Fig. 1b, previous methods
resort to either multi-task learning, which incorporates diverse perception and prediction tasks into training and inference, or supervised perception pretraining, which utilizes
the pretrained autonomous driving perception models as visual tokenizers. However, fine-grained human annotations

1. Introduction
The exploration of end-to-end autonomous driving dates
back to the 1980s [43], where the motion planning model
† Work done when they were interns at Waymo
∗ Equal contribution

1622

