This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Escaping Plato’s Cave: Towards the Alignment of 3D and Text Latent Spaces
Andrea Santilli2
Souhail Hadgi1
Luca Moschella2, *
Diego Gomez1
Qixing Huang4
Emanuele Rodolà2
3
Simone Melzi
Maks Ovsjanikov1
1
3

2

École polytechnique
4

University of Milano-Bicocca

Abstract
Recent works have shown that, when trained at scale, unimodal 2D vision and text encoders converge to learned features that share remarkable structural properties, despite
arising from different representations. However, the role of
3D encoders with respect to other modalities remains unexplored. Furthermore, existing 3D foundation models that
leverage large datasets are typically trained with explicit
alignment objectives with respect to frozen encoders from
other representations. In this work, we investigate the possibility of a posteriori alignment of representations obtained
from uni-modal 3D encoders compared to text-based feature
spaces. We show that naive post-training feature alignment
of uni-modal text and 3D encoders results in limited performance. We then focus on extracting subspaces of the corresponding feature spaces and discover that by projecting
learned representations onto well-chosen lower-dimensional
subspaces the quality of alignment becomes significantly
higher, leading to improved accuracy on matching and retrieval tasks. Our analysis further sheds light on the nature
of these shared subspaces, which roughly separate between
semantic and geometric data representations. Overall, ours
is the first work that helps to establish a baseline for posttraining alignment of 3D uni-modal and text feature spaces,
and helps to highlight both the shared and unique properties
of 3D data compared to other representations.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in multi-modal learning, particularly in
vision-language models such as CLIP [47], have sparked
interest in extending these successes to the 3D domain. Most
current approaches primarily focus on training 3D encoders
through triplet-based learning with pre-trained 2D vision and
language encoders [32, 64, 69], leveraging new large-scale
datasets such as Objaverse [9, 10], and showing promising
* Currently at Apple.

Sapienza University of Rome

The University of Texas at Austin

results in tasks such as zero-shot shape recognition.
While CLIP [47] was trained with explicit alignment
objectives between text and image representations, recent
work has observed that even when trained independently,
vision and text encoders tend to exhibit significant similarities [21, 37]. In particular, the learned latent spaces of pure
(uni-modal) text and vision encoders have similar proximity
structure [21] and can be aligned relatively easily after training with a small number of known anchor correspondences
[2, 37, 43]. Furthermore, the degree of similarity in learned
features across modalities strongly correlates with the quality
of performance in various downstream tasks. One prominent
interpretation of these results is that given sufficient scale of
training data and model complexity, different representations
are converging to a shared underlying structure of the physical world. This has given rise to the Platonic Representation
Hypothesis [21], where different representations are viewed
as projections of reality on particular modalities.
At the same time, as the physical world is inherently (at
least) 3-dimensional, a natural question is how the structure
of uni-modal vision or text encoders relates to the features
learned directly from 3D data. This question raises several
challenges: first, large-scale 3D datasets have only recently
become available [9, 10]; second, most existing 3D “foundation models” are trained with explicit alignment objectives
with respect to frozen 2D and text encoders, which limits the
utility of post-training comparison. Finally, there is a lack of
universally agreed-upon architectures and training objectives
for 3D data, and many commonly-used architectures tend to
have limited generalization power [62].
In this work, we initiate the first study on the relation
between 3D and language representations. We formulate the
task of post-training alignment between a range of 3D and
text encoders and study the accuracy and utility of several
alignment strategies.
Our first insight is that when trained on pure 3D data
with self-supervised objectives, 3D encoders tend to lead
to representations that align only very weakly to text-based
representations. We believe that this observation already

19825

