This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dissecting and Mitigating Diffusion Bias via Mechanistic Interpretability
Yingdong Shi1 * Changming Li1 * Yifan Wang2 Yongxiang Zhao1
Anqi Pang3 Sibei Yang1 Jingyi Yu1 Kan Ren1†
1

ShanghaiTech University

2

Stony Brook University

3

Tencent PCG

{shiyd2023,lichm2024,renkan}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract

biased content [34, 43], often resulting in skewed representations of sensitive social attributes such as gender, race,
and age. While biases may originate from the training
data [36, 47], they can be further amplified by the learned
model itself [47]. Given the extensive deployment of diffusion models, these biases may lead to detrimental effects
in real-world contexts, such as reinforcing stereotypes in
media representations or perpetuating inequalities in automated decision-making systems.
Existing approaches to debias diffusion models generally fall into two main strategies. The first attempts to train
unbiased models from scratch on biased datasets [30] or
fine-tune the target model [54], both of which are resourceintensive and can significantly impact the model’s original
performance. The second aims to guide or edit the generation process [17, 42, 43], but these methods undermine
the distinct internal workings of diffusion models, risking
overcorrecting the model behavior or distorting non-target
attributes, which affecting generation quality. In contrast,
few studies have explored the intrinsic mechanisms within
diffusion models that causally drive biased outcomes.
In this work, we hypothesize that neurons collectively
play a pivotal role in driving the generation of biased concepts. These neurons exhibit specific features which we
identify as intrinsic mechanisms within the model that contribute to social bias. In particular, we set out to investigate these mechanisms to better understand and mitigate
bias within diffusion models.
Our approach also aligns with the latest efforts on understanding the inner workings of neural networks, which
has drawn huge interest within the community [7, 44], not
only due to the interpretability benefits that reveal model
decision patterns [31, 59], but also for its potential to enhance control over model behaviors [4, 38]. However, the
intrinsic neuron activities within diffusion models remain
largely unexplored. A significant challenge stems from the
generative nature of diffusion models, which complicates, if
not completely prohibits, fine-grained analysis at the neuron
level. The neuron polysemanticity [4], which links individual neurons to multiple unrelated concepts additionally, fur-

Diffusion models have demonstrated impressive capabilities in synthesizing diverse content. However, despite
their high-quality outputs, these models often perpetuate
social biases, including those related to gender and race.
These biases can potentially contribute to harmful realworld consequences, reinforcing stereotypes and exacerbating inequalities in various social contexts. While existing research on diffusion bias mitigation has predominantly focused on guiding content generation, it often neglects the intrinsic mechanisms within diffusion models that
causally drive biased outputs. In this paper, we investigate the internal processes of diffusion models, identifying
specific decision-making mechanisms, termed bias features,
embedded within the model architecture. By directly manipulating these features, our method precisely isolates and
adjusts the elements responsible for bias generation, permitting granular control over the bias levels in the generated content. Through experiments on both unconditional
and conditional diffusion models across various social bias
attributes, we demonstrate our method’s efficacy in managing generation distribution while preserving image quality.
We also dissect the discovered model mechanism, revealing
different intrinsic features controlling fine-grained aspects
of generation, boosting further research on mechanistic interpretability of diffusion models. The project website is at
https://foundation-model-research.github.io/difflens.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have emerged as powerful generative
tools capable of generating high-quality content by iteratively denoising random noise [23, 55]. These models are
now widely credited in applications such as content synthesis [49], data manipulation [29], and data augmentation
[37], impacting numerous aspects of human society. However, diffusion models have been criticized for generating
* Equal contribution.

† Corresponding author.

8192

