This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Accuracy and Calibration via Differentiated Deep Mutual Learning
Han Liu1,2,† , Peng Cui1,† , Binging Wang2 , Weipeng Chen2 , Yupeng Zhang2 ,
Jun Zhu1,* , and Xiaolin Hu1,3,4,*
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute for AI,
BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Baichuan Inc.
3
Tsinghua Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence (THBI),
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
4
Chinese Institute for Brain Research (CIBR), Beijing 100010, China
{han-liu18, cuip22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{daniel, chenweipeng, zhangyupeng}@baichuan-inc.com
{dcszj, xlhu}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
success in a variety of tasks, particularly in terms of prediction accuracy. However, in real-world scenarios, especially
in safety-critical applications, accuracy alone is insufficient;
reliable uncertainty estimates are essential. Modern DNNs,
often trained with cross-entropy loss, tend to exhibit overconfidence, especially on ambiguous samples. Many techniques
aim to improve uncertainty calibration, yet they often come
at the cost of reduced accuracy or increased computational
demands. To address this challenge, we propose Differentiated Deep Mutual Learning (Diff-DML), an efficient ensemble approach that simultaneously enhances accuracy
and uncertainty calibration. Diff-DML draws inspiration
from Deep Mutual Learning (DML) while introducing two
strategies to maintain prediction diversity: (1) Differentiated Training Strategy (DTS) and (2) Diversity-Preserving
Learning Objective (DPLO). Our theoretical analysis shows
that Diff-DML’s diversified learning framework not only
leverages ensemble benefits but also avoids the loss of prediction diversity observed in traditional DML setups, which
is crucial for improved calibration. Extensive evaluations
on various benchmarks confirm the effectiveness of DiffDML. For instance, on the CIFAR-100 dataset, Diff-DML
on ResNet34/50 models achieved substantial improvements
over the previous state-of-the-art method, MDCA, with absolute accuracy gains of 1.3%/3.1%, relative ECE reductions

Figure 1. Scatter plot of ECE and accuracy for different calibration
methods based on the ResNet50 backbone on the CIFAR-100 test
set. Methods located closer to the top left corner perform better.

of 49.6%/43.8%, and relative classwise-ECE reductions of
7.7%/13.0%.

1. Introduction

This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2021ZD0200301) and the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. U2341228).
†Equal contribution. *Corresponding author.

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved great success
in various tasks, especially in terms of prediction accuracy.
In safety-critical areas such as medical diagnosis [4, 18],
self-driving cars [20], and protein engineering [6], accurate
uncertainty estimation (i.e., well-calibrated prediction) is
crucial for reliable model deployment. For instance, a reliable model needs to show high uncertainty when making
incorrect predictions. However, models trained with crossentropy (CE) loss tend to be overconfident, especially when

25812

