This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OffsetOPT: Explicit Surface Reconstruction without Normals
Huan Lei
AIML, University of Adelaide
huan.lei@adelaide.edu.au
https://github.com/EnyaHermite/OffsetOPT

Figure 1. We present OffsetOPT (Offset OPTimization) for explicit surface reconstruction from 3D point clouds, without the need for
point normals. The prediction model is trained on synthetic meshes with supervision and then generalized to unseen point clouds through
unsupervised optimization of per-point offsets. All surfaces in this figure are reconstructed using the same trained model with offset
optimization. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in overall surface quality, sharp detail preservation, and scalability.

Abstract
Neural surface reconstruction has been dominated by implicit representations with marching cubes for explicit surface extraction. However, those methods typically require
high-quality normals for accurate reconstruction. We propose OffsetOPT, a method that reconstructs explicit surfaces directly from 3D point clouds and eliminates the need
for point normals. The approach comprises two stages:
first, we train a neural network to predict surface triangles
based on local point geometry, given uniformly distributed
training point clouds. Next, we apply the frozen network
to reconstruct surfaces from unseen point clouds by optimizing a per-point offset to maximize the accuracy of triangle predictions. Compared to state-of-the-art methods, OffsetOPT not only excels at reconstructing overall surfaces
but also significantly preserves sharp surface features. We
demonstrate its accuracy on popular benchmarks, including
small-scale shapes and large-scale open surfaces.

linear system. The success of Poisson surface reconstruction [22] in industry has resulted in the predominant exploration of implicit neural representations in geometric deep
learning [20, 30, 33, 42]. These methods generally require
high-quality, oriented normals to predict a scalar field as the
implicit surface representation. Explicit surfaces are then
extracted using Marching Cubes [27] or its variants [21, 40].
However, Marching Cubes becomes incompatible with
the unsigned distance fields (UDFs) [13] in open-surface
reconstruction because it relies on sign changes across the
surface for mesh extraction. Researchers have explored various methods [18, 20, 43] to incorporate signs into UDFs
such that Marching Cubes can still be applied. In contrast
to the widespread interest in implicit neural representations,
neural computational methods for explicit surface reconstruction have been largely overlooked [25, 26, 39, 41], despite their bypass of implicit representations, no reliance on
point normals, and good generalization to diverse surfaces.
The key limitations restricting their applications are: (i) a
strong bias toward input points distributed like those from
Poisson disk sampling [49], which is impractical, (ii) insufficient or inconvenient handling of edge-manifoldness in
reconstructed surfaces.
With this work, we contribute a novel neural computational method, OffsetOPT, for explicit surface reconstruction directly from 3D point clouds. The method does not
rely on normals but reconstructs surfaces of both shapes
and open scenes with high accuracy. More importantly, it
demonstrates remarkable performance in producing edge-

1. Introduction
Surface reconstruction from 3D point clouds is essential in
applications across computer vision, graphics, and robotics.
Traditional solutions to this problem include computational
methods such as ball-pivoting [3] and Delaunay triangulation [12], along with the classic Poisson method [22, 23],
which estimates an implicit indicator function by solving a

11729

