This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GLASS: Guided Latent Slot Diffusion for Object-Centric Learning
Krishnakant Singh1
Simone Schaub-Meyer1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt

Stefan Roth 1,2
2
hessian.AI

Abstract
Object-centric learning aims to decompose an input image into a set of meaningful object files (slots). These latent object representations enable a variety of downstream
tasks. Yet, object-centric learning struggles on real-world
datasets, which contain multiple objects of complex textures
and shapes in natural everyday scenes. To address this, we
introduce Guided Latent Slot Diffusion (GLASS), a novel
slot-attention model that learns in the space of generated
images and uses semantic and instance guidance modules to
learn better slot embeddings for various downstream tasks.
Our experiments show that GLASS surpasses state-of-theart slot-attention methods by a wide margin on tasks such
as (zero-shot) object discovery and conditional image generation for real-world scenes. Moreover, GLASS enables
the first application of slot attention to the compositional
generation of complex, realistic scenes.*

1. Introduction
Humans perceive a scene as a collection of objects [35].
Such a decomposition of the scene into objects makes humans capable of higher cognitive tasks like control, reasoning, and the ability to generalize to unseen experiences [25].
Building on these ideas, object-centric learning (OCL) aims
to decompose a scene into compositional and modular symbolic components. OCL methods bind these components
to latent (neural) representations, enabling such models to
be applied to tasks like causal inference [61], reasoning [3],
control [5], and out-of-distribution generalization [15].
Slot-attention models [45], a popular class of OCL methods, decompose an image into a set of latent representations
where each element, called slot, competes to represent a
certain part of the image. Slot-attention methods can be categorized as form of representation learning, where the representation (slots) facilitates various downstream tasks such as
property prediction [15], image reconstruction [32], image
editing [73], and object discovery [62]. However, numerous
promising slot-attention methods [45, 64, 65] have remained
limited to synthetic and simple datasets [16, 26, 33, 37].

Figure 1. (top) High-level architecture of GLASS. GLASS employs semantic and instance guidance modules to generate a semantic guidance signal using the decoder network and an instance
guidance signal using the encoder features. This helps our method
to learn superior slot embeddings for various downstream tasks
compared to existing slot-attention methods. (bottom) GLASS can
perform multiple tasks using the learned slot embeddings, such as
object discovery, compositional generation, conditional generation
(reconstruction), and instance-level property prediction.

* Project page and code: https://visinf.github.io/glass/

Some recent methods [32, 36, 62, 73] use powerful, modern
encoder [8, 51] and decoder networks [56] to scale to complex real-world imagery [21, 44]. Yet, these models remain
restricted to object discovery, lacking the versatility to reconstruct or perform compositional generation of realistic
images. Moreover, the quality of the obtained slot representations remains limited as witnessed by both qualitative and
quantitative results, which show the slots to suffer from the
issue of over-segmentation (segmenting an object into multiple slots), under-segmentation (segmenting multiple objects
into one slot), or imprecise object boundaries. This over- and
under-segmentation issue is also known as the part-whole
hierarchy ambiguity [29–31].
To overcome the above issues, we propose Guided Latent
Slot Diffusion (GLASS), a weakly-supervised slot attentionbased model that uses a pre-trained diffusion decoder for
reconstructing the input image and an MLP decoder for re-

28673

