This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Forensic Self-Descriptions Are All You Need for Zero-Shot Detection, Open-Set
Source Attribution, and Clustering of AI-generated Images
Tai D. Nguyen, Aref Azizpour, Matthew C. Stamm
Drexel University
Philadelphia, PA, USA
tdn47,aa4639,mcs382@drexel.edu

Figure 1. We extract the self-description of the forensic microstructures in each image and use them to accurately perform a variety of
challenging tasks, including: zero-shot detection, open-set source attribution, and unsupervised clustering of image sources.

Abstract

new generative models emerge at a rapid pace, there is an
urgent need for detection methods that can reliably identify
images from novel sources without prior exposure [40, 55].
Conventional approaches to synthetic image detection
and source attribution typically rely on learning embeddings that are discriminative between real and synthetic images, or between real and a number of specific synthetic
sources [14, 29, 46, 65, 70]. While these methods are effective for sources similar to those in training, they often
fail to adapt to new generative models [19, 54]. This occurs
because their objective functions tend to make them learn
features that are only useful to discriminate between known
sources in the training data. Consequently, these methods
often overlook features that would be critical for identifying images from new, unseen generators.
To address this problem, we propose an alternative approach (as illustrated in Fig. 1 and detailed in Fig. 3) that is
both more effective and general for detecting synthetic images and attributing them to their source. Instead of learning
a discriminative embedding space, we focus on explicitly
modeling the forensic microstructures embedded in images.
It is well-established that both cameras and synthetic image generators imprint unique forensic traces in the form of
statistical microstructures—subtle, pixel-level relationships
that can serve as identifying features [45, 47, 73, 74]. To
isolate these microstructures from the image content, relying on only real images, we employ a self-supervised process that learns a set of diverse predictive filters to approximate the scene content. By applying these filters, we obtain multiple distinct residuals, each captures a different as-

The emergence of advanced AI-based tools to generate
realistic images poses significant challenges for forensic detection and source attribution, especially as new generative techniques appear rapidly. Traditional methods often
fail to generalize to unseen generators due to reliance on
features specific to known sources during training. To address this problem, we propose a novel approach that explicitly models forensic microstructures—subtle, pixel-level
patterns unique to the image creation process. Using only
real images in a self-supervised manner, we learn a set of diverse predictive filters to extract residuals that capture different aspects of these microstructures. By jointly modeling
these residuals across multiple scales, we obtain a compact model whose parameters constitute a unique forensic self-description for each image. This self-description
enables us to perform zero-shot detection of synthetic images, open-set source attribution of images, and clustering
based on source without prior knowledge. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves superior accuracy and adaptability compared to competing techniques,
advancing the state of the art in synthetic media forensics.

1. Introduction
The rapid improvement in AI-generated image quality has
made synthetic images increasingly difficult to distinguish
from real ones [26, 68]. While traditional detection methods
can be trained to identify these images, they struggle to generalize to content produced by new or unseen generators. As

3040

