This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PIDSR: Complementary Polarized Image Demosaicing and Super-Resolution
Shuangfan Zhou1# Chu Zhou2# Youwei Lyu1 Heng Guo1* Zhanyu Ma1 Boxin Shi3,4 Imari Sato2
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2

National Institute of Informatics

3

State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University

4

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University

{zhoushuangfan, youweilv, guoheng, mazhanyu}@bupt.edu.cn
shiboxin@pku.edu.cn

HR DoP & AoP
Calculate

DoP & AoP
Calculate

Concept of PID&PISR

Abstract
Polarization cameras can capture multiple polarized images with different polarizer angles in a single shot, bringing convenience to polarization-based downstream tasks.
However, their direct outputs are color-polarization filter
array (CPFA) raw images, requiring demosaicing to reconstruct full-resolution, full-color polarized images; unfortunately, this necessary step introduces artifacts that make
polarization-related parameters such as the degree of polarization (DoP) and angle of polarization (AoP) prone to
error. Besides, limited by the hardware design, the resolution of a polarization camera is often much lower than that
of a conventional RGB camera. Existing polarized image
demosaicing (PID) methods are limited in that they cannot
enhance resolution, while polarized image super-resolution
(PISR) methods, though designed to obtain high-resolution
(HR) polarized images from the demosaicing results, tend to
retain or even amplify errors in the DoP and AoP introduced
by demosaicing artifacts. In this paper, we propose PIDSR,
a joint framework that performs complementary Polarized
Image Demosaicing and Super-Resolution, showing the ability to robustly obtain high-quality HR polarized images with
more accurate DoP and AoP from a CPFA raw image in
a direct manner. Experiments show our PIDSR not only
achieves state-of-the-art performance on both synthetic and
real data, but also facilitates downstream tasks.

zhou_chu@hotmail.com

imarik@nii.ac.jp

Direct output of the
polarization camera
𝐑𝐑

𝐈𝐈𝛼𝛼1

𝐈𝐈𝛼𝛼2

PID

CPFA raw image
1 × ℎ × 𝑤𝑤

𝐈𝐈𝛼𝛼3

Red Green Blue

0° 45° 90° 135°

Baseline: PIDPISR

𝐈𝐈𝛼𝛼4

PISR
𝑘𝑘 × SR

𝐈𝐈𝛼𝛼HR
1

𝐈𝐈𝛼𝛼HR
2

𝐈𝐈𝛼𝛼HR
3

𝐈𝐈𝛼𝛼HR
4

Four HR polarized images
3 × 𝑘𝑘𝑘 × 𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘

Four full-color polarized images
3 × ℎ × 𝑤𝑤
AoP

HR AoP

Input CPFA raw image

𝒟𝒟

↑

𝐈𝐈𝛼𝛼1,2,3,4

Demosaicing results and the
AoP produced by TCPDNet

Ours: PIDSR

𝑘𝑘 × SR

𝐈𝐈𝛼𝛼HR
1,2,3,4

HR polarized images and the
AoP produced by PSRNet

AoP

HR AoP

Ground truth HR AoP

𝒟𝒟 ↑

𝐈𝐈𝛼𝛼1,2,3,4

Demosaicing results and the
AoP produced by our PIDSR

complem
entary
𝐈𝐈𝛼𝛼HR
1,2,3,4

HR polarized images and the
AoP produced by our PIDSR

Figure 1. Top: The concept of polarized image demosaicing (PID)
and polarized image super-resolution (PISR). Mid: An example
shows that the baseline (PID→PISR) works in a sequential manner,
where the AoPs calculated from the demosaicing results (produced
by TCPDNet [23]) and the HR polarized images (produced by
PSRNet [8]) suffer from severe artifacts. Bottom: An example
shows that our PIDSR works in a complementary manner, where
the calculated AoPs are more accurate. We choose k = 4 here.

1. Introduction
relevant parameters such as the degree of polarization (DoP)
and angle of polarization (AoP), polarization-based methods often achieve higher performance compared with the
image-based ones, showing promising potentials. To acquire
the DoP and AoP, at least three polarized images with different polarizer angles are required. While a polarizer can
be used for this purpose, it demands multiple shots, making

Polarization-based vision has benefited various applications,
such as shape from polarization [1, 2], reflection removal
[19], image dehazing [41], HDR imaging [42], etc. By
fully utilizing the physical clues encoded in the polarization# Equal contribution. * Corresponding author.
Code: https://github.com/PRIS-CV/PIDSR

16081

