This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Augmented Deep Contexts for Spatially Embedded Video Coding
Yifan Bian

Chuanbo Tang

Li Li

Dong Liu

MOE Key Laboratory of Brain-Inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China
togelbian@gmail.com, cbtang@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {lil1,dongeliu}@ustc.edu.cn

Pervious NVCs

Abstract
M

Most Neural Video Codecs (NVCs) only employ temporal references to generate temporal-only contexts and latent prior. These temporal-only NVCs fail to handle large
motions or emerging objects due to limited contexts and
misaligned latent prior. To relieve the limitations, we propose a Spatially Embedded Video Codec (SEVC), in which
the low-resolution video is compressed for spatial references. Firstly, our SEVC leverages both spatial and temporal references to generate augmented motion vectors and
hybrid spatial-temporal contexts. Secondly, to address the
misalignment issue in latent prior and enrich the prior information, we introduce a spatial-guided latent prior augmented by multiple temporal latent representations. At last,
we design a joint spatial-temporal optimization to learn
quality-adaptive bit allocation for spatial references, further boosting rate-distortion performance. Experimental
results show that our SEVC effectively alleviates the limitations in handling large motions or emerging objects, and
also reduces 11.9% more bitrate than the previous state-ofthe-art NVC while providing an additional low-resolution
bitstream. Our code and model are available at https:
//github.com/EsakaK/SEVC.

𝑣𝑣𝑡𝑡

𝑥𝑥𝑡𝑡

Temporal
References

Temporal
Reference Flow

Temporal
References

F

Temporal-only

Spatial
Reference Flow

F

Frame Coding

M

Motion Coding

F

Augmentation
Spatial
References

Spatially
Embedded

M
𝑣𝑣𝑡𝑡𝑏𝑏

Base Temporal
References

F

Our NVC

𝑥𝑥𝑡𝑡𝑏𝑏

𝑥𝑥𝑡𝑡

Temporal-only

Figure 1. Compared with previous Neural Video Codecs (NVCs),
our proposed codec embeds a base temporal-only codec to compress the low-resolution motion vtb and frame xbt and provide additional spatial references. Spatial and temporal references then
augment deep contexts for frame coding.

developments in neural video codecs (NVCs) [20, 28, 29,
50, 51, 56] have also concentrated on improving the utilization efficiency of temporal references.
However, for most recent NVCs, employing only temporal references fails to handle large motions or emerging
objects. One reason is that the motion models in existing
NVCs are not strong enough to accurately estimate motion
vectors (MVs) [41], and inevitable motion coding errors exacerbate this inaccuracy. Inaccurate MVs disrupt the context mining, resulting in poor temporal contexts. Another
reason is that these temporal-only contexts rely on limited
temporal references, such as a single previously decoded
feature and the misaligned latent prior [27], challenging to
describe emerging objects. Therefore, mitigating the MV
errors and generating richer contexts still represent the limitations encountered by NVCs.
Deviating from previous temporal-only NVCs, we draw
inspiration from Video Super-Resolution (VSR) [10, 11, 23,

1. Introduction
The fundamental problem in video coding lies in determining rich references and effectively utilizing them to obtain an accurate prediction. The richer the references, the
better the prediction, and the more bitrate saved.
Over the years, advancements in traditional video
codecs [9, 18, 46, 54, 60] have heavily relied on more efficient utilization of temporal references. For example, more
complex motion models [31, 33, 59, 61], are proposed to
improve the quality of prediction. Inspired by them, recent
This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grants 62036005 and 62021001. We acknowledge the support of
GPU cluster built by MCC Lab of Information Science and Technology
Institution, USTC. (Corresponding author: Dong Liu.)

2094

