This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MVPortrait: Text-Guided Motion and Emotion Control for
Multi-view Vivid Portrait Animation
Yukang Lin1, ,* Hokit Fung2, ,* Jianjin Xu3 , Zeping Ren1 , Adela S.M. Lau2 , Guosheng Yin2†, Xiu Li1†
1
Tsinghua University, 2 The University of Hong Kong, 3 Carnegie Mellon University
{linyk23,rzp22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, fung0311@connect.hku.hk, jianjinx@andrew.cmu.edu,
{adelalau, gyin}@hku.hk, li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Signal

演

Recent portrait animation methods have made signiﬁcant
strides in generating realistic lip synchronization. However, they often lack explicit control over head movements
and facial expressions, and cannot produce videos from
multiple viewpoints, resulting in less controllable and expressive animations. Moreover, text-guided portrait animation remains underexplored, despite its user-friendly nature. We present a novel two-stage text-guided framework,
MVPortrait (Multi-view Vivid Portrait), to generate expressive multi-view portrait animations that faithfully capture
the described motion and emotion. MVPortrait is the ﬁrst to
introduce FLAME as an intermediate representation, effectively embedding facial movements, expressions, and view
transformations within its parameter space. In the ﬁrst
stage, we separately train the FLAME motion and emotion diffusion models based on text input. In the second
stage, we train a multi-view video generation model conditioned on a reference portrait image and multi-view FLAME
rendering sequences from the ﬁrst stage. Experimental results exhibit that MVPortrait outperforms existing methods
in terms of motion and emotion control, as well as view consistency. Furthermore, by leveraging FLAME as a bridge,
MVPortrait becomes the ﬁrst controllable portrait animation framework that is compatible with text, speech, and
video as driving signals.

1. Introduction
With the advent of high-quality datasets [26, 40] and advanced methods [22, 24, 27, 28, 54, 56], digital human animation has achieved promising results. Among animations,
portrait animation intends to generate lively video from a
reference image. With different guidance such as audio,
textual instructions, and exemplar gestures, the static por* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

speech/music

演

“The young woman
is talking and
wagging her head.
She is very happy.”

Multi-view FLAMEs

Multi-view animations

view 1

view 1

Audio2FLAME

OR

•••

•••

FLAME2Video

Text2FLAME

text

source portrait

OR

演

view i

view i

•••

•••

view m

view m

FLAME
Estimation

driver video

Figure 1. The uniﬁed pipeline of multi-view portrait animation.
Users can obtain FLAME sequences via audio-driven methods like
Talkshow [57] or FLAME estimation methods like DECA [13]
from driver video. This paper focuses on text-driven animation.

trait is endowed with speaking and moving capabilities.
There are three primary approaches to accomplish portrait animation: (1) Emotion control especially lip synchronization [47, 52, 53], (2) Motion control [33, 50], and (3)
3D-aware face reconstruction [3, 12]. The ﬁrst approach
focuses on aligning lip movements with audio input. The
common way is to extract the audio features and inject
the features into the generative network, often via a crossattention layer in UNet [39]. Compared to full facial performance, lip synchronization is a restrictive subset and lacks
the generalization of portrait expression learning. The second approach relies on pose images, i.e. the expressionaware landmarks, to direct the animation, producing lifelike facial expressions and diverse postures. However, relying on landmarks alone may not capture all facial details,
potentially limiting visual ﬁdelity. The third approach generates animations by creating sequential 3D representations
like Triplane [41] and obtains multi-view renderings. However, Triplane can introduce inconsistent artifacts, such as
the “multi-face” issue in side views [1], which may degrade performance in multi-view animations. It is worth
noting that text-guided portrait animation, as the most userfriendly and ﬂexible scheme, has not been fully explored.
To address the problems of restrictive facial expression, lack of detailed guidance, and poor multi-view perfor-

26242

