This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing is Not Believing: Adversarial Natural Object Optimization for
Hard-Label 3D Scene Attacks
Daizong Liu and Wei Hu *
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
dzliu@stu.pku.edu.cn, forhuwei@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning models for 3D data have shown to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks, which have received increasing
attention in various safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving and robotic navigation. Existing 3D attackers mainly put effort into attacking the simple 3D classification model by perturbing point cloud objects in the
white/black-box setting. However, real-world 3D applications focus on tackling more complicated scene-based data
while sharing no information about the model parameters
and logits with users. Therefore, directly applying previous naive 3D attack methods to these applications does not
work. To this end, this paper attempts to address the challenging hard-label 3D scene attack with access only to the
input/output of the 3D models. To make the attack effective
and stealthy, we propose to generate universal adversarial objects, which will mislead scene-aware 3D models to
predict attacker-chosen labels whenever these objects are
placed on any scene input. Specifically, we inject an imperceptible object trigger with further perturbations into all
scenes and learn to mislead their reasoning by only querying the 3D model. We start by initializing the trigger pattern with a realistic object and searching for an appropriate location to place it naturally in the scene data. Then,
we design a novel weighted gradient estimation strategy
to perturb the object trigger with additive slight noise to
make them adversarial in an iterative optimization procedure. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our attack
can achieve superior performance on seven 3D models and
three scene-based datasets, with satisfactory adversarial
imperceptibility and strong resistance to defense methods.

rect prediction results. Significant progress has been made
in adversarial attacks on 2D images, where many methods
[13, 38, 63, 78] learn to add imperceptible pixel-wise noise.
Nevertheless, adversarial attacks on 3D depth or point cloud
data are still relatively under-explored. Different from images, point clouds are discrete representations of 3D objects
or scenes [28], receiving increasing attention in various 3D
applications such as autonomous driving [10]. Similarly to
their 2D counterparts [16–21, 45–48, 71, 73, 82, 93, 96, 98],
deep learning models trained for point clouds are often vulnerable to adversarial perturbations, increasing the risk in
safety-critical 3D applications.
Existing 3D point cloud attack methods [4, 14, 22, 29,
37, 39, 41, 43, 44, 49, 53, 58, 67, 69, 70, 72, 77, 83, 87, 91,
94, 95, 97] are mainly deployed on the simple 3D classification models. As shown in Figure 1 (a), they generally perturb point cloud objects to generate corresponding adversarial samples for misclassification under the white/black-box
setting. Although they achieve high attack success rates,
they are impractical to be deployed in more realistic yet
challenging 3D tasks as: (1) Real-world 3D applications
mainly focus on tackling more complicated 3D scene cases,
which contain hundreds of individual objects with distinct
spatial relationships. However, existing 3D attackers solely
perturb a single object to fool the classifier without considering any geometry-aware spatial relationship. Directly perturbing the whole 3D scene following them would destroy
the spatial relations across different objects and the topological structures of the entire scene. (2) Existing 3D attacks
are realized with access to the model’s gradient or its output confidence. However, practical 3D applications share
no knowledge of weight parameters, hyper-parameters, the
training procedure, the original training data, etc., to users.
Their only feedback is the predicted result of a given input.
Therefore, how to craft/optimize perturbations in 3D scenes
that enable the wrong prediction by only querying the 3D
models would be a severe security problem.
To alleviate the above issues, we attempt to tackle the
hard-label 3D scene attack, where the attackers can only
query the model and obtain the predicted label for each

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown to be vulnerable to adversarial examples [25, 54, 68], which add visually indistinguishable perturbations to network inputs but lead to incor* Corresponding author: Wei Hu.

11886

