This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ICT: Image-Object Cross-Level Trusted Intervention for Mitigating Object
Hallucination in Large Vision-Language Models
Junzhe Chen1,2∗ , Tianshu Zhang1∗ , Shiyu Huang3 , Yuwei Niu4 ,
Linfeng Zhang5 , Lijie Wen1† , Xuming Hu2†
1
Tsinghua University, 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou),
3
Zhipu AI, 4 Chongqing University, 5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
chenjz24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
wenlj@tsinghua.edu.cn, xuminghu97@gmail.com,

Abstract

Contrastive Decoding
Methods (e.g. VCD)

Forward Pass
What does the man
in the picture do
for a living?

Despite the recent breakthroughs achieved by Large Vision
Language Models (LVLMs) in understanding and responding to complex visual-textual contexts, their inherent hallucination tendencies limit their practical application in realworld scenarios that demand high levels of precision. Existing methods typically either fine-tune the LVLMs using
additional data, which incurs extra costs in manual annotation and computational resources or perform comparisons
at the decoding stage, which may eliminate useful language
priors for reasoning while introducing inference time overhead. Therefore, we propose ICT, a lightweight, trainingfree method that calculates an intervention direction to shift
the model’s focus towards different levels of visual information, enhancing its attention to high-level and fine-grained
visual details. During the forward pass stage, the intervention is applied to the attention heads that encode the
overall image information and the fine-grained object details, effectively mitigating the phenomenon of overly language priors, and thereby alleviating hallucinations. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ICT achieves strong
performance with a small amount of data and generalizes
well across different datasets and models. Our codes are
publicly available at:https://github.com/THU-BPM/ICT/.

Decoding

basketball golf soccer

basketball golf soccer

Contrast

basketball golf soccer

Eliminate useful
language priors

Ours

Forward Pass

Image-Level

Intervention

Object-Level
Intervention

What does the man
in the picture do
for a living?

High inference
latency

Decoding

basketball golf soccer

Attention

The man is
holding a golf
club, so he is
a golfer.

The picture shows
Curry playing
golf. Curry is a
basketball player.
Pay more attention
to visual information
No additional
inference latency

Figure 1. Comparison between Contrastive Decoding (top) and
our proposed ICT (bottom). In the top example, Contrastive Decoding indiscriminately removes both beneficial and detrimental
language priors, leading to hallucinations. In contrast, our approach enhances the model’s attention to visual details while preserving useful language priors, allowing it to correctly identify and
describe objects in the image.

describing the attributes of those objects [55, 73]. This
issue is commonly referred to as the object hallucination
phenomenon [55], which significantly limits the applicability of LVLMs in high-stakes scenarios that demand precise accuracy, such as autonomous driving [95] and medical
surgery [35, 83]. Previous research suggested that the primary reasons for hallucinations in LVLMs are as follows: 1)
Large language models (LLMs), such as Vicuna [12], possess significantly stronger parameters and capabilities compared to visual encoders, such as CLIP [68]. This results
in an excessively strong language prior, causing the model
to overly rely on language cues while neglecting visual input [24, 25, 40, 43, 55]. 2) Current visual decoders often
struggle to accurately capture fine-grained visual semantics,
resulting in errors in detailed object attributes in an image,
such as color and quantity [4, 9, 13, 55].
Based on the two issues outlined above, previous ef-

1. Introduction
The recent rapid advancements in Large Vision Language
Models (LVLMs) have demonstrated significant potential to
tackle complex real-world tasks [5, 27, 29, 52, 56]. However, LVLMs frequently generate text outputs that are inconsistent with the visual input, such as incorrectly determining the presence of objects in an image or inaccurately
∗ Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

4209

