This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VolFormer: Explore More Comprehensive Cube Interaction for Hyperspectral
Image Restoration and Beyond
Dabing Yu
OVOPARK
Suzhou, China
Hohai University
Changzhou, China

Zheng Gao
Hohai University
Changzhou, China
221620010015@hhu.edu.cn

yudadabing@hhu.edu.cn

Abstract

Capitalizing on the talent of self-attention in capturing
non-local features, Transformer architectures have exhibited remarkable performance in single hyperspectral image restoration. For hyperspectral images, each pixel
is located in the hyperspectral image cubes with a large
spectral dimension and two spatial dimensions. Although
uni-dimensional self-attention, like channel self-attention
or spatial self-attention, builds long-range dependencies
in spectral or spatial dimensions, they lack more comprehensive interactions across dimensions. To tackle the
above drawback, we propose a VolFormer, a volumetric
self-attention embedded Transformer network for single hyperspectral image restoration. Speciﬁcally, we propose volumetric self-attention (VolSA), which extends the interaction from 2D ﬂat to 3D cube. VolSA can simultaneously
model token interaction in the 3D cube, mining the potential correlations between the hyperspectral image cube.
An attention decomposition form is proposed to reduce
the computational burden of modeling volumetric information. In practical terms, VolSA adapts double similarity matrixes in spatial and channel dimensions to implicitly model 3D context information while transforming the
complexity from cubic to quadratic. Additionally, we introduce the explicit spectral location prior to enhance the
proposed self-attention. This property allows the target token to perceive global spectral information while simultaneously assigning different levels of attention to tokens at
varying wavelength bands. Extensive experiments demonstrate that VolFormer achieves record-high performance on
hyperspectral image super-resolution, denoise and classiﬁcation benchmarks. The source code is available at
https://github.com/yudadabing/VolFormer.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral image (HSI) is referred to as an image cube,
which has a large spectral dimension besides spatial dimension. Large spectral dimension provide ample and detailed
spectral information to identify and distinguish objects.
Therefore, hyperspectral images have been widely used in
various tasks. [33, 37]. Due to the physical limitations of
imaging sensors and long imaging time, the captured hyperspectral images maintain low resolution and introduce
noise. Thus, hyperspectral image restoration is mainly categorized into hyperspectral image super-resolution and hyperspectral image denoise, which aims to restore a highquality image from the degraded observation.
Deep learning methods based on data-driven have explicit performance over conventional prior-based methods
in most computer vision tasks. Thus, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been used in HSI restoration
tasks and demonstrate the powerful spatial-spectral feature extraction ability. However, the local feature learning characteristic of prevailing CNN methods shows limitations in modeling non-local correlation. Extracting nonlocal features is equally signiﬁcant in high-dimensional data
of hyperspectral images. Vision Transformer utilizes selfattention to capture long-range dependencies and provide
powerful local and non-local feature representations. Recent work [56, 62] makes an effort to tailor the vision Transformer for hyperspectral image restoration tasks. These
Transformers exploit the self-attention mechanisms (i.e.,
channel self-attention and spatial self-attention) to extract
the non-local features in spatial and spectral dimensions and
signiﬁcantly improve visual quality and quantitative metrics. However, in channel self-attention (CSA) or spatial
self-attention (SSA), the three-dimensional (3D) context information is mapped to a two-dimensional (2D) similarity matrix, where space or channel compression. Different
from traditional visible images with R-G-B channels, hy-

28091

