This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Consensus Prompting for Co-Salient Object Detection
Jie Wang1 , Nana Yu1 , Zihao Zhang1 , Yahong Han1 *
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
wangjiexy@tju.edu.cn, yunana@tju.edu.cn, zhangzihao2490@tju.edu.cn, yahong@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing co-salient object detection (CoSOD) methods generally employ a three-stage architecture (i.e., encoding,
consensus extraction & dispersion, and prediction) along
with a typical full fine-tuning paradigm. Although they yield
certain benefits, they exhibit two notable limitations: 1) This
architecture relies on encoded features to facilitate consensus extraction, but the meticulously extracted consensus
does not provide timely guidance to the encoding stage. 2)
This paradigm involves globally updating all parameters of
the model, which is parameter-inefficient and hinders the
effective representation of knowledge within the foundation
model for this task. Therefore, in this paper, we propose
an interaction-effective and parameter-efficient concise architecture for the CoSOD task, addressing two key limitations. It introduces, for the first time, a parameter-efficient
prompt tuning paradigm and seamlessly embeds consensus
into the prompts to formulate task-specific Visual Consensus Prompts (VCP). Our VCP aims to induce the frozen
foundation model to perform better on CoSOD tasks by formulating task-specific visual consensus prompts with minimized tunable parameters. Concretely, the primary insight of the purposeful Consensus Prompt Generator (CPG)
is to enforce limited tunable parameters to focus on cosalient representations and generate consensus prompts.
The formulated Consensus Prompt Disperser (CPD) leverages consensus prompts to form task-specific visual consensus prompts, thereby arousing the powerful potential of pretrained models in addressing CoSOD tasks. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our concise VCP outperforms
13 cutting-edge full fine-tuning models, achieving the new
state of the art (with 6.8% improvement in Fm metrics on
the most challenging CoCA dataset). Source code has been
available at https://github.com/WJ-CV/VCP.

Figure 1. Existing relevant methods VS. our VCP. (a) Existing
CoSOD methods based on typical architectural patterns and full
fine-tuning paradigms. (b) Introducing simple tunable parameters as visual prompts to address foreground segmentation tasks
in single-scene images. (c) Our proposed VCP and some visualization results. The frozen foundation model is mined to generate
task-specific visual consensus prompts (with minimized tunable
parameters), thereby inducing it to effectively perform CoSOD.

CoSOD methods have demonstrated their effectiveness as a
key pre-processing step for various computer vision tasks,
such as co-segmentation [39], co-localization [9], and object tracking [34]. Additionally, with the effectiveness of
CoSOD methods continue to improve, they are increasingly
being utilized in numerous practical applications [8, 30, 37].
Numerous impressive CoSOD methods have been proposed and continually advancing the performance of this
task. As illustrated in Fig.1 (a), most of these methods
[33, 35, 40, 42, 44, 46] employ a common three-stage architecture: first, encoding multi-scale features using a foundation model pretrained on large-scale datasets; next, designing unique consensus mining schemes to focus on and
mine co-salient object representations within the group of
relevant images to complete consensus extraction and further disperse the consensus into multi-scale features; finally,
obtaining co-saliency predictions using a prediction head.
In this architecture, the effectiveness of encoded features
greatly facilitates the extraction and dispersion of consensus, but the meticulously extracted consensus struggles to

1. Introduction
Co-Salient Object Detection (CoSOD) is a group-based image understanding task aimed at detecting salient objects
that commonly appear among a group of relevant images.
* Corresponding author.

9591

