This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Classifier-Free Guidance inside the Attraction Basin May Cause Memorization
Anubhav Jain1 ,* Yuya Kobayashi2 , Takashi Shibuya2 , Yuhta Takida2 ,
Nasir Memon1 , Julian Togelius1 , Yuki Mitsufuji2,3
1
New York University, 2 Sony AI, 3 Sony Group Corporation
{aj3281,memon,julian.togelius}@nyu.edu
{u.kobayashi,takashi.tak.shibuya,yuta.takida,yuhki.mitsufuji}@sony.com
Abstract

Memorized

Conditional

Attraction Basin (shaded region)

Diffusion models are prone to exactly reproduce images
from the training data. This exact reproduction of the
training data is concerning as it can lead to copyright
infringement and/or leakage of privacy-sensitive information. In this paper, we present a novel perspective
on the memorization phenomenon and propose a simple
yet effective approach to mitigate it. We argue that
memorization occurs because of an attraction basin in
the denoising process which steers the diffusion trajectory
towards a memorized image. However, this can be mitigated
by guiding the diffusion trajectory away from the attraction
basin by not applying classifier-free guidance until an ideal
transition point occurs from which classifier-free guidance
is applied. This leads to the generation of non-memorized
images that are high in image quality and well-aligned with
the conditioning mechanism. To further improve on this,
we present a new guidance technique, opposite guidance,
that escapes the attraction basin sooner in the denoising
process. We demonstrate the existence of attraction basins
in various scenarios in which memorization occurs, and
we show that our proposed approach successfully mitigates memorization. Our codebase is publicly available at
https://github.com/SonyResearch/mitigating_memorization.

Guidance after &∗
Unconditional

Transition
Point

Non-memorized

Original
!=#

$!

$∗

!=0

Figure 1. The diffusion trajectory contains an attraction basin (red
region) which steers conditioned samples towards their memorized
images. It can be avoided by applying zero classifier-free guidance
when the trajectory is inside the attraction basin, such that there
is an ideal transition point ω → after which applying CFG leads to
non-memorized output. Applying CFG at an earlier point such as
ω1 inside the attraction basin leads to the same memorized sample.

1. Introduction

age of privacy sensitive information. Alternatively, the
model can generate images copying the composition and
structure present in one or more training images (template
memorization)[20]. Researchers have identified factors contributing to memorization and reproduction, such as the duplication of training images and repeated captions [24]. However, not all causes are understood, as memorization can still
occur even when these issues are avoided. Therefore, there
is a growing need for effective mitigation strategies, in particular methods that can be applied during inference without
requiring computationally intensive retraining of the core
diffusion models.

Recent advancements in image-generation models have enabled the generation of hyper-realistic images. Diffusion
models [21, 25] have been at the forefront of this advancement with their ability to align image generation with different conditioning mechanisms such as text giving users
more control over the output. However, a key challenge has
emerged: these models can memorize and reproduce training examples verbatim (verbatim memorization) [4, 23, 24],
leading to concerns over copyright infringement and leak* Work done during an internship at Sony AI.

In text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models, strong associations between a text prompt and an image in the training
dataset lead to memorization. This can occur due to the
presence of "trigger tokens" in overly specific text-prompts
[20, 28], the model seeing multiple occurrences of these dur-

12871

