This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VIRES: Video Instance Repainting via Sketch and Text Guided Generation
Shuchen Weng1,2†‡

Haojie Zheng3,4† Peixuan Zhang5
Han Jiang3 Si Li5 Boxin Shi1,2*

Yuchen Hong1,2

1

State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
OpenBayes Information Technology Co., Ltd. 4 School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University
5
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
scweng@baai.ac.cn, suimu@stu.pku.edu.cn, {pxzhang,lisi}@bupt.edu.cn
yuchenhong.cn@gmail.com, hahn@openbayes.com, shiboxin@pku.edu.cn
2

(b) Video instance replacement

The man is dressed in a blue shirt, walking in the park.

A dark-colored SUV is seen driving on the curve of the road, away from the camera.

(c) Custom instance generation

(d) Specified instance removal

A corgi, with its orange and white fur, runs towards the camera.

A football field with a brown-green graffiti wall as the background.

Result

Input

Result

Input

(a) Video instance repainting

Figure 1. Our VIRES model demonstrates powerful video editing capabilities with sketch and text guidance, as shown in four typical
scenarios: (a) Repainting the color and style of the man’s shirt. (b) Replacing the pickup truck with the dark-colored SUV. (c) Generating
a running corgi within a video clip. (d) Removing a specified football from a video clip.

Abstract
We introduce VIRES, a video instance repainting method
with sketch and text guidance, enabling video instance repainting, replacement, generation, and removal. Existing
† Equal contribution.
‡ Now at Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence.

approaches struggle with temporal consistency and accurate alignment with the provided sketch sequence. VIRES
leverages the generative priors of text-to-video models to
maintain temporal consistency and produce visually pleasing results. We propose the Sequential ControlNet with the
standardized self-scaling, which effectively extracts structure layouts and adaptively captures high-contrast sketch
details. We further augment the diffusion transformer back-

∗ Corresponding author.

28416

