This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High Temporal Consistency through Semantic Similarity Propagation in
Semi-Supervised Video Semantic Segmentation for Autonomous Flight

1

Cédric Vincent1,2,∗ Taehyoung Kim2,∗ Henri Meeß2
Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris 2 Fraunhofer IVI

13vincentcedric@gmail.com, {taehyoung.kim, henri.meess}@ivi.fraunhofer.de

Current Frame

Past Frame

Abstract
Semantic segmentation from RGB cameras is essential to
the perception of autonomous flying vehicles. The stability of predictions through the captured videos is paramount
to their reliability and, by extension, to the trustworthiness of the agents. In this paper, we propose a lightweight
video semantic segmentation approach—suited to onboard
real-time inference—achieving high temporal consistency
on aerial data through Semantic Similarity Propagation
across frames. SSP temporally propagates the predictions
of an efficient image segmentation model with global registration alignment to compensate for camera movements.
Overview of Semantic
It combines
the current estimation and the prior predicSimilarity Propagation
(SSP):
on each frame,
estimation
tionthe
with
linear interpolation using weights computed from
of the image segmentation
the features similarities of the two frames. Because data
model is linearly combined
availability
is a challenge in this domain, we propose a
with the last prediction
based
on interpolation
weights
consistency-aware
Knowledge Distillation training procecomputed from the feature
dure
for
sparsely
labeled
datasets with few annotations.
similarities by the similarity
layer. This results
Usingina large image segmentation model as a teacher to
temporarily consistent robust
train the efficient SSP, we leverage the strong correlapredictions. The global
between labeled and unlabeled frames in the same
registrationtions
alignment is
omitted here.
training videos to obtain high-quality supervision on all
frames. KD-SSP obtains a significant temporal consistency increase over the base image segmentation model
of 12.5% and 6.7% TC on UAVid and RuralScapes respectively, with higher accuracy and comparable inference
speed. On these aerial datasets, KD-SSP provides a superior segmentation quality and inference speed trade-off
than other video methods proposed for general applications
and shows considerably higher consistency. Project page:
https://github.com/FraunhoferIVI/SSP.

Image
Encoder

Similarity
Layer

…

Past Prediction

Image
Encoder
Decoder

Similarity Weights

Image Model
Estimation

Current Prediction

Figure 1. Overview of Semantic Similarity Propagation (SSP).
On each frame, the estimation of the image segmentation model is
linearly combined with the last prediction based on interpolation
weights computed from the feature similarities. This results in
temporarily consistent robust predictions. The global registration
alignment is omitted here.

interpreting their surroundings, with additional use cases
in emergency landing [16], 3D semantic reconstruction for
scene understanding [49], or power lines detection [14].
It also has applications in other downstream tasks such as
surveillance or photogrammetry [19, 21]. For trustworthy
systems, the predictions must be temporally stable to avoid
contradictory information or inconsistent predictions of crucial objects such as obstacles. While an image model can
accurately process each frame independently, the temporal
consistency of predictions requires a video model leveraging the correlations between consecutive frames.
Aerial footage captured at reasonable altitudes contains
vastly different motion content compared to ground-level
settings. With objects moving in a plane approximately or-

1. Introduction
Autonomous Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) rely on environmental perception for navigation. Semantic segmentation from RGB cameras serves as a crucial component for
* Equal contribution

1461

