This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ArtFormer: Controllable Generation of Diverse 3D Articulated Objects
Jiayi Su1,∗,† Youhe Feng2,∗ Zheng Li4 Jinhua Song1 Yangfan He5,6 Botao Ren3 Botian Xu3,‡
1
Xiamen University Malaysia 2 Renmin University of China 3 Tsinghua University
4
Southern University of Science and Technology 5 University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
6
Henan RunTai Digital Technology Group Co., Ltd.
∗
†
‡
Equal Contribution.
CST2209162@xmu.edu.my
btx0424@outlook.com
github.com/ShuYuMo2003/ArtFormer

A storage furniture with:
- Upper drawers: Slide out horizontally.
- Lower doors: Swing open horizontally on hinges.

Trial #1

Trial #2

0.5

0

Trial #2

1

Openness Ratio (Joint Position)

Trial #1

The bottle consists of two main parts: the body and
the cap. The body has a base that gradually tapers
into a narrower neck.

varying geometry feature

varying number of parts

Figure 1. We present the Articulation TransFormer, for high-quality generation articulated objects. This figure illustrates controlled
generation across random trials based on text descriptions. Notably, it can generate a diverse range of objects with varying numbers of
sub-parts and different geometry features.

Abstract

enables the generation of diverse objects with high-quality
geometry and varying number of parts. Comprehensive experiments on conditional generation from text descriptions
demonstrate the effectiveness and flexibility of our method.

This paper presents a novel framework for modeling and
conditional generation of 3D articulated objects. Troubled
by flexibility-quality tradeoffs, existing methods are often
limited to using predefined structures or retrieving shapes
from static datasets. To address these challenges, we parameterize an articulated object as a tree of tokens and
employ a transformer to generate both the object’s highlevel geometry code and its kinematic relations. Subsequently, each sub-part’s geometry is further decoded using a signed-distance-function (SDF) shape prior, facilitating the synthesis of high-quality 3D shapes. Our approach

1. Introduction
Articulated objects are defined as entities composed of
multiple rigid sub-parts connected by various joints which
allow the sub-parts to undergo constrained relative motion [26]. Among others, man-made articulated objects constitute most everyday objects around us.
The perception [15, 22, 30, 53] and reconstruction [11,

1894

