This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instant Gaussian Stream: Fast and Generalizable Streaming of Dynamic Scene
Reconstruction via Gaussian Splatting
Jinbo Yan1 , Rui Peng1,2 , Zhiyan Wang1 , Luyang Tang1,2 , Jiayu Yang1,2
Jie Liang1 , Jiahao Wu1 , Ronggang Wang1,2 *
1
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology,
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
2
Pengcheng Laboratory
{yjb, ruipeng, zywang23, tly926, liangjie, wjh0616}@stu.pku.edu.cn

Ours

3DGstream

rgwang@pkusz.edu.cn

PSNR:34.15
FPS:204
Train time: 2.67s/frame
Storage: 7.9MB/frame

34.4
PSNR(dB)

jiayuyang@pku.edu.cn

34.0

IGS-l*
IGS-s* (Ours)
33.6 (Ours)

33.2
32.8
32.4

32.0
2

(a)High Quality Result

(b)Realtime Rendering

Spacetime-GS
(CVPR24)

3DGStream*
(CVPR24)
Kplanes

StreamRF*
(CVPR23)
(CVPR24) (Nips22)
4DGS

5
10 15 30 60
Per-frame Train time(s)
(c)Comparison on Quality and Train Speed
3

Figure 1. Performance comparison with pervious SOTA[17, 29, 31, 51, 62]. Our method achieves a per-frame reconstruction time of 2.67s,
delivering high-quality rendering results in a streaming fashion (a)(b), with a noticeable improvement in performance (c). * denotes a
streamable method.

Abstract

tions, demonstrating that our approach can achieve streaming with a average per-frame reconstruction time of 2s+,
alongside a enhancement in view synthesis quality.

(b)Real-time rendering

Building Free-Viewpoint Videos in a streaming manner offers the advantage of rapid responsiveness compared to offline training methods, greatly enhancing user experience.
However, current streaming approaches face challenges of
high per-frame reconstruction time (10s+) and error accumulation, limiting their broader application. In this paper, we propose Instant Gaussian Stream (IGS), a fast and
generalizable streaming framework, to address these issues.
First, we introduce a generalized Anchor-driven Gaussian
Motion Network, which projects multi-view 2D motion features into 3D space, using anchor points to drive the motion of all Gaussians. This generalized Network generates the motion of Gaussians for each target frame in the
time required for a single inference. Second, we propose
a Key-frame-guided Streaming Strategy that refines each
key frame, enabling accurate reconstruction of temporally
complex scenes while mitigating error accumulation. We
conducted extensive in-domain and cross-domain evalua-

1. Introduction

16520

Reconstructing Free-Viewpoint Videos (FVV) from multiview images is a valuable area of research, with applications spanning immersive media such as VR, AR, and
sports broadcasting. By enabling interactive, photorealistic visuals, FVVs from dynamic scenes hold the potential to become a next-generation visual medium, offering
experiences that go beyond traditional video formats. To
enhance user experience, streaming-based FVV construction—where dynamic scenes are reconstructed frame by
frame—offers a low-delay response compared to traditional
offline training approaches, making it better suited for realtime, interactive applications.
With advancements in real-time rendering and high-

