This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RICCARDO: Radar Hit Prediction and Convolution for Camera-Radar
3D Object Detection
Yunfei Long

Abhinav Kumar
Xiaoming Liu
Michigan State University

Daniel Morris

{longyunf,kumarab6,liuxm,dmorris}@msu.edu

Abstract
Radar hits reflect from points on both the boundary and
internal to object outlines. This results in a complex distribution of radar hits that depends on factors including object category, size and orientation. Current radar-camera
fusion methods implicitly account for this with a black-box
neural network. In this paper, we explicitly utilize a radar
hit distribution model to assist fusion. First, we build a
model to predict radar hit distributions conditioned on object properties obtained from a monocular detector. Second,
we use the predicted distribution as a kernel to match actual
measured radar points in the neighborhood of the monocular detections, generating matching scores at nearby positions. Finally, a fusion stage combines context with the
kernel detector to refine the matching scores. Our method
achieves the state-of-the-art radar-camera detection performance on nuScenes. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/longyunf/riccardo.

1. Introduction
3D object detection [5, 7] is a key component of scene
understanding in autonomous vehicles (AVs). It predicts
nearby objects and their attributes including 3D location,
size, orientation and category, setting the stage for navigation tasks such as path planning. The primary sensors
used for 3D object detection are cameras, LiDARs [41], and
radars, with the focus here on the two-sensor combination
that is the least expensive and already ubiquitous on vehicles, namely cameras and radars. This paper asks how to
combine camera and radar data in order to achieve the best
performance improvement over a single modality detection.
Detection can be performed on camera and radar individually, with each sensor having its strengths and drawbacks.
Cameras are inexpensive and capture high-resolution details
and texture with state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods [12, 24,
28] achieving accurate object classification, as well as estimating size and orientation. One of the primary limitations

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Given a (a) monocular detection, we estimate (b) radar
point distribution relative to its bounding box in BEV; then we shift
the distribution and convolve it with (c) actual radar measurement
in the neighborhood to compute (d) similarity scores and estimate
an updated position, where the matching score is maximum. In (c)
the monocular bounding box (in magenta) is misaligned with radar
points; the updated position (in orange) with peak matching score
shifts the box to a farther range so that relative positions of radar
points match the predicted distribution (radar hits concentrated at
the head of vehicle instead of in the middle).

is the depth-scale ambiguity, resulting in relatively inaccurate object depth estimation [12, 24]. In contrast, current
automotive radar is another inexpensive sensor that directly
measures range to target, as well as Doppler velocity, and
is robust to adverse weather such as rain, snow, and darkness [26]. The drawbacks of radar are its very sparse scene
sampling and lack of texture, making it challenging to perform tasks such as object categorization, orientation, and
size estimation. For example, radar point clouds collected
in nuScenes dataset [5] are 2D points on radar bird’s-eye
view (BEV) plane without height measurements (the default
height is zero). This comparison shows that the strengths of
radar and camera are complementary, and indeed this paper

22276

