This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PICO: Reconstructing 3D People In Contact with Objects
Alpár Cseke1,2∗‡ Shashank Tripathi1∗† Sai Kumar Dwivedi1 Arjun S. Lakshmipathy3
Agniv Chatterjee4 Michael J. Black1 Dimitrios Tzionas5
1

3

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 Meshcapade
Carnegie Mellon University, USA 4 UT Austin, USA 5 University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands

Figure 1. We present PICO, a novel framework for joint human-object reconstruction in 3D. PICO includes PICO-db, a unique dataset that
pairs natural images with dense vertex-level 3D contact correspondences on both the human and the object. We leverage this dataset for
building PICO-fit, an optimization-based method that fits 3D body and object meshes to an image guided by rich contact constraints. Here,
we show reconstruction results of PICO-fit: 3D human pose and shape (shown with blue color), 3D object pose and shape (shown with
orange color), and contact correspondences (shown with various colors in inset). Note that PICO-fit works for in-the-wild images, as well
as for many previously untackled object classes.

Abstract

This minimal human input establishes rich contact correspondences between bodies and objects. (2) We exploit our
new dataset in a novel render-and-compare fitting method,
called PICO-fit, to recover 3D body and object meshes in
interaction. PICO-fit infers contact for the SMPL-X body,
retrieves a likely 3D object mesh and contact from PICO-db
for that object, and uses the contact to iteratively fit the 3D
body and object meshes to image evidence via optimization.
Uniquely, PICO-fit works well for many object classes that
no existing method can tackle. This is crucial for scaling
HOI understanding in the wild. Our data and code are
available at https://pico.is.tue.mpg.de.

Recovering 3D Human-Object Interaction (HOI) from single images is challenging due to depth ambiguities, occlusions, and the huge variation in object shape and appearance. Thus, past work requires controlled settings
such as known object shapes and contacts, and tackles
only limited object classes. Instead, we need methods
that generalize to natural images and novel object classes.
We tackle this in two main ways: (1) We collect PICO-db,
a new dataset of natural images uniquely paired with
dense 3D contact correspondences on both body and object meshes. To this end, we use images from the recent
DAMON dataset that are paired with annotated contacts,
but only on a canonical 3D body. In contrast, we seek contact labels on both the body and the object. To infer these,
given an image, we retrieve an appropriate 3D object mesh
from a database by leveraging vision foundation models.
Then, we project DAMON’s body contact patches onto the
object via a novel method needing only 2 clicks per patch.
* Equal contribution.

† Project lead.

1. Introduction
Humans routinely interact with objects. Thus, recovering
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) in 3D from natural images
is important for human-centric applications such as smart
homes, mixed reality, or assistive robots. At its core, this entails inferring human pose and shape, object pose and shape,
and their spatial arrangement and contacts, all in 3D.

‡ Work done while at MPI.

1783

