This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual Diffusion for Unified Image Generation and Understanding
Zijie Li1 * Henry Li2∗

Yichun Shi3 Amir Barati Farimani1
Linjie Yang3 Peng Wang3
zjli.jlee@gmail.com, henry.li@yale.edu
{linjie.yang, peng.wang}@bytedance.com

1

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Yale University

3

Yuval Kluger2

ByteDance Seed

Project website

Abstract

groundbreaking performance both in pure text generation
and reasoning such as in ChatGPT [1], Gemini [73], and
Llama [18] and in visually-grounded text generation with
large language models (LLMs), as seen with LLaVA [47]
or BLIP-2 [39].
Given these developments, a natural question comes to
mind: Can these existing image-to-text (I2T) or text-toimage (T2I) systems be modified to reason with and generate data in the reverse direction? A positive answer
would suggest the possibility of producing a fully multimodal model that is able to understand and sample from
conditional distributions between modalities in an omnidirectional manner. Moreover, unifying these generative
frameworks under a single model with shared parameters
can confer a multitude of downstream benefits including
improved reasoning, simplified implementation, and may
be a natural next step towards artificial general intelligence
[32, 75].
With autoregressive next-token prediction models, this
query has already been answered resoundingly in the affirmative, as evidenced by a multitude of studies [17, 23, 25,
70, 72, 78, 82] demonstrating T2I capabilities of finetuned
LLMs. This is in part due to the known next-token generative capability of autoregressive models with visual tokens
[40, 74, 81].
On the contrary, with diffusion models there has been
surprisingly little evidence of a similar reverse capacity.
Until recently, generative diffusion models have struggled
with language modeling due to the lack of an empirically
performant discrete diffusion process on text tokens, in spite
of continued research in this area [4, 16, 42]. At present,
multimodal diffusion models either exhibit limited text reasoning capabilities and partial text diffusion [7, 80], which
require an autoregressive model such as GPT2 [59] to decode denoised text latents, or emerge as add-ons to pretrained LLMs fine-tuned in conjunction with a diffusion
loss [79, 84], and ultimately still rely entirely on next-token
prediction for text generation.

Diffusion models have gained tremendous success in textto-image generation, yet still struggle with visual understanding tasks, an area dominated by autoregressive visionlanguage models. We propose a large-scale and fully endto-end diffusion model for multi-modal understanding and
generation that significantly improves on existing diffusionbased multimodal models, and is the first of its kind to support the full suite of vision-language modeling capabilities.
Inspired by the multimodal diffusion transformer (MM-DiT)
and recent advances in discrete diffusion language modeling, we leverage a cross-modal maximum likelihood estimation framework that simultaneously trains the conditional likelihoods of both images and text jointly under a
single loss function, which is back-propagated through both
branches of the diffusion transformer. The resulting model
is highly flexible and capable of a wide range of tasks including image generation, captioning, and visual question
answering. Our model attained competitive performance
compared to recent unified image understanding and generation models, demonstrating the potential of multimodal
diffusion modeling as a promising alternative to autoregressive next-token prediction models.

1. Introduction
We are currently in the midst of a multimodal generative
modeling revolution. Large scale diffusion models such as
Stable Diffusion [20], Dall-E [62], FLUX, and Imagen [64]
have become indisputable industry leaders for generating
high fidelity images from text descriptions, enabling the
accurate modeling and sampling of complex and high dimensional distributions of images given text. Conversely,
autoregressive next-token prediction models have achieved
* The first two authors contributed equally to this work, work done during an internship at ByteDance.

2779

