This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

It’s a (Blind) Match!
Towards Vision-Language Correspondence without Parallel Data
Dominik Schnaus
TU Munich

Nikita Araslanov†

Daniel Cremers†

Munich Center for Machine Learning
†

Project page: dominik-schnaus.github.io/itsamatch

World

Abstract
The platonic representation hypothesis suggests that vision
and language embeddings become more homogeneous as
model and dataset sizes increase. In particular, pairwise
distances within each modality become more similar. This
suggests that as foundation models mature, it may become
possible to match vision and language embeddings in a fully
unsupervised fashion, i.e. without parallel data. We present
the ﬁrst feasibility study, and investigate conformity of existing vision and language foundation models in the context
of unsupervised, or “blind”, matching. First, we formulate
unsupervised matching as a quadratic assignment problem
and introduce a novel heuristic that outperforms previous
solvers. We also develop a technique to ﬁnd optimal matching problems, for which a non-trivial match is very likely.
Second, we conduct an extensive study deploying a range of
vision and language models on four datasets. Our analysis
reveals that for many problem instances, vision and language representations can be indeed matched without supervision. This ﬁnding opens up the exciting possibility of
embedding semantic knowledge into other modalities virtually annotation-free. As a proof of concept, we showcase an
unsupervised classiﬁer, which achieves non-trivial classiﬁcation accuracy without any image-text annotation.

1. Introduction
Vision and language foundation models are changing the
research landscape in computer vision and natural language
processing. On the one hand, computer vision has widely
adopted deep image representations, such as DINO [3],
across virtually all applications, including semantic understanding [15] and 3D reconstruction [50]. On the other
hand, large language models (LLMs) [e.g., 10] are already
excelling at imitating natural language, performing comparably or better than humans in language translation and basic reasoning [e.g., see 53, for a survey]. Yet, we gravely
lack in understanding the conformity between these mod-

equal advising

airplane
cat

fl

cat
airplane

dog

dog
Factorized Hahn-Grant

fv

Figure 1. Blind matching of vision and language: Text and images are both abstractions of the same underlying world. Vision
and language encoders fv and fl learn similar pairwise relations
between concepts, e.g. “cat” is closer to “dog” than to “airplane”.
We exploit these pairwise relations in our factorized Hahn-Grant
solver to ﬁnd valid correspondences between vision and language
without any parallel data.

els. Previous work offers some analysis under the lens of
a single modality or in the cross-modal scenario with focus
on label efﬁciency [34, 35]. In particular, the latter body of
work pursued dense alignment between vision and language
embeddings from a few correspondences. Taking this scenario to the extreme, we study “blind” matching, illustrated
in Fig. 1. Speciﬁcally, we aim to ﬁnd vision-language correspondence without any parallel data.
Vision and language representations may seem incompatible at ﬁrst. Indeed, there are signiﬁcant differences in
the training process, data distribution, and model architectures. However, the platonic representation hypothesis [17]
posits that textual and visual representations of the same
concepts converge to geometrically similar latent spaces. It
asserts that models trained on large, diverse datasets encounter the same phenomena and, more importantly, the

24983

