This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SP3D: Boosting Sparsely-Supervised 3D Object Detection via Accurate
Cross-Modal Semantic Prompts
Shijia Zhao1,2 * Qiming Xia1,2 * Xusheng Guo1,2 Pufan Zou1,2 Maoji Zheng1,2
Hai Wu1,2 Chenglu Wen1,2† Cheng Wang1,2
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efﬁcient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China

Recently, sparsely-supervised 3D object detection has
gained great attention, achieving performance close to
fully-supervised 3D detectors while requiring only a few
annotated instances. Nevertheless, these methods suffer
challenges when accurate labels are extremely absent. In
this paper, we propose a boosting strategy, termed SP3D,
explicitly utilizing the cross-modal semantic prompts generated from Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) to boost
the 3D detector with robust feature discrimination capability under sparse annotation settings. Speciﬁcally,
we ﬁrst develop a Conﬁdent Points Semantic Transfer
(CPST) module that generates accurate cross-modal semantic prompts through boundary-constrained center cluster selection. Based on these accurate semantic prompts,
which we treat as seed points, we introduce a Dynamic
Cluster Pseudo-label Generation (DCPG) module to yield
pseudo-supervision signals from the geometry shape of
multi-scale neighbor points. Additionally, we design a
Distribution Shape score (DS score) that chooses highquality supervision signals for the initial training of the 3D
detector. Experiments on the KITTI dataset and Waymo
Open Dataset (WOD) have validated that SP3D can enhance the performance of sparsely supervised detectors by
a large margin under meager labeling conditions. Moreover, we veriﬁed SP3D in the zero-shot setting, where its
performance exceeded that of the state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at https://github.com/
xmuqimingxia/SP3D.

1. Introduction
3D object detection, aiming at locating and classifying objects within 3D scenes, has garnered signiﬁcant attention in
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author, clwen@xmu.edu.cn.

'$3 

Abstract







(DV\

&R,Q
63'

0RG

&R,Q
63'

+DUG
&R,Q
63'

ϭϬ͘ϬϮ͘ϬϬ͘ϱϬ͘ϭ ϭϬ͘ϬϮ͘ϬϬ͘ϱϬ͘ϭϭϬ͘ϬϮ͘ϬϬ͘ϱϬ͘ϭ
$QQRWDWLRQUDWH 

$QQRWDWLRQUDWH 

$QQRWDWLRQUDWH 

Figure 1. Performance comparison of the sparsely-supervised detector at various annotation rates. SP3D indicates the CoIn initialized with the proposed SP3D.

autonomous driving [6, 10, 19, 34, 36]. However, the mainstream 3D detectors relies heavily on high-quality labels annotated by humans, which is not only time-consuming but
also sensitive to the subjective impression of annotators.
To minimize the dependence of 3D detectors on highquality manual annotations, recent work has begun to focus on label-efﬁcient training strategies [15, 21, 31, 37].
To discover unlabeled instances, SS3D [14] employs a selftraining approach to iteratively optimize the detector trained
on sparsely annotated data. CoIn [37] introduces contrastive learning methods, enhancing the model’s discriminative capability for various category features. However,
existing strategies make 3D detectors struggle to extract
sufﬁciently discriminative features from extremely limited
annotations. Fig. 1 shows some examples where the stateof-the-art (SoTA) sparsely-supervised object detector CoIn
[37] hardly maintains robust performance with a signiﬁcant
reduction in annotation rate.
With the successive emergence and widespread application of large language models (LLMs), such as BERT [7]
and GPT [1, 3], in natural language processing, research
on large multimodal models (LMMs) is also gaining momentum [12, 13, 17, 27]. Beneﬁting from the outstanding
performance of LMMs, the utilization of pre-trained LMMs
has led to signiﬁcant advancements in 2D vision tasks. Inspired by this, [40, 46, 50] transfers the image-text knowl-

29374

