This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MotionPRO: Exploring the Role of Pressure in Human MoCap and Beyond
Shenghao Ren∗1 , Yi Lu∗1 , Jiayi Huang1 , Jiayi Zhao1 , He Zhang3 , Tao Yu3 , Qiu Shen†1,2 , Xun Cao1,2
1
School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems with Extreme
Performances of MOE, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
3
BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

Figure 1. MotionPRO is a large-scale human Motion capture dataset with Pressure, RGB and Optical sensors, which comprises 70
volunteers performing 400 types of motion, encompassing a total of 12.4M pose frames.

Abstract
Existing human Motion Capture (MoCap) methods
mostly focus on the visual similarity while neglecting the
physical plausibility. As a result, downstream tasks such as
driving virtual human in 3D scene or humanoid robots in
real world suffer from issues such as timing drift and jitter, spatial problems like sliding and penetration, and poor
global trajectory accuracy. In this paper, we revisit human
MoCap from the perspective of interaction between human
body and physical world by exploring the role of pressure.
Firstly, we construct a large-scale human Motion capture
dataset with Pressure, RGB and Optical sensors (named
MotionPRO), which comprises 70 volunteers performing
400 types of motion, encompassing a total of 12.4M pose
frames. Secondly, we examine both the necessity and effectiveness of the pressure signal through two challenging
tasks: (1) pose and trajectory estimation based solely on
pressure: We propose a network that incorporates a small
kernel decoder and a long-short-term attention module, and
proof that pressure could provide accurate global trajectory and plausible lower body pose. (2) pose and trajectory estimation by fusing pressure and RGB: We impose
constraints on orthographic similarity along the camera

axis and whole-body contact along the vertical axis to enhance the cross-attention strategy to fuse pressure and RGB
feature maps. Experiments demonstrate that fusing pressure with RGB features not only significantly improves performance in terms of objective metrics, but also plausibly
drives virtual humans (SMPL) in 3D scene. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that incorporating physical perception enables humanoid robots to perform more precise and stable
actions, which is highly beneficial for the development of
embodied artificial intelligence. Project page is available
at: https://nju-cite-mocaphumanoid.github.io/MotionPRO/

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Human Motion Capture (MoCap) is a crucial foundation for
motion understanding and imitation with diverse applications in AR/VR, humanoid robot actuation, and more. Current MoCap methods [10, 12, 14, 19, 21, 27–29, 50, 59]
have gained popularity due to their high precision in geometry similarity when evaluating the human body itself.
However, when applied to drive virtual humans in 3D scene
or humanoid robots in real world, current human MoCap
methods still exhibit dynamic inaccuracies, including temporal drift and jitter, as well as spatial issues such as sliding,
floating, and penetration. This is because these methods

27760

