This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progress-Aware Video Frame Captioning
Zihui Xue1 , Joungbin An1 , Xitong Yang†, Kristen Grauman1
1
University of Texas at Austin
Abstract
While image captioning provides isolated descriptions for
individual images, and video captioning offers one single
narrative for an entire video clip, our work explores an important middle ground: progress-aware video captioning at
the frame level. This novel task aims to generate temporally
fine-grained captions that not only accurately describe each
frame but also capture the subtle progression of actions
throughout a video sequence. Despite the strong capabilities of existing leading vision language models, they often
struggle to discern the nuances of frame-wise differences.
To address this, we propose ProgressCaptioner, a captioning model designed to capture the fine-grained temporal dynamics within an action sequence. Alongside, we develop
the FrameCap dataset to support training and the FrameCapEval benchmark to assess caption quality. The results
demonstrate that ProgressCaptioner significantly surpasses
leading captioning models, producing precise captions that
accurately capture action progression and set a new standard for temporal precision in video captioning. Finally, we
showcase practical applications of our approach, specifically in aiding keyframe selection and advancing video understanding, highlighting its broad utility.1

a close up of a wok
with a lot of oil in it

eggs are fried in a
wok on a stove top

cooking eggs in a
wok on the stove

cooking food in a
wok on the stove

Image captioning
Scramble the eggs in the wok

Video captioning
The frame shows a
large, worn-out
wok with a dark
interior. There is a
small amount of
oil visible at the
bottom of the wok,
indicating that it is
ready for cooking.

Three eggs are
being added into
the wok. The eggs
are still intact and
have bright yellow
yolks. The wok
remains in the
same position as
in the first frame.

A metal spatula is
used to stir the
eggs. The eggs are
starting to cook,
with some white
parts becoming
more solid while
others remain
runny.

The scene
transitions to
show the same
wok, now
containing
scrambled eggs.
The yolks are fully
mixed into the
whites.

Progress-aware video frame captioning

Figure 1. We propose progress-aware video frame captioning (bottom), which aims to generate a sequence of captions that capture
the temporal dynamics within a video. Unlike traditional image
and video captioning (top) that focus on broad event-level descriptions, our task delves into the detailed, progressive dynamics of an
action, necessitating precise, temporally fine-grained capabilities.
Blue text highlights how the progress-aware captions build successively on the earlier content to highlight what is changing.

1. Introduction

age captioning model like BLIP [37] to describe each frame
of the video results in captions that are local, not temporally
context-aware, and may exhibit little variation across the sequence. Conversely, video captioning provides a global, not
temporally fine-grained overview of the event, as exemplified by the YouCook2 [85] ground truth label “scramble the
eggs in the wok”. In both scenarios, the nuances of how the
action unfolds over time are missed. This raises the question: Can we develop temporally fine-grained captions that
capture the subtle, progressive nature of action sequences?
Figure 1 (bottom) illustrates what we seek.
Having such progress-aware captions could benefit a
great variety of downstream tasks, bringing improved video
understanding [73, 79], more precise video retrieval [66–
68], and enriched video generation [50, 58]. Moreover,
such a capability could open up new AR/VR and robotics
applications. For instance, in AI coaching, a captioning
system could meticulously analyze an expert’s tennis forehand, simplifying the learning process for users. Similarly,
for how-to video creation, it could elicit and describe the

Visual captioning [38]—the task of generating textual descriptions of visual content—is a fundamental problem in
computer vision with extensive practical applications. Existing captioning paradigms are broadly divided into two
categories: image captioning and video captioning, with a
clear distinction between them. Image captioning [23] generates a single, isolated description for each image, with
no contextual linkage among different images. In contrast,
video captioning [1] assigns a single caption for the entire
video clip, aggregating information across frames without
addressing the specifics of individual frames.
Figure 1 illustrates this dichotomy. Employing an im† Work conducted as an independent researcher

1 Project webpage:
https : / / vision . cs . utexas . edu /
projects/ProgressCaptioner.

13639

