This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoGLaMM

: A Large Multimodal Model for Pixel-Level
Visual Grounding in Videos

Shehan Munasinghe1 Hanan Gani1 Wenqi Zhu2 Jiale Cao 2
Eric Xing1,3 Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,4 Salman Khan1,5
1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, 2 Tianjin University, 3 Carnegie Mellon University,
4
Linköping University, 5 Australian National University
shehan.munasinghe@mbzuai.ac.ae, hanan.ghani@mbzuai.ac.ae

https://mbzuai-oryx.github.io/VideoGLaMM

Abstract
Fine-grained alignment between videos and text is challenging due to complex spatial and temporal dynamics in
videos. Existing video-based Large Multimodal Models
(LMMs) handle basic conversations but struggle with precise pixel-level grounding in videos. To address this, we
introduce VideoGLaMM, a LMM designed for fine-grained
pixel-level grounding in videos based on user-provided textual inputs. Our design seamlessly connects three key components: a Large Language Model, a dual vision encoder
that emphasizes both spatial and temporal details, and
a spatio-temporal decoder for accurate mask generation.
This connection is facilitated via tunable V→L and L→V
adapters that enable close Vision-Language (VL) alignment. The architecture is trained to synchronize both spatial
and temporal elements of video content with textual instructions. To enable fine-grained grounding, we curate a multimodal dataset featuring detailed visually-grounded conversations using a semiautomatic annotation pipeline, resulting in a diverse set of 38k video-QA triplets along with
83k objects and 671k masks. We evaluate VideoGLaMM on
three challenging tasks: Grounded Conversation Generation, Visual Grounding, and Referring Video Segmentation.
Experimental results show that our model consistently outperforms existing approaches across all three tasks.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Grounded Conversation with VideoGLaMM. Our
proposed multimodal video conversational model provides text
responses grounded at the pixel level in the input video. The
generated masks are spatio-temporally consistent across frames.
The fine-grained grounded outputs from VideoGLaMM describe
different levels of granularity, e.g., person, objects (bike), stuff
(road), and explain object and scene attributes. Existing VideoLMMs do not offer pixel-level grounded conversational capability.

The rise of Large Language Models (LLMs) has significantly advanced progress in language-based tasks [7, 10, 13,
35, 47]. Their success in solving language-based complex
reasoning tasks has led to their adoption in visual domains,
resulting in Large Multimodal Models (LMMs). To align
textual and visual modalities, previous works [11, 20, 21,

19036

28, 57] train a projection layer or a cross-attention block that
maps visual features into the latent space of an LLM. This
straightforward adaptation has enabled advanced spatial understanding, allowing detailed conversations about image
content. Recently, these models have been extended to
video, aligning textual instructions with the spatio-temporal

