This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Personalized Preference Fine-tuning of Diffusion Models
Meihua Dang1→

Anikait Singh1→
Linqi Zhou1,2
Stefano Ermon1
1
Stanford University, 2 Luma AI

Jiaming Song2

{mhdang,anikait,ermon}@cs.stanford.edu, {alexzhou,jiaming}@lumalabs.ai

Abstract

models to better align with human preferences. Methods
such as DDPO [2] and DPOK [9] employ reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) techniques to optimize human-alignment reward functions. Alternatively,
Diffusion-DPO [45] utilize direct preference optimization
(DPO) [32] to directly optimizes for human preferences using an offline ranking dataset. SD3 [7] shows that finetuning diffusion models with human feedback techniques
can significantly enhance overall image quality.

RLHF techniques like DPO can significantly improve the
generation quality of text-to-image diffusion models. However, these methods optimize for a single reward that aligns
model generation with population-level preferences, neglecting the nuances of individual users’ beliefs or values.
This lack of personalization limits the efficacy of these models. To bridge this gap, we introduce PPD, a multi-reward
optimization objective that aligns diffusion models with personalized preferences. With PPD, a diffusion model learns
the individual preferences of a population of users in a fewshot way, enabling generalization to unseen users. Specifically, our approach (1) leverages a vision-language model
(VLM) to extract personal preference embeddings from a
small set of pairwise preference examples, and then (2) incorporates the embeddings into diffusion models through
cross attention. Conditioning on user embeddings, the textto-image models are fine-tuned with the DPO objective, simultaneously optimizing for alignment with the preferences
of multiple users. Empirical results demonstrate that our
method effectively optimizes for multiple reward functions
and can interpolate between them during inference. In realworld user scenarios, with as few as four preference examples from a new user, our approach achieves an average
win rate of 76% over Stable Cascade, generating images
that more accurately reflect specific user preferences.

Despite these promising results, Diffusion-DPO aligns a
model with a single reward that represents population-level
human preferences. These fine-tuning techniques are thus
insufficient for achieving personalized preference alignment. As studied in domains such as language [10, 36, 44],
individual users have unique preferences—for instance,
some may favor images with brighter colors, while others
might prefer images with centralized foregrounds. Finetuning a separate model for each person based on their preference data is impractical and does not scale well, limiting
the feasibility of personalized alignment. Additionally, this
may limit cross-user generalization.
A complementary research direction introduces additional control mechanisms into diffusion models to enable
customization and personalization. Approaches such as IPAdapter [51] and CtrlNet [54] allow for controlled image
generation by using an additional conditioning image that
encodes personalization features. However, these methods
are constrained by their reliance on single-image inputs and
do not directly learn or adapt to human preferences.

1. Introduction

To address these limitations, we propose PPD, a general framework that incorporates personalization into a diffusion model preference alignment through multi-reward
optimization. Our approach learns a diverse set of human preferences within a single model and generalizes effectively to new users. Personalization in our approach
requires minimal additional data, as we label samples in
the preference dataset with a unique identifier for each
user. This annotation is inexpensive to obtain and commonly included in datasets such as Pick-a-Pic [16]. We
leverage vision-language models (VLMs) such as LLaVAOneVision [20] to extract user preference embeddings from

Diffusion models [12, 40, 42, 43] have achieved great success in text-to-images generation tasks, as demonstrated by
models such as DALL-E 2 [33], Imagen [35], Stable Diffusion [29, 34], and Stable Cascade [27]. These largescale models, often trained through supervised fine-tuning
on text-image datasets containing high-quality aesthetic images such as LAION-5B [38], demonstrate impressive image quality and a remarkable visual understanding of text
prompts. Recent advances focus on fine-tuning diffusion
→ Equal contributions.
Work done during MD’s internship at Luma AI.

8020

