This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Denoising Functional Maps: Diffusion Models for Shape Correspondence
Aleksei Zhuravlev1
1
University of Bonn

Zorah Lähner1, 2
2
Lamarr Institute

Vladislav Golyanik3
3
MPI for Informatics, SIC

Figure 1. We propose DenoisFM, a novel method for predicting shape correspondences in the form of functional maps using
denoising diffusion models. (Left:) Challenging examples our method can handle, with color-coded correspondences. (Right:) By
sequentially denoising samples of random noise, the diffusion model can predict the correct functional map between a pair of shapes.

1. Introduction

Abstract

A long-standing problem in computer graphics and vision
is to find corresponding points in a pair of 3D shapes
[9, 11, 19, 42, 49, 64, 69]. The point map can then be
used for texture [14], segmentation [63] and deformation
transfer [68], statistical shape analysis [13], and construction of parametric models [37, 55]. A popular approach to
solving the correspondence problem involves the functional
map framework [49], which represents the correspondence
as a small matrix that maps between the eigenfunctions of
the Laplace operator on each shape. This representation is
compact and allows to regularize constraints on the correspondences, such as bijectivity or area preservation. The
functional map framework has been extended in numerous
works, such as matching shapes with partiality [4, 58], analyzing the properties of shape collections [13] or improving
accuracy through iterative refinement [19, 44, 57].
Previous functional map approaches focused on using
small datasets, rarely exceeding a hundred unique shapes.
This favored training models with lightweight architectures
that could learn as much as possible with limited data, but
these methods may face challenges with generalization to
broad shape categories. To develop a unified model that is
applicable to various tasks, we draw attention to denoising
diffusion models [25, 66, 67], which have impressive generalization ability when trained on large amounts of data.
In our work, we apply this approach to correspondence estimation using functional maps.
Based on the idea of sequentially denoising samples of
random noise into samples from the data distribution, dif-

Estimating correspondences between pairs of deformable shapes remains a challenging problem. Despite
substantial progress, existing methods lack broad generalization capabilities and require category-specific training data. To address these limitations, we propose a fundamentally new approach to shape correspondence based
on denoising diffusion models. In our method, a diffusion
model learns to directly predict the functional map, a lowdimensional representation of a point-wise map between
shapes. We use a large dataset of synthetic human meshes
for training and employ two steps to reduce the number of
functional maps that need to be learned. First, the maps refer to a template rather than shape pairs. Second, the functional map is defined in a basis of eigenvectors of the Laplacian, which is not unique due to sign ambiguity. Therefore,
we introduce an unsupervised approach to select a specific
basis by correcting the signs of eigenvectors based on surface features. Our model achieves competitive performance
on standard human datasets, meshes with anisotropic connectivity, non-isometric humanoid shapes, as well as animals compared to existing descriptor-based and large-scale
shape deformation methods. See our project page1 for the
source code2 and the datasets.

1 Project page: https://alekseizhuravlev.github.io/
denoising-functional-maps/
2 Source code: https://github.com/alekseizhuravlev/
denoising-functional-maps/

26899

