This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Test-Time Backdoor Detection for Object Detection Models
Hangtao Zhang1 Yichen Wang1 Shihui Yan1 Chenyu Zhu2 Ziqi Zhou3
Linshan Hou4 Shengshan Hu1 Minghui Li2 Yanjun Zhang5 Leo Yu Zhang6
1

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Software Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
4
Harbin Institute of Technology 5 University of Technology Sydney 6 Griffith University
{hangt zhang, wangyichen, m202472227}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Object detection models are vulnerable to backdoor attacks,
where attackers poison a small subset of training samples
by embedding a predefined trigger to manipulate prediction. Detecting poisoned samples (i.e., those containing
triggers) at test time can prevent backdoor activation. However, unlike image classification tasks, the unique characteristics of object detection—particularly its output of numerous objects—pose fresh challenges for backdoor detection. The complex attack effects (e.g., “ghost” object
emergence or “vanishing” object) further render current
defenses fundamentally inadequate. To this end, we design TRAnsformation Consistency Evaluation (T RACE),
a brand-new method for detecting poisoned samples at test
time in object detection. Our journey begins with two intriguing observations: 1) poisoned samples exhibit significantly more consistent detection results than clean ones
across varied backgrounds. 2) clean samples show higher
detection consistency when introduced to different focal information. Based on these phenomena, T RACE applies
foreground and background transformations to each test
sample, then assesses transformation consistency by calculating the variance in objects confidences. T RACE achieves
black-box, universal backdoor detection, with extensive experiments showing a 30% improvement in AUROC over
state-of-the-art defenses and resistance to adaptive attacks.

Figure 1. Divergent attack effects of OD backdoors. (a-c): backdoor triggered by a fixed pattern. (d): backdoor triggered by the co-occurrence of
two natural objects (a person and an umbrella).

1. Introduction

like classification models, where backdoors solely cause incorrect class predictions, OD backdoors can result in more
sophisticated attack effects, i.e., a “ghost” object appearing [3, 7] (Fig. 1(a)), an object vanishing [25, 26, 38]
(Fig. 1(b)), the misclassification of all objects globally [3]
(Fig. 1(c)), and the co-occurrence of two benign features
triggering a backdoor [4, 21] (Fig. 1(d)).
To mitigate backdoor threats in OD, recent studies have
made preliminary advances, including trigger reverse engineering [6, 32] and black-box test-time trigger sample detection (TTSD)1 [3]. However, the former relies on whitebox settings, requiring access to model weights and training data. By contrast, black-box TTSD detects and prevents poisoned samples during test time without access
to model parameters, acting as a final ‘firewall’. Blackbox TTSD is highly practical for many real-world applications, such as the prevalent Machine Learning as a Service
(MLaaS) [18, 31], and is therefore the focus of our work.
To the best of our knowledge, Detector Cleanse [3] is the
only black-box TTSD method tailored for OD tasks. However, it assumes that defenders have full knowledge of the
specific details of the attacks (i.e., the adversary-specified
judgment criteria, as noted in Tab. 1). In practice, defend-

Object detection (OD), a key computer vision application [2, 29], has shown vulnerability to backdoor attacks [3,
25]. Backdoor-infected models perform normally on clean
objects but predict the attacker-chosen target annotations
whenever a trigger (e.g., a small patch) is present. Un-

24377

1 Also known as online defense [27, 33] or input-level detection [19]

