This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RL-RC-DoT: A Block-level RL agent for Task-Aware Video Compression
Uri Gadot1,2

Assaf Shocher 2
1

Shie Mannor 1,2

Technion

2

Gal Chechik 2

Assaf Hallak 2

NVIDIA Research

Corresponding authors: uri.gad@campus.technion.ac.il, ahallak@nvidia.com

Abstract
Video encoders optimize compression for human perception by minimizing reconstruction error under bit-rate constraints. In many modern applications such as autonomous
driving, an overwhelming majority of videos serve as input
for AI systems performing tasks like object recognition or
segmentation, rather than being watched by humans. It is
therefore useful to optimize the encoder for a downstream
task instead of for perceptual image quality. However, a
major challenge is how to combine such downstream optimization with existing standard video encoders, which are
highly efficient and popular. Here, we address this challenge by controlling the Quantization Parameters (QPs) at
the macro-block level to optimize the downstream task. This
granular control allows us to prioritize encoding for taskrelevant regions within each frame. We formulate this optimization problem as a Reinforcement Learning (RL) task,
where the agent learns to balance long-term implications of
choosing QPs on both task performance and bit-rate constraints. Notably, our policy does not require the downstream task as an input during inference, making it suitable
for streaming applications and edge devices such as vehicles. We demonstrate significant improvements in two tasks,
car detection, and ROI (saliency) encoding. Our approach
improves task performance for a given bit rate compared to
traditional task agnostic encoding methods, paving the way
for more efficient task-aware video compression.

1. Introduction
Video compression is an essential and widely studied problem [1, 3, 15, 32, 35]. Most video compression algorithms are designed for preserving how a video is perceived
by people. With the success of computer vision applications, many videos are used in automated systems, from
autonomous drones and cars, to security cameras, and in
downstream tasks, like object detection or recognition. In
these cases, compression must prioritize regions relevant to
the task at hand (e.g., allocating more bits to objects than to

the background).
Real-world deployment of compression and computer
vision systems complicates matters further. Video data must
be collected in real time from devices, using low computational resources, and be usable for training various models
across multiple tasks, not just for immediate inference. Furthermore, due to computational and hardware constraints,
compression must be done without access to the ground
truth for the downstream tasks during the encoding process.
Our goal is to tackle these challenges by providing a general
video compression method that can be adapted to any task,
any encoding standard, operates in real-time, imposes low
computational demands on the encoding side, and requires
no ground-truth labels.
Two previous approaches were taken to this problem.
The first relies on standardized video encoders [24, 32]
which are highly efficient but are not designed for adapting compression to specific tasks in real-time. To address
that, previous studies used downstream task information as
input to the encoder side [17, 29, 39]. As one example,
[39] performs semantic compression by applying a heavy
feature extractor before encoding using a ground-truth segmentation maps. This approach may compress well at this
setup, but typically require large computation resources before encoding, can not be used for various tasks, and is unsuitable for data collection. A second approach relies on
deep encoding [21]. Once again it is computationally expensive and currently unsuitable for real-time applications
or resource-constrained environments.
In this paper, we propose RL-RC-DoT, a novel solution to the problem of tuning an efficient real-time video
compression system to a downstream task without access to
its ground truth labels during inference. Our approach integrates a lightweight network on the video encoder side,
trained to control the encoding process such that the decoded output is ideal for the task at hand. By leveraging
standardized codecs, we ensure that our method is both
computationally efficient and easily deployable across a
range of devices. The solution allows for real-time video
compression without requiring ground truth for downstream
tasks. Our solution can be applied over any existing en-

12533

