This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PrEditor3D: Fast and Precise 3D Shape Editing
Ziya Erkoç1

Can Gümeli1

Chaoyang Wang2

Peter Wonka2,3
1

Matthias Nießner1

Hsin-Ying Lee2

Angela Dai1

Peiye Zhuang2

Technical University of Munich 2 Snap Inc 3 KAUST
https://ziyaerkoc.com/preditor3d

“chicken cat …”

chicken dog …

“… racing car jeep”

8

CLIPdir-cos

“chicken in a racing car”

Ours
Vox-E

Tailor3D

MV-Edit

1
1 min 4 min … 1 hr
“cannon
in a wooden cart”

“cannon
flamethrower …”

“viking with a
mustache, helmet”

“... helmet party hat”

“cannon
trebuchet …”

“… red pepper
mustache …”

“house in a forest”

“house treasure
cave …”

“chicken in a

“chicken

racing car”

cat with a tail …”

“truck carrying clay”

“android”

Time

“… clay pizza”

“android chicken
wearing a tie”

Figure 1. PrEditor3D is a (top) fast and high-quality editing method that can perform precise and consistent editing only in the intended
regions, keeping the rest identical. (mid) It can handle diverse editing prompts with any given 3D object. (bottom) Furthermore, it can
support iterative editing, facilitating artistic workflow, and can also support editing multiple regions in a single run.

Abstract

rough masks. However, the targeted regions to be edited
are ambiguous due to projection from 3D to 2D. To ensure precise editing only in intended regions, we develop
a 3D segmentation pipeline that detects edited areas in 3D
space, followed by a merging algorithm to seamlessly integrate edited 3D regions with the original input. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method
over previous approaches, enabling fast, high-quality editing while preserving unintended regions.

We propose a training-free approach to 3D editing that
enables the editing of a single shape within a few minutes.
The edited 3D mesh aligns well with the prompts, and remains identical for regions that are not intended to be altered. To this end, we first project the 3D object onto 4-view
images and perform synchronized multi-view image editing along with user-guided text prompts and user-provided

640

