This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IM-Zero: Instance-level Motion Controllable Video Generation
in a Zero-shot Manner
Li Ding1 , Xiaopeng Zhang2†, Wenrui Dai1†, Junni Zou1†,
Hongkai Xiong1 , Qi Tian2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Huawei Inc., Shenzhen, China

Yuyang Huang1 *,

Yabo Chen1 *,

{huangyuyang, chenyabo, wangzhongren, daiwenrui, zoujunni, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn
zxphistory@gmail.com, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Figure 1. IM-Zero introduces a zero-shot framework for instance-level motion controllable video generation. IM-Zero allows users to: (a)
Control overall instance motion. (b) Control instance subpart motion. (c) Control instance motion and specify instance shape via mask. (d)
Perform motion transfer by reference video. (e) Perform high-quality text-to-video generation.

Abstract

sumption, generation quality, and user controllability. As
an efficient alternative to prohibitive training-based video
generation, existing zero-shot video generation methods
cannot generate high-quality and motion-consistent videos
under the control of layouts and movement trajectories. In
this paper, we propose a novel zero-shot method named IMZero that ameliorates instance-level motion controllable
video generation with enhanced control accuracy, motion
consistency, and richness of details to address this prob-

Controllability of video generation has been recently
concerned in addition to the quality of generated videos.
The main challenge to controllable video generation is to
synthesize videos based on user-specified instance spatial
locations and movement trajectories. However, existing
methods suffer from a dilemma between the resource con* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors: Xiaopeng Zhang; Wenrui Dai; Junni Zou.

7265

