This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DynFocus: Dynamic Cooperative Network Empowers LLMs with Video
Understanding
Yudong Han1♢ , Qingpei Guo2† , Liyuan Pan1† , Liu Liu3 , Yu Guan4 , Ming Yang2
1

Beijing Institute of Technology, 2 Ant Group,
3
KooMap Dept., Huawei, 4 University of Warwick
hanyudong.sdu@gmail.com, qingpei.gqp@antgroup.com, liyuan.pan@bit.edu.cn
liuliu33@huawei.com, Yu.Guan@warwick.ac.uk, m.yang@antgroup.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown their ability on
general AI [24]. Vision Language Models (VLMs) extend
the capabilities of LLMs to process visual data, demonstrating proficiency in tasks such as image captioning and visual
question answering. However, challenges arise in video
understanding, especially with long-term videos, where representing consecutive video frames requires an excessive
1 The implementation is provided in supplementary materials.

† Corresponding authors. ♢ Work done during internship at Ant Group.

Redundant Ratio (%)

The challenge in LLM-based video understanding lies
in preserving visual and semantic information in long
videos while maintaining a memory-affordable token count.
However, redundancy and correspondence in videos have
hindered the performance potential of existing methods.
Through statistical learning on current datasets, we observe that redundancy occurs in both repeated and answerirrelevant frames, and the corresponding frames vary with
different questions. This suggests the possibility of adopting dynamic encoding to balance detailed video information preservation with token budget reduction. To this end,
we propose a dynamic cooperative network, DynFocus, for
memory-efficient video encoding in this paper. Specifically, i)
a Dynamic Event Prototype Estimation (DPE) module to dynamically select meaningful frames for question answering;
(ii) a Compact Cooperative Encoding (CCE) module that
encodes meaningful frames with detailed visual appearance
and the remaining frames with sketchy perception separately.
We evaluate our method on five publicly available benchmarks, and experimental results consistently demonstrate
that our method achieves competitive performance. Code
is available at https://github.com/Simon98-AI/
DynFocus

50

Temporal Repetitive Frame

Answer-irrelevant Frame

40
30
20
10
0

VCGBench

MLVU-G

LVBench VideoMME-SVideoMME-MVideoMME-L
(a) Redundancy

Q1: What is she doing on the stairs at 08:00? A1: She is dancing clown dance

Q2：What does the vlogger do on the third day? A2: She watches bread made
by the sea, visits a waterfall, eats at restaurant, and then sees the aurora

(b) Correspondence

Figure 1. Concept of redundancy and correspondence in our
pipeline. (a) The proportion of redundancy for video datasets1 .
Redundancy includes both repeated and answer-irrelevant frames.
Repeatance gauges the redundancy between consecutive frames,
while answer-irrelevance refers to frames with a marginal contribution to question answering. (b) An example of correspondence.
Given a video, we highlight the corresponding question/answer
pairs and frames using red and blue boxes, respectively.

number of tokens, leading to high memory usage.
Recent attempts use average pooling, attention, or dynamic masking to reduce video tokens spatially [23, 30, 37,
39, 58]. However, redundant frames lead to the neglect of
key visual details. Several works [17, 57] capture visual appearance with memory banks to preserve key details. However, the key details vary in correspondence to questions,
which can easily result in the loss of keyframes from long

8512

