This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Enhanced Image Inpainting:
Mitigating Unwanted Object Insertion and Preserving Color Consistency

1

Yikai Wang1,2 *, Chenjie Cao1,3,4∗ , Junqiu Yu1∗ , Ke Fan1 , Xiangyang Xue1 , Yanwei Fu1
Fudan University 2 Nanyang Technological University 3 Alibaba DAMO Academy 4 Hupan Lab
yi-kai.wang@outlook.com, yanweifu@fudan.edu.cn
Project page (include code, model, and dataset): https://yikai-wang.github.io/asuka

Abstract

Input Image with mask

Recent advances in image inpainting increasingly use generative models to handle large irregular masks. However,
these models can create unrealistic inpainted images due
to two main issues: (1) Unwanted object insertion: Even
with unmasked areas as context, generative models may
still generate arbitrary objects in the masked region that
don’t align with the rest of the image. (2) Color inconsistency: Inpainted regions often have color shifts that causes
a smeared appearance, reducing image quality. Retraining the generative model could help solve these issues, but
it’s costly since state-of-the-art latent-based diffusion and
rectified flow models require a three-stage training process: training a VAE, training a generative U-Net or transformer, and fine-tuning for inpainting. Instead, this paper
proposes a post-processing approach, dubbed as ASUKA
(Aligned Stable inpainting with UnKnown Areas prior), to
improve inpainting models. To address unwanted object
insertion, we leverage a Masked Auto-Encoder (MAE) for
reconstruction-based priors. This mitigates object hallucination while maintaining the model’s generation capabilities. To address color inconsistency, we propose a specialized VAE decoder that treats latent-to-image decoding
as a local harmonization task, significantly reducing color
shifts for color-consistent inpainting. We validate ASUKA
on SD 1.5 and FLUX inpainting variants with Places2 and
MISATO, our proposed diverse collection of datasets. Results show that ASUKA mitigates object hallucination and
improves color consistency over standard diffusion and rectified flow models and other inpainting methods.

MAE

SD

ASUKA-SD

Figure 1. Image inpainting on 10242 images. ASUKA solves
two issues existed in current diffusion and rectified flow inpainting
models: (1) Unwanted object insertion, where randomly elements
that are not aligned with the unmasked region are generated; (2)
Color-inconsistency: the color shift of the generated masked region, causing smear-like traces. ASUKA proposes a post-training
procedure for these models, significantly mitigates object hallucination and improves color consistency of inpainted results.

1. Introduction

ditional inpainting algorithms [5, 19, 28, 36, 56] often result in blurred synthesis when reconstructing masked regions [53]. The Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
based models could fill complex mask structures, achieving impressive inpainting results [8, 22, 25, 31, 40, 50, 60,
62, 83]. However, they still struggle with general challenging inpainting cases, particularly in filling large holes. Recently, more powerful generative model like Stable Diffusion [55] and FLUX [35], with their large model capacity
and extensive training dataset, act as versatile tools for image inpainting. These models mainly follow the latent generation pipeline, first encode the image into a small latent
space, then train the inpainting model in this latent space.
However, these latent-based generative inpainting models still suffer from some issues, causing the inpainted im-

Image inpainting [5] fills masked areas of images while
maintaining consistency with the unmasked regions. TraFirst three authors contribute equally. Most parts of this work was
done when Yikai was at Fudan. Yanwei Fu is the corresponding author.

23237

