This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RelationField: Relate Anything in Radiance Fields
Sebastian Koch1,2
Johanna Wald3
Mirco Colosi2
Narunas Vaskevicius2
Pedro Hermosilla4
Federico Tombari3,5
Timo Ropinski1
1

2

University Ulm

Composition

Bosch Center for AI

Compare

3

Google

Spatial

4

TU Vienna

5

TU Munich

A ordance

Same object class

Support
Standing on

Cleaning

On top of

Part of

RelationField

xyz
xyz
d

Rel. feat.
Obj. feat.

Network

Density

rgb

Figure 1. Open-Vocabulary Relationship Understanding. We propose RelationField, the first framework to extract open-vocabulary
inter-object relationships directly from neural radiance fields. RelationField can answer a wide variety of relationship queries, such as
“composition”, “compare”, “spatial”, “affordance” and “support” relationships.

Abstract
Neural radiance fields are an emerging 3D scene representation and recently even been extended to learn features for scene understanding by distilling open-vocabulary
features from vision-language models. However, current
method primarily focus on object-centric representations,
supporting object segmentation or detection, while understanding semantic relationships between objects remains
largely unexplored. To address this gap, we propose RelationField, the first method to extract inter-object relationships directly from neural radiance fields. RelationField represents relationships between objects as pairs of rays within
a neural radiance field, effectively extending its formulation
to include implicit relationship queries. To teach RelationField complex, open-vocabulary relationships, relationship
knowledge is distilled from multi-modal LLMs. To evaluate
RelationField, we solve open-vocabulary 3D scene graph
generation tasks and relationship-guided instance segmentation, achieving state-of-the-art performance in both tasks.
See the project website at relationfield.github.io.

cal and the digital world, by enabling machines to perceive
environments in a way similar to humans. In robotics, 3D
scene understanding is required to navigate complex environments, interact with objects, and perform tasks autonomously. In AR/VR it enables realistic and immersive
experiences, e.g., by allowing accurate placing of and interacting with virtual content in the real world. Notably, many
applications require a level of understanding that goes beyond just localizing and segmenting a known list of objects
categories [8, 34, 37, 44] but are also able to segment novel
entities beyond the closed-set class assumption [16, 36, 48].

1. Introduction

True holistic and adaptable scene understanding needs to
go a step further and not only reconstruct and identify individual objects within a scene but also understand complex
inter-object relationships, functionalities, and the overall
context of the environment. This aspect of scene understanding, particularly the ability to recognize and reason about
relationships between objects, is often overlooked. Yet, it is
essential to interact with the surroundings in a sophisticated,
adaptive and natural manner. Significant progress has been
made in understanding relationships in 2D images, mainly
driven by the exploration of foundation models [4, 24, 39]
and in particular by multi-modal LLMs [1, 12]. These mod-

3D scene understanding bridges the gap between the physi-

21706

