This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GoLF-NRT: Integrating Global Context and Local Geometry for Few-Shot View
Synthesis*
You Wang1† Li Fang1† Hao Zhu2 Fei Hu1 Long Ye1 Zhan Ma2
1
Key Laboratory of Media Audio and Video (Communication University of China),
Ministry of Education, Beijing 100024, China
2
School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{wyou621, lifang8902, hufei, yelong}@cuc.edu.cn

{zhuhao photo, mazhan}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have transformed novel
view synthesis by modeling scene-specific volumetric representations directly from images. While generalizable NeRF
models can generate novel views across unknown scenes
by learning latent ray representations, their performance
heavily depends on a large number of multi-view observations. However, with limited input views, these methods experience significant degradation in rendering quality. To address this limitation, we propose GoLF-NRT:
a Global and Local feature Fusion-based Neural Rendering Transformer. GoLF-NRT enhances generalizable neural rendering from few input views by leveraging a 3D
transformer with efficient sparse attention to capture global
scene context. In parallel, it integrates local geometric
features extracted along the epipolar line, enabling highquality scene reconstruction from as few as 1 to 3 input
views. Furthermore, we introduce an adaptive sampling
strategy based on attention weights and kernel regression,
improving the accuracy of transformer-based neural rendering. Extensive experiments on public datasets show that
GoLF-NRT achieves state-of-the-art performance across
varying numbers of input views, highlighting the effectiveness and superiority of our approach. Code is available at
https://github.com/KLMAV-CUC/GoLF-NRT.

Target View

Source View 1
(a)

Source View 2

Only Local Geometry

Only Global Context
(b)

GoLF-NRT

Figure 1. The integration of global context and local geometry in GoLF-NRT significantly enhances reconstruction accuracy.
(a) Local geometric features (red) are extracted along the epipolar line of the target pixel, effectively capturing local geometric constraints, while surrounding features (yellow) provide the
global context. (b) Relying solely on local features can introduce
depth ambiguities and artifacts, while using only global features
often fails to capture fine details. By combining both, GoLF-NRT
achieves more precise and detailed reconstructions.

1. Introduction

optimization with a large number captured images for each
scene, hindering their widespread adoption in real-world
applications. These constraints underscore the necessity of
few-shot generalizable neural rendering, which aims to render unseen scenes from novel viewpoints using a limited
number of input views.
To address the generalization issue, existing methods
mainly introduce explicit or implicit priors to extract local
geometrical features, such as the depth maps [12, 36], cost
volumes [6, 55, 65], geometric consistency across views
[1, 24, 33], and epipolar features encoded in attention maps
[38, 39, 49]. However, these methods often require many
input views to accurately capture geometry. With fewer
views, they tend to produce over-smoothed textures or ar-

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [31] and its subsequent refinements [2–4, 42, 64] have achieved remarkable success
in generating realistic, high-resolution, and view-consistent
scenes for novel view synthesis. Despite these advancements, conventional NeRF approaches require expensive
* This work is supported by National Key R&D Program of China under
Grant No. 2021YFF0900500, and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 62001432.
† You Wang and Li Fang contributed equally to this work. Li Fang is
the corresponding author.

21349

