This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discovering Fine-Grained Visual-Concept Relations by Disentangled Optimal
Transport Concept Bottleneck Models
Yan Xie1 * Zequn Zeng1 * Hao Zhang1†
Yucheng Ding Yi Wang1 Zhengjue Wang2 Bo Chen1 Hongwei Liu1
1
National Key Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, 710071, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Service Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an, 710071, China
1

{yanxie0904, zzequn99, zhanghao xidian}@163.com, bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Concept
Bottleneck

Black-Box
𝑔 𝑥|𝑐

Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) try to make the
decision-making process transparent by exploring an intermediate concept space between the input image and the output prediction. Existing CBMs just learn coarse-grained
relations between the whole image and the concepts, less
considering local image information, leading to two main
drawbacks: i) they often produce spurious visual-concept
relations, hence decreasing model reliability; and ii) though
CBMs could explain the importance of every concept to
the final prediction, it is still challenging to tell which visual region produces the prediction. To solve these problems, this paper proposes a Disentangled Optimal Transport CBM (DOT-CBM) framework to explore fine-grained
visual-concept relations between local image patches and
concepts. Specifically, we model the concept prediction
process as a transportation problem between the patches
and concepts, thereby achieving explicit fine-grained feature alignment. We also incorporate orthogonal projection losses within the modality to enhance local feature
disentanglement. To further address the shortcut issues
caused by statistical biases in the data, we utilize the visual
saliency map and concept label statistics as transportation
priors. Thus, DOT-CBM can visualize inversion heatmaps,
provide more reliable concept predictions, and produce
more accurate class predictions. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed DOT-CBM achieves
SOTA performance on several tasks, including image classification, local part detection and out-of-distribution generalization. Codes are available in supplementary material.

𝑥

𝑊𝑓

𝑦

…

Optimal
Transport

Linear
Classifier

𝑐1 : Seabird’s hooked bill
𝑐2 : White wing
𝑐3 : Webbed Feet
𝑐4 : Forked tail
…

Concept
Bottleneck

𝑐

𝑐1 : Seabird’s hooked bill
𝑐2 : White wing
𝑐3 : Webbed Feet
𝑐4 : Forked tail
…

Vanilla CBM

Class

𝑊𝑓

𝑦

Linear
Classifier

Ours

(a) Brief comparison about the coarse-grained design of vanilla
CBM and fine-grained design of our proposed DOT-CBM.
Part-Object

Part-Part

Seabird’s hooked bill

Webbed Feet

Forked tail

Ours

Vanilla CBM

Part-Background

(b) Inversion heatmap visualization.

Figure 1. Comparison between vanilla CBM and our proposed
DOT-CBM, including architecture design and inversion heatmap
for concept predictions. (a) Due to the black-box mapping from
images to concepts, Vanilla CBM needs Grad-CAM [37] techniques to locate concept predictions back to image space while
DOT-CBM can provide an explicit inversion heatmap visualization. (b) Due to lack of fine-grained alignment, vanilla CBM
produces spurious correlations in three levels of granularity (partbackground, part-object and part-part level) that mislocalizes the
local concept to the background, the whole object, and incorrect
local region.

chine learning algorithms [6, 14]. Compared with post-hoc
explanation methods [37] for black-box models, designing explicit interpretability during modeling and learning
processes is beneficial to obtaining more natural explanations [8].
The Concept Bottleneck Model (CBM) [17], a representative interpretable image classification model, first predicts a pre-defined set of concepts from images and then

1. Introduction
Explainable artificial intelligence aims to allow human
users to comprehend and trust the output created by ma* Equal contribution.

Concept
Predictor

𝑐

Class

inversion

Abstract

†Corresponding authors

30199

