This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ACL: Activating Capability of Linear Attention for Image Restoration
Yubin Gu1 , Yuan Meng1 , Jiayi Ji1,2 , Xiaoshuai Sun1 *
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China
2
National University of Singapore, Singapore
{guyubin,aprilmyy}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, jjyxmu@gmail.com, xssun@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Image restoration (IR), a key area in computer vision, has
entered a new era with deep learning. Recent research
has shifted toward Selective State Space Models (Mamba)
to overcome CNNs’ limited receptive fields and Transformers’ computational inefficiency. However, due to Mamba’s
inherent one-dimensional scanning limitations, recent approaches have introduced multi-directional scanning to bolster inter-sequence correlations. Despite these enhancements, these methods still struggle with managing local
pixel correlations across various directions. Moreover, the
recursive computation in Mamba’s SSM leads to reduced
efficiency. To resolve these issues, we exploit the mathematical congruences between linear attention and SSM within
Mamba to propose a novel model, ACL, which leverages
news designs to Activate the Capability of Linear attention for IR. ACL integrates linear attention blocks instead
of SSM within Mamba, serving as the core component of
encoders/decoders, and aims to preserve a global perspective while boosting computational efficiency. Furthermore,
we have designed a simple yet robust local enhancement
module with multi-scale dilated convolutions to extract both
coarse and fine features to improve local detail recovery.
Experimental results confirm that our ACL model excels in
classical IR tasks such as de-raining and de-blurring, while
maintaining relatively low parameter counts and FLOPs1 .

Output

Output

Output

Output

CNN

Transformer

SSM-based
Mamba

LA-based
Mamba

CNN

Norm

Norm

Norm

Input

Input

Input

Weak in Global Views

Weak in Efficiency

Weak in Multi-Views

(a) CNN-based
Block

(b) Transformerbased Block

(c) SSM-based
Mamba Block

Before

VS

Ours

Input

Balance

(d) LA-based
Mamba Block

Figure 1. Comparison of our method’s core block design with
those of recent mainstream approaches.

1. Introduction

Over the past decade, with the rapid development of deep
learning, many fields have been propelled forward, such as
image segmentation and generation [11, 12, 14, 17, 48], and
of course, IR as well. The initial IR models were primarily
based on CNN designs [6, 41], whose translational invariance and high inferential efficiency have made them widely
applied, as depicted in the core structure in Fig. 1(a). However, these CNN-based models face challenges in processing global features and often require stacking additional network layers to compensate for this deficiency. With the rise
of attention mechanisms [34], particularly the application
of the Transformer, which boasts exceptional global feature
modeling capabilities, an increasing number of researchers
have shifted toward Transformer-based designs [23, 36, 44],
achieving remarkable restoration results, as shown in the
core structure in Fig. 1 (b). Although the Transformer
broadens the global perspective, its softmax attention mechanism’s quadratic computational complexity significantly
reduces efficiency during inference.
Recently, state-space models from the field of control
science, especially the Mamba model [8], have been proposed by related IR methods [13, 30] demonstrating superior training and inference efficiency on sequential data.
These models have even outperformed some Transformer-

In the field of image processing, restoring degraded images to clarity is a crucial technology. High-quality image restoration (IR) methods play a key role in ensuring the
smooth progression of downstream vision tasks. Vanilla IR
methods rely primarily on manually designed feature extraction, but often perform poorly when faced with complicated degradation factors in reality.
* Corresponding Author: Xiaoshuai Sun
1 https://github.com/ClimBin/ACLNet

17913

