This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploration-Driven Generative Interactive Environments
Nedko Savov1,†

Naser Kazemi1
Mohammad Mahdi1
Danda Pani Paudel1
Xi Wang1,2,3
Luc Van Gool1
1
2
3
INSAIT, Sofia University ”St. Kliment Ohridski”
ETH Zurich
TU Munich

Abstract

A:none,B:kick ↑:fly...
A:jump,B:shoot, ↑:none...

Modern world models require costly and timeconsuming collection of large video datasets with action
demonstrations by people or by environment-specific
agents. To simplify training, we focus on using many virtual
environments for inexpensive, automatically collected
interaction data. Genie [5], a recent multi-environment
world model, demonstrates simulation abilities of many
environments with shared behavior. Unfortunately, training
their model requires expensive demonstrations. Therefore,
we propose a training framework merely using a random
agent in virtual environments. While the model trained
in this manner exhibits good controls, it is limited by the
random exploration possibilities. To address this limitation,
we propose AutoExplore Agent - an exploration agent that
entirely relies on the uncertainty of the world model,
delivering diverse data from which it can learn the best.
Our agent is fully independent of environment-specific
rewards and thus adapts easily to new environments. With
this approach, the pretrained multi-environment model can
quickly adapt to new environments achieving video fidelity
and controllability improvement.
In order to obtain automatically large-scale interaction
datasets for pretraining, we group environments with similar behavior and controls. To this end, we annotate the behavior and controls of 974 virtual environments - a dataset
that we name RetroAct. For building our model, we
first create an open implementation of Genie - GenieRedux and apply enhancements and adaptations in our version GenieRedux-G. Our code and data are available at
https://github.com/insait-institute/GenieRedux.

(e.g. Platformer;
left,right,crouch,jump)

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Our proposed world model training framework. It
consists of a pretrained multi-environment world model on random agent data, and a new AutoExplore Agent that explores an
environment and delivers diverse data for fine-tuning.

Learning from interactive environments allows us to understand and represent the rules, the possible actions, and the
consequences that govern them. As an alternative to labori†Corresponding author. firstname.secondname@insait.ai

27597

ously hand-coded synthetic simulators, world models have
emerged as deep learning tools for realistic environment
modeling entirely from observations, commonly images of
the observed environment [1, 5, 37, 65].
Previous work such as [19, 23, 33] uses light world models to support goal-driven agents with goal-specific state
representations. The focus is on coarse future predictions,
not on their high visual quality. In contrast, the objective of
recent world models is to achieve high-quality future predictions given past observations and actions. Such recent
models are able to offer realistic action execution and even
real-time interaction with people [1, 58]. This has become
possible with the rise of diffusion, transformers [14, 59],
and state space models [17], and by borrowing architectural
choices from video generation pipelines [51, 60]. Typically,
these generative models are designed to closely match a single selected environment. One of the state-of-the-art models, Genie, distinguishes itself by being trained on many
visually diverse environments with similar dynamics, thus

