This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MobilePortrait: Real-Time One-Shot Neural Head Avatars on Mobile Devices
Jianwen Jiang1 * † Gaojie Lin1∗ Zhengkun Rong1 Chao Liang1
Yongming Zhu1 Jiaqi Yang1 Tianyun Zhong2‡
1
Bytedance Intelligent Creation, 2 Zhejiang University
{jianwen.alan,liangchao.0412,yjq850207131}@gmail.com
zhongtianyun@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing neural head avatars methods have achieved significant progress in the image quality and motion range of
portrait animation. However, these methods prioritize effectiveness over computational overhead. This paper presents
MobilePortrait, a lightweight one-shot neural head avatars
method that reduces learning complexity by integrating external knowledge into both the motion modeling and image synthesis, enabling real-time inference on mobile devices. Specifically, We introduce a mixed keypoint representation of explicit and implicit keypoints for precise motion
modeling and equip it with precomputed visual features to
enhance both facial and background synthesis. With these
designs, our model can match state-of-the-art performance
using UNet with low FLOPs as the backbone, requiring less
than 1/10 the computational demand. It has been validated
to reach speeds of over 50 FPS on mobile devices and support both video and audio-driven inputs.

1. Introduction
One-shot neural head avatar (NHA) is a technology that
animates a single facial image according to a specified
driving signal, which could be video or audio, to synthesize a portrait video. In recent years, significant improvements [5, 13, 22, 32, 34, 35, 37–39, 41, 45] have been made
in the quality of the generated image and the range of motion. However, existing approaches concentrate on achieving realism and robustness in image synthesis with models that are increasingly complex. With advances in large
language models and widespread smartphone use, mobile
avatars are set to become a key AI interaction interface.
This prospect drove us to develop an efficient and effective one-shot neural head avatar model optimized for mobile
platforms.
* Equal Contribution
† Project Lead
‡ Done during an internship at ByteDance.

15920

Initially, we attempted to convert existing SOTA models into ones that could be deployed on mobile devices.
However, we found that these models incorporated many
complex modules in their structural design, such as memory modules, dynamic convolutions [13], attentions [13,
20], multiscale feature warping [13, 34, 45] or image-toplane [38] methods, which cause many adaptation issues.
Therefore, we start to reflect on the rationale underlying
these methods and aim to construct a lightweight NHA
model through the most essential and simple design.
Recent methods, Real3D [38] and MCNet [13] represent
two distinct categories of motion modeling: explicit facial
movement modeling and implicit global motion modeling.
Explicit modeling [22, 38, 41] methods often involve predefined facial keypoints or 3D face representation to capture motion driven by facial movements. This results in undefined motion in regions beyond the face, necessitating a
powerful motion network to extrapolate and fill in the motion for these areas based solely on facial movements. Implicit modeling methods [13, 24, 25, 35, 45] use an encoder
to extract global and image-level motion from inputs without facial priors, representing motion with neural keypoints
or latents, which requires a powerful motion network to define facial and background movements.
From the Figure 1, we can observe that the explicit modeling method, Real3D, produces poor results in areas not
defined by the 3DMM, such as inside the mouth and around
the neck. Meanwhile, the implicit modeling method, MCNet, produces notable blurriness at the boundary between
the person and the background, possibly due to the lack
of an explicit facial region prior. This observation inspired
us to develop a more holistic and efficient approach to motion modeling that combines face-specific knowledge with
global motion representations, complementing each other.
The results shown in Figure 1 not only reveal issues
with motion capturing but also indicate inadequate appearance synthesis capability of the model. Recent advancements [1, 15, 23, 27, 31] in 3D fields have been driven by
the integration of multiview designs into network. The ra-

