This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ChatGarment: Garment Estimation, Generation and Editing
via Large Language Models
Siyuan Bian1,2

Chenghao Xu1,3 Yuliang Xiu1,4
Cewu Lu2 Michael J. Black1

Artur Grigorev1,5
†
Yao Feng7,8,

Zhen Liu1,6

1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
EPFL 4 Westlake University 5 ETH Zürich 6 Mila, University of Montreal
7
Meshcapade 8 Stanford University
chatgarment.github.io

“Estimate the sewing pattern”

(a) Input image

“I want to have a long-sleeve”

(b) Estimated sewing pattern, 3D garment, and its animation

(c) Input garment

(d) Edited sewing pattern

(e) Edited garment

Figure 1. As a multimodal 3D garment creator, ChatGarment understands both images and language. It can estimate complex 3D garments represented as
sewing patterns from a single image, which can be easily animated and simulated. It also supports garment editing based on text instructions.

Abstract

large-scale dataset of image-to-sewing-pattern and text-tosewing-pattern pairs through an automated data pipeline.
Extensive evaluations demonstrate ChatGarment’s ability
to accurately reconstruct, generate, and edit garments from
multimodal inputs, highlighting its potential to simplify workflows in fashion and gaming applications. Code and data
are available at https://chatgarment.github.io/.

We introduce ChatGarment, a novel approach that leverages large vision-language models (VLMs) to automate the
estimation, generation, and editing of 3D garments from
images or text descriptions. Unlike previous methods that
struggle in real-world scenarios or lack interactive editing capabilities, ChatGarment can estimate sewing patterns
from in-the-wild images or sketches, generate them from text
descriptions, and edit garments based on user instructions,
all within an interactive dialogue. These sewing patterns
can then be draped on a 3D body and animated. This is
achieved by finetuning a VLM to directly generate a JSON
file that includes both textual descriptions of garment types
and styles, as well as continuous numerical attributes. This
JSON file is then used to create sewing patterns through a
programming parametric model. To support this, we refine
the existing programming model, GarmentCode, by expanding its garment type coverage and simplifying its structure
for efficient VLM fine-tuning. Additionally, we construct a
†

1. Introduction
Imagine seeing a photo of someone in a nice looking outfit
that you would like for yourself or your 3D avatar. Our goal
is to take that photo and convert it into a 2D sewing pattern
and then enable the user to use language to edit the pattern,
for example, making the sleeves longer or editing the neckline. We then drape the garment on a 3D body and animate
it. This is illustrated in Fig. 1. With this approach, given just
an image and/or text, we construct sewing patterns for 3D
garments that can be immediately used in fashion or gaming
applications. This lightweight process is in stark contrast
to how sewing patterns and 3D garments are traditionally
created by an artist or clothing designer. In contrast to the
traditional labor-intensive process, our approach exploits

This work was done while YF was at Meshcapade.

2924

