This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Motion Transfer with Diffusion Transformers
Alexander Pondaven1

Aliaksandr Siarohin2
1

Sergey Tulyakov2
2

University of Oxford

Snap Inc.

Philip Torr1
3

Fabio Pizzati1,3

MBZUAI

ditflow.github.io

Reference

DiT

DiT

DiTFlow

A lion walking through a busy market

Robot walking on a sidewalk

Motorbiker driving around moonlit sand dunes

Astronaut walking on the moon

Figure 1. Overview of DiTFlow. We propose a motion transfer method tailored for video Diffusion Transformers (DiT). We exploit a
training-free strategy to transfer the motion of a reference video (top) to newly synthesized video content with arbitrary prompts (bottom).
By optimizing DiT-specific positional embeddings, we can also synthesize new videos in a zero-shot manner.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have rapidly emerged as the global standard for visual content synthesis, largely due to their performance at scale. By scaling the model size, it has been possible to train on increasingly large datasets, even including
billions of samples, incredibly boosting synthesis capabilities [4, 12, 61, 66]. This trend is especially pronounced
in video synthesis, where generating realistic, frame-byframe visuals with coherent motion relies heavily on extensive data and large models. In this context, a particularly promising development is the introduction of diffusion
transformers (DiTs) [37]. Inspired by transformers, DiTs
propose a new class of diffusion model that allows for improved scalability, ultimately achieving impressive realism
in generation, as demonstrated by their adoption in many
scale-oriented open source [53, 61] and commercial systems [34, 38].

We propose DiTFlow, a method for transferring the
motion of a reference video to a newly synthesized one,
designed specifically for Diffusion Transformers (DiT).
We first process the reference video with a pre-trained
DiT to analyze cross-frame attention maps and extract
a patch-wise motion signal called the Attention Motion
Flow (AMF). We guide the latent denoising process in an
optimization-based, training-free, manner by optimizing latents with our AMF loss to generate videos reproducing the
motion of the reference one. We also apply our optimization
strategy to transformer positional embeddings, granting us
a boost in zero-shot motion transfer capabilities. We evaluate DiTFlow against recently published methods, outperforming all across multiple metrics and human evaluation.
Corr.: pondaven@robots.ox.ac.uk fabio.pizzati@mbzuai.ac.ae

22911

