This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlexGS: Train Once, Deploy Everywhere with Many-in-One
Flexible 3D Gaussian Splatting
Hengyu Liu1 *, Yuehao Wang2∗ , Chenxin Li1∗ , Ruisi Cai2,3† , Kevin Wang2 ,
Wuyang Li1 , Pavlo Molchanov3 , Peihao Wang2 , Zhangyang Wang2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 University of Texas at Austin, 3 Nvidia

Abstract
3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) has enabled various applications in 3D scene representation and novel view synthesis due to its efficient rendering capabilities. However,
3DGS demands relatively significant GPU memory, limiting
its use on devices with restricted computational resources.
Previous approaches have focused on pruning less important Gaussians, effectively compressing 3DGS but often requiring a fine-tuning stage and lacking adaptability for the
specific memory needs of different devices. In this work,
we present an elastic inference method for 3DGS. Given
an input for the desired model size, our method selects
and transforms a subset of Gaussians, achieving substantial rendering performance without additional fine-tuning.
We introduce a tiny learnable module that controls Gaussian selection based on the input percentage, along with
a transformation module that adjusts the selected Gaussians to complement the performance of the reduced model.
Comprehensive experiments on ZipNeRF, MipNeRF and
Tanks&Temples scenes demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach. Code is available at https://flexgs.github.io/.

Figure 1. Comparison between compression methods for 3D
Gaussian Splatting. (a) Traditional case-by-case compression requires separate fine-tuning for each ratio. (b) Our elastic inference
enables dynamic compression at any ratio without re-training,
adaptively balancing quality and computational costs for diverse
deployment scenarios.

1. Introduction

sian primitives, each with attributes such as position, scaling, rotation, opacity, and color, leading to significant memory overhead. For instance, as reported in [29], deploying
and rendering a city-scale scene (over 20 million Gaussians)
requires at least 4 GB of networking bandwidth and GPU
memory, which is not always affordable to smartphones and
laptops with weak GPU. To mitigate this, recent work compresses 3DGS via pruning [10, 37], which employs heuristics to estimate the importance of Gaussians and subsequently prune the less important ones. The pruning process is typically followed by an additional fine-tuning stage,
which requires around 16.7% of the original training cost to
restore rendering quality for each compression.
Second, even efficient pruned 3DGS models often struggle to meet the diverse hardware constraints of different
deployment environments. For instance, as a potential application of 3DGS, virtual reality city roaming and room
tours require the deployment of 3DGS-represented scenes
across various devices: PC-connected headsets (e.g., Valve
Index® ) rely on consumer-grade GPUs in the connected PC;
while standalone headsets (e.g., Meta Quest® ) feature integrated GPUs with limited memory and processing power.
Additionally, different device models (such as those in the
iPhone® series) may have varying configurations of computing and graphics units, further increasing the diversity of
computational demands. Although one can compress an op-

Neural scene representations have significantly advanced
the field of novel view synthesis by enabling the efficient
and high-fidelity reconstruction of complex 3D scenes.
Among these, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [15, 18, 28,
50–52] has emerged as a prominent technique due to its
efficient rendering capabilities and ability to handle largescale scenes. By representing scenes as a collection of
anisotropic Gaussians, 3DGS strikes a balance between rendering speed and visual quality, making it suitable for realtime applications. Despite 3DGS being a promising technique for various applications and platforms, its widespread
adoption faces two major challenges. First, standard 3DGS
models are costly, requiring users to store millions of Gaus* denotes Equal Contribution, † denotes Project Lead.

16336

