This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BimArt: A Unified Approach for the Synthesis of
3D Bimanual Interaction with Articulated Objects
Wanyue Zhang1,2 Rishabh Dabral1,2 Vladislav Golyanik1 Vasileios Choutas3
Eduardo Alvarado1 Thabo Beeler3
Marc Habermann1,2 Christian Theobalt1,2
1
2
3
MPI for Informatics, SIC
VIA Center
Google

Figure 1. Given the mesh of an articulated object and its 7 DoF trajectories with 6D global states and 1D articulation, BimArt generates
diverse and plausible hand motions that justify the object’s trajectory. Distance-based contact maps act as intermediate features for handobject interaction, enabling our method to generate diverse and realistic bimanual motions.

Abstract
We present BimArt, a novel generative approach for synthesizing 3D bimanual hand interactions with articulated
objects. Unlike prior works, we do not rely on a reference grasp, a coarse hand trajectory, or separate modes
for grasping and articulating. To achieve this, we first generate distance-based contact maps conditioned on the object trajectory with an articulation-aware feature representation, revealing rich bimanual patterns for manipulation.
The learned contact prior is then used to guide our hand
motion generator, producing diverse and realistic bimanual motions for object movement and articulation. Our
work offers key insights into feature representation and contact prior for articulated objects, demonstrating their effectiveness in taming the complex, high-dimensional space
of bimanual hand-object interactions. Through comprehensive quantitative experiments, we demonstrate a clear
step towards simplified and high-quality hand-object animations that surpass the state of the art in motion quality and diversity. Project page: https://vcai.mpiinf.mpg.de/projects/bimart/.

1. Introduction
Humans engage with articulated objects in countless ways
throughout the day, whether it is twisting the cap of a water
bottle, tilting a laptop screen for better viewing, or deftly

slicing through paper with a pair of scissors. Although
these interactions seem effortless for humans, they are challenging to generate computationally due to the highly complex and high-dimensional space of bimanual hand animations that not only rigidly move an object, but also generate meaningful object articulations. From a 3D modeling
perspective, these motions require a deeper understanding
of the individual object parts, their interaction affordances,
and their geometry.
Despite substantial progress in 3D character animation
research [20, 35, 57, 82] driven by deep learning and generative models, recent works either focus on synthesizing
whole-body without considering hands [57, 70], or generate hand-object interaction assuming objects are rigid [9,
16, 78]. Very few studies address 3D bimanual interactions with articulated objects. Methods that are designed
for articulated objects either work in a category-specific
manner [83] for unimanual motions, cannot simultaneously
perform articulation and object root translation and rotation [79], or rely on noisy hand-object interaction sequences
as input and refine hand motions afterwards [39]. Some
works [16, 79, 83] also assume the initial or goal grasp to
be known, which can be a restrictive assumption for nonexpert users.
In contrast to prior works, BimArt operates with relaxed
assumptions: it does not assume a known reference grasp, is
not trained in an object-specific manner, does not require a

27694

