This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HiFi-Portrait: Zero-shot Identity-preserved Portrait Generation
with High-fidelity Multi-face Fusion
Yifang Xu1*
1

Nanjing University

Benxiang Zhai1*
2

Yunzhuo Sun2

Dalian University of Technology

{xyf, zbx}@smail.nju.edu.cn,

3

Ming Li3

Yang Li1

Sidan Du1†

Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology

sunyunzhuomail.dlut.edu.cn,

mingli@nuist.edu.cn,

{yogo, coff128}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advancements in diffusion-based technologies have
made significant strides, particularly in identity-preserved
portrait generation (IPG). However, when using multiple
reference images from the same ID, existing methods typically
produce lower-fidelity portraits and struggle to customize
face attributes precisely. To address these issues, this paper
presents HiFi-Portrait, a high-fidelity method for zero-shot
portrait generation. Specifically, we first introduce the face
refiner and landmark generator to obtain fine-grained multiface features and 3D-aware face landmarks. The landmarks
include the reference ID and the target attributes. Then, we
design HiFi-Net to fuse multi-face features and align them
with landmarks, which improves ID fidelity and face control.
In addition, we devise an automated pipeline to construct
an ID-based dataset for training HiFi-Portrait. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate that our method surpasses
the SOTA approaches in face similarity and controllability.
Furthermore, our method is also compatible with previous
SDXL-based works.

Figure 1. (a) Previous multi-face methods lack face location
information, obtaining poor results. (b) InstantID only utilizes
a single reference image, which limits its performance. (c) Our
method fuses multi-faces and aligns them with landmarks via HiFiNet, achieving high-fidelity ID-preservation. For a more concise
presentation, we omit the face encoder.

ation within seconds without fine-tuning during inference.
Among them, InstantID [51] is a representative work, as
depicted in Fig.1 (b), utilizing five keypoints (from target
face) to guide the reference face in IdentityNet to achieve
realistic IPG. Yet, it only considers one reference image
during training, limiting its performance. Inspired by face
feature fusion [28], some follow-up works [14, 32, 64] attempt using Adapter [61] to inject multi-face embeddings
from the same ID, as illustrated in Fig.1 (a). However, these
methods tend to generate lower-fidelity portraits due to two
factors: (1) Adapter provides weaker control compared to
IdentityNet [51], and (2) the absence of facial positional
guidance during multi-face fusion, resulting in inadequate
multi-face alignment. In addition, all the above approaches
cannot precisely control facial expressions and postures by
relying solely on text prompts.

1. Introduction
Identity-preserved portrait generation (IPG) has garnered
significant attention in the past few years because of its
potential applications in image animation, virtual try-ons,
and e-commerce advertising. It aims to customize portraits
consistent with the reference ID. Early approaches [11, 48],
constrained by the capabilities of generative model [21], suffered from poor face similarity and image diversity. Thanks
to the rapid advancement of large-scale text-image datasets
[40, 46] and text-to-image diffusion models [42, 45], some
methods fine-tune UNet [19, 43] or LoRA [26, 34, 44, 54]
to create true-to-reality portraits. However, this fine-tuning
typically requires at least 30 minutes per ID, which limits
their practicality.
Recently, some studies [14, 23, 27, 51, 53, 55, 57, 59, 61,
64, 67] introduce a zero-shot setup, enabling portrait gener* Equal contributions.

To address the aforementioned challenges, this paper
proposes HiFi-Portrait for zero-shot IPG, a high-fidelity
framework incorporating multi-face fusion, as illustrated in
Fig. 2 and 3. To preserve more fine-grained ID information,
we first design the face refiner to encode local and global
facial features, generating multi-face features. Next, we
introduce HiFi-Net to integrate these multi-face features and
align them with 3D-aware face landmarks, thus enhancing

† Corresponding author.

5625

