This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continuous Space-Time Video Resampling with
Invertible Motion Steganography
Yuantong Zhang Zhenzhong Chen∗
Wuhan University
{yuantongzhang, zzchen}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract

+LJKUDWHIUDPHV

Space-time video resampling aims to conduct both spatialtemporal downsampling and upsampling processes to
achieve high-quality video reconstruction. Although there
has been much progress, some major challenges still exist, such as how to preserve motion information during
temporal resampling while avoiding blurring artifacts, and
how to achieve ﬂexible temporal and spatial resampling
factors. In this paper, we introduce an Invertible Motion
Steganography Module (IMSM), designed to embed motion
information from high-frame-rate videos into downsampled
frames with lower frame rates in a visually imperceptible
manner. Its reversible nature allows the motion information to be recovered, facilitating the reconstruction of highframe-rate videos. Furthermore, we propose a 3D implicit
feature modulation technique that enables continuous spatiotemporal resampling. With tailored training strategies,
our method supports ﬂexible frame rate conversions, including non-integer changes like 30 FPS to 24 FPS and
vice versa. Extensive experiments show that our method
signiﬁcantly outperforms existing solutions across multiple
datasets in various video resampling tasks with high ﬂexibility. Codes will be made available at the URL https:
//github.com/hahazh/CSTVR.

,

,W

,

7UDGLWLRQDO
IUDPHVNLSSLQJ

/RZUDWHIUDPHV

/HDUQDEOHWHPSRUDO
GRZQVDPSOH
/RZUDWHIUDPHV
ZLWKKLGGHQPRWLRQ

)RUZDUG
,060

/DWHQWIHDWXUHV

%DFNZDUG
,060

,

,Ö

,

,Ö

, ODWHQW

/HDUQDEOH
/HDUQDEOH
WHPSRUDOXSVDPSOH
WHPSRUDOXSVDPSOH

9LGHRIUDPH
LQWHUSRODWLRQ

3615


,W

,ODWHQW

D 7UDGLWLRQDOIUDPHVNLSSLQJDQG9),

3615


,ÖW

E  2XUPRWLRQVWHJDQRJUDSK\DSSURDFK

Figure 1. (a) Traditional ”frame-skipping and VFI”: Motion information is discarded, causing blur in reconstructed frames. (b) Our
motion steganography approach: The IMSM reversibly embeds
motion information into the low-frame-rate results in a imperceptible manner, aiding in frame reconstruction.

Given these practical considerations, video resampling aims
to jointly optimize the downsampling and upsampling processes to achieve better resampling results. Numerous techniques for image [14, 38, 43, 52, 54] and video resampling
[10, 15, 45] have been developed, aiming to enhance the
performance by optimizing both the upsampling and downsampling procedures. Despite years of progress, two key
challenges in video resampling remain underexplored: (1)
effective modeling of temporal resampling and (2) continuous space-time resampling. Regarding the ﬁrst issue, most existing methods primarily focus on spatial resampling, with less emphasis on temporal resampling. As
spatial downsampling does not require explicit strict requirements; various methods can be chosen as long as they

1. Introduction
Spatial and temporal downsampling are widely applied in
video processing to ensure compatibility across various devices and playback settings, facilitate storage [45, 54], and
enable efﬁcient transmission and preview [38]. Additionally, certain video coding standards [59] and high-level
computer vision tasks [6, 45, 47] utilize space-time downsampling to reduce complexity. However, reconstructing
high-ﬁdelity video from downsampled versions is challenging due to the inherently ill-posed nature of the problem.
∗ Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by National
Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62036005).

2116

