This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Lightweight UDF Learning Framework for 3D Reconstruction Based on Local
Shape Functions
Yanggeng Li2 * Fei Hou3,4 Junhui Hou5 Zhebin Zhang6 Shengfa Wang1
Na Lei1 Ying He2†
1
School of Software, Dalian University of Technology 2 CCDS, Nanyang Technological University
3
Key Laboratory of System Software (CAS) and SKLCS, Institute of Software, CAS
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong 6 OPPO
Jiangbei Hu1,2∗

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D surface reconstruction from raw point clouds is a significant and long-standing problem in computer graphics
and machine vision. Traditional techniques like Poisson
Surface Reconstruction [19] create an implicit indicator
function from oriented points and reconstruct the surface
by extracting an appropriate isosurface. The advancement
of artificial intelligence has led to the emergence of numerous neural network-based methods for 3D reconstruction. Among these, neural implicit representations have
gained significant influence, which utilize signed distance
fields (SDFs) [1, 2, 7, 33, 38, 42, 43] and occupancy fields
[6, 10, 29, 35] to implicitly depict 3D geometries. SDFs
and occupancy fields extract isosurfaces by solving regression and classification problems, respectively. However,
both techniques require internal and external definitions
of the surfaces, limiting their capability to reconstructing
only watertight geometries. Therefore, unsigned distance
fields [11, 15, 22, 27, 37, 46, 48, 49] have recently gained
increasing attention due to their ability to reconstruct nonwatertight surfaces and complex geometries with arbitrary
topologies.
Reconstructing 3D geometries from raw point clouds
using UDFs presents significant challenges due to the nondifferentiability near the surface. This characteristic complicates the development of loss functions and undermines
the stability of neural network training. Various unsupervised approaches [15, 48, 49] have been developed to tailor loss functions that leverage the intrinsic characteristics
of UDFs, ensuring that the reconstructed geometry aligns
closely with the original point clouds. However, these methods suffer from slow convergence, necessitating an extensive
network training time to reconstruct a single geometry. As
a supervised method, GeoUDF [37] learns local geometric
priors through training on datasets such as ShapeNet [8],
thus achieving efficient UDF estimation. Nonetheless, the

Unsigned distance fields (UDFs) provide a versatile framework for representing a diverse array of 3D shapes, encompassing both watertight and non-watertight geometries.
Traditional UDF learning methods typically require extensive training on large 3D shape datasets, which is costly
and necessitates re-training for new datasets. This paper
presents a novel neural framework, LoSF-UDF, for reconstructing surfaces from 3D point clouds by leveraging local shape functions to learn UDFs. We observe that 3D
shapes manifest simple patterns in localized regions, prompting us to develop a training dataset of point cloud patches
characterized by mathematical functions that represent a
continuum from smooth surfaces to sharp edges and corners. Our approach learns features within a specific radius
around each query point and utilizes an attention mechanism to focus on the crucial features for UDF estimation.
Despite being highly lightweight, with only 653 KB of trainable parameters and a modest-sized training dataset with
0.5 GB storage, our method enables efficient and robust surface reconstruction from point clouds without requiring for
shape-specific training. Furthermore, our method exhibits
enhanced resilience to noise and outliers in point clouds
compared to existing methods. We conduct comprehensive
experiments and comparisons across various datasets, including synthetic and real-scanned point clouds, to validate
our method’s efficacy. Notably, our lightweight framework
offers rapid and reliable initialization for other unsupervised
iterative approaches, improving both the efficiency and accuracy of their reconstructions. Our project and code are
available at https://jbhu67.github.io/LoSF-UDF.github.io/.

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author: yhe@ntu.edu.sg

1297

