This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniSTD: Towards Uniﬁed Spatio-Temporal Learning across Diverse Disciplines
Chen Tang1 Xinzhu Ma1,2, * Encheng Su2 Xiufeng Song2,3 Xiaohong Liu3
Wei-Hong Li1,4 Lei Bai2 Wanli Ouyang1,2 Xiangyu Yue1,4,∗
1

2
3
MMLab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shanghai AI Lab
Shanghai Jiaotong University
4
Shun Hing Institute of Advanced Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Existing Methods

Abstract
Traditional spatiotemporal models generally rely on taskspeciﬁc architectures, which limit their generalizability and
scalability across diverse tasks due to domain-speciﬁc design requirements. In this paper, we introduce UniSTD,
a uniﬁed Transformer-based framework for spatiotemporal
modeling, which is inspired by advances in recent foundation models with the two-stage pretraining-then-adaption
paradigm. Speciﬁcally, our work demonstrates that taskagnostic pretraining on 2D vision and vision-text datasets
can build a generalizable model foundation for spatiotemporal learning, followed by specialized joint training on
spatiotemporal datasets to enhance task-speciﬁc adaptability. To improve the learning capabilities across domains,
our framework employs a rank-adaptive mixture-of-expert
adaptation by using fractional interpolation to relax the
discrete variables so that can be optimized in the continuous space. Additionally, we introduce a temporal module to incorporate temporal dynamics explicitly. We evaluate our approach on a large-scale dataset covering 10
tasks across 4 disciplines, demonstrating that a uniﬁed spatiotemporal model can achieve scalable, cross-task learning and support up to 10 tasks simultaneously within one
model while reducing training costs in multi-domain applications. Code will be available at https://github.
com/1hunters/UniSTD.

1. Introduction
In recent years, substantial progress has been made across
a wide array of computer vision tasks, including image
classiﬁcation [7, 17, 59], object detection [18, 47, 81],
and more [19, 30, 34, 52]. Among these, spatiotemporal learning—which focuses on predicting future events
based on historical data—has emerged as crucial for numerous ﬁelds and practical applications, such as human
motion prediction, trafﬁc management, robotic planning,
* Corresponding Author

Specialized
Model

«

Specialized
Model

Specialized
Model

«
Task 1

«

Specialized
Model

«
Task N

Task N

Task I

Weather Forecasting

Traffic Control
Our Framework

Task Specific
Outputs

General-purpose
Model

UniSTD

Task Specific
Inputs

Figure 1. Top: Existing works need specialized models for both
tasks within the same disciplines (e.g., weather forecasting, trafﬁc
control). Bottom: Uniﬁed Spatio-Temporal Learning. UniSTD
uniﬁes 4 disciplines with 10 tasks under one model and is trained
on a massive collection of datasets.

weather forecasting, etc. By capturing both spatial correlations and temporal dynamics, spatiotemporal learning
offers a robust framework for modeling the complexities
of the physical world, enabling more accurate and responsive predictions in diverse, real-world contexts. While
achieving meaningful progress, most of the existing methods [2, 10, 15, 28, 51, 57, 64, 65, 68–72, 75] still resort to
designing specialized architectures to learn the spatiotemporal representations for each task.
Recurrent-based approaches have traditionally relied on
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks [20] for se-

29213

