This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FADA: Fast Diffusion Avatar Synthesis with Mixed-Supervised Multi-CFG
Distillation
Tianyun Zhong1 *†, Chao Liang2∗ , Jianwen Jiang2∗ ‡, Gaojie Lin2 , Jiaqi Yang2 , Zhou Zhao1
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Bytedance Intelligent Creation
zhongtianyun@zju.edu.cn
{liangchao.0412,jianwen.alan,yjq850207131}@gmail.com

https://fadavatar.github.io/

Abstract

model-based approaches[1, 2, 10, 14, 31, 33, 36]. Diffusion model-based methods, in particular, have gained attention due to their strong generative capabilities. These
models exhibit excellent robustness in input images and
produce vivid and highly expressive videos that naturally
align with the audio. However, the current diffusion modelbased talking head generation methods suffer from slow
inference speeds, which hinder their practical application.
Methods[1, 10, 36] based on Stable Diffusion (SD)[23], all
require multiple denoising steps. Moreover, to ensure the
correlation between the audio input and the image input in
the final video, multi-CFG (Classifier-Free Guidance) inference is often employed, further increasing the runtime.
Although most methods achieve 30-40 denoising steps with
the help of DDIM[27], they still face speed challenges due
to CFG calculations.
Recently, several works have explored diffusion distillation in text-to-image [3, 12, 15, 17, 21, 24, 28, 46] and textto-video tasks [18] to accelerate inference. Nonetheless,
there has been no direct exploration of diffusion distillation
for talking avatar synthesis tasks. Our observations indicate
that simply applying text-to-image and text-to-video diffusion distillation methods results in a noticeable decline in
performance. Unlike text to image or video tasks, talking
avatar synthesis involves two key conditions: audio and a
reference image. Since audio has a relatively weaker influence on video generation[10, 31], the final output is jointly
influenced by both conditions, necessitating careful parameter tuning in multi-CFG settings. The sensitivity to condition guidance often leads to severe artifacts when applying
diffusion distillation methods with few-step inference.
In this paper, we propose FADA (FAst Diffusion Avatar
Synthesis with Mixed-Supervised Multi-CFG Distillation)
to address these issues from two perspectives, resulting
in an audio-driven talking avatar diffusion model that balances both speed and quality. First, we address the robustness of the distilled model. In this task, the mapping between audio and portrait movement must be learned from
data. Previous works have emphasized meticulous data se-

Diffusion-based audio-driven talking avatar methods
have recently gained attention for their high-fidelity, vivid,
and expressive results. However, their slow inference speed
limits practical applications. Despite the development of
various distillation techniques for diffusion models, we
found that naive diffusion distillation methods do not yield
satisfactory results. Distilled models exhibit reduced robustness with open-set input images and a decreased correlation between audio and video compared to teacher models, undermining the advantages of diffusion models. To
address this, we propose FADA (Fast Diffusion Avatar Synthesis with Mixed-Supervised Multi-CFG Distillation). We
first designed a mixed-supervised loss to leverage data of
varying quality and enhance the overall model capability as
well as robustness. Additionally, we propose a multi-CFG
distillation with learnable tokens to utilize the correlation
between audio and reference image conditions, reducing
the threefold inference runs caused by multi-CFG with acceptable quality degradation. Extensive experiments across
multiple datasets show that FADA generates vivid videos
comparable to recent diffusion model-based methods while
achieving an NFE speedup of 4.17-12.5 times. Demos are
available at our webpage https://fadavatar.github.io.

1. Introduction
Talking avatar synthesis aims to animate a given portrait
image using driven video or audio. Due to the ease of
obtaining audio inputs and their low usage barrier, there
has been a surge of recent work in this area. Based on
the technical route, talking avatar synthesis methods can
be categorized into GAN-based[4, 8, 19, 34, 44, 47, 48],
NeRF-based[5, 30, 38–41], and the more recent diffusion
* Equal Contribution
† Done during an internship at ByteDance.
‡ Project Lead

3101

