This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Segmenting Maxillofacial Structures in CBCT Volumes
Federico Bolelli1, ⋆,
Kevin Marchesini1, ⋆ Niels van Nistelrooij2, 3 Luca Lumetti1
1
Vittorio Pipoli
Elisa Ficarra1 Shankeeth Vinayahalingam2 Costantino Grana1
1

2

University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy
Radboud University Medical Center, the Netherlands
3
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany

Abstract
Cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) is a standard
imaging modality in orofacial and dental practices, providing essential 3D volumetric imaging of anatomical structures, including jawbones, teeth, sinuses, and neurovascular canals. Accurately segmenting these structures is fundamental to numerous clinical applications, such as surgical planning and implant placement. However, manual
segmentation of CBCT scans is time-intensive and requires
expert input, creating a demand for automated solutions
through deep learning. Effective development of such algorithms relies on access to large, well-annotated datasets,
yet current datasets are often privately stored or limited
in scope and considered structures, especially concerning
3D annotations. This paper proposes ToothFairy2, a comprehensive, publicly accessible CBCT dataset with voxellevel 3D annotations of 42 distinct classes corresponding to
maxillofacial structures. We validate the dataset by benchmarking state-of-the-art neural network models, including convolutional, transformer-based, and hybrid Mambabased architectures, to evaluate segmentation performance
across complex anatomical regions. Our work also explores
adaptations to the nnU-Net framework to optimize multiclass segmentation for maxillofacial anatomy. The proposed dataset provides a fundamental resource for advancing maxillofacial segmentation and supports future research
in automated 3D image analysis in digital dentistry.

Figure 1. Fully annotated sample from the proposed dataset.

2D panoramic X-rays, 3D Intra-Oral Scans (IOS), and 3D
Cone-Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT) [29]. Among
the available modalities, CBCT is the only one providing comprehensive 3D volumetric information on all the
anatomical structures in the orofacial area, including jawbones, complete teeth, sinuses, and neurovascular canals,
becoming a standard modality for maxillofacial image analysis. Segmenting individual structures from CBCT images
to reconstruct a precise 3D model is essential in digital dentistry for various clinical applications, including surgical
planning and implant placement [16, 53].
Manual segmentation of CBCT scans is a timeconsuming and labor-intensive process that requires specialized expertise. For this reason, automated algorithms
using deep learning techniques offer a promising solution
to alleviate this burden, enhance efficiency, and improve the
consistency of segmentation results [41]. However, developing robust deep learning models heavily depends on the
availability of large, annotated datasets. Unfortunately, existing datasets often focus on a limited number of anatomical structures —i.e., teeth or alveolar canal— and usually
lack 3D annotations. The few available methods trained on

1. Introduction
Medical imaging is currently employed in the clinical
practice of dental treatments. Different modalities are available to assist in diagnosis, treatment planning, and surgery:
⋆ Equal contribution.

Authors are allowed to list their names first in
their respective CVs.
Corresponding author: federico.bolelli@unimore.it.

5238

