This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3DTopia-XL: Scaling High-quality 3D Asset Generation via Primitive Diffusion
Zhaoxi Chen1 Jiaxiang Tang2 Yuhao Dong1,3 Ziang Cao1
Fangzhou Hong1 Yushi Lan1 Tengfei Wang3 Haozhe Xie1
Tong Wu3,4 Shunsuke Saito Liang Pan3 Dahua Lin3,4
Ziwei Liu1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Peking University
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
https://3dtopia.github.io/3DTopia-XL/

Figure 1. 3DTopia-XL generates high-quality 3D assets with smooth geometry and spatially varied textures and materials. The output asset
(GLB mesh) can be seamlessly ported into graphics engines for physically-based rendering.

Abstract
The increasing demand for high-quality 3D assets across
various industries necessitates efficient and automated 3D
content creation. Despite recent advancements in 3D generative models, existing methods still face challenges with
optimization speed, geometric fidelity, and the lack of assets
for physically based rendering (PBR). In this paper, we introduce 3DTopia-XL, a scalable native 3D generative model
designed to overcome these limitations. 3DTopia-XL leverages a novel primitive-based 3D representation, PrimX,
which encodes detailed shape, albedo, and material field
into a compact tensorial format, facilitating the modeling
of high-resolution geometry with PBR assets. On top of the

novel representation, we propose a generative framework
based on Diffusion Transformer (DiT), which comprises 1)
Primitive Patch Compression, 2) and Latent Primitive Diffusion. 3DTopia-XL learns to generate high-quality 3D assets from textual or visual inputs. Extensive qualitative and
quantitative evaluations are conducted to demonstrate that
3DTopia-XL significantly outperforms existing methods in
generating high-quality 3D assets with fine-grained textures
and materials, efficiently bridging the quality gap between
generative models and real-world applications.

1. Introduction

26576

High-quality 3D assets are essential for various real-world
applications like films, gaming, and virtual reality. How-

