This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Be More Specific: Evaluating Object-centric Realism in Synthetic Images
Anqi Liang

Ciprian Corneanu

Qianli Feng

Abstract

Giorgio Giannone

Aleix Martinez

Evaluation of synthetic images is important for both
model development and selection. An ideal evaluation
should be specific, accurate and aligned with human perception. This paper addresses the problem of evaluating
realism of objects in synthetic images. Although methods
have been proposed to evaluate holistic realism, there are
no methods tailored towards object-centric realism evaluation. In this work, we define a new standard for assessing
object-centric realism that follows a shape-texture breakdown and proposes the first object-centric realism evaluation dataset for synthetic images. The dataset contains images generated from state-of-the-art image generative models and is richly annotated at object level across a diverse
set of object categories. We then design and train the OLIP
model, an architecture that considerably outperforms any
existing baseline on object-centric realism evaluation.

recently, even finer-grained text-image alignment evaluation systems like TIFA [12], VQAScore [22] and RichHF [21] have been introduced.
Despite this trend there remains surprisingly limited focus on decomposing the fidelity/realism aspect of generated
images (Tab. 1). Unlike text-image alignment, which can
anchor evaluation around each semantic concept in the text
prompt [12, 22], image realism does not benefit from such
straightforward anchoring. This makes guiding annotators
to assess specific aspects of realism challenging.
We propose an evaluation framework, a dataset and an
algorithm to be more specific on image evaluation. Inspired
by anchoring text-image alignment evaluation to prompts,
we ground our realism evaluation on individual objects, introducing what we term object-centric realism, or OcR.

1. Introduction

For each image, OcR is assessed at the object level,
with each evaluation comprising a shape score and a texture
score. This separation aligns with human perception and
reflects the image generation process itself, where shape
(mesh) and texture (material) are typically defined independently. We developed an annotation framework that facilitates efficient and consistent collection of OcR data from
human annotators, resulting in an object-centric evaluation
dataset. Sec. 3 provides further details.

Generative models have become excellent at synthesizing
high-quality diverse images from text [28–31]. Diffusion
models, a particularly effective type, can create impressive
images that closely follow complex prompts [17].
Evaluating these models is critical, not only for further
improvement but also for selecting best models for specific applications. To this end, several model-level evaluation metrics have been introduced, including FID [10],
FID1 [7], and CMMD [13]. These metrics primarily measure the distribution divergence of generated vs. reference
images, offering a general perspective on model quality.
However, they do not align well with human perception and
they lack the granularity necessary to detect specific quality
errors essential for subsequent improvement.
To address these limitations, new evaluation methods
and benchmarks increasingly focus on alignment with human perception and a finer taxonomy of image defects.
The field has evolved from broad metrics like Aesthetic
Score [1], PickScore [16], and CLIPScore [9], towards more
nuanced assessments, such as dividing overall image quality
into realism (fidelity) and text-image alignment [37]. More

Additionally, we develop a set of algorithms to assess
OcR, ranging from low-effort prompt engineering and zeroshot/few-shot learning approaches to our own OLIP model,
which is specifically designed and trained for this task. Results demonstrate that existing image realism algorithms
are largely ineffective in this context—some performing almost randomly—yet we identify promising directions for
adaptation, with our model achieving state-of-the-art performance. This work is detailed in Sec. 4.

28842

Our contributions are: 1. Introducing an object-level image realism evaluation framework with a systematic assessment method. 2. Compiling the first dataset dedicated to
object realism assessment in synthetic images. 3. Proposing a suite of automated evaluation methods and present extensive experimental results for estimating object realism in
synthetic images.

