This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HERA: Hybrid Explicit Representation for Ultra-Realistic Head Avatars
Hongrui Cai1 * Yuting Xiao2 * Xuan Wang3† Jiafei Li3
Yudong Guo1 Yanbo Fan4 Shenghua Gao5 Juyong Zhang1†
1

University of Science and Technology of China
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University 4 Nanjing University

2

ShanghaiTech University
University of Hong Kong

5

hrcai@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xiaoyt@shanghaitech.edu.cn, xwang.cv@gmail.com,
jiafeili@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, yudong@ustc.edu.cn, fanyanbo0124@gmail.com,
gaosh@hku.hk, juyong@ustc.edu.cn

Mesh based Avatars

Ours

GaussianAvatars

Figure 1. We present HERA, a novel hybrid explicit representation to model 3D head avatars efficiently and effectively. In detail, we
combine the advantages of UV-mapped 3D mesh and 3DGS through the proposed hybrid rendering pipeline. On the right side, we
showcase the animatable head avatars that employ the hybrid representation, illustrating that high-fidelity rendering effects are achieved
across different characters, varying viewpoints and diverse expressions.

Abstract

on captured multi-view RGB videos, our goal is to simultaneously optimize the texture and opacity map of mesh, as
well as a set of 3D Gaussian splats localized and rigged
onto the mesh facets. Specifically, we perform α-blending
on the color and opacity values based on the merged and reordered z-buffer from the rasterization results of mesh and
3DGS. This process involves the mesh and 3DGS adaptively
fitting the captured visual information to outline a highfidelity digital avatar. To avoid artifacts caused by Gaussian splats crossing the mesh facets, we design a stable hybrid depth sorting strategy. Experiments illustrate that our
modeled results exceed those of state-of-the-art approaches.

We introduce a novel approach to creating ultra-realistic
head avatars and rendering them in real time (≥ 30 fps at
2048 × 1334 resolution). First, we propose a hybrid explicit representation that combines the advantages of two
primitive based efficient rendering techniques. UV-mapped
3D mesh is utilized to capture sharp and rich textures on
smooth surfaces, while 3D Gaussian Splatting is employed
to represent complex geometric structures. In the pipeline of
modeling an avatar, after tracking parametric models based
1 Equal contribution
2 Corresponding authors

260

