This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Floxels: Fast Unsupervised Voxel Based Scene Flow Estimation
David T. Hoffmann∗,1,2 Syed Haseeb Raza∗,3 Hanqiu Jiang∗,1
Denis Tananaev1 Steffen Klingenhoefer3 Martin Meinke∗,1
∗
Equal contribution 1 Robert Bosch GmbH 2 University of Freiburg 3 CARIAD SE
syed.haseeb.raza@cariad.technology

Abstract
Scene flow estimation is a foundational task for many
robotic applications, including robust dynamic object detection, automatic labeling, and sensor synchronization.
Two types of approaches to the problem have evolved: 1)
Supervised and 2) optimization-based methods. Supervised
methods are fast during inference and achieve high-quality
results, however, they are limited by the need for large
amounts of labeled training data and are susceptible to domain gaps. In contrast, unsupervised test-time optimization
methods do not face the problem of domain gaps but usually
suffer from substantial runtime, exhibit artifacts, or fail to
converge to the right solution. In this work, we mitigate several limitations of existing optimization-based methods. To
this end, we 1) introduce a simple voxel grid-based model
that improves over the standard MLP-based formulation in
multiple dimensions and 2) introduce a new multi-frame
loss formulation. 3) We combine both contributions in our
new method, termed Floxels. On the Argoverse 2 benchmark, Floxels is surpassed only by EulerFlow among unsupervised methods while achieving comparable performance
at a fraction of the computational cost. Floxels achieves a
massive speedup of more than ∼ 60 − 140× over EulerFlow, reducing the runtime from a day to 10 minutes per
sequence. Over the faster but low-quality baseline, NSFP,
Floxels achieves a speedup of ∼ 14×.

1. Introduction
We live in a dynamic, three-dimensional world. To operate
safely in this complex environment, any autonomous agent
must perceive its three-dimensional structure and dynamics.
This is reflected in many tasks, such as moving object detection, trajectory prediction, camera-lidar synchronization,
collision avoidance, or point cloud densification. Sensors
that provide information about the structure of the 3D world
are widespread nowadays, particularly in the form of Lidar
scanners found in cars, robots, phones, and augmented reality devices. However, estimating the dynamics of a scene

hanqiu.jiang@de.bosch.com

remains a challenge. A common formulation of the problem
is referred to as scene flow estimation: The task of estimating a dense 3D motion field that represents how points move
in space across consecutive lidar scans.
As diverse as the devices and applications that require
scene flow estimation are, so are the proposed algorithms.
Existing scene flow algorithms can be coarsely sorted into
two categories, both of which come with an individual set
of advantages and disadvantages. (Semi-)supervised methods [1, 8, 9, 16, 21, 22, 29, 32] and optimization-based
approaches [11–13, 23, 24, 33]. (Semi-)Supervised methods tend to be fast and perform well. However, they require large and expensive datasets for training and large
GPUs even for inference. Additionally, they demonstrate
the typical issues associated with learning-based methods
when exposed to domain shifts, such as new environments
or variations in motion characteristics. In this work, we will
focus on test-time optimization methods. These methods
are limited mainly by their significantly longer inference
time [11, 24], but they promise high-quality results, generalization capabilities by design and can be used to generate pseudo ground truth data for supervised methods [23].
However, as we will show, current methods often fall short
of delivering the anticipated levels of quality (see Fig. 1) or
require massive amounts of compute [24].
In this work, we will address both problems of previous methods. While EulerFlow [24] exhibits stunning results, the enormous computational demand limits its practical use. The alternatives are lightweight optimization-based
methods like NSFP, but they usually lead to low-quality
flow. To overcome these limitations we first analyze the
methods NSFP [11] and FNSF [12]. Our analysis reveals
that MLP-based methods exhibit a “homogeneous motion”
bias in the shadow of objects (Fig. 1c) and predict wrong
flow patterns in empty regions, referred to as “windmill artifacts”, as they resemble the sails of a windmill (see Fig. 1d).
Last, we observe false flow associations, when a dynamic
point is closer to a false point than to its true counterpart
(Fig. 1a). While using EulerFlow might resolve such problems, the enormous computational demand will prohibit its

22328

