This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BIOMEDICA: An Open Biomedical Image-Caption Archive, Dataset,
and Vision-Language Models Derived from Scientific Literature
Alejandro Lozano* Min Woo Sun* James Burgess* Liangyu Chen Jeffrey J. Nirschl
Jeffrey Gu Ivan Lopez Josiah Aklilu Anita Rau Austin Wolfgang Katzer Yuhui Zhang
Collin Chiu Xiaohan Wang Alfred Seunghoon Song Robert Tibshirani Serena Yeung-Levy
Stanford University
Abstract
The development of vision-language models (VLMs) is
driven by large-scale and diverse multi-modal datasets.
However, progress toward generalist biomedical VLMs
is limited by the lack of annotated, publicly accessible
datasets across biology and medicine. Existing efforts are
limited to narrow domains, missing the full diversity of
biomedical knowledge encoded in scientific literature. To
address this gap, we introduce BIOMEDICA: a scalable,
open-source framework to extract, annotate, and serialize
the entirety of the PubMed Central Open Access subset into
an easy-to-use, publicly accessible dataset. Our framework
produces a comprehensive archive with over 24 million
unique image-text pairs from over 6 million articles.
Metadata and expert-guided annotations are additionally
provided.
Figure 1. Overlap of BIOMEDICA dataset with the Landscape
of Biomedical Research [24] Each color region reflects thematic
concentrations, capturing the diversity of topics within our dataset.
Gray points represent articles not present in BIOMEDICA.

We demonstrate the utility and accessibility of our resource by releasing BMC-CLIP, a suite of CLIP-style
models continuously pre-trained on BIOMEDICA dataset
via streaming (eliminating the need to download 27 TB of
data locally). On average, our models achieve state-of-theart performance across 40 tasks — spanning pathology,
radiology, ophthalmology, dermatology, surgery, molecular
biology, parasitology, and cell biology — excelling in
zero-shot classification with 6.56% average improvement
(as high as 29.8% and 17.5% in dermatology and ophthalmology, respectively) and stronger image-text retrieval
while using 10x less compute. To foster reproducibility and
collaboration, we release our codebase1 ,2 and dataset3 to
the broader research community.

1. Introduction

1 https://github.com/minwoosun/biomedica-etl

Progress in vision-language foundation models (FMs) is
driven by readily available large-scale and diverse datasets
[17, 52]. These datasets provide the basis for pretaining
and adaptation, leading to strong visual representations and
expert-level zero-shot performance across a wide range of
downstream tasks [3, 56, 65].
This success has sparked interest in biomedical multimodal FMs as integrating knowledge captured throughout
different modalities across medical specialties, molecular
biology, genetics, and related fields has the potential to revolutionize precision health. For instance, in daily practice,
clinicians typically have one care-related question for every

2 https://github.com/Ale9806/open_clip_with_biomedica

→

3 https://huggingface.co/BIOMEDICA
Equal contributions: {lozanoe, minwoos, jmhb}@stanford.edu

19724

