This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Federated Learning with Domain Shift Eraser
Zheng Wang1,2,3 Zihui Wang5 Zheng Wang 4 Xiaoliang Fan 1,2 Cheng Wang 1,2 *
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
3
Shanghai Innovation Institution
4
School of Informatic, Xiamen University, China
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is emerging as a promising technique for collaborative learning without local data leaving
their devices. However, clients’ data originating from diverse domains may degrade model performance due to domain shifts, preventing the model from learning consistent
representation space. In this paper, we propose a novel
FL framework, Federated Domain Shift Eraser (FDSE),
to improve model performance by differently erasing each
client’s domain skew and enhancing their consensus. First,
we formulate the model forward passing as an iterative
deskewing process that extracts and then deskews features
alternatively. This is efficiently achieved by decomposing
each original layer in the neural network into a Domainagnostic Feature Extractor (DFE) and a Domain-specific
Skew Eraser (DSE). Then, a regularization term is applied
to promise the effectiveness of feature deskewing by pulling
local statistics of DSE’s outputs close to the globally consistent ones. Finally, DFE modules are fairly aggregated
and broadcast to all the clients to maximize their consensus, and DSE modules are personalized for each client via
similarity-aware aggregation to erase their domain skew
differently. Comprehensive experiments were conducted on
three datasets to confirm the advantages of our method in
terms of accuracy, efficiency, and generalizability.

Figure 1. Inllustration of the characteristic of the proposed
FDSE v.s. Vallina FL [24]. FDSE decomposes the model to re(i)
spectively erase domain skew for each client by fDSE and extract
generalizable features for all the clients by fDF E . This promotes
consistency in representation space across domains since knowledge is fine-grainedly decoupled for learning and aggregation.

example, hospitals located in different regions may collect
data from diverse patient populations using various machines and protocols, leading to distinct domains in their
feature distributions [20]. The misalignment in feature
spaces can hinder client consensus on the representation
space (e.g., Figure 1 left), finally reducing model performance in two ways. First, the model is compelled to additionally learn generalizable representations for vastly different samples across domains, competitively preventing it
from focusing on the task objective. Second, the training
process may be dominated by a single domain when clients’
model updates exhibit conflicts and substantial variations in
magnitude [5, 37], which causes the model to overfit on the
prevailing domain while sacrificing its utility on others [10].
Recent works addressing the FL domain shift problem
can be categorized into two main groups. The first group

1. Introduction
Federated learning has emerged as a promising paradigm
for training machine learning models on distributed data
while preserving privacy [24]. However, a notable challenge arises when clients originate from diverse domains,
where domain shifts across clients may result in performance degradation of the aggregated model [4, 11]. For
* Corresponding Author

4978

