This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Synergizing Motion and Appearance: Multi-Scale Compensatory Codebooks for
Talking Head Video Generation
Shuling Zhao1 , Fa-Ting Hong1 , Xiaoshui Huang2 , Dan Xu1
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,

2

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

{szhaoax,fhongac}@connect.ust.hk, huangxiaoshui@sjtu.edu.cn, danxu@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Talking head video generation aims to generate a realistic
talking head video that preserves the person’s identity from
a source image and the motion from a driving video. Despite the promising progress made in the field, it remains a
challenging and critical problem to generate videos with
accurate poses and fine-grained facial details simultaneously. Essentially, facial motion is often highly complex to
model precisely, and the one-shot source face image cannot provide sufficient appearance guidance during generation due to dynamic pose changes. To tackle the problem, we propose to jointly learn motion and appearance
codebooks and perform multi-scale codebook compensation to effectively refine both the facial motion conditions
and appearance features for talking face image decoding.
Specifically, the designed multi-scale motion and appearance codebooks are learned simultaneously in a unified
framework to store representative global facial motion flow
and appearance patterns. Then, we present a novel multiscale motion and appearance compensation module, which
utilizes a transformer-based codebook retrieval strategy to
query complementary information from the two codebooks
for joint motion and appearance compensation. The entire process produces motion flows of greater flexibility and
appearance features with fewer distortions across different scales, resulting in a high-quality talking head video
generation framework. Extensive experiments on various
benchmarks validate the effectiveness of our approach and
demonstrate superior generation results from both qualitative and quantitative perspectives when compared to stateof-the-art competitors. The project page is available at
https://shaelynz.github.io/synergize-motion-appearance/.

1. Introduction
Given a source image and a driving video, talking head
video generation [13, 22] aims to animate the person in the
source image using the pose and expression from the driv-

(a) Source and
Driving

(b) Initial Motion
Flow

(c) Compensated (d) Warped Source (e) Compensated
Source Appearance
Motion Flow
Appearance

(f) Ours

Figure 1. Effect of motion and appearance compensation with
jointly learned compensatory codebooks. Motion flows and
warped source appearance features are refined by the complementary information retrieved from the motion and appearance codebooks, which jointly contribute to high-quality generated results.

ing video. Due to its widespread applications, such as video
conferencing, the film industry, and virtual reality, it has attracted growing interest in the community.
Recent years have witnessed significant advancements in
quality and robustness for this task. Current approaches
primarily focus on improving motion estimation accuracy and appearance representation, whether in 2D or 3D,
to enhance generation quality. Along the direction, unsupervised methods target predicting local motion flows
around unsupervised keypoints without relying on facial
priors [21, 24, 37], and methods based on predefined models (e.g., 3DMM) [9, 32, 35] focus on learning robust decoding features to generate high-quality face outputs. Despite the promising achievements, critical challenges persist: 1) Some motion patterns (e.g., local subtle motions)
cannot be inferred from a single image pair solely relying
on unsupervised keypoints or predefined models for motion estimation, as such models often have limited power
of motion representation and may fail to capture certain dynamic aspects of the facial motion from single image pairs
(see Fig. 1b). 2) Even with accurate motion estimation,
highly dynamic and complex motions in driving videos can
create ambiguity during generation, as a still source image lacks sufficient appearance information to handle occluded regions or subtle expression changes (see Fig. 1d).
This results in noticeable artifacts and a significant drop in

26232

