This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Repurposing Pre-trained Video Diffusion Models
for Event-based Video Interpolation
Jingxi Chen1 , Brandon Y. Feng2 , Haoming Cai1 , Tianfu Wang1 , Levi Burner1 , Dehao Yuan1 ,
Cornelia Fermüller1 , Christopher A. Metzler1 , Yiannis Aloimonos1
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
https://vdm-evfi.github.io/

Reference

(a) Frame-only Video Frame Interpolation

(b) Pre-trained Video Diffusion Model

(c) Event-based Video Frame Interpolation

(d) Ours

Figure 1. We compare our proposed approach RE-VDM, which adapts a pre-trained video diffusion model for event-based video frame
interpolation on unseen real-world data, with three baselines: frame-only interpolation method GIMM-VFI-R-P [14], test-time optimization
of a pre-trained video diffusion model via Time Reversal [11], and event-based interpolation method CBMNet-Large [21], trained on the
same dataset as our method. The left-most column shows the start frame, end frame, and reference interpolation frames overlaid with events.
Leveraging data priors in the pre-trained video diffusion model and the diffusion process, along with motion guidance controlled by input
events, our approach demonstrates superior generalization performance on unseen real-world frames with substantial motion.

Abstract
Video Frame Interpolation aims to recover realistic missing frames between observed frames, generating a highframe-rate video from a low-frame-rate video. However,
without additional guidance, the large motion between
frames makes this problem ill-posed. Event-based Video
Frame Interpolation (EVFI) addresses this challenge by using sparse, high-temporal-resolution event measurements as
motion guidance. This guidance allows EVFI methods to significantly outperform frame-only methods. However, to date,

EVFI methods have relied on a limited set of paired eventframe training data, severely limiting their performance and
generalization capabilities. In this work, we overcome the
limited data challenge by adapting pre-trained video diffusion models trained on internet-scale datasets to EVFI. We
experimentally validate our approach on real-world EVFI
datasets, including a new one that we introduce. Our method
outperforms existing methods and generalizes across cameras far better than existing approaches.

12456

