This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DRAWER: Digital Reconstruction and Articulation With Environment Realism
Hongchi Xia1 Entong Su2 Marius Memmel2 Arhan Jain2 Raymond Yu2 Numfor Mbiziwo-Tiapo2
Ali Farhadi2,3 Abhishek Gupta2 Shenlong Wang1 Wei-Chiu Ma4
1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 University of Washington
3
Allen Institute for AI 4 Cornell University
A high fidelity and interactable digital twin

Interactive Game

Open

Place an object

Real-to-Sim-to-Real
Closed

Move an object

Figure 1. DRAWER automatically converts a video of a static scene into an interactive environment with segmented objects and articulated
doors. It supports physical interactions like opening/closing drawers and moving/placing objects, with precise geometry and high-fidelity
rendering. With these capabilities, DRAWER can transform a video into interactive games and enable real-to-sim-to-real transfer in robotics.

Abstract
Creating virtual digital replicas from real-world data unlocks significant potential across domains like gaming and
robotics. In this paper, we present DRAWER, a novel framework that converts a video of a static indoor scene into
a photorealistic and interactive digital environment. Our
approach centers on two main contributions: (i) a reconstruction module based on a dual scene representation that
reconstructs the scene with fine-grained geometric details,
and (ii) an articulation module that identifies articulation
types and hinge positions, reconstructs simulatable shapes
and appearances and integrates them into the scene. The resulting virtual environment is photorealistic, interactive, and
runs in real time, with compatibility for game engines and
robotic simulation platforms. We demonstrate the potential
of DRAWER by using it to automatically create an interactive game in Unreal Engine and to enable real-to-sim-to-real
transfer for robotics applications. Project page: here.

offers immense potential across multiple domains. For game
developers, this presents an opportunity to replace painstaking human labor with streamlined, automated processes
[14, 16]. In robotics, training and evaluating autonomous
systems within richly detailed virtual spaces enable safer and
more scalable learning. Take Fig. 1 as an example. Given a
video of a scene (in this case, static), if we were to construct
a digital replica that is not only visually and geometrically
authentic but also physically grounded, then an agent deployed in this mirror world would be able to freely navigate
the environment, interact with the scene (e.g., opening drawers/cabinets, grabbing objects), and leverage observations
and feedback to learn a policy that can seamlessly transfer
to its real-world counterpart. Digital twins can thus serve as
dynamic, virtual testbeds for studying and interacting with
reality. However, to this day, automatically generating digital
twins that mirror their real-world counterparts in terms of visual appearance, geometric details, and physical properties
still remains a complex and unresolved task.
To mitigate the domain gap in visual or geometric quality,
3D reconstruction techniques, such as neural fields [56, 82],
have emerged as promising solutions for constructing digital
twins. However, despite their impressive realism, the recon-

1. Introduction
The ability to automatically create a realistic, interactable,
and highly detailed virtual replica of a physical environment

21771

