This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Search and Detect: Training-Free Long Tail Object Detection via Web-Image
Retrieval
Mankeerat Sidhu1 , Hetarth Chopra1 , Ansel Blume1 , Jeonghwan Kim1 , Revanth Gangi Reddy1 , Heng Ji1
1
University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, Urbana, USA
{mssidhu2, hetarth2, blume5, jk100, revanth3, hengji}@illinois.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce SearchDet, a training-free longtail object detection framework that significantly enhances
open-vocabulary object detection performance. SearchDet
retrieves a set of positive and negative images of an object
to ground, embeds these images, and computes an input
image–weighted query which is used to detect the desired
concept in the image. Our proposed method is simple and
training-free, yet achieves over 16.81% mAP improvement
on ODinW and 59.85% mAP improvement on LVIS compared to state-of-the-art models such as GroundingDINO.
We further show that our approach of basing object detection on a set of Web-retrieved exemplars is stable with respect to variations in the exemplars, suggesting a path towards eliminating costly data annotation and training procedures. 1

(a) Mountain Dew

(b) Phone

(c) Fork

Figure 1. Detection results for label “Mountain Dew”. While the
GroundingDINO, one of the state-of-the-art grounded object detection methods, fails to capture the Mountain Dew bottles in the
image displayed in the figure, SearchDet manages to ground every
instance of Mountain Dew that appears in the image. Detection
results for other classes “Phone” and “Fork”.

1. Introduction
The proliferation of the web as a repository of imagetext data has drastically improved access to data used to
train neural object detection models. Modern deep-learning
models rely heavily on this colossal cache of data to train
and improve their representations. Such datasets are often
used to pre-train vision-language models such as CLIP [31],
GLIP [23], GroundingDINO [25], and T-Rex2 [13]. While
models such as GroundingDINO and GLIP have achieved
substantial advances in grounded object detection by reducing the pre-train-to-downstream task discrepancy, further
improving the performance of these models necessitates either continual pre-training or additional task-specific finetuning that incurs extra costs.
A crucial aspect of the aforementioned models’ training
involves data indexed by search engines like Google, which
provide easy access to high-recall sets of images for a text
query. This capability opens up several intriguing possibil1 Data and code are available at https : / / github . com /
Mankeerat/SearchDet_Long_Tail_Object_Detection

ities for grounding using search engines. First, search engines can retrieve relevant images for a given text label, enhancing the specificity of grounding. Secondly, unlike traditional models that encode information into their parameters,
search engines operate with a retrieval-based framework,
utilizing databases that serve as a continuously expanding
object “memory.” Integrating such external memory, i.e.,
the web database of images, during inference provides a potential path to obviate the need for additional training while
improving performance on object detection.
In this paper, we propose SearchDet (Search and Detect;
pronounced “searched it”), an inference-stage, trainingfree, long-tail object detection framework that drastically
improves performance while avoiding additional finetuning.

15129

