This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaDCoW: Marginal Distortion Correction for Wide-Angle Photography with
Arbitrary Objects
Kevin Zhang
UMD

Jia-Bin Huang
UMD

Jose Echevarria
Adobe Research

Stephen DiVerdi
Adobe Research

Aaron Hertzmann
Adobe Research

Carroll et al. [6]
(a) Linear Perspective

(b) Current state-of-the-art

(c) Our results

Shih et al. [22]
(d) Linear Perspective

(e) Current state-of-the-art

(f) Our results

Figure 1. Correcting marginal distortion in arbitrary objects. (a) Linear perspective projection of a wide field-of-view (here, 150◦ )
produces extreme marginal distortions, such as the buildings’ distorted appearances. (b) The method of Carroll et al. [6] with line annotations (top left inset) preserves some straight lines, but the building on the right seems to lean left. (c) For MaDCoW, we supply a single
region annotation for the building on the right, and MaDCoW successfully avoids distortion for the whole building. (d) A linear perspective
photograph (90◦ field-of-view), from Shih et al. [26]. The man on the left appears widened. (e) Shih et al. [26] correct distortion on faces,
but not on bodies. The leftmost person’s head is corrected but not his body, making his body look even larger, relative to his head. (f)
MaDCoW makes people on the margins appear more realistic.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We introduce MaDCoW, a method for correcting marginal
distortion of arbitrary objects in wide-angle photography.
People often use wide-angle photography—it is the default
in smartphone cameras—but very-wide-fields-of-view produce distorted object appearance in image margins. In
our system, a user annotates straight lines and regions of
interest. MaDCoW solves for a separate linear perspective projection for each region and then jointly solves for a
distortion-minimizing projection for the whole photograph.
We show that MaDCoW can produce good results in cases
where previous methods yield visible distortions.

To convey large spaces, people often use wide-angle photography; today’s smartphones shoot wide-angle by default.
Wide-angle refers to photographs where the camera’s fieldof-view is much wider than how people normally view
pictures [10]; this mismatch in viewing condition causes
shapes to appear distorted. Notably, marginal distortion
(Figure 1(a)) occurs when objects appear in the sides or corners of a wide-angle linear perspective picture. To avoid
distortion, many artists and scientists have developed alternative wide-angle projections [13]. However, alternative
projections typically create other kinds of distortions, such
as bending straight lines, and no single projection can eliminate all distortion [35]. As a result, state-of-the-art methods

10923

