This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BIP3D: Bridging 2D Images and 3D Perception for Embodied Intelligence
Xuewu Lin, Tianwei Lin, Lichao Huang, Hongyu Xie, Zhizhong Su
Horizon Robotics, Beijing, China
xuewu.lin@horizon.auto

Abstract
In embodied intelligence systems, a key component is
3D perception algorithm, which enables agents to understand their surrounding environments. Previous algorithms
primarily rely on point cloud, which, despite offering precise geometric information, still constrain perception performance due to inherent sparsity, noise, and data scarcity.
In this work, we introduce a novel image-centric 3D perception model, BIP3D, which leverages expressive image
features with explicit 3D position encoding to overcome the
limitations of point-centric methods. Specifically, we leverage pre-trained 2D vision foundation models to enhance
semantic understanding, and introduce a spatial enhancer
module to improve spatial understanding. Together, these
modules enable BIP3D to achieve multi-view, multi-modal
feature fusion and end-to-end 3D perception. In our experiments, BIP3D outperforms current state-of-the-art results
on the EmbodiedScan benchmark, achieving improvements
of 5.69% in the 3D detection task and 15.25% in the 3D visual grounding task. Code has been released at https:
//github.com/HorizonRobotics/BIP3D.

Figure 1. Comparison of Point-centric and Image-centric Model
Architectures. Dashed boxes denote optional pluggable modules.
(a) The point-centric model centers its parameters within the 3D
encoder, utilizing feature representations like point or 3D voxel
features. (b) By contrast, the image-centric model emphasizes the
2D encoder, using 2D feature maps for its representations.

tances, or intense lighting conditions. (2) Point clouds are
sparse, lack texture, and can be noisy, leading to detection
errors and a limited performance ceiling. (3) Collecting and
annotating point cloud data is costly, which poses a challenge for acquiring large-scale training data.
These challenges limit the performance of point-centric
models. In contrast, the abundance of image data has accelerated advancements in vision models, with 2D vision
foundation models exhibiting strong semantic understanding and generalization capabilities. Therefore, transferring
2D vision foundation models (e.g. CLIP [32, 45], EVA [10]
and DINO [27]) to the 3D domain holds significant potential for enhancing 3D task performance.
In this paper, we propose BIP3D, an image-centric 3D
perception model (Figure 1(b)) that performs 3D object detection and 3D visual grounding by fusing multi-view image and text features, and can accept depth maps as auxiliary inputs for enhanced precision. Our model is based
on the 2D model, GroundingDINO [22], sharing a similar
overall network architecture and initialized with its model
weights, thereby inheriting the strong generalization capabilities of GroundingDINO. Unlike GroundingDINO, our

1. Introduction
3D perception models are utilized to estimate the 3D pose,
shape, and category of objects of interest in a scene, typically outputting 3D bounding boxes or segmentation masks.
In the field of embodied intelligence, these models generally serve to provide essential input for planning modules or
serve as crucial algorithmic components in cloud-based data
systems. Enhancing the accuracy of 3D perception holds
significant research value. As shown in Figure 1(a), current
mainstream 3D perception models extract features from the
point cloud (using PointNet++ [29] or 3D CNN [7]) and
generate perception results based on these point features.
While point clouds offer precise geometric information
that has advanced 3D perception, several challenges remain [41]: (1) High-quality point clouds are difficult to obtain, because depth sensors often have limitations, such as
struggling with reflective or transparent objects, long dis-

9007

