This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Not Just Text: Uncovering Vision Modality Typographic Threats in Image
Generation Models
Hao Cheng1 *, Erjia Xiao1∗ , Jiayan Yang4 , Jiahang Cao1 , Qiang Zhang1 ,
Jize Zhang3 , Kaidi Xu5 , Jindong Gu2† , Renjing Xu1†
1
3

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou); 2 University of Oxford;

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology; 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen; 5 Drexel University
Code:
Dataset:

https://github.com/ChaduCheng/TypoThreat-ImgGMs

https://huggingface.co/datasets/chadhao/VMT-IGMs-Dataset

Abstract

Generated Images

User Text Prompt
a youthful figure on the stage.

Current image generation models can effortlessly produce
high-quality, highly realistic images, but this also increases
the risk of misuse. In various Text-to-Image or Imageto-Image tasks, attackers can generate a series of images
containing inappropriate content by simply editing the language modality input. To mitigate this security concern,
numerous guarding or defensive strategies have been proposed, with a particular emphasis on safeguarding language modality. However, in practical applications, threats
in the vision modality, particularly in tasks involving the
editing of real-world images, present heightened security
risks as they can easily infringe upon the rights of the image
owner. Therefore, this paper employs a method named typographic attack to reveal that various image generation models are also susceptible to threats within the vision modality.
Furthermore, we also evaluate the defense performance of
various existing methods when facing threats in the vision
modality and uncover their ineffectiveness. Finally, we propose the Vision Modal Threats in Image Generation Models
(VMT-IGMs) dataset, which would serve as a baseline for
evaluating the vision modality vulnerability of various image generation models.
Warning: This paper includes content that may cause
discomfort or distress. Potentially disturbing content has
been blocked and blurred.

User Image Prompt

CLIP Text Encoder

CLIP Vision Encoder

Diffusion Model

Generated Images

User Text Prompt
a youthful figure on the stage.
User Image Prompt
African

Typography Inserted
Muslim

bloody

naked

NSFW

NSFW

Figure 1. Inserting typography into input images can manipulate
the semantic direction of generated images in image generation.

(MLLMs) [11, 26, 30, 31, 54, 63], which incorporate Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) [46] as a vision encoder and Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 22,
39, 56], leverage cross-modality interactions with imagetext input pairs, enabling the generated language output to
approach or even surpass human-level performance. The
image generation tasks [54, 60, 63] could be classified into
Text-to-Image (T2I) and Image-to-Image (I2I). Since I2I
tasks are prevalent in real-life applications, they would receive more attention and could be divided into sub-tasks
such as Image Editing [4, 42], Style Transfer [10, 61], and
Conditional Generation [5, 40]. For the specific models,
Diffusion Models (DMs), represented by Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) [20], attract increasing
attention due to their training stability and high-quality image outputs. Furthermore, CLIP-guided Diffusion Models

1. Introduction
The continuous development of Artificial Intelligence Generated Content (AIGC) models greatly accelerates the possibility of achieving the true Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) era. Multimodal Large Language Models
* equal contribution. †correspondence authors

2997

