This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-shot Implicit Function Generation via Equivariance
Suizhi Huang1,2 , Xingyi Yang2 , Hongtao Lu1 ,* Xinchao Wang2 *
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 National University of Singapore
huangsuizhi@sjtu.edu.cn, xyang@u.nus.edu, htlu@sjtu.edu.cn, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Source samples

Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) have emerged as
a powerful framework for representing continuous signals.
However, generating diverse INR weights remains challenging due to limited training data. We introduce Few-shot Implicit Function Generation, a new problem setup that aims
to generate diverse yet functionally consistent INR weights
from only a few examples. This is challenging because even
for the same signal, the optimal INRs can vary significantly
depending on their initializations. To tackle this, we propose E QUI G EN, a framework that can generate new INRs
from limited data. The core idea is that functionally similar networks can be transformed into one another through
weight permutations, forming an equivariance group. By
projecting these weights into an equivariant latent space,
we enable diverse generation within these groups, even
with few examples. E QUI G EN implements this through
an equivariant encoder trained via contrastive learning
and smooth augmentation, an equivariance-guided diffusion process, and controlled perturbations in the equivariant subspace. Experiments on 2D image and 3D shape
INR datasets demonstrate that our approach effectively generates diverse INR weights while preserving their functional properties in few-shot scenarios. Code is available
at https://github.com/JeanDiable/EquiGen.

1. Introduction
Open-sourced models have been the driving force behind
the incredible progress of Artificial Intelligence (AI) [27,
52, 64]. Beyond just making powerful models accessible, this openness has created new opportunities for
meta-learning: treating model weights themselves as data
sources. Recent works have demonstrated the potential of
learning from [13, 24, 36, 46, 71] and generating neural network weights [15, 28, 51, 80] to promote further research.
One type of neural network well-suited for the weight
generation paradigm is the Implicit Neural Representation
(INR). These networks use a simple multi-layer perceptron
* Corresponding author.

MC

Limited samples
Overﬁt

Generated samples
Train

Generator

Sample

Figure 1. Illustration of the Few-shot Implicit Function Generation setting with 3D INR data examples. The goal is to generate
diverse INR weights from limited target samples. Source samples
(top) show previously observed INRs of diverse shape categories.
In practice, only limited target samples (bottom left) are available
for training. The framework aims to learn a generator that can produce diverse generated samples (right) despite the limited training
data. This setting addresses the practical scenario where only a
few examples of new shapes are available for training.

(MLP) to fit continuous signals [8, 54, 61]. INRs serve as
powerful tools for representing continuous data, offering
several advantages: high-fidelity reconstruction [44, 49],
smooth interpolation properties [8, 75], and infinite output resolution [3]. Their consistent and comparative simple
architecture makes them ideal candidates for weight-based
generative modeling.
However, training generative model on weight comes
with its challenges, primarily due to a shortage of data.
Currently, collecting large-scale INR data is costly, as it involves time-consuming gradient-based optimization. Existing datasets for INR data are limited from the diversity of
sources [40, 46]. This data gap imposes restrictions on further investigation of weight space.
Given these constraints, an intuitive motivation is to target on a more practical task of Few-shot Implicit Function
Generation. As illustrated in Fig. 1, with only a few new
INR checkpoints, we aim to train a generative model that
can produce diverse weights while preserving the original
distribution’s function of these few INR data. These generated checkpoints serve multiple purposes: they can be utilized as new data sources for weight space learning, or they
can be directly applicable for practical downstream tasks
like 3D shape generation.

16262

