This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IRGS: Inter-Reflective Gaussian Splatting with 2D Gaussian Ray Tracing
Chun Gu1,2 Xiaofei Wei1,2 Zixuan Zeng1 Yuxuan Yao1 Li Zhang1,2 *
1
School of Data Science, Fudan University 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute
https://fudan-zvg.github.io/IRGS

Abstract

Global illumination

In inverse rendering, accurately modeling visibility and
indirect radiance for incident light is essential for capturing secondary effects. Due to the absence of a powerful Gaussian ray tracer, previous 3DGS-based methods
have either adopted a simplified rendering equation or used
learnable parameters to approximate incident light, resulting in inaccurate material and lighting estimations. To
this end, we introduce inter-reflective Gaussian splatting
(IRGS) for inverse rendering. To capture inter-reflection,
we apply the full rendering equation without simplification
and compute incident radiance on the fly using the proposed differentiable 2D Gaussian ray tracing. Additionally, we present an efficient optimization scheme to handle
the computational demands of Monte Carlo sampling for
rendering equation evaluation. Furthermore, we introduce
a novel strategy for querying the indirect radiance of incident light when relighting the optimized scenes. Extensive
experiments on multiple standard benchmarks validate the
effectiveness of IRGS, demonstrating its capability to accurately model complex inter-reflection effects.

Indirect illumination

Figure 1. Global and indirect illumination in a Gaussian-based
scene using our IRGS, highlighting its inter-reflective capabilities.

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering is a fundamental problem in computer vision and graphics, aiming to reconstruct geometry and estimate material and lighting from a set of posed images. The
introduction of neural radiance field (NeRF) [21], which
uses a neural implicit field modeled by a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to represent 3D scenes, has inspired many
NeRF-based methods [5, 15, 20, 28, 40] to address inverse
rendering tasks. Leveraging NeRF’s ray-based rendering
technique, these methods can accurately compute the visibility and indirect radiance for incident light as required by
the rendering equation. However, the exhaustive querying
of a neural field during ray marching and its limited representational capacity constrain the efficiency and performance of neural implicit fields in inverse rendering.
* Corresponding author (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn).

10943

Recently, 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) [16] has
emerged as a promising technique for 3D scene representation, offering both remarkable rendering quality and efficiency. By modeling a static 3D scene as a collection of
3D Gaussians, 3DGS achieves real-time, high-quality rendering with a tile-based rasterizer. However, despite its
strengths, 3DGS has notable limitations due to its reliance
on rasterization, which limits its ability to accurately simulate ray-based effects that are essential for inverse rendering. As a result, some 3DGS-based inverse rendering methods [14, 19, 27] have adopted simplified versions of the rendering equation, such as the split-sum approximation [24].
Other approaches, such as R3DG [10], use learnable parameters to approximate indirect radiance, which fails to

