This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EDCFlow: Exploring Temporally Dense Difference Maps for Event-based
Optical Flow Estimation
Daikun Liu

Lei Cheng
Teng Wang*
Southeast University

Changyin Sun

{dkliu, leicheng, wangteng, cysun}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent learning-based methods for event-based optical flow
estimation utilize cost volumes for pixel matching but suffer from redundant computations and limited scalability
to higher resolutions for flow refinement. In this work,
we take advantage of the complementarity between temporally dense feature differences of adjacent event frames and
cost volume and present a lightweight event-based optical
flow network (EDCFlow) to achieve high-quality flow estimation at a higher resolution. Specifically, an attentionbased multi-scale temporal feature difference layer is developed to capture diverse motion patterns at high resolution in a computation-efficient manner. An adaptive fusion of high-resolution difference motion features and lowresolution correlation motion features is performed to enhance motion representation and model generalization. Notably, EDCFlow can serve as a plug-and-play refinement
module for RAFT-like event-based methods to enhance flow
details. Extensive experiments demonstrate that EDCFlow
achieves better performance with lower complexity compared to existing methods, offering superior generalization.
Codes and models will be available at here.

(a) Reference image

(b) Event stream

(c) Correlation motion feature (d) Difference motion feature

Figure 1. Illustration of difference between correlation and difference motion features. (a) Reference image of DSEC [11] dataset.
(b) Corresponding event stream. (c) Correlation motion feature.
(d) Difference motion feature.

ative refinement. Inspired by the success of RAFT in the
frame domain, several event-based methods [12, 13, 20, 36]
adopt analogous architectures by treating event streams as
consecutive event frames. Specifically, DCEIFlow [36] and
E-RAFT [12] focus on long-range correspondences, neglecting intermediate motions in events; TMA [20] and
MultiFlow [13] mitigate this by building temporally dense
cost volumes, resulting in a complexity of O(T N 2 C) with
T , N , and C representing the number of event frames, pixels, and feature dimensions, respectively. However, event
streams typically provide small displacement in a short time
window and performing global 2D searches within temporally dense cost volumes leads to information redundancy
and unnecessary computations. Furthermore, this computational burden limits the scalability of these RAFT-like methods to higher resolutions, which offer potential accuracy
gains as evidenced by recent studies [4, 38].
In this work, we attempt to perform flow estimation at
a higher resolution (i.e., 1/4) without resorting to computationally expensive high-resolution cost volumes. Instead,
we exploit the potential of temporally dense motion features derived from dense feature differences between ad-

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation calculates per-pixel displacement
vectors and is important for various applications like deblurring [19, 41], action recognition [9, 37], and object tracking [40]. Event streams offer fine-grained temporal detail,
high dynamic range, and no motion blur [8], making them
well-suited for motion capture in challenging scenarios.
Flow estimation essentially involves establishing correspondences between the source and target pixels, commonly achieved by modeling correlations in 4D cost volumes [6, 33, 34]. As a representative method, RAFT [34]
constructs a single-resolution (i.e., 1/8) cost volume of allpairs for correlations retrieval and employs a GRU for iter* Corresponding author: Teng Wang.

1984

