This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Disentangled Pose and Appearance Guidance for Multi-Pose Generation
Tengfei Xiao1,4 , Yue Wu†,∗,1,4 , Yuelong Li†,∗,2,5 , Can Qin3 , Maoguo Gong1,4
Qiguang Miao1,4 , Wenping Ma1
1
Xidian University 2 Tiangong University 3 Northeastern University
4
MoE Key Lab of Collaborative Intelligence Systems, Xidian University
5
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Autonomous Intelligence Technology and Systems, Tiangong University
tfxiao@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {ywu, qgmiao}@xidian.edu.cn, liyuelong@pku.edu.cn,
qin.ca@northeastern.edu, gong@ieee.org, wpma@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Reference Image

Generated Diverse Poses

Figure 1. Given a reference image and different target poses, our method can generate multiple images of the person in various poses.

Abstract

ally, we introduce the Global-aware Transformer Decoder,
which leverages similarity queries and attention mechanisms to achieve spatial transformations and enhance pose
consistency through a Global-aware block. In the appearance generation phase, we condition a diffusion model on
pose embeddings produced in the initial stage and introduce an Appearance Adapter that extracts high-level contextual semantic information from multi-scale features, enabling further refinement of pose appearance textures and
providing appearance guidance. Extensive experiments on
the UBC Fashion and TikTok datasets demonstrate that our
framework achieves state-of-the-art results in both quality
and fidelity, establishing it as a powerful approach for complex pose generation tasks.

Human pose generation is a complex task due to the nonrigid and highly variable nature of human body structures
and appearances. However, existing methods often overlook the fundamental differences between spatial transformations of poses and texture generation for appearance,
which makes them prone to overfitting. To address this issue, we propose a multi-pose generation framework driven
by disentangled pose and appearance guidance. Our approach includes a Global-aware Pose Generation module
that iteratively generates pose embeddings, enabling effective control over non-rigid body deformations. Addition† Equal contributions in no particular order.
∗ Corresponding author.

5646

