This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

iSegMan: Interactive Segment-and-Manipulate 3D Gaussians
Yian Zhao1,3 Wanshi Xu1 Ruochong Zheng1,3 Pengchong Qiao1,3 Chang Liu4 Jie Chen1,2,3 B
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
3

2

Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China
4

Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
zhaoyian@stu.pku.edu.cn

jiechen2019@pku.edu.cn
“ Turn him into Tolkien Elf.”

Abstract
The efficient rendering and explicit nature of 3DGS promote the advancement of 3D scene manipulation. However,
existing methods typically encounter challenges in controlling the manipulation region and are unable to furnish the
user with interactive feedback, which inevitably leads to unexpected results. Intuitively, incorporating interactive 3D
segmentation tools can compensate for this deficiency. Nevertheless, existing segmentation frameworks impose a preprocessing step of scene-specific parameter training, which
limits the efficiency and flexibility of scene manipulation.
To deliver a 3D region control module that is well-suited
for scene manipulation with reliable efficiency, we propose interactive Segment-and-Manipulate 3D Gaussians
(iSegMan), an interactive segmentation and manipulation
framework that only requires simple 2D user interactions in
any view. To propagate user interactions to other views, we
propose Epipolar-guided Interaction Propagation (EIP),
which innovatively exploits epipolar constraint for efficient
and robust interaction matching. To avoid scene-specific
training to maintain efficiency, we further propose the novel
Visibility-based Gaussian Voting (VGV), which obtains 2D
segmentations from SAM and models the region extraction
as a voting game between 2D Pixels and 3D Gaussians
based on Gaussian visibility. Taking advantage of the efficient and precise region control of EIP and VGV, we put
forth a Manipulation Toolbox to implement various functions on selected regions, enhancing the controllability, flexibility and practicality of scene manipulation. Extensive results on 3D scene manipulation and segmentation tasks fully
demonstrate the significant advantages of iSegMan. Project
page is available at https://zhao-yian.github.io/iSegMan.

“ Make the desk and vase blue.”

(a) Existing 3D Gaussian Manipulation Methods.
“ Turn him into Tolkien Elf.”

Pos.
Neg.
User Click
“ Make him smiling.”

“ Make the desk and vase blue.”

“ Make the vase dark red.” & “ Enlarge”

(b) Our Interactive Segment-and-Manipulate 3D Gaussians.

Figure 1. (a): Existing 3D manipulation methods. The red circles
mark the irrelevant regions affected by editing, leading to unexpected results. (b): Our iSegMan achieves precise control of the
manipulation region and interactively performs various functions.

tial computing [36]. The advancement of these applications
continues to propel innovation in user experience. Recently,
the efficient differentiable rendering and explicit nature of
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [19] have propelled the field
of 3D scene manipulation to new frontiers. However, existing methods typically face challenges in precisely controlling the manipulation region and are unable to provide
interactive feedback to users, which inevitably leads to unexpected or uncontrolled results in practice, cf. Fig. 1(a).
Intuitively, the above deficiency can be compensated for
by incorporating interactive 3D segmentation tools, which
accept various types of user interactions to achieve precise
control of the manipulation region. Traditional 3D representations (e.g.,point clouds [14] and meshes [41]) typically
require users to interact directly in 3D space, which involves
complex transformation or post-processing, resulting in a
poor user experience. With the advent of differentiable rendering techniques (i.e., NeRF [29] and 3DGS [19]), several
interactive 3D segmentation frameworks [6, 7, 17] based
on 2D user interaction have been explored, which exploits
a priori knowledge of the promptable image segmentation
model SAM [22] to achieve 3D region selection. How-

1. Introduction
The capacity to interact with the 3D environments is a critical component across a range of applications, including
augmented reality (AR) [4], embodied AI [10], and spaB Corresponding author.

661

