This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Repurposing Stable Diffusion Attention for Training-Free Unsupervised
Interactive Segmentation
Markus Karmann
Onay Urfalioglu
Vivo Tech Research GmbH

Figure 1. We introduce M2N2, an unsupervised training-free point prompt based segmentation framework. We enhance the semantic
information present in the self-attention of Stable Diffusion 2 by using a Markov process to generate semantically rich Markov-maps. We
then perform a truncated nearest neighbor of each point’s Markov-map to obtain a final segmentation.

Abstract
Recent progress in interactive point prompt based Image
Segmentation allows to significantly reduce the manual effort to obtain high quality semantic labels. State-of-theart unsupervised methods use self-supervised pre-trained
models to obtain pseudo-labels which are used in training a prompt-based segmentation model. In this paper, we
propose a novel unsupervised and training-free approach
based solely on the self-attention of Stable Diffusion. We interpret the self-attention tensor as a Markov transition operator, which enables us to iteratively construct a Markov
chain. Pixel-wise counting of the required number of iterations along the Markov chain to reach a relative probability threshold yields a Markov-iteration-map, which we
simply call a Markov-map. Compared to the raw attention maps, we show that our proposed Markov-map has
less noise, sharper semantic boundaries and more uniform
values within semantically similar regions. We integrate
the Markov-map in a simple yet effective truncated near-

est neighbor framework to obtain interactive point prompt
based segmentation. Despite being training-free, we experimentally show that our approach yields excellent results in terms of Number of Clicks (NoC), even outperforming state-of-the-art training based unsupervised methods in most of the datasets. Code is available at https:
//github.com/mkarmann/m2n2.

1. Introduction

24518

The goal of point prompt based interactive image segmentation is to obtain a high-quality segmentation from limited
user interaction in the form of clicking. Prompt-based image segmentation gained popularity lately due to large supervised foundation models [18, 35]. In this paper, we focus
on unsupervised methods, where no segmentation labels are
used at all in the design and/or training of the models. Most
recent approaches rely on self supervised backbones like
ViT [7], trained either by DINO [4] or MAE [13] based self-

