This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NoPain: No-box Point Cloud Attack via Optimal Transport Singular Boundary
Zezeng Li1,2 , Xiaoyu Du1 , Na Lei1∗ , Liming Chen2 , Weimin Wang1 *
1

School of Software, Dalian University of Technology, China

2

École Centrale de Lyon, France

Abstract
Adversarial attacks exploit the vulnerability of deep
models against adversarial samples. Existing point cloud
attackers are tailored to specific models, iteratively optimizing perturbations based on gradients in either a whitebox or black-box setting. Despite their promising attack
performance, they often struggle to produce transferable
adversarial samples due to overfitting to the specific parameters of surrogate models. To overcome this issue, we
shift our focus to the data distribution itself and introduce
a novel approach named NoPain, which employs optimal
transport (OT) to identify the inherent singular boundaries
of the data manifold for cross-network point cloud attacks.
Specifically, we first calculate the OT mapping from noise
to the target feature space, then identify singular boundaries by locating non-differentiable positions. Finally, we
sample along singular boundaries to generate adversarial point clouds. Once the singular boundaries are determined, NoPain can efficiently produce adversarial samples
without the need of iterative updates or guidance from the
surrogate classifiers. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that the proposed end-to-end method outperforms baseline
approaches in terms of both transferability and efficiency,
while also maintaining notable advantages even against defense strategies. Code and model are available at https:
//github.com/cognaclee/nopain.

1. Introduction
Recent research has extensively examined the adversarial
vulnerability of deep neural networks (DNNs) [2, 7, 14,
17, 39, 41, 50], demonstrating that even minimal perturbations to input data can lead advanced DNN models to make
erroneous predictions. This vulnerability poses significant
threats to security-critical systems and has spurred research
on adversarial attacks to improve models’ robustness.
Given the crucial role of 3D DNNs in security-sensitive
applications such as autonomous driving and robot navigation, various point cloud attack methods [12, 13, 19, 22, 32,
34, 35, 45, 49, 51–53, 62, 64] have been developed to per* Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Point cloud attack via OT singular boundary. We exploit
singular boundaries of the data manifold, induced by the OT, to
perform no-box attacks. Our approach begins by applying the OT
mapping to obtain the hyperplane set {πh,i } and polygons decomposition of the data manifold. Next, we compute dihedral angles
between neighbor hyperplanes to identify singular boundaries. Fib are generated by sampling along sinnally, adversarial samples y
gular boundaries. Hyperplanes of the same color represent the
hyperplane associated with yi (dark) and its neighbor (light), with
a singular boundary indicated by the solid and dashed red lines.

turb data from different perspectives, effectively revealing
the vulnerabilities of current point cloud classifiers. Most
of these methods are white-box attacks [12, 13, 23, 34, 36,
45, 46, 49, 51, 53, 58, 64], requiring access to the structure, weights, and gradients of the target models. However,
their effectiveness diminishes significantly when tested on
different networks, indicating low attack transferability.
Contemporary advancements aimed at enhancing attack
transferability in black-box settings [9, 19, 21, 22, 32,
33, 52, 60, 62] can be divided into two primary categories: transfer-based attacks and boundary-based attacks.
Transfer-based methods typically employ autoencoders or
partial parameters of the surrogate model to enhance the
transferability of attacks. Boundary-based attacks aim to
improve transferability by generating perturbations at the
decision boundaries, thereby altering the predictions. While
these techniques enhance transferability, they require access
to partial model parameters or multiple queries to proxy

3492

