This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Recurrence-Enhanced Vision-and-Language Transformers
for Robust Multimodal Document Retrieval
Davide Caffagni1 * Sara Sarto1 * Marcella Cornia1 Lorenzo Baraldi1 Rita Cucchiara1,2
1
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy 2 IIT-CNR, Italy

Query

Retrieval w/
Unimodal Queries

Query

Visual
Encoder

Cross-modal retrieval is gaining increasing efficacy and interest from the research community, thanks to large-scale
training, novel architectural and learning designs, and its
application in LLMs and multimodal LLMs. In this paper,
we move a step forward and design an approach that allows for multimodal queries – composed of both an image
and a text – and can search within collections of multimodal documents, where images and text are interleaved.
Our model, ReT, employs multi-level representations extracted from different layers of both visual and textual backbones, both at the query and document side. To allow for
multi-level and cross-modal understanding and feature extraction, ReT employs a novel Transformer-based recurrent
cell that integrates both textual and visual features at different layers, and leverages sigmoidal gates inspired by
the classical design of LSTMs. Extensive experiments on
M2KR and M-BEIR benchmarks show that ReT achieves
state-of-the-art performance across diverse settings. Our
source code and trained models are publicly available at:
https://github.com/aimagelab/ReT.

Text
Encoder

Document

Document
Text
Encoder

Feature Fusion
Retrieval

Visual
Encoder
Text
Encoder

Visual
Encoder

Query Side

Query

Visual
Encoder

Merge Layer

Abstract

Merge Layer

{name.surname}@unimore.it

Recurrent
Cell

Text
Encoder

ReT (Ours)

What’s the
player’s
number?

Feat Fusion

ReT

Figure 1. Comparison between cross-modal retrieval with unimodal queries (top left), retrieval with multimodal queries with
feature fusion [53] (top right), and our ReT (bottom left). Our
approach enables retrieval with multimodal queries employing a
recurrent, multi-level feature extraction process.

systems the ability to deal with multimodal queries and the
capacity of searching among multimodal documents, i.e. in
settings in which multiple modalities coexist both inside the
query and inside the retrievable items. One of such cases is
that of queries consisting of an image paired with a text that
poses a question related to the image or specifies what in the
image should be retrieved [6, 32, 35, 53]. Similarly, the latter is the case of multimodal documents, in which text and
images are naturally interleaved. The current state of the art
for multimodal retrieval [29, 40, 57] falls short in accommodating this flexibility in user demands, as it mainly supports
single-modality queries and retrievable documents.
In an effort to address these needs, in this paper, we propose a retrieval approach that natively supports multimodal
(i.e., composed of images and text) queries and retrievable
items. Differently from existing proposals in the field [53],
that fuse feature extracted from the last layer of vision-andlanguage backbones, our proposal employs multi-layer representations in both modalities, while still allowing a late
interaction schema (Fig. 1). Indeed, we posit that including representations from shallower layers of vision-andlanguage models can help to address the wide variety of

1. Introduction
Retrieving useful information to satisfy an input query is a
fundamental problem in Computer Vision and Multimedia.
In early years, retrieval was done mostly in unimodal settings, where a query is expressed either with an image or
in natural language and the retrievable set of items belongs
to the same modality [18, 37, 39, 58]. Recently, we have
been experiencing a progressive shift towards multimodal
data [30, 44, 46]. Real-world applications currently require
at least to understand natural language queries to retrieve
images, or vice versa [40, 43]. This trend is expected to
give rise to the need for retrieval engines capable of handling more data modalities, such as video and audio [12].
Concurrently, there is a growing need to give retrieval
* Equal contribution.

9286

