This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VEU-Bench: Towards Comprehensive Understanding of Video Editing
Bozheng Li1,2

Yongliang Wu1,3
Wenqing Zhu1

Yi Lu1,4 Jiashuo Yu5 Licheng Tang1 Jiawang Cao1
Yuyang Sun1 Jay Wu1 Wenbo Zhu1
1
Opus AI Research
2
3
Brown University
Southeast University 4 University of Toronto 5 Fudan University
bozheng li@brown.edu wenbo.zhu@berkeley.edu

Dimension

Level

Intra-frame

Q: What Shot type does the given clip belong to?
A: Over-the-shoulder shot.
Size: Wide

Angle: Overhead

Recognition

Color: Cold

Q: Clarify shot motion of given video and explain grounds for the judgment.

Subject: Object

Type: Group Shot

Location: indoor

slight vertical and horizontal jitters as it follows the girl walking and then
moves to focus on the two boys conversing.

Motion: Tilt

Speed: Slow

Reasoning

Q: what is the cut type used in the given video, and what is its function?
A: The video uses emphasis/deemphasis cut. By cutting from medium shot

Inter-Shot

Inter-frame

A: The shot-motion of the given video is handheld. The camera exhibits

of reporter, Gayle Hailstorm, to close-up of Heather in car, the emphasis
Transition: Mix

Cut : Match Cut

cut draws attention to Heather.

Judging

Figure 1. The overview of our proposed VEU-Bench. VEU-Bench covers 10 editing dimensions, evaluating models on tasks ranging
from recognition to reasoning and judging, providing a robust evaluation of video editing understanding across various aspects and levels
of difficulty.

Abstract
Widely shared videos on the internet are often edited. Recently, although Video Large Language Models (Vid-LLMs)
have made great progress in general video understanding tasks, their capabilities in video editing understanding (VEU) tasks remain unexplored. To address this gap,
in this paper, we introduce VEU-Bench (Video Editing
Understanding Benchmark), a comprehensive benchmark
that categorizes video editing components across various
dimensions, from intra-frame features like shot size to intershot attributes such as cut types and transitions. Unlike previous video editing understanding benchmarks that focus
mainly on editing element classification, VEU-Bench encompasses 19 fine-grained tasks across three stages: recognition, reasoning, and judging. To enhance the annotation
of VEU automatically, we built an annotation pipeline inte-

grated with an ontology-based knowledge base. Through
extensive experiments with 11 state-of-the-art Vid-LLMs,
our findings reveal that current Vid-LLMs face significant
challenges in VEU tasks, with some performing worse than
random choice. To alleviate this issue, we develop Oscars1 ,
a VEU expert model fine-tuned on the curated VEU-Bench
dataset. It outperforms existing open-source Vid-LLMs on
VEU-Bench by over 28.3% in accuracy and achieves performance comparable to commercial models like GPT-4o.
We also demonstrate that incorporating VEU data significantly enhances the performance of Vid-LLMs on general
video understanding benchmarks, with an average improvement of 8.3% across nine reasoning tasks. The code and
data are available at project page

13671

1 Named after the Academy Awards.

