This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Q-Bench-Video: Benchmark the Video Quality Understanding of LMMs
Zicheng Zhang1∗ , Ziheng Jia1∗ , Haoning Wu2† , Chunyi Li1 , Zijian Chen1 , Yingjie Zhou1 ,
Wei Sun1 , Xiaohong Liu1 , Xiongkuo Min1† , Weisi Lin2 , and Guangtao Zhai1†
1
Shanghai Jiaotong University, 2 Nanyang Technological University
∗

First Authors, † Corresponding Authors

https://github.com/Q-Future/Q-Bench-Video

Abstract

videos, such as classifying objects, identifying actions, and
recognizing events. However, the aspect of video quality,
which is vital for optimizing compression and transmission systems, enhancing viewer experience, and establishing standards for high-quality video generation, has
received less attention. Although numerous LMM video
benchmarks[8, 10, 23] have been developed to assess the
semantic understanding of videos by LMMs comprehensively, benchmarks systematically targeting video quality
are still lacking. Additionally, while semantic understanding is closely linked to high-level video information, the
perception and understanding of low-level information are
crucial in video quality [5, 25] as well.

With the rising interest in research on Large Multi-modal
Models (LMMs) for video understanding, many studies
have emphasized general video comprehension capabilities, neglecting the systematic exploration into video quality understanding. To address this oversight, we introduce
Q-Bench-Video in this paper, a new benchmark specifically designed to evaluate LMMs’ proficiency in discerning video quality. a) To ensure video source diversity, QBench-Video encompasses videos from natural scenes, AIgenerated content (AIGC), and computer graphics (CG). b)
Building on the traditional multiple-choice questions format with the Yes-or-No and What-How categories, we include Open-ended questions to better evaluate complex scenarios. Additionally, we incorporate the video pair quality comparison question to enhance comprehensiveness. c)
Beyond the traditional Technical, Aesthetic, and Temporal
distortions, we have expanded our evaluation aspects to include the dimension of AIGC distortions, which addresses
the increasing demand for video generation. Finally, we
collect a total of 2,378 question-answer pairs and test them
on 12 open-source & 5 proprietary LMMs. Our findings
indicate that while LMMs have a foundational understanding of perceptual video quality, their performance remains
incomplete and imprecise, with a notable discrepancy compared to the performance of human beings. Through QBench-Video, we seek to catalyze community interest, stimulate further research, and unlock the untapped potential of
LMMs to close the gap in video quality understanding.

To address this gap, we introduce Q-Bench-Video, a
novel benchmark specifically designed to systematically
evaluate the video quality understanding of LMMs. As
illustrated in Fig. 1, our benchmark encompasses a wide
range of video content, including natural scenes, AIgenerated content (AIGC), and computer graphics (CG), ensuring diversity in video sources. In addition, to maintain a
reasonable distribution of source video quality, we employ
uniform sampling from video datasets that contain subjective quality annotations. This approach guarantees comprehensive coverage of the quality spectrum while avoiding imbalanced quality distributions. Moreover, we extend
beyond traditional video evaluations by incorporating both
multiple-choice questions (MCQs) and open-ended questions. This enables a more thorough analysis of LMMs’
ability to discern video quality across diverse scenarios. We
further introduce a new evaluation dimension specifically
tailored to assess distortions related to AIGC, which are increasingly prominent in video generation tasks. Recognizing the importance of quality comparison settings in realworld applications, such as camera parameter optimization
and AIGC video generation, we further incorporate video
pairs to facilitate quality comparison assessment as well. In
total, we collect 1800 videos and annotated 2,378 questionanswer pairs for validation, creating a robust framework for
systematic evaluation on video quality understanding.

1. Introduction
As the field of artificial intelligence (AI) continues to
evolve, Large Multi-modal Models (LMMs) [4, 16, 19, 50,
51] are progressively utilized in high-level video understanding tasks. These models have shown remarkable capabilities in analyzing and interpreting the semantic content of

3229

