This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Autoregressive Sequential Pretraining for Visual Tracking
Shiyi Liang*
Yifan Bai* †
Yihong Gong
Xing WeiB
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{sy liang2023, yfbai}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
{ygong, weixing}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

https://ARPTrack.github.io

Abstract
Recent advancements in visual object tracking have shifted
towards a sequential generation paradigm, where object
deformation and motion exhibit strong temporal dependencies. Despite the importance of these dependencies, widely
adopted image-level pretrained backbones barely capture
the dynamics in the consecutive video, which is the essence
of tracking. Thus, we propose AutoRegressive Sequential Pretraining (ARP), an unsupervised spatio-temporal
learner, via generating the evolution of object appearance and motion in video sequences. Our method leverages
a diffusion model to autoregressively generate the future
frame appearance, conditioned on historical embeddings
extracted by a general encoder. Furthermore, to ensure trajectory coherence, the same encoder is employed to learn
trajectory consistency by generating coordinate sequences
in a reverse autoregressive fashion, a process we term backtracking. Further, we integrate the pretrained ARP into ARTrackV2, creating ARPTrack, which is further fine-tuned
for tracking tasks. ARPTrack achieves state-of-the-art performance across multiple benchmarks, becoming the first
tracker to surpass 80% AO on GOT-10k, while maintaining
high efficiency. These results demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach in capturing temporal dependencies for
continuous video tracking. The code will be released soon.

Figure 1. Comparison between image-level and video-level pretrained backbones. Top: Representative training samples from
image-based datasets (blue) and video-based datasets (red). Bottom: (1) The gradient cosine similarity between consecutive iterations follows a normal distribution during image-level pretraining, whereas it demonstrates significant temporal correlation in
the video-level pretrained backbone, and (2) when fine-tuned with
ARTrackV2, the video-level pretrained approach (red) demonstrates superior tracking performance on GOT-10k then imagelevel (blue) and pairs-level (yellow).

tracking [6, 39, 62, 70], where object deformation and motion exhibit strong sequential dependencies. This advancement has far-reaching implications for time-critical applications, spanning from embodied intelligence, autonomous
driving, human-computer interaction, and augmented reality systems.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in Visual Object Tracking [3, 36, 38, 42,
48], have witnessed a paradigm shift from traditional perframe template matching [2, 23, 29, 41, 44, 56, 66] to sequential generation [1, 14, 59], which has set new performance benchmarks, pioneered by ARTrack [59]. This
transformation aligns with the inherently temporal nature of

Moreover, the paradigm shift offers a novel perspective
on conventional approaches. As demonstrated in Figure 1,
the gradient patterns between image-level and video-level
pretrained models exhibit stark disparities, with video models demonstrating superior perception to temporal dynamics. This reveals a fundamental constraint in current tracking frameworks: despite their widespread adoption, image-

*Co-first authors
†Project lead
BCorresponding author

7254

