This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HUSH: Holistic Panoramic 3D Scene Understanding using Spherical Harmonics
Jongsung Lee1 , Harin Park1 , Byeong-Uk Lee2 , Kyungdon Joo1 *
1
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, UNIST, 2 KRAFTON
{syniez, harinp33, kyungdon}@unist.ac.kr
byeonguk.lee@krafton.com

Abstract

Panorama Image

1. Introduction
The 360◦ camera is becoming more popular to be used in
various fields of computer vision and robotics, as it can capture a 360◦ view of an environment within a single frame
due to its large field of view (FoV). The capability to provide a complete spatial context makes it highly advantageous in understanding holistic 3D scenes. As a result,
there is a dramatic increase of interest in 3D understanding tasks like depth estimation or surface normal estimation
using 360◦ images as input.
The most popular way of interpreting 360◦ images is

Depth
●

https://vision3d-lab.github.io/hush/.

Task Heads

● ●

Motivated by the efficiency of spherical harmonics (SH)
in representing various physical phenomena, we propose a
Holistic panoramic 3D scene Understanding framework using Spherical Harmonics, dubbed as HUSH. Our approach
focuses on a unified framework adaptable to various 3D
scene understanding tasks via SH bases. To achieve this,
we first estimate SH coefficients, allowing for the adaptive configuration of the SH bases specific to each scene.
HUSH then employs a hierarchical attention module that
uses SH bases as queries to generate comprehensive scene
features by integrating these scene-adaptive SH bases with
image features. Additionally, we introduce an SH basis index module that adaptively emphasizes relevant SH bases
to produce task-relevant features, enhancing the versatility of HUSH across different scene understanding tasks. Finally, by combining the scene features with task-relevant
features in the task-specific heads, we perform various
scene understanding tasks, including depth, surface normal
and room layout estimation. Experiments demonstrate that
HUSH achieves state-of-the-art performance on depth estimation benchmarks, highlighting the robustness and scalability of using SH in panoramic 3D scene understanding. For more information, you can visit our project page

* Corresponding author.

HUSH
Image Feature

●●●

SH Bases

●●●

Normal

Task-relevant SH Bases
Depth-relevant SH Basis

3D Indoor Scene

Normal-relevant SH Basis

SH Basis Index Map for Normal and Depth

Figure 1. Illustration of HUSH. Our method exploits SH bases to
perform various panoramic 3D scene understanding tasks, such as
estimating depth and surface normals. In particular, HUSH focuses
more on the SH bases relevant to each task. The bottom illustrates
an example of the SH basis index map for each task, where we can
observe colorized task-relevant SH index maps. For visualization
purposes only, we use the ground truth depth map.

equirectangular projection (ERP). It maps 360◦ view to a
2D plane, and is commonly known as panorama images.
ERP image is advantageous in a way that it holds all the information in a single image, but it contains visual distortion,
especially near the pole regions. This makes an ERP image
difficult to be utilized in conventional computer vision algorithms since most of the methods are trained on perspective images. Therefore, many of the previous approaches
try to simplify the process by converting ERP images into
multiple perspective patches, as in cubemap projections
(CP) [12, 34] or tangent projections (TP) [3, 19, 26]. Another line of works focuses on utilizing ERP image itself, by
either assuming strong geometric constraints or developing
ERP-specific convolution modules [28, 38, 39].
While patch-based approaches show promising results in
panorama-based 3D scene understanding tasks, they commonly suffer from computational inefficiency due to constant conversion between an ERP image and multiple perspective images. In this work, we focus on the nature
of ERP. Panoramic images are inherently represented in a

16599

