This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Invisible Backdoor Attack against Self-supervised Learning
Hanrong Zhang1 * Zhenting Wang2 * Boheng Li3 Fulin Lin1 Tingxu Han4
Mingyu Jin2 Chenlu Zhan1 Mengnan Du5 Hongwei Wang1† Shiqing Ma6
1
Zhejiang University 2 Rutgers University 3 Nanyang Technological University
4
Nanjing University 5 New Jersey Institute of Technology 6 University of Massachusetts Amherst

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) models are vulnerable to
backdoor attacks. Existing backdoor attacks that are effective in SSL often involve noticeable triggers, like colored patches or visible noise, which are vulnerable to human inspection. This paper proposes an imperceptible and
effective backdoor attack against self-supervised models.
We first find that existing imperceptible triggers designed
for supervised learning are less effective in compromising
self-supervised models. We then identify this ineffectiveness is attributed to the overlap in distributions between
the backdoor and augmented samples used in SSL. Building
on this insight, we design an attack using optimized triggers disentangled with the augmented transformation in the
SSL, while remaining imperceptible to human vision. Experiments on five datasets and six SSL algorithms demonstrate our attack is highly effective and stealthy. It also
has strong resistance to existing backdoor defenses. Our
code can be found at https://github.com/ZhangHenry/INACTIVE.

door can be inherited to the downstream task. The downstream classifier predicts a specific target label if the input
contains a pre-defined backdoor trigger. Existing backdoor
attacks on SSL such as BadEncoder [27] achieve high attack success rates (ASR). However, a common drawback of
these effective attacks is that their trigger patterns are obvious, making them susceptible to human inspection. Moreover, while data-poisoning-based attacks CTRL [34] and
BLTO [63] are relatively stealthy, their ASRs are suboptimal, For example, on CIFAR10 CTRL only has 61.90%
ASR under BYOL framework and BLTO only has 84.63%
ASR under SimSiam framework. Furthermore, they also
rely on the downstream dataset matching the pre-training
dataset distribution, limiting effectiveness across diverse
datasets. In this paper, we aim to propose a backdoor attack
in SSL that is both effective and stealthy to human vision
without this distribution dependency.

1. Introduction

There are various invisible triggers designed for
the backdoor attacks on supervised classifiers, such as
WaNet [47], ISSBA [36], and filter attack [42]. A straightforward way to achieve imperceptible backdoor attacks in
SSL is by directly applying these invisible triggers. However, these existing invisible triggers designed for supervised learning do not perform as well in attacking selfsupervised models (see Fig. 2). We then find that this lack of
effectiveness is due to the overlapping distributions between
the backdoor samples and the augmented samples utilized
in SSL. Namely, self-supervised models cannot effectively
distinguish the distribution of the backdoor samples and the
augmented samples, due to the similarity between the transformation altered by the backdoor trigger and intrinsic image augmentations in SSL, such as RandomGrayscale and
ColorJitter (see Fig. 3).

In recent years, Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has become a powerful approach in deep learning, enabling the
learning of rich representations from vast unlabeled data,
thus avoiding manual labeling. SSL aims to develop an
image encoder that produces similar embeddings for similar images by applying various augmentations to the same
image. This pre-trained encoder can be used for different
downstream tasks by training compact downstream classifiers with relatively few parameters.
Although SSL has been extensively used in the development of foundational models [5, 6, 20], it is at risk of backdoor attacks [27, 34, 56, 68], where the attacker embeds
hidden malicious behavior within the encoder. The back* Equal Contribution. Email: zhanghr0709@gmail.com;
zhenting.wang@rutgers.edu
† Corresponding author. Email: hongweiwang@intl.zju.edu.cn

Based on the above observations, we developed a backdoor attack that disentangles its optimized trigger transformation and the augmented transformation in SSL. In detail,
it involves increasing the distributional distance between
backdoor samples and the augmented samples in the SSL
process. We also keep the trigger stealthy by adding the
constraints on both pixel-space and feature-space distance

25790

