This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Simple Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Zihang Lai
Visual Geometry Group (VGG), University of Oxford
zlai@robots.ox.ac.uk

Figure 1. S-Seg result on a web image. Our goal is to segment
everything, including fictional characters like minions.

Abstract

Mask
supervision

Pseudo-mask
generator
A yellow
rubber duck
sits in water.

Language
model

tiger

Image-text pair

minions

Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation models aim to accurately assign a semantic label to each pixel in an image
from a set of arbitrary open-vocabulary texts. In order to
learn such pixel-level alignment, current approaches typically rely on a combination of (i) image-level VL model (e.g.
CLIP), (ii) ground truth masks, (iii) custom grouping encoders, and (iv) the Segment Anything Model (SAM). In this
paper, we introduce S-Seg, a simple model that can achieve
surprisingly strong performance without depending on any
of the above elements. S-Seg leverages pseudo-masks and
language features to train a MaskFormer, and can be easily
trained from publicly available image-text datasets. Contrary to prior works, our model directly trains for pixellevel features and language alignment. Once trained, S-Seg
generalizes well to multiple testing datasets without requiring fine-tuning. In addition, S-Seg has the extra benefits of
scalability with data and consistently improving when augmented with self-training. We believe that our simple yet
effective approach will serve as a solid baseline for future
research. Project page: zlai0.github.io/S-Seg.

Language
feature

Semantic
supervision

Maoi

Figure 2. Our S-Seg framework leverages pseudo-mask and language to train a MaskFormer. We show that our method of directly
training for pixel-level feature and language alignment yields superior results.

1. Introduction

One common tactic is adapting existing Vision-Language
(VL) models, which are initially trained for image-level
alignment (e.g., CLIP [37]), to perform at the pixel level.
Another strategy involves training models on ground truth
masks that are annotated for a select number of seen classes,
thereby encouraging the model to extrapolate its knowledge
to novel unseen classes during testing. Furthermore, specialized models such as GroupViT [47] and OVSegmentor [48], which are explicitly designed for openvocabulary segmentation, are being explored. Lastly, recent
literature adapts the Segment Anything Model (SAM), originally not designed to classify segments, for effective use in
open-vocabulary segmentation.
In this paper, we report a model that can work surprisingly well with none of the above strategies. Our approach,
named S-Seg, is built on top of a standard MaskFormer
model. Our model directly trains for pixel-level feature
and language alignment, using neither existing large imagelevel alignment models like CLIP [37] nor manually annotated segmentation or classification labels.
One of the biggest challenges we face is finding the right

Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation presents a unique
challenge as it requires assigning accurate semantic labels
to each pixel in an image using arbitrary open-vocabulary
texts, rather than a fixed set of classes. This means that
the model must be able to segment and classify any arbitrary categories expressed in language. Achieving this requires a robust, pixel-level alignment between images and
textual descriptions, which enables accurate association of
each pixel with the most relevant class from a dynamically
provided set of textual categories.
A primary obstacle in this domain is that it is impossible to construct datasets that provide pixel-level annotations
for all possible labels. This limitation often results in the
adoption of weakly-supervised or semi-supervised learning
approaches. Current methods typically rely on a combination of strategies to learn the required pixel-level alignment.

30221

