This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

KVQ: Boosting Video Quality Assessment via Saliency-guided Local Perception
Yunpeng Qu1,2 , Kun Yuan2,†(B) , Qizhi Xie1,2 , Ming Sun2 , Chao Zhou2 , Jian Wang1,3(B)
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Kuaishou Technology, 3 BNRist, Tsinghua University
{qyp21, xqz20}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, jian-wang@tsinghua.edu.cn
{yuankun03,sunming03,zhouchao}@kuaishou.com

Abstract
Video Quality Assessment (VQA), which intends to predict
the perceptual quality of videos, has attracted increasing
attention. Due to factors like motion blur or specific distortions, the quality of different regions in a video varies.
Recognizing the region-wise local quality within a video
is beneficial for assessing global quality and can guide
us in adopting fine-grained enhancement or transcoding
strategies. Due to the heavy cost of annotating regionwise quality, the lack of ground truth constraints from relevant datasets further complicates the utilization of local
perception. Inspired by the Human Visual System (HVS)
that links global quality to the local texture of different regions and their visual saliency, we propose a Kaleidoscope
Video Quality Assessment (KVQ) framework, which aims to
effectively assess both saliency and local texture, thereby
facilitating the assessment of global quality. Our framework extracts visual saliency and allocates attention using Fusion-Window Attention (FWA) while incorporating
a Local Perception Constraint (LPC) to mitigate the reliance of regional texture perception on neighboring areas.
KVQ obtains significant improvements across multiple scenarios on five VQA benchmarks compared to SOTA methods. Furthermore, to assess local perception, we establish a new Local Perception Visual Quality (LPVQ) dataset
with region-wise annotations. Experimental results demonstrate the capability of KVQ in perceiving local distortions.
KVQ models and the LPVQ dataset will be available at
https://github.com/qyp2000/KVQ.

Window Attention
Mechanism

Visual Saliency
Local Window

Correlated Window

Fusion-Window Attention
Mechanism
Selected Patch

Figure 1. Human visual saliency and different attention mechanisms. (Left) Visual saliency obtained through mouse-tracking in
the SALICON [17] dataset. (Middle) Window Attention mechanism [27], where patches establish connections only within the
window. (Right) Our Fusion-Window Attention, where patches
can allocate long-range attention across correlated regions.

video, has attracted raising attention [36]. VQA facilitates
the identification of low-quality videos, thereby guiding the
video enhancement and encoding system [4, 59], resulting
in a superior visual experience while effectively reducing
bandwidth costs. Due to the difficulty in obtaining reference videos in most user-generated content scenarios, we
focus on the No-Reference (NR) VQA domain [19, 24, 47].
Classical VQA algorithms rely on handcrafted features
to predict quality [20, 31, 36]. In recent years, numerous deep learning methods based on CNN [22, 24, 62]
or Transformer [47, 50] have also been applied [21, 56].
These methods focus on predicting the global quality of
videos. Indeed, there are differences in the quality of disparate spatiotemporal regions within a video due to their
distinct textures and distortions (e.g., motion blur, compression), and it may not align with the global perceptual quality [30]. Achieving a perception of region-wise distortions
is crucial for VQA. Nevertheless, utilizing local perception to assist VQA poses a challenge, owing to the dearth
of publicly accessible datasets meeting the constraints of
local perception. It is a time-consuming and complicated
task to annotate Mean Opinion Scores (MOS) for videos,
as it requires a large number of participants to ensure reliability [26, 29, 58]. Annotating the local quality of spatiotemporal regions in videos incurs even more challeng-

1. Introduction
In the era of burgeoning video content-driven social media
platforms, there has been an unprecedented surge in the creation and dissemination of videos. To enhance users’ Quality of Experience (QoE), Video Quality Assessment (VQA),
which aims to forecast the human perceptual quality of a
† Project leader. B Corresponding authors.

2150

