This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stop Walking in Circles! Bailing Out Early in Projected Gradient Descent
Philip Doldo
Booz Allen Hamilton

Derek Everett
Booz Allen Hamilton

Andre T Nguyen
Booz Allen Hamilton

Edward Raff
Booz Allen Hamilton

Abstract

in perspective, 100 training epochs on ImageNet is the same
number of forward/backward passes as one test-set evaluation of ImageNet using T = 1,000 PGD iterations.
Due to the prevalence of computer vision (CV) applications, the L∞ ball has become the predominant norm used
in such evaluations. Inspired by this, we devise a simple
strategy to reduce the number of PGD computations needed
by up to 96%, depending on the model being evaluated. Our
key insight is that PGD is performed using a fixed step size
α. When an image x is adversarially robust against a ball
of radius ϵ, this will often result in a cycling behavior as the
iterates are pushed back to the feasible region, as shown by
Figure 1. By detecting these cycles, we can provably terminate the PGD attack, knowing that we will reach exactly the
same conclusion of adversarial robustness.
The rest of this manuscript is organized as follows. In
Section 2 we will briefly review the related work to our own,
and provide the technical background on PGD in Section 3.
With this formalization, in Section 4 we can state our new
PGD with Cycle Detection, PGDCD , that obtains identical
results as the standard PGD attack at essentially no extra
cost. The worst-case scenario is that no cycle was detected,
and so the same number of forward/backward passes are
performed. We evaluate several models trained to be adversarially robust in Section 5 to demonstrate the range of
results obtained with PGDCD , where we see that our method
tends to perform best on larger and more expensive datasets
like ImageNet compared to smaller datasets like CIFAR100.
In Section 6 we will demonstrate how PGDCD can still
achieve attack success rates comparable to, or even better,
than adaptive step-size alternatives. This shows why PGD
is still a strong and important baseline method, and why
PGDCD should be the first attack used since it is both efficacious and orders of magnitude faster. Any sample quickly
attacked by PGDCD need not be considered by slower algorithms, as the adversarial perturbation has already been
found. Finally, we conclude in Section 7.

Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) under the L∞ ball has
become one of the defacto methods used in adversarial robustness evaluation for computer vision (CV) due to its reliability and efficacy, making a strong and easy-to-implement
iterative baseline. However, PGD is computationally demanding to apply, especially when using thousands of iterations is the current best-practice recommendation to generate an adversarial example for a single image. In this work,
we introduce a simple novel method for early termination
of PGD based on cycle detection by exploiting the geometry of how PGD is implemented in practice and show that it
can produce large speedup factors while providing the exact same estimate of model robustness as standard PGD.
This method substantially speeds up PGD without sacrificing any attack strength, enabling evaluations of robustness
that were previously computationally intractable.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art computer vision classifiers have been
shown to be vulnerable to adversarial examples, small perturbations of their inputs which cause incorrect classifications [1]. The existence of adversarial examples is particularly concerning in safety-critical applications and consequently, researchers have given significant attention to developing defenses against adversarial perturbations [2–7].
As such, we are interested in reducing the time it takes
for researchers and practitioners to perform standard evaluations of adversarial robustness, notably via the Projected
Gradient Descent (PGD) attack under the L∞ ball.
PGD is particularly demanding to evaluate in all cases
because it is an iterative attack; for each sample x we wish
to perturb, T forward and backward passes will be performed on top of the overhead of the optimization procedure. The use of T ≥ 1, 000 iterations has long been the
recommendation [8, 9] 1 . To put this computational burden
1 See

Amol Khanna
Booz Allen Hamilton

carlini.com/writing/2018/evaluating- adversarialexample-defenses.html

original recommendation from https : / / nicholas .

6373

