This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UHD-processer: Uniﬁed UHD Image Restoration with
Progressive Frequency Learning and Degradation-aware Prompts
Yidi Liu, DongLi, Xueyang Fu† , Xin Lu, Jie Huang, Zheng-jun Zha
School of Information Science and Technology and MoE Key Laboratory of
Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230026, China
liuyidi2023@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xyfu@ustc.edu.cn

†

Corresponding Author

Abstract
We introduce UHD-Processor, a uniﬁed and robust framework for all-in-one image restoration, which is particularly
resource-efﬁcient for Ultra-High-Deﬁnition (UHD) images.
To address the limitations of traditional all-in-one methods
that rely on complex restoration backbones, our strategy employs a frequency domain decoupling progressive learning
technique, motivated by curriculum learning, to incrementally learn restoration mappings from low to high frequencies. This approach incorporates specialized sub-network
modules to effectively tackle different frequency bands in
a divide-and-conquer manner, signiﬁcantly enhancing the
learning capability of simpler networks. Moreover, to accommodate the high-resolution characteristics of UHD images,
we developed a variational autoencoder (VAE)-based framework that reduces computational complexity by modeling
a concise latent space. It integrates task-speciﬁc degradation awareness in the encoder and frequency selection
in the decoder, enhancing task comprehension and generalization. Our uniﬁed model is able to handle various
degradations such as denoising, deblurring, dehazing, lowlighting, etc. Experimental evaluations extensively showcase the effectiveness of our dual-strategy approach, signiﬁcantly improving UHD image restoration and achieving
cutting-edge performance across diverse conditions. The
code will be available at https://github.com/lyd2022/UHD-processer

Figure 1. (a) Comparison of PSNR between our method and the
previous state-of-the-art (SOTA) all-in-one method across six degradation settings in UHD images. (b) Observe the performance gains
when integrating the same promptIR prompt branch into Restormer
models with varying parameter sizes. (c) Comparison of low-tohigh frequency training order on UHD and regular images, showing
greater effectiveness for UHD tasks. (d) Quantitative evaluation of
restoration tasks across low, high, and full-frequency bands.

1. Introduction

tonomous driving [3] face complex degradation patterns
that vary across time and space, making reliance on singlefunction models impractical. This calls for a generalized
model that can address multiple degradation types to support
robust low-level vision tasks.
In response to the above requirements, all-in-one(AIO)
approaches aim to use a single model to manage various
degradations, but they generally target standard-resolution
images and encounter computational difﬁculties when scaled
to UHD. This gap highlights the pressing need for an efﬁcient

Ultra-high-deﬁnition (UHD) images are increasingly utilized across various ﬁelds, prompting substantial research
in UHD image restoration for speciﬁc degradation types,
such as low-light enhancement, deblurring, dehazing, and
deraining [2, 15, 29, 36]. However, real-world applications
like object detection [21], video segmentation [16], and au-

23121

