This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Arbitrary-steps Image Super-resolution via Diffusion Inversion
Zongsheng Yue1,2 , Kang Liao2 , Chen Change Loy2
1

2

Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Zoomed LR

Zoomed LR

StableSR-50 (3459ms)

DiffBIR-50 (7937ms)

ResShift-4 (319ms)

SinSR-1 (138ms)

OSEDiff-1 (176ms)

Ours-1 (117ms)

Ours-2 (149ms)

Ours-3 (176ms)

Ours-4 (207ms)

Ours-5 (244ms)

StableSR-50

DiffBIR-50

ResShift-4

SinSR-1

OSEDiff-1

Ours-1

Ours-2

Ours-3

Ours-4

Ours-5

Figure 1. Qualitative comparisons of our proposed method to recent state-of-the-art diffusion-based approaches on two real-world examples, where the number of sampling steps is annotated in the format “Method name-Steps”. We provide the runtime (in milliseconds)
highlighted by red in the sub-caption of the first example , which is tested on ×4 (128 → 512) SR task on an A100 GPU. Our method
offers an efficient and flexible sampling mechanism, allowing users to freely adjust the number of sampling steps based on the degradation
type or their specific requirements. In the first example, mainly degraded by blurriness, multi-step sampling is preferable to single-step
sampling as it progressively recovers finer details. Conversely, in the second example with severe noise, a single sampling step is sufficient
to achieve satisfactory results, whereas additional steps may amplify the noise and introduce unwanted artifacts. (Zoom-in for best view)

Abstract
This study presents a new image super-resolution (SR) technique based on diffusion inversion, aiming at harnessing
the rich image priors encapsulated in large pre-trained
diffusion models to improve SR performance. We design
a Partial noise Prediction strategy to construct an intermediate state of the diffusion model, which serves as the
starting sampling point. Central to our approach is a
deep noise predictor to estimate the optimal noise maps
for the forward diffusion process. Once trained, this noise

predictor can be used to initialize the sampling process
partially along the diffusion trajectory, generating the desirable high-resolution result. Compared to existing approaches, our method offers a flexible and efficient sampling mechanism that supports an arbitrary number of sampling steps, ranging from one to five. Even with a single
sampling step, our method demonstrates superior or comparable performance to recent state-of-the-art approaches.
The code and model are publicly available at https:
//github.com/zsyOAOA/InvSR.

23153

