This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompting Depth Anything for 4K Resolution Accurate Metric Depth Estimation
Haotong Lin1,2 Sida Peng1† Jingxiao Chen3 Songyou Peng4 Jiaming Sun1
Minghuan Liu3 Hujun Bao1 Jiashi Feng2 Xiaowei Zhou1 Bingyi Kang2
1

Zhejiang University

2

3

ByteDance Seed

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

4

ETH Zurich

https://PromptDA.github.io/

Prompting
Image & Low-cost LiDAR

m

cm

.0
60

68.5
c

Depth
Foundation
Model

cm

(b) Consistent Multi-view Depth Estimation for Static Scenes

59.2

(a) Prompt Depth Anything

Accurate metric depth

(c) High-res Accurate Depth Estimation for Dynamic Scenes

...

...

ARKit Depth: low-res & noisy

Ours: high-res & accurate

80.7c
m

60.0cm

59.5cm

Groundtruth distance

Err rate: 0.8%—1.3%

Err rate: 14%—34%

Input viewpoints

Ours

Metric3D v2

Figure 1. Illustration and capabilities of Prompt Depth Anything. (a) Prompt Depth Anything is a new paradigm for metric depth
estimation, which is formulated as prompting a depth foundation model with a metric prompt, specifically utilizing a low-cost LiDAR as
the prompt. (b) Our method enables consistent depth estimation, addressing the limitations of Metric3D v2 [25] that suffer from inaccurate
scale and inconsistency. (c) It achieves accurate 4K accurate depth estimation, significantly surpassing ARKit LiDAR Depth (240 × 320).

3D reconstruction and generalized robotic grasping.

Abstract
1. Introduction

Prompts play a critical role in unleashing the power of language and vision foundation models for specific tasks. For
the first time, we introduce prompting into depth foundation models, creating a new paradigm for metric depth estimation termed Prompt Depth Anything. Specifically, we
use a low-cost LiDAR as the prompt to guide the Depth
Anything model for accurate metric depth output, achieving up to 4K resolution. Our approach centers on a concise
prompt fusion design that integrates the LiDAR at multiple
scales within the depth decoder. To address training challenges posed by limited datasets containing both LiDAR
depth and precise GT depth, we propose a scalable data
pipeline that includes synthetic data LiDAR simulation and
real data pseudo GT depth generation. Our approach sets
new state-of-the-arts on the ARKitScenes and ScanNet++
datasets and benefits downstream applications, including
† Corresponding author: Sida Peng.

High-quality depth perception is a fundamental challenge
in computer vision and robotics. Recent monocular depth
estimation has experienced a significant leap by scaling the
model or data, leading to the flourishing of depth foundation models [19, 29, 72, 73]. These models demonstrate
strong abilities in producing high-quality relative depth, but
suffer from scale ambiguity, hindering their practical applications in autonomous driving and robotic manipulation,
etc. Therefore, significant efforts have been made to achieve
metric depth estimation, by either finetuning depth foundation models [6, 20] on metric datasets or training metric depth models with image intrinsics as additional inputs [8, 25, 45, 77]. However, neither of them can address
the problem properly, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b).
A natural question thus arises: Do these foundation models truly lack utility in accurate metric depth estimation?
This reminds us to closely examine the foundation models

17070

