This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Spatial Correspondence Across Modalities
Ayush Shrivastava
Andrew Owens
University of Michigan
https://ayshrv.com/cmrw
RGB

Depth

Photo

RGB

Thermal

Photorealistic style

(a) Geometric Correspondence

Sketch

Anime style

(b) Semantic Correspondence

Figure 1. Finding spatial correspondences across modalities. We present a method for cross-modal matching, trained entirely through
self-supervision using a simple formulation based on contrastive random walks [14]. (a) Given two images taken by different visual
modalities and at different positions and times, we predict the pairs of image patches that physically correspond to the same points. (b) We
also apply our method to semantic matching tasks, using a visual encoder initialized with pretrained DINOv2 [27] weights and fine-tuned
during training. These include tasks such as photo-sketch alignment [26] and style-based matching between images of different styles
generated with a text-to-image model [19].

Abstract

1. Introduction

We present a method for finding cross-modal space-time
correspondences. Given two images from different visual
modalities, such as an RGB image and a depth map, our
model identifies which pairs of pixels correspond to the same
physical points in the scene. To solve this problem, we extend
the contrastive random walk framework to simultaneously
learn cycle-consistent feature representations for both crossmodal and intra-modal matching. The resulting model is
simple and has no explicit photo-consistency assumptions.
It can be trained entirely using unlabeled data, without the
need for any spatially aligned multimodal image pairs. We
evaluate our method on both geometric and semantic correspondence tasks. For geometric matching, we consider
challenging tasks such as RGB-to-depth and RGB-to-thermal
matching (and vice versa); for semantic matching, we evaluate on photo-sketch and cross-style image alignment. Our
method achieves strong performance across all benchmarks.

Cameras take a multitude of different forms. While RGB,
thermal, and depth cameras each record images, what is
stored within each pixel differs drastically. Consequently,
when a scene is captured using cameras that are based on
different sensory modalities, it is difficult to determine which
pixels within them correspond to the same physical points.
These cross-modal pixel correspondences have a number of
applications, such as cross-modal registration, 3D reconstruction, and multimodal data fusion [1, 6, 22, 43]. Recent work
on multimodal learning has provided effective ways of learning cross-modal correspondences through self-supervision,
yet these methods largely rely on having paired data from
multiple sensors, which is not available for pixel-level correspondence.
Traditional self-supervised methods for pixel correspondences often make strong assumptions about the visual appearance of pixels that should be matched together, such as
by assuming that matching image patches should be photo-

6383

