This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interpreting Object-level Foundation Models via Visual Precision Search
Ruoyu Chen1,2 , Siyuan Liang3 , Jingzhi Li1,2,7 , Shiming Liu4 , Maosen Li5 ,
Zhen Huang6 , Hua Zhang1,2,∗ , and Xiaochun Cao8, *
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
School of Computing, NUS 4 RAMS Lab, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. 5 IAS BU, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
6
College of Computer, NUDT 7 Key Lab. of Edu. Inf. for Nationalities (YNNU), Ministry of Education, Kunming, China
8
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 518107, China
2

chenruoyu@iie.ac.cn

{lijingzhi,zhanghua}@iie.ac.cn

pandaliang521@gmail.com

{liushiming3,limaosen2}@huawei.com

huangzhen@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract

caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Object-level Foundation Model
Interpretation

Advances in multimodal pre-training have propelled objectlevel foundation models, such as Grounding DINO and
Florence-2, in tasks like visual grounding and object detection. However, interpreting these models’ decisions has
grown increasingly challenging. Existing interpretable attribution methods for object-level task interpretation have
notable limitations: (1) gradient-based methods lack precise localization due to visual-textual fusion in foundation
models, and (2) perturbation-based methods produce noisy
saliency maps, limiting fine-grained interpretability. To address these, we propose a Visual Precision Search method
that generates accurate attribution maps with fewer regions.
Our method bypasses internal model parameters to overcome attribution issues from multimodal fusion, dividing
inputs into sparse sub-regions and using consistency and
collaboration scores to accurately identify critical decisionmaking regions. We also conducted a theoretical analysis
of the boundary guarantees and scope of applicability of
our method. Experiments on RefCOCO, MS COCO, and
LVIS show our approach enhances object-level task interpretability over SOTA for Grounding DINO and Florence-2
across various evaluation metrics, with faithfulness gains
of 23.7%, 31.6%, and 20.1% on MS COCO, LVIS, and
RefCOCO for Grounding DINO, and 50.7% and 66.9%
on MS COCO and RefCOCO for Florence-2. Additionally, our method can interpret failures in visual grounding and object detection tasks, surpassing existing methods
across multiple evaluation metrics. The code is released at
https://github.com/RuoyuChen10/VPS.

not white ×

Why

guy in white

in <location> ?
guy in white

Clue: guy

Clue: white
Location sensitive

Visual precision search

Attribution Map (Ours)

guy in white

guy in white

ODAM (Gradient-based)

D-RISE (Perturbation-based)

Figure 1. Illustration of our Visual Precision Search interpretation
method, which more precisely identifies key sub-regions in objectlevel foundation model decision-making compared to gradientbased and perturbation-based methods.

1. Introduction

portance across various fields, including autonomous driving [4, 15, 44]. With advancements in multimodal alignment technology [20, 34], object-level foundation models [28, 46, 48, 56] like Grounding DINO [28] and Florence2 [48] have been developed to handle various tasks, including visual grounding and object detection. However, the
massive data volume, rich semantic concepts, and large parameters significantly reduce the transparency [21, 22, 26]
and interpretability [5, 11, 55] of these models. Since
object-level tasks like autonomous driving demand high
model reliability [9, 30, 45], building transparent and interpretable models is crucial for enhancing safety and trustworthy [6, 17, 21, 23, 24, 43], making it essential to interpret object-level foundation models.
Some interpretable attribution algorithms for traditional
object detection models have been proposed, including

Understanding object information in images, such as object detection [7, 14, 24, 51, 52, 57], is a crucial and enduring challenge in computer vision, holding significant im* Corresponding authors.

30042

