This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Heterogeneous Tissues with Mixture of Experts for Gigapixel Whole
Slide Images
Junxian Wu1 , Minheng Chen1 , Xinyi Ke2 , Tianwang Xun3 , Xiaoming Jiang4 *, Hongyu Zhou5 ,
Lizhi Shao6 ,* Youyong Kong1 *
1

Southeast University
4

2

Peking Union Medical College Hospital

Chongqing University of Post and Telecommunications

3

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5

Tsinghua University

6

Anhui University

{junxianwu, mh chen, kongyouyong}@seu.edu.cn,
xinyike0321@student.pumc.edu.cn, xuntianwang2022@ia.ac.cn, jiangxm@cqupt.edu.cn,
nourzhou@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, 24115@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract
Analyzing gigapixel Whole Slide Images (WSIs) is challenging due to the complex pathological tissue environment and
the absence of target-driven domain knowledge. Previous
methods incorporated pathological priors to mitigate this
issue but relied on additional inference steps and specialized
workflows, restricting scalability and the model’s capacity to identify novel outcome-related factors. To address
these challenges, we propose a plug-and-play PathologyAware Mixture-of-Experts (PAMoE) module, which based
on mixture of experts to learn pathology-related knowledge
and extract useful information. We train the experts to become ‘specialists’ in specific intratumoral tissues by learning to route each tissue to its mapped expert. In addition,
to reduce the impact of irrelevant content on the model,
we introduce a new routing rule that discards patches in
which none of the experts express interest, which helps
the model better capture the relationships between relevant
patches. Through a comprehensive evaluation of PAMoE
on survival task, we demonstrate that 1) Our module enhances the performance of baseline models in most cases,
and 2) The sparse expert processing across different tissues enhances the learning of patch representations by addressing tissue heterogeneity. Source code is available at
https://github.com/wjx-error/PAMoE.

Figure 1. Typical kinds of methods for exploiting tissue heterogeneity. (a) PANTHER [38] utilizes cluster centers derived
global clustering as prototypes to guide the aggregation of patches.
(b) HEAT [3] adopts a pre-trained classifier to introduce priors of
pathological tissue categories for each patch, and builds a heterogeneous graph to explore the interactions among them. (c) Our
proposed PAMoE learns to recognize and process patches through
a trainable gating mechanism in an end-to-end manner.

Slide Images (WSIs) with deep learning methods. The standard approach for analyzing WSIs is weakly supervised
learning based on Multiple Instance Learning (MIL). This
process divides the gigapixel WSI into a substantial number of patches (N > 10, 000) and employs a pre-trained
encoder to obtain embeddings for each patch as instances,
followed by aggregation of the patches to obtain slide-level
embeddings.

1. Introduction
Pathological images are regarded as the gold standard for
cancer diagnosis. The advancement of whole-slide imaging
enables the entire slide to be digitized at high resolution,
enabling the standardized and automated analysis of Whole
* Corresponding author.

5144

