This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reversing Flow for Image Restoration
Haina Qin1,2*♡ , Wenyang Luo1,2* , Libin Wang3† , Dandan Zheng3 ,
Jingdong Chen3 , Ming Yang3 , Bing Li1,2 , Weiming Hu1,2
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS), CASIA;
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences; 3 Ant Group;
{qinhaina2020@,luowenyang2020@,bli@nlpr.,wmhu@nlpr.}ia.ac.cn lbin.wlb@antgroup.com

Abstract
Image restoration aims to recover high-quality (HQ) images
from degraded low-quality (LQ) ones by reversing the effects of degradation. Existing generative models for image
restoration, including diffusion and score-based models, often treat the degradation process as a stochastic transformation, which introduces inefficiency and complexity. In
this work, we propose ResFlow, a novel image restoration
framework that models the degradation process as a deterministic path using continuous normalizing flows. ResFlow
augments the degradation process with an auxiliary process that disambiguates the uncertainty in HQ prediction
to enable reversible modeling of the degradation process.
ResFlow adopts entropy-preserving flow paths and learns
the augmented degradation flow by matching the velocity
field. ResFlow significantly improves the performance and
speed of image restoration, completing the task in fewer
than four sampling steps. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ResFlow achieves state-of-the-art results across
various image restoration benchmarks, offering a practical
and efficient solution for real-world applications.

Figure 1. Image restoration is an ill-posed problem. The degradation process incurs decreasing mutual information between HQ
and intermediate images, and multiple HQ images can degrade to
similar or the same LQ images when their variations diminish in
the process. Gray regions represent the uncertainty range from an
intermediate state. As the image moves from LQ to HQ, its mutual
information with HQ increases, and the uncertainty scope shrinks.

1. Introduction
Image restoration [24, 39, 51, 77, 96, 100] refers to recovering high-quality (HQ) images from degraded, low-quality
(LQ) ones by reversing the effects associated with image
degradation to reconstruct the original object. Many problems in image restoration, such as dehaze [17, 27, 124],
weather removal [21, 60, 76, 101, 126], denoise [53, 71,
117], and artifact removal [23, 35].
Image restoration is ill-posed because it erases information in the HQ images. Given an LQ image, its corresponding HQ image is not necessarily unique, as depicted
in Fig. 1. Image degradation gradually removes details from
*

the HQ images. The corrupted image can result from multiple HQ images with different degradation processes. In
fact, degradation is a Markov chain that transits from HQ
to LQ images, which is subject to the data processing inequality (DPI) [11]: the mutual information between HQ
and intermediate images decreases as more distortion is applied to the image. The ambiguous multi-correspondence
between HQ and LQ images creates uncertainty scopes for
LQ images defined as the collection of possible HQ images
given the LQ images. The uncertainty scope should be disambiguated to make the degradation process reversible by

Equal contribution. † Project lead. Project Page.

♡ Work done during internship at Ant Group.

7545

