This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Omni-ID: Holistic Identity Representation Designed for Generative Tasks
Guocheng Qian Kuan-Chieh Wang Or Patashnik Negin Heravi
Daniil Ostashev Sergey Tulyakov Daniel Cohen-Or Kfir Aberman
Snap Research
https://snap-research.github.io/Omni-ID/

Abstract
We introduce Omni-ID, a novel facial representation designed specifically for generative tasks. Omni-ID encodes holistic information about an individual’s appearance across diverse expressions and poses within a fixedsize representation. It consolidates information from a varied number of unstructured input images into a structured
representation, where each entry represents certain global
or local identity features. Our approach uses a few-tomany identity reconstruction training paradigm, where a
limited set of input images is used to reconstruct multiple
target images of the same individual in various poses and
expressions. A multi-decoder framework is introduced to
leverage the complementary strengths of diverse decoders
during training. Unlike conventional representations, such
as ArcFace and CLIP, which are typically learned through
discriminative or contrastive objectives, Omni-ID is optimized with a generative objective, resulting in a more
comprehensive and nuanced identity capture for generative
tasks. Trained on our MFHQ dataset – a multi-view facial
image collection, Omni-ID demonstrates substantial improvements over conventional representations across various generative tasks.

Figure 1. Omni-ID is a facial representation that consolidates information from a varied number of images of an individual into
a fixed-size, structured encoding. Each element of this encoding captures specific global or local identity features, enabling
high-fidelity generation in new poses, expressions, and capturing
identity-consistent variations.

like CLIP [26], are not well suited for generative applications. Intuitively, Information Bottleneck Principle [3] suggests that subtle variations critical for generation but irrelevant to class boundary are likely lost in discriminative training. Consequently, discriminative features struggled to capture the subtle nuances that define a person’s unique identity
especially across different poses and expressions. Refer to
Figs. 2, 6 and 7 for examples of an inaccurate nose, missing
beards, and an inaccurate head shape when using discriminative features for generation.
In this work, we introduce Omni-ID, a facial identity representation designed for generative tasks. Omni-ID encodes
a varied number of images of an individual into a compact,
fixed-size representation, capturing the individual in diverse
expressions and poses as shown in Fig. 1. This enriched encoding can be used in a wide range of generative tasks, maximizing the faithful preservation of the individual’s subtle

1. Introduction
Generating images that faithfully represent an individual’s
identity requires a face encoding capable of depicting nuanced details across diverse poses and facial expressions.
However, a significant limitation of existing facial representations [9, 26, 38, 46] is their reliance on single-image
encodings, which fundamentally lack holistic information
about one’s appearance. For example, an image of someone in a frontal pose with a neutral expression reveals little about how they look when smiling, frowning, or viewed
from their profile.
Furthermore, existing face representation methods, typically derived from networks optimized for discriminative
tasks such as ArcFace [9] or text-aligned image encoders

8786

