This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Annotation Ambiguity Aware Semi-Supervised Medical Image Segmentation
Suruchi Kumari

Pravendra Singh*

Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee
{suruchi k@cs.iitr.ac.in, pravendra.singh@cs.iitr.ac.in}

Abstract
Despite the remarkable progress of deep learning-based
methods in medical image segmentation, their use in clinical practice remains limited for two main reasons. First,
obtaining a large medical dataset with precise annotations
to train segmentation models is challenging. Secondly,
most current segmentation techniques generate a single deterministic segmentation mask for each image. However,
in real-world scenarios, there is often significant uncertainty regarding what defines the “correct” segmentation,
and various expert annotators might provide different segmentations for the same image. To tackle both of these
problems, we propose Annotation Ambiguity Aware SemiSupervised Medical Image Segmentation (AmbiSSL). AmbiSSL combines a small amount of multi-annotator labeled
data and a large set of unlabeled data to generate diverse
and plausible segmentation maps. Our method consists of
three key components: (1) The Diverse Pseudo-Label Generation (DPG) module utilizes multiple decoders, created
by performing randomized pruning on the original backbone decoder. These pruned decoders enable the generation of a diverse pseudo-label set; (2) a Semi-Supervised
Latent Distribution Learning (SSLDL) module constructs a
common latent space by utilizing both ground truth annotations and pseudo-label set; and (3) a Cross-Decoder Supervision (CDS) module, which enables pruned decoders
to guide each other’s learning. We evaluated the proposed
method on two publicly available datasets. Extensive experiments demonstrate that AmbiSSL can generate diverse
segmentation maps using only a small amount of labeled
data and abundant unlabeled data, offering a more practical solution for medical image segmentation by reducing
reliance on large labeled datasets.

Figure 1. In semi-supervised segmentation (top), few labeled samples and abundant unlabeled data are utilized, producing a single
label map per image. Existing ambiguity-aware methods (middle)
use multiple annotations per image, generating multiple segmentations. AmbiSSL, by contrast, leverages both unlabeled data and a
limited amount of labeled data with multiple annotations, enabling
the generation of multiple segmentations per image.

1. Introduction

markable progress of deep learning-based methods in medical image segmentation [9, 11, 33], their use in clinical
practice [4] remains limited for two main reasons. First,
acquiring a large, accurately annotated medical dataset for
segmentation is challenging, as it requires pixel-level annotations, which are both time-consuming and costly to produce. Second, existing methods typically provide only a
single segmentation map, while medical images often contain regions of inherent ambiguity, and a single ”correct”

Automatic medical image segmentation is a crucial step in
developing effective clinical applications. Despite the re* Corresponding Author.

10404

