This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Electromyography-Informed Facial Expression Reconstruction for
Physiological-Based Synthesis and Analysis
Tim Büchner1

Christoph Anders2
1

Orlando Guntinas-Lichius2

Joachim Denzler1

2

Computer Vision Group
Jena University Hospital
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany

{tim.buechner, joachim.denzler}@uni-jena.de
{christoph.anders, orlando.guntinas}@med.uni-jena.de

Figure 1. Bridging the gap between mimics and muscles: Our method EIFER utilizes neural unpaired image-to-image translation to
decouple facial geometry and appearance for muscle-activity-based expression synthesis and electrode-free facial electromyography.

Abstract

synchronized sEMG recordings and facial mimicry, demonstrating faithful geometry and appearance reconstruction.
Further, we synthesize expressions based on muscle activity
and how observed expressions can predict dynamic muscle
activity. Consequently, EIFER introduces a new paradigm
for facial electromyography, which could be extended to
other forms of multi-modal face recordings1 .

The relationship between muscle activity and resulting facial expressions is crucial for various fields, including psychology, medicine, and entertainment. The synchronous
recording of facial mimicry and muscular activity via surface electromyography (sEMG) provides a unique window into these complex dynamics. Unfortunately, existing methods for facial analysis cannot handle electrode occlusion, rendering them ineffective. Even with occlusionfree reference images of the same person, variations in
expression intensity and execution are unmatchable. Our
electromyography-informed facial expression reconstruction (EIFER) approach is a novel method to restore faces
under sEMG occlusion faithfully in an adversarial manner. We decouple facial geometry and visual appearance
(e.g., skin texture, lighting, electrodes) by combining a 3D
Morphable Model (3DMM) with neural unpaired image-toimage translation via reference recordings. Then, EIFER
learns a bidirectional mapping between 3DMM expression
parameters and muscle activity, establishing correspondence between the two domains. We validate the effectiveness of our approach through experiments on a dataset of

1. Introduction
The relationship between muscle activity and facial expressions presents a complex challenge with significant implications for various application areas, including psychology [8, 17, 25, 27, 49, 64, 66, 78], medicine [4, 6, 18, 32, 34,
39, 40, 54, 71, 72, 80, 87], and animation [13, 29, 75, 77, 79,
91, 97, 105]. Despite its importance, many questions about
how muscle activity influences facial expressions and vice
versa remain unanswered. Synchronously recorded muscle
activity via surface electromyography (sEMG) and facial
expressions open a unique window into these dynamics.
The modeling of facial geometry, encompassing shape
1 Project page: https://eifer-mam.github.io

215

