This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Agentic AI for Spatial Reasoning with a Dynamic API
Damiano Marsili⇤

Rohun Agrawal⇤

Yisong Yue

Georgia Gkioxari

California Institute of Technology

Figure 1. Spatial reasoning in 3D is challenging as it requires multiple steps of grounding and inference. We introduce a benchmark for
3D understanding with complex queries; an example is shown here. To tackle these queries we propose a training-free agentic approach,
VADAR, that dynamically generates new skills in Python and thus can handle a wider range of queries compared to prior methods.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Visual reasoning – the ability to interpret the visual world
– is crucial for embodied agents that operate within
three-dimensional scenes. Progress in AI has led to vision
and language models capable of answering questions from
images. However, their performance declines when tasked
with 3D spatial reasoning. To tackle the complexity of
such reasoning problems, we introduce an agentic program
synthesis approach where LLM agents collaboratively
generate a Pythonic API with new functions to solve
common subproblems. Our method overcomes limitations
of prior approaches that rely on a static, human-defined
API, allowing it to handle a wider range of queries. To
assess AI capabilities for 3D understanding, we introduce
a new benchmark of queries involving multiple steps
of grounding and inference. We show that our method
outperforms prior zero-shot models for visual reasoning in 3D and empirically validate the effectiveness of
our agentic framework for 3D spatial reasoning tasks.
Project website:
https://glab-caltech.github.io/vadar/
⇤ Equal contribution.

Consider Fig. 1. Here, a person or an agent wants to determine the radius of the mirror in the image, given that the
table is 20 meters tall. Answering this question requires
visual reasoning, a crucial step toward achieving generalpurpose AI. Visual reasoning enables machines to analyze
and make sense of the visual world. Humans rely heavily
on visual cues to navigate complex environments, interact
with objects and make informed decisions. Our goal is to
build intelligent agents that can do the same. Recent advances in AI have produced vision and language models
(VLMs) [1, 2, 8, 36] that can answer questions from images. Although impressive, these models excel primarily at
category-level semantic understanding. Their performance
significantly declines when tasked with spatial understanding within the three-dimensional world [6, 19, 38].
Returning to Fig. 1, to answer the query, an AI agent
must first locate the relevant objects, determine their dimensions in pixel space, use their depth to calculate their
3D sizes, and finally compute the mirror’s radius using the
table’s height. This is a complex sequence of tasks, involving multiple steps of understanding, grounding, and infer-

19446

