This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Understanding How Knowledge Evolves in Large Vision-Language
Models
Sudong Wang1,2 , Yunjian Zhang3 *, Yao Zhu3 *, Jianing Li3
Zizhe Wang3 , Yanwei Liu1 , Xiangyang Ji3
1
Institute of Information Engeering, Chinese Academy of Sciences;
2
Nanyang Technological University; 3 Tsinghua University
SWANG049@e.ntu.edu.sg, sdtczyj@gmail.com, ee zhuy@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

features are then aligned through an affine module and embedded into a format suitable for the language model. Ultimately, the embedded features are fed into the backend
LLM to generate natural language descriptions. This raises
a critical question: How are multimodal features converted into natural language? Exploring this question is
vital for demystifying the black-box LVLMs and is essential
for developing more intelligent models.

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) are gradually becoming the foundation for many artificial intelligence applications. However, understanding their internal working
mechanisms has continued to puzzle researchers, which in
turn limits the further enhancement of their capabilities. In
this paper, we seek to investigate how multimodal knowledge evolves and eventually induces natural languages in
LVLMs. We design a series of novel strategies for analyzing
internal knowledge within LVLMs, and delve into the evolution of multimodal knowledge from three levels, including
single token probabilities, token probability distributions,
and feature encodings. In this process, we identify two key
nodes in knowledge evolution: the critical layers and the
mutation layers, dividing the evolution process into three
stages: rapid evolution, stabilization, and mutation. Our research is the first to reveal the trajectory of knowledge evolution in LVLMs, providing a fresh perspective for understanding their underlying mechanisms. Our codes are avaiable at https://github.com/XIAO4579/Vlminterpretability.

Currently, several studies have explored the knowledge
transfer process within LLMs [7, 8, 11, 12, 16, 32, 40], analyzing the evolution of representations across different layers from a bottom-up perspective. Although these studies
provide valuable insights into the processing mechanisms of
language models, research on bridging visual and linguistic
representations within LVLMs is still limited.
In this work, we investigate how aligned multimodal features are transmitted within LVLMs and ultimately converted into natural languages, aiming for finding the evolution patterns of knowledge representations, and bridging
the gap between multimodal information and natural language. Towards this end, we design a series of effective
methods for tracking the knowledge flow across intermediate layers, without any additional special training, these
methods allow us to intuitively observe how knowledge
evolves through the hidden space. As shown in Figure 1,
we reverse-engineer the token generation procedure for investigation. Specifically, we first examine the probability
changes of key tokens across layers, then study the differences in token probability distributions between layers, and
finally delve into the feature encoding level to explore the
progression of knowledge from shallow to deep layers. This
approach enables us to start from the output and backward
reason how language is constructed on multimodal features.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the rapid progress of Large Language Models (LLMs) [4, 10, 15, 19, 38, 39], Large Vision-Language
Models (LVLMs) [1–3, 6, 9, 13, 14, 20, 23, 28, 29, 44–
48, 51] have made remarkable strides in recent years. These
models align multimodal features in the same latent space
and demonstrate exceptional performance in jointly representing complex visual and linguistic patterns, elevating
general foundational models to unprecedented levels.
In a typical processing flow of an LVLM, visual and
textual inputs are first encoded into vectors by their corresponding feature extractors, respectively. The multimodal
1 Corresponding authors: Yunjian Zhang and Yao Zhu.

At the token probability level, we use the early exit
technique [17, 18, 30, 31, 35, 49] to calculate the probabilities of predicted tokens across different transformer
blocks. We observe that token probabilities undergo an

29858

