This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LPOSS: Label Propagation Over Patches and Pixels
for Open-vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Vladan Stojnić1
1

Yannis Kalantidis2

Jiřı́ Matas1

Giorgos Tolias1

2

NAVER LABS Europe

VRG, FEE, Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract
We propose a training-free method for open-vocabulary
semantic segmentation using Vision-and-Language Models
(VLMs). Our approach enhances the initial per-patch predictions of VLMs through label propagation, which jointly
optimizes predictions by incorporating patch-to-patch relationships. Since VLMs are primarily optimized for crossmodal alignment and not for intra-modal similarity, we use
a Vision Model (VM) that is observed to better capture these
relationships. We address resolution limitations inherent to
patch-based encoders by applying label propagation at the
pixel level as a refinement step, significantly improving segmentation accuracy near class boundaries. Our method,
called LPOSS+, performs inference over the entire image,
avoiding window-based processing and thereby capturing
contextual interactions across the full image. LPOSS+
achieves state-of-the-art performance among training-free
methods, across a diverse set of datasets. Code: https:
//github.com/vladan-stojnic/LPOSS

ground-truth

53.8/35.9

66.1/48.4

82.1/53.6

84.0/59.1

69.4/54.5

70.3/60.0

LPOSS

LPOSS+

Figure 1. Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation with LPOSS
(patch-level LP) and LPOSS+ (pixel-level LP). Performance reported via mIoU / Boundary IoU. Images from the Context and
COCO-Stuff datasets.

1. Introduction

with textual data. Our work addresses this gap by proposing a novel, training-free VLM enhancement for openvocabulary semantic segmentation.
Although segmentation is defined as pixel-wise labeling,
recent approaches, that rely on VLMs [26, 42, 46] utilizing
ViT [15] architecture, form predictions at the patch level
and simply up-sample the predictions. A ViT-based VLM
typically provides a class probability distribution independently for each patch, yielding an initial prediction. Our
approach incorporates the initial prediction together with
patch relationships by making joint predictions across all
patches. This is achieved through minimizing a quadratic
cost function with unary and binary terms. This approach
ensures that final predictions remain close to initial ones
while nearby patches or patches with similar appearances
produce similar predictions, reflecting a common prior in
semantic segmentation. Optimization is performed through

Semantic segmentation models are typically trained in a supervised manner, requiring pixel-level annotations based on
a predefined set of categories or classes. These approaches
face significant scalability challenges due to the high cost of
annotation, and their applicability is limited by the fixed set
of classes they are trained to recognize. Open-vocabulary
semantic segmentation aims to generalize and allow the segmentation of an image into any given list of classes provided
at inference time. This task is usually solved with the use of
a Vision-and-Language Model (VLM) [10, 22, 33].
VLMs produce aligned textual and visual features and
enable matching textual descriptions, such as class names,
to visual features. While highly effective for image-level
classification tasks, VLMs are less suited for dense prediction tasks like semantic segmentation out-of-the-box,
as they are trained to align global image representations

9794

