This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAMBLE: Shape-Specific Point Cloud Sampling for an Optimal
Trade-Off Between Local Detail and Global Uniformity
Chengzhi Wu1
Zeyun Zhong1
1

Yuxin Wan1 *
Hao Fu1 *
Julius Pfrommer2
1†
1
Junwei Zheng
Jiaming Zhang
Jürgen Beyerer1,2

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany

2

Fraunhofer IOSB, Germany

{chengzhi.wu, zeyun.zhong, junwei.zheng, jiangming.zhang}@kit.edu,

{yuxin.wan, hao.fu}@student.kit.edu,

{julius.pfrommer, juergen.beyerer}@iosb.fraunhofer.de

Abstract

APES (local)

Ours

Sampling
Scores

Driven by the increasing demand for accurate and efficient representation of 3D data in various domains, point
cloud sampling has emerged as a pivotal research topic in
3D computer vision. Recently, learning-to-sample methods
have garnered growing interest from the community, particularly for their ability to be jointly trained with downstream
tasks. However, previous learning-based sampling methods
either lead to unrecognizable sampling patterns by generating a new point cloud or biased sampled results by focusing excessively on sharp edge details. Moreover, they all
overlook the natural variations in point distribution across
different shapes, applying a similar sampling strategy to all
point clouds. In this paper, we propose a Sparse Attention
Map and Bin-based Learning method (termed SAMBLE)
to learn shape-specific sampling strategies for point cloud
shapes. SAMBLE effectively achieves an improved balance
between sampling edge points for local details and preserving uniformity in the global shape, resulting in superior performance across multiple common point cloud downstream
tasks, even in scenarios with few-point sampling.

Sampled
1024 points
Local
Detail

Global
Uniformity

Sampled
16 points

Figure 1. Our method achieves an improved trade-off between
sampling local details and preserving global uniformity.

techniques akin to black-box neural network models with
limited interpretability. Consequently, discerning geometric patterns in their qualitative results becomes challenging,
as their outcomes closely resemble those obtained through
random sampling. More recently, APES [46] pioneers the
direction of using neural networks to learn point-wise sampling scores, with which it subsequently samples points
whose scores are higher. However, with its score computation design and the Top-M sampling strategy, APES excessively focuses on local details of edge points, resulting
in a deficiency in preserving good global uniformity of the
input shapes. Consequently, the interpolation operation becomes impractical during the upsampling process, and the
sampling quality of few-point sampling is notably subpar
(see Fig. 1). In this paper, we introduce a novel point cloud
sampling method that addresses the limitations of prior approaches, aiming to achieve a refined balance between capturing local details and preserving global uniformity.
The concept originates from rethinking the mathematical characteristics of local details within point cloud shapes.
Typically, these local details are represented by edge points

1. Introduction
Point cloud sampling is a less explored research area within
the realm of this data representation. Traditional random
sampling (RS) and farthest point sampling (FPS) remain
the most commonly employed methods when sampling
is required for point cloud learning. With the advancement of neural networks, several methods have emerged
for point cloud sampling in a downstream task-oriented
learning framework, including S-Net [7], SampleNet [14],
MOPS-Net [34], etc. However, these methods first generate
a new, smaller-sized point cloud as a proxy rather than directly sampling points from the original input, rendering the
* Equal contribution.

APES (global)

† Corresponding author.

1342

