This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Not All Parameters Matter: Masking Diffusion Models for Enhancing
Generation Ability
Lei Wang1 , Senmao Li1 , Fei Yang1† , Jianye Wang1 , Ziheng Zhang1
Yuhan Liu1 , Yaxing Wang1,2 , Jian Yang1†
1
PCA Lab, VCIP, College of Computer Science, Nankai University 2 Shenzhen Futian, NKIARI
{scitop1998, senmaonk, feiyangflyhigher}@gmail.com, {yaxing,csjyang}@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
The diffusion models, in early stages focus on constructing basic image structures, while the refined details, including local features and textures, are generated in later
stages. Thus the same network layers are forced to learn
both structural and textural information simultaneously, significantly differing from the traditional deep learning architectures (e.g., ResNet or GANs) which captures or generates the image semantic information at different layers.
This difference inspires us to explore the time-wise diffusion models. We initially investigate the key contributions
of the U-Net parameters to the denoising process and identify that properly zeroing out certain parameters (including large parameters) contributes to denoising, substantially improving the generation quality on the fly. Capitalizing on this discovery, we propose a simple yet effective method—termed “MaskUNet”— that enhances generation quality with negligible parameter numbers. Our
method fully leverages timestep- and sample-dependent effective U-Net parameters. To optimize MaskUNet, we offer
two fine-tuning strategies: a training-based approach and
a training-free approach, including tailored networks and
optimization functions. In zero-shot inference on the COCO
dataset, MaskUNet achieves the best FID score and further
demonstrates its effectiveness in downstream task evaluations. Project page: https://gudaochangsheng.
github.io/MaskUnet-Page/

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [20, 54], a class of generative models based
on iterative denoising processes, have recently gained significant attention as powerful tools for generating high-quality
images, videos, and 3D data representations. Text-to-image
models, such as stable diffusion (SD) [47], have successfully
applied pre-trained U-Net models to downstream tasks, in† Corresponding authors.

cluding personalized text-to-image generation [33, 48], relation inversion [25], semantic binding [2, 12, 24, 46], and
controllable generation [7, 41, 64, 68]. The diffusion models, in the early denoising stage, establish spatial information representing semantic structure, and then widen to the
regional details of the elements in the later stage [5, 13].
Therefore, at different inference steps, the diffusion models
use the same network paramaters (e.g., a U-Net in SD) to
forcibly learn different information: the global structure and
characteristics, and edges and textures etc..
However, the traditional classification models [17, 23, 53,
58], such as ResNet [17], they capture the image information (e.g., the structure and semantic features) at different
layers. Typically, the shallow layers focus on extracting
the structure information, while the deeper layers capture
higher-level semantic information [30, 51, 67]. Similarly, in
traditional generative models [27, 28], the first few layers of
the generator control the synthesis of structural information,
while the deeper layers represent texture and edge details.
Both classical classification and generative tasks leverage
distinct model parts to represent the internal properties of
sample, reducing the difficulty of network optimization and
enhancing its representational capacity. Distinct from above
two classes, the diffusion models use the same parameters to
forcibly learn different information when generating a sample. However, to our best knowledge this difference of the
diffusion U-Net remains largely underexplored.
Beyond the application of diffusion models, in this paper,
we are interested in investigating the effectiveness of the
pretrained U-Net parameters for the denoising process. To
better understand the denoising process, we first present a
empirical analysis using a random mask at inference time to
examine the generation process of diffusion models, an area
that has received limited prior investigation. As illustrated
in Figure 1 (c), we multiply the pre-trained U-Net weights by
a random binary UNet-like mask at inference time, ensuring
that we have different networks at every time step. This aims
to keep the consistency with the traditional network design
that the vary semantic features are modeled at different lay-

12880

