This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DAGSM: Disentangled Avatar Generation with GS-enhanced Mesh
Jingyu Zhuang1,2 Di Kang2 Linchao Bao2 Liang Lin1,3,4 * Guanbin Li1,3,4
1
2
3
Sun Yat-sen University
Tencent
Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing
zhuangjy6@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, di.kang@outlook.com, linchaobao@gmail.com,
linliang@ieee.org, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Figure 1. Given text prompts, our method DAGSM allows the users to generate disentangled avatars in diverse styles (e.g., real, cartoon)
with various garments. Our method separately generates the human body and garments for disentanglement, so our method naturally
supports clothing replacement. We represent every single part (e.g., body, upper/lower clothes) using a hybrid GS-enhanced mesh, where
the 2D Gaussians are attached on a proxy mesh to better handle complicated cloth texture (e.g., cotton, woolen, and transparent fabric in
row 1, left 2) and produce realistic animations.

Abstract

sians to better handle complicated textures (e.g., woolen,
translucent clothes) and produce realistic cloth animations.
During the generation, we first create the unclothed body,
followed by a sequence of individual cloth generation based
on the body, where we introduce a semantic-based algorithm to achieve better human-cloth and garment-garment
separation. To improve texture quality, we propose a viewconsistent texture refinement module, including a crossview attention mechanism for texture style consistency and
an incident-angle-weighted denoising (IAW-DE) strategy to
update the appearance. Extensive experiments have demonstrated that DAGSM generates high-quality disentangled
avatars, supports clothing replacement and realistic animation, and outperforms the baselines in visual quality.

Text-driven avatar generation has gained significant attention owing to its convenience. However, existing methods typically model the human body with all garments as
a single 3D model, limiting its usability, such as clothing
replacement, and reducing user control over the generation process. To overcome the limitations above, we propose DAGSM, a novel pipeline that generates disentangled
human bodies and garments from the given text prompts.
Specifically, we model each part (e.g., body, upper/lower
clothes) of the clothed human as one GS-enhanced mesh
(GSM), which is a traditional mesh attached with 2D Gaus∗ Corresponding author is Liang Lin. Welcome to Project page

292

