This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MESC-3D:Mining Effective Semantic Cues for 3D Reconstruction
from a Single Image
Shaoming Li1 *, Qing Cai1*†, Songqi Kong1 , Runqing Tan1 , Heng Tong1 ,
Shiji Qiu1 , Yongguo Jiang1 , Zhi Liu2
Faculty of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China1
School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University2
{lishaoming,kongsongqi,tanrunqing,tongheng,qiushiji}@stu.ouc.edu.cn
{cq,jiangyongguo}@ouc.edu.cn liuzhi@sdu.edu.cn

Figure 1. (a) Previous methods simply performed basic operations on the extracted 2D image information and 3D point cloud without establishing a connection between them. (b) Compared to that, we introduced two key designs: First, the Effective Semantic Mining Module,
which effectively mines semantic information from the entangled features and enables point cloud to select the information. Second, the
3D Semantic Prior Learning Module, which aims to enable the model to interpret 3D structures as humans do in 3D reconstruction from
a single image. (c) The generalization comparsion between the proposed MESC-3D and SOTA methods on base classes with complex
backgrounds. (d) MESC-3D’s zero-shot on unseen classes. (e) Comparison with state-of-the-art methods on ShapeNet [1] Dataset on
Chamfer Distance (y-axis), parameter count (size of the area), and inference time (x-aixs) which show that MESC-3D achieve the best
performance with comparable computational cost.

Abstract
Reconstructing 3D shapes from a single image plays an important role in computer vision. Many methods have been
proposed and achieve impressive performance. However,
existing methods mainly focus on extracting semantic information from images and then simply concatenating it with
3D point clouds without further exploring the concatenated
semantics. As a result, these entangled semantic features
significantly hinder the reconstruction performance. In this

paper, we propose a novel single-image 3D reconstruction
method called Mining Effective Semantic Cues for 3D Reconstruction from a Single Image (MESC-3D), which can
actively mine effective semantic cues from entangled features. Specifically, we design an Effective Semantic Mining Module, which incorporates a point-selection map establish connections between point clouds and semantic attributes, enabling the point clouds to autonomously select
the necessary information. Furthermore, to address the potential insufficiencies in semantic information from a single image, such as occlusions, inspired by the human ability to represent 3D objects using prior knowledge drawn

* Equal contribution.
† The corresponding author is Qing Cai.

16912

