This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Antidote: A Unified Framework for Mitigating LVLM Hallucinations in
Counterfactual Presupposition and Object Perception
Yuanchen Wu1,2, * Lu Zhang2 Hang Yao1 Junlong Du2 Ke Yan2,†
Shouhong Ding2 Yunsheng Wu2 Xiaoqiang Li1,†
1
School of Computer Engineering & Science, Shanghai University 2 Tencent YouTu Lab
{yuanchenwu,yaohang,xqli}@shu.edu.cn

{xluzhang,jeffdu,kerwinyan,ericshding,simonwu}@tencent.com

Abstract
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have achieved
impressive results across various cross-modal tasks. However, hallucinations, i.e., the models generating counterfactual responses, remain a challenge. Though recent studies have attempted to alleviate object perception hallucinations, they focus on the models’ response generation, and
overlooking the task question itself. This paper discusses
the vulnerability of LVLMs in solving counterfactual presupposition questions (CPQs), where the models are prone
to accept the presuppositions of counterfactual objects and
produce severe hallucinatory responses. To this end, we introduce “Antidote”, a unified, synthetic data-driven posttraining framework for mitigating both types of hallucination above. It leverages synthetic data to incorporate factual priors into questions to achieve self-correction, and decouple the mitigation process into a preference optimization
problem. Furthermore, we construct “CP-Bench”, a novel
benchmark to evaluate LVLMs’ ability to correctly handle
CPQs and produce factual responses. Applied to the LLaVA
series, Antidote can simultaneously enhance performance
on CP-Bench by over 50%, POPE by 1.8-3.3%, and CHAIR
& SHR by 30-50%, all without relying on external supervision from stronger LVLMs or human feedback and introducing noticeable catastrophic forgetting issues.

1. Introduction
Recently, Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have
achieved significant advancements, showing promising performance across various tasks, such as image caption, visual question answering (VQA), and visual dialogues [5, 23,
43, 45]. Despite their capabilities and versatility, the hallucination, characterized by generating counterfactual information, remains a significant challenge. It undermines their
* This work was done during an internship at Tencent YouTu Lab.
† Corresponding author.

Input Image:

Question (POPE-type):
Is there a car in the image?
LLaVA 1.5 + HACL:
No, there is no car visible in …
Question (CPQ):
What is the brand of the car?

LLaVA 1.5 + HACL:
The car is a BMW in the image.

LLaVA 1.5 + HACL (Continue: why is it a BMW car?) :
It is identified by a distinct kidney design, twin circular headlights, and a
particular shape and style of the body.

Figure 1. The hallucination responses induced by CPQ. Though
recent hallucination mitigation methods improves LVLMs in object perception, while their models can still be easily deceived by
CPQs and induce severe hallucinatory responses.

reliability and limits applications in sensitive domains like
healthcare and autonomous systems. In LVLM, studies of
hallucination mainly focus on “object perception”, including “object existence” and “image description” [17, 47, 50].
The former refers to whether the mentioned objects are
actually non-existent, while the latter further evaluates
whether the models output counterfactual attributes or relationships between objects. To alleviate the above types
of hallucinations, recent works improve the instruction tuning process [15, 20], post-calibrate the model response via
experts or decoding strategies [17, 46], and conduct posttraining of models [41, 50]. They have manifested effectiveness in alleviating object hallucinations on popular benchmarks, such as POPE [18] and CHAIR [32].
However, a phenomenon emerges in Figure 1: for a simple question about the existence of a “car”, the LVLMs
with recent hallucination mitigation methods (HACL [15]
as an example) can confirm its absence. When we implicitly presuppose its existence and pose a relevant question
“What is the brand of the car?”, the model suddenly outputs hallucinatory responses. This issue is particularly notable when querying about objects that are absent in the
current image but frequently appear in similar visual con-

14646

