This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LineArt: A Knowledge-guided Training-free High-quality Appearance Transfer
for Design Drawing with Diffusion Model
Xi Wang1 Hongzhen Li1 Heng Fang2 Yichen Peng3 Haoran Xie4 Xi Yang1* Chuntao Li1*
1
Jilin University 2 KTH Royal Institute of Technology 3 Institute of Science Tokyo
4
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (JAIST)
[t]

Figure 1. Generated results by our method and comparison with SOTAs. (a) Given an object-centered design drawing and a photo
as the reference, our method transfers the complex appearance features in the photo to the fine structure of the design drawing with high
fidelity. (b) Compared with ZeST [16], StyleID [17], AesPA-Net [33], Cross-Image Attention [1], and T2I-Adapter-SDXL [51]. Our
method better ensures the accurate transfer of complex appearance features and maintains the fine structure of the original design drawing.

Abstract

the limitations of current methods in terms of difficulty in
fine-grained control and style degradation in design drawings. It requires no precise 3D modeling, physical property
specifications, or network training, making it more convenient for design tasks. LineArt consists of two stages: a
multi-frequency lines fusion module to supplement the input design drawing with detailed structural information and
a two-part painting process for Base Layer Shaping and
Surface Layer Coloring. We also present a new design
drawing dataset, ProLines, for evaluation. The experiments
show that LineArt performs better in accuracy, realism,
and material precision compared to SOTAs. Project page:
https://meaoxixi.github.io/LineArt/.

Image rendering from line drawings is vital in design
and image generation technologies reduce costs, yet professional line drawings demand preserving complex details.
Text prompts struggle with accuracy, and image translation
struggles with consistency and fine-grained control. We
present LineArt, a framework that transfers complex appearance onto detailed design drawings, facilitating design
and artistic creation. It generates high-fidelity appearance
while preserving structural accuracy by simulating hierarchical visual cognition and integrating human artistic experience to guide the diffusion process. LineArt overcomes
∗ Corresponding authors

2912

