This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GIFStream: 4D Gaussian-based Immersive Video with Feature Stream
Hao Li, Sicheng Li, Xiang Gao, Abudouaihati Batuer, Lu Yu∗∗ , Yiyi Liao∗
Zhejiang University
Rate-SSIM Curve

Ground Truth

PSNR 31.06 108MB PSNR 31.06 9.72MB PSNR 31.93 5.29MB

CSTG

4DGaussian

Ours

Figure 1. GIFStream achieves high quality and small storage size on dynamic scenes containing fast motion. We present the rendering
results on a challenging scene on the left and the Rate-SSIM curve on the right.

Abstract
Immersive video offers a 6-Dof-free viewing experience, potentially playing a key role in future video technology. Recently, 4D Gaussian Splatting has gained attention as an
effective approach for immersive video due to its high rendering efficiency and quality, though maintaining quality
with manageable storage remains challenging. To address
this, we introduce GIFStream, a novel 4D Gaussian representation using a canonical space and a deformation field
enhanced with time-dependent feature streams. These feature streams enable complex motion modeling and allow efficient compression by leveraging their motion-awareness
and temporal correspondence. Additionally, we incorporate
both temporal and spatial compression networks for endto-end compression. Experimental results show that GIFStream delivers high-quality immersive video at 30 Mbps,
with real-time rendering and fast decoding on an RTX 4090.

ting (3DGS) [15] and its 4D extensions have emerged as
promising approaches for immersive video, achieving highquality reconstruction and real-time rendering performance.
However, to make these technologies feasible for real-world
applications, it is essential to balance rendering quality with
storage requirements. Although 4D Gaussian representations show promise for immersive video, current techniques
struggle to achieve this balance effectively.

1. Introduction

To tackle this challenge, we argue that both the representation and compression should be considered together. An
ideal 4D representation should support high-quality novel
view synthesis for dynamic scenes while allowing for efficient compression. One line of works, as shown in Fig. 2
left, represents the 4D scene as a 3D canonical space combined with a deformation field, parameterized by models
such as MLPs, triplanes, per-frame single embedding or
deformation bases [1, 11, 13, 16, 41, 43]. Since the deformation field is generally lightweight, compact memory
usage can be achieved by applying 3D compression methods to the canonical space. However, deformation-based
methods struggle with highly dynamic scenes, as existing
deformation representations lack the capacity to capture
rapid motion. Another line of works [6, 23, 42], shown
in Fig. 2 middle, employs 4D Gaussians to represent the
scene, where each primitive models a brief time segment
and a local region. This allows for high-quality representation of complex motion using numerous 4D Gaussian primitives, though at the cost of substantial memory consump-

Immersive video, which enables users to explore dynamic
scenes with six degrees of freedom (6-DoF), offers a highly
engaging experience with applications in virtual meetings,
sports viewing, and gaming. Recently, 3D Gaussian splat∗ Corresponding author. ∗∗ Co-corresponding author.

21761

