This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Radio Frequency Ray Tracing with Neural Object Representation
for Enhanced RF Modeling
Xingyu Chen
UC San Diego

Zihao Feng
UC San Diego

Kun Qian
University of Virginia

Xinyu Zhang
UC San Diego

xic063@ucsd.edu

zif004@ucsd.edu

kunqian@virginia.edu

xyzhang@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Radio frequency (RF) propagation modeling poses unique
electromagnetic simulation challenges. While recent neural representations have shown success in visible spectrum
rendering, the fundamentally different scales and physics of
RF signals require novel modeling paradigms. In this paper, we introduce RFScape, a novel framework that bridges
the gap between neural scene representation and RF propagation modeling. Our key insight is that complex RF-object
interactions can be captured through object-centric neural
representations while preserving the composability of traditional ray tracing. Unlike previous approaches that either
rely on crude geometric approximations or require dense
spatial sampling of entire scenes, RFScape learns perobject electromagnetic properties and enables flexible scene
composition. Through extensive evaluation on real-world
RF testbeds, we demonstrate that our approach achieves
13 dB improvement over conventional ray tracing and 5 dB
over state-of-the-art neural baselines in modeling accuracy,
while requiring only sparse training samples.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in neural rendering have transformed 3D
scene understanding and reconstruction in computer vision
[4, 13, 14, 17, 32, 34, 38–40, 42]. Methods such as Neural
Radiance Fields [20] and 3D Gaussian Splatting [9] have
demonstrated exceptional capabilities in modeling complex
light transport and material interactions for photorealistic
scene reconstruction. These advances in modeling optical
frequencies suggest promising approaches for addressing
challenges in radio frequency (RF) propagation modeling,
as both domains share fundamental physical principles. RF
signals, like visible light, follow Maxwell’s equations and
exhibit similar wave phenomena, including reflection, refraction, and diffraction. However, the much longer wavelengths, smaller antenna aperture, and ability to penetrate
common objects, result in more sophisticated interaction

21339

with objects.
Accurate modeling of RF propagation remains a challenging problem in wireless systems with diverse use cases.
For instance, RF simulation enables optimal deployment
of access points [16] and intelligent reflectors [19, 26], by
computing signal coverage across all possible deployment
configurations. While industry-standard ray tracing algorithms [25, 28] approximate electromagnetic wave behavior through ray-object interactions, they often exhibit significant simulation-to-reality gaps due to simplified modeling of surface characteristics and material electromagnetic
properties. Recent neural approaches in RF modeling, such
as NeRF2 [43], have shown potential in learning detailed
RF-object interactions. However, these data-driven models
require dense spatial sampling and complete model retraining when environmental conditions change, highlighting the
need for more efficient and adaptable approaches.
In this paper, we introduce RFScape, a novel RF simulation framework that synergistically integrates the highfidelity of neural representation and the flexibility and interpretability of ray tracing. The core novelty of RFScape
lies in its approach of generating dedicated neural representations for individual objects within a scene and seamlessly
importing these representations into a ray tracing pipeline.
By implicitly modeling the minute structural details and
complex material properties of objects using neural representations, RFScape captures the intricacies of RF signal propagation and interactions. Simultaneously, RFScape
preserves the inherent flexibility of traditional ray tracing
methods, enabling editing and dynamic updates of the simulated RF environment as objects are added, moved, or removed. To enable optimization of scene geometries in RFScape, differentiable ray-geometry intersections are needed
for gradient-based optimization. We choose to represent geometries using Signed Distance Functions (SDFs), as they
provide continuous and differentiable distance fields that
are compatible with automatic differentiation, making them
suitable for gradient-based optimization of object shapes
and positions [2, 35, 36].
By decoupling object representations from ray propaga-

