This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PillarHist: A Quantization-aware Pillar Feature Encoder
based on Height-aware Histogram
Sifan Zhou1†∗

Zhihang Yuan2†
1

Dawei Yang2‡

Xing Hu2

Jian Qian3

Ziyu Zhao1

School of Automation, Southeast University
2
3
Houmo AI
Fudan University

{sifanjay, hahnyuan, zhaoziyu.950207}@gmail.com,{dawei.yang, xing.hu}@houmo.ai

Abstract
Real-time and high-performance 3D object detection plays
a critical role in autonomous driving and robotics. Recent
pillar-based 3D object detectors have gained significant attention due to their compact representation and low computational overhead, making them suitable for onboard deployment and quantization. However, existing pillar-based
detectors still suffer from information loss along height dimension and large numerical distribution difference during pillar feature encoding (PFE), which severely limits
their performance and quantization potential. To address
above issue, we first unveil the importance of different input information during PFE and identify the height dimension as a key factor in enhancing 3D detection performance. Motivated by this observation, we propose a heightaware pillar feature encoder, called PillarHist. Specifically, PillarHist statistics the discrete distribution of points
at different heights within one pillar with the information entropy guidance. This simple yet effective design
greatly preserves the information along the height dimension while significantly reducing the computation overhead
of the PFE. Meanwhile, PillarHist also constrains the arithmetic distribution of PFE input to a stable range, making it
quantization-friendly. Notably, PillarHist operates exclusively within the PFE stage to enhance performance, enabling seamless integration into existing pillar-based methods without introducing complex operations. Extensive experiments show the effectiveness of PillarHist in terms of
both efficiency and performance.

1. Introduction
LiDAR-based 3D object detection plays a pivotal role in
various applications [5, 7, 9, 13, 29, 37, 50], particularly in
autonomous driving and robotics. It is important to detect
* Work

done as an intern at Houmo AI.

‡ Corresponding author.

† Equal

Contribution.

the objects in the surrounding environment fastly and accurately, which places a high demand for both performance
and latency. Existing mainstream methods can be categorized into two types based on the point cloud representation: (1) point-based [8, 28, 31, 32, 42] and (2) grid-based
models [2, 6, 14, 15, 21, 41, 41, 51]. Point-based models
generally inherit the success in point cloud representation
learning using deep neural networks[26, 44] and detect objects directly from raw points. However, these methods often face challenges in real-time onboard deployment as they
often require point query/retrieval in 3D space ( e.g., PointNet++ [27]). Grid-based methods rasterize the points into
regular grid (voxel/pillar) and employ 2D or 3D convolution for feature learning. Compared to voxel-based methods, pillar-based detectors exhibit a more compact grid representation and can seamlessly integrate advanced 2D detection techniques without much modification. Therefore,
those methods offer a favorable trade-off between performance and speed, making them highly suitable for practical deployment in autonomous systems. Furthermore, it is
equally crucial to deploy them on resource-limited edge devices by improve their efficiency ( e.g., reduce memory and
computation cost).
The Pillar Feature Encoding (PFE) module plays a huge
role in pillar-based networks [15, 17, 30, 45, 49]. Its main
purpose is to transform the input point clouds, which are
initially unordered (x, y, z, intensity) information, into pillars with a regular spatial arrangement. Each pillar has a
fixed length of feature dimensions. In this paper, we observe that existing pillar-based methods suffer from two key
problem in PFE module. ❶ Information loss significantly
hampers their performance. ❷ Encoding scheme leads to a
large variation of activations, making quantization challenging. As shown in Figure 1, the problem ❶ can be attributed
to two factors: (1) Lack of detailed height-aware feature
encoding. The height information is not well handled, resulting in an incomplete representation of the 3D scene. It is

27336

