This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GENIUS: A Generative Framework for Universal Multimodal Search
Sungyeon Kim1,2 Xinliang Zhu1 Xiaofan Lin1 Muhammet Bastan1 Douglas Gray1 Suha Kwak2
1
2
Amazon
POSTECH
{sungyeon.kim,suha.kwak}@postech.ac.kr

{xlzhu, xiaofanl, mbastan, douggray}@amazon.com

Abstract
Generative retrieval is an emerging approach in information retrieval that generates identifiers (IDs) of target
data based on a query, providing an efficient alternative
to traditional embedding-based retrieval methods. However, existing models are task-specific and fall short of
embedding-based retrieval in performance. This paper proposes GENIUS, a universal generative retrieval framework
supporting diverse tasks across multiple modalities and domains. At its core, GENIUS introduces modality-decoupled
semantic quantization, transforming multimodal data into
discrete IDs encoding both modality and semantics. Moreover, to enhance generalization, we propose a query augmentation that interpolates between a query and its target,
allowing GENIUS to adapt to varied query forms. Evaluated on the M-BEIR benchmark, it surpasses prior generative methods by a clear margin. Unlike embeddingbased retrieval, GENIUS consistently maintains high retrieval speed across database size, with competitive performance across multiple benchmarks. With additional reranking, GENIUS often achieves results close to those of
embedding-based methods while preserving efficiency.

Similarity Score: 0.6
Vision
Encoder

Text
Encoder

(a) Embedding-based Retrieval
Text IDs: 1 9 1 4

Image IDs: 4 3 2 7
Task-Specific
Generative Model

(b) Existing Generative Retrieval

Image IDs: 0 9 1 4

MM IDs: 2 9 1 4

Generative Universal Multimodal Search

Instruction: Retrieve
a caption describing
this image.

Instruction: Find an
image with the
described change.

Instruction: Find an
image-text pair
regarding this text.

(c) Our GENIUS Framework

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustrations of three Information Retrieval paradigms.
(a) Embedding-based retrieval, where queries and candidates are
embedded, and similarity is measured. (b) Existing generative retrieval generates task-specific identifiers. (c) The GENIUS framework generates identifiers across modalities based on queries and
instructions, where the first-level code indicates modality.

Information Retrieval (IR) is a fundamental task of finding relevant information from a large database [33, 43].
With the rapid growth of data, efficient and accurate IR
is more essential than ever. Conventional IR approaches
commonly follow the embed-and-retrieve paradigm, known
as embedding-based retrieval (Fig. 1(a)). They embed the
query and the database into a high-dimensional embedding
space, which is learned by metric learning [20, 35, 44, 45,
49, 56], and then find the nearest neighbors of the query.
As the database expands, however, a scalability issue arises
due to the rapidly increasing cost of index building, maintenance, and nearest neighbor search, even with approximate
nearest neighbor search like HNSW [32] and Faiss [9].
Recently, generative retrieval has emerged as a promising alternative. Inspired by Differentiable Search Index [48]

and SPLADE [11], this approach generates identifiers (IDs)
of target data directly from a query, bypassing the nearest neighbor search. However, existing methods in this
line of research have limited capability due to their taskspecific designs. Most of them are dedicated to text retrieval [48, 50], and only a few recent works address images [58] and cross-modal retrieval [25] (Fig. 1(b)). Hence,
these methods fail to meet the diverse, multimodal demands
of users in real-world applications. Moreover, existing generative methods underperform in cross-modal retrieval compared to embedding-based retrieval methods [25, 58].
In this paper, we propose GENeratIve Universal multimodal Search (GENIUS), the first generative retrieval
framework that handles diverse retrieval tasks across mul-

19659

