This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Viewpoint Rosetta Stone: Unlocking Unpaired Ego-Exo Videos for
View-invariant Representation Learning
Mi Luo1 Zihui Xue1 Alex Dimakis2, 3 Kristen Grauman1
1
2
3
The University of Texas at Austin
UC Berkeley
Bespoke Labs

Abstract

Paired Data

Egocentric and exocentric perspectives of human action differ significantly, yet overcoming this extreme viewpoint gap is critical in augmented reality and robotics.
We propose V IEWPOINT ROSETTA, an approach that unlocks large-scale unpaired ego and exo video data to learn
clip-level viewpoint-invariant video representations. Our
framework introduces (1) a diffusion-based Rosetta Stone
Translator (RST), which, leveraging a moderate amount of
synchronized multi-view videos, serves as a translator in
feature space to decipher the alignment between unpaired
ego and exo data, and (2) a dual encoder that aligns unpaired data representations through contrastive learning
with RST-based synthetic feature augmentation and soft
alignment. To evaluate the learned features in a standardized setting, we construct a new cross-view benchmark using Ego-Exo4D, covering cross-view retrieval, action recognition, and skill assessment tasks. Our framework
demonstrates superior cross-view understanding compared
to previous view-invariant learning and ego video representation learning approaches, and opens the door to bringing
vast amounts of traditional third-person video to bear on
the more nascent first-person setting.

Natural Ego-Exo Alignment
Limited Scale

Unpaired Data

Internet Scale
Lack Ego-Exo Alignment

?

Feature
Space

Exocentric Videos

Feature
Space

Egocentric Videos

Exocentric Videos

Egocentric Videos

Figure 1. Paired data is ideal for ego-exo view-invariant representation learning due to its perfect synchronization, but it is costly
to collect. We explore leveraging both paired and unpaired data,
taking advantage of the greater scale of unpaired videos. The key
question is how to discover meaningful links within unpaired data
and how to effectively align ego and exo representations.

1. Introduction

across the two viewpoints (see Figure 1, left).
We take a step toward scaling ego-exo view-invariant
representation learning, which can benefit a range of applications that require cross-view understanding. Viewinvariant representations are essential to enable cross-view
retrieval in AR, such as automatically retrieving a relevant
exo video from YouTube that aligns with the user’s current
cooking setup and tools as viewed from their wearable camera, showing a chef performing the same task and providing
real-time guidance. Similarly, robot learning from video
demands being able to interchangeably understand how an
action looks when watching a human subject versus how it
looks from the first-person view when performing dexterous manipulation. In addition, we see practical potential for
transferring knowledge from the exocentric domain to the
egocentric domain—resources for exocentric video are far
more extensive, while egocentric datasets (e.g., Ego4D [16],
Ego-Exo4D [17], EPIC-Kitchens [9, 10]) are relatively new
and not yet at the Internet scale.
Previous approaches to learn ego-exo view invariance
have relied on limited amounts of paired multi-view video

Human perception of action is profoundly view-invariant.
No matter the angle from which we observe an action—whether we’re viewing a person from a third-person
(exocentric) perspective or experiencing it firsthand (egocentric)—our understanding of that action remains stable.
This capacity allows us to recognize, interpret, and respond
to complex movements and interactions across diverse perspectives. However, existing computer vision models struggle to replicate this ego-exo1 view-invariant understanding
of action. The extreme variations in visual appearance of
the two views make it difficult for models to generalize
1 We use “ego” to refer to egocentric (first-person) and “exo” to refer to
exocentric (third-person) perspectives.

15802

