This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IDEA-Bench: How Far are Generative Models from Professional Designing?
Chen Liang1,2

Lianghua Huang3

Zhi-Fan Wu3

Yupeng Shi3

Jingwu Fang4

Huanzhang Dou5

Junge Zhang1,2

Xin Zhao4 *

Wei Wang3
Yu Liu 3

1

2

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Aritificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group
4
University of Science and Technology Beijing
5
Zhejiang University
Abstract

Recent advancements in image generation models enable
the creation of high-quality images and targeted modifications based on textual instructions. Some models even
support multimodal complex guidance and demonstrate robust task generalization capabilities. However, they still fall
short of meeting the nuanced, professional demands of designers. To bridge this gap, we introduce IDEA-Bench, a
comprehensive benchmark designed to advance image generation models toward applications with robust task generalization. IDEA-Bench comprises 100 professional image
generation tasks and 275 specific cases, categorized into
five major types based on the current capabilities of existing models. Furthermore, we provide a representative
subset of 18 tasks with enhanced evaluation criteria to facilitate more nuanced and reliable evaluations using Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). By assessing
models’ ability to comprehend and execute novel, complex
tasks, IDEA-Bench paves the way toward the development
of generative models with autonomous and versatile visual
generation capabilities.

for complex image editing tasks. Despite the widespread
popularity of models like DALL-E 3 [40] and FLUX-1 [24],
which attract millions of visits daily, professional users often rely on established workflows and specialized software
for image creation. This reliance highlights a substantial
gap between the capabilities of current image generation
models and the demanding requirements of professionalgrade image design. When existing image generation models focus on academic task research, the rapid evolution of
large language models (LLMs) [6, 11, 34, 37, 38, 50, 51, 62]
and multimodal language models (MLLMs) [28, 33, 49, 52]
indicate that future image generation models will increasingly aim to achieve both professional-grade quality and
task unification, enabling them to handle a diverse range
of complex applications seamlessly.
Recent advances in image generation have demonstrated
robust task unification and generalization through largescale pre-training and arbitrary task learning [8, 16, 22, 46,
47, 53]. These models handle a wide range of academic
tasks with a unified input-output format and can generalize to unseen tasks, showcasing in-context learning abilities. However, existing benchmarks [9, 17, 20, 23, 43, 45]
are often narrow in scope, focusing primarily on isolated
academic tasks and lacking comprehensive criteria to evaluate the multifaceted demands of professional image design.
Consequently, there is a critical need for more robust and
versatile evaluation frameworks to effectively assess the diverse and sophisticated capabilities of contemporary generative models.
To bridge the gap between generative models
and professional-grade design, we introduce IDEABench (Intelligent Design Evaluation and Assessment
Benchmark). We conduct a thorough review of real-world
design and art tasks from diverse platforms, distilling
100 representative professional image generation tasks

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in Text-to-Image (T2I) models [3, 4,
7, 12, 13, 24, 36, 39–41, 44] have significantly enhanced the
ability to generate high-quality images from textual descriptions. Building on these successes, models such as ControlNet [61] and T2I-Adapter [32] integrate additional networks into text-to-image diffusion frameworks to incorporate visual conditioning. Similarly, InstructPix2Pix [5] and
Emu-Edit [45] are specifically trained on datasets tailored
* Corresponding author.

18541

