This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PI-HMR: Towards Robust In-bed Temporal Human Shape Reconstruction with
Contact Pressure Sensing
Ziyu Wu*, Yufan Xiong*, Mengting Niu, Fangting Xie, Quan Wan, Qijun Ying, Boyan Liu, Xiaohui Cai†
University of Science and Technology of China
(a) SMPLify-IB

(b) PI-HMR

Optimization
t=1

t = 11

Figure 1. We present a general framework for in-bed HPS tasks, containing a monocular optimization strategy to generate high-quality
SMPL annotations in in-bed scenarios, SMPLify-IB; and a HPS network to predict in-bed motions from pressure sequence, PI-HMR.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Long-term in-bed monitoring benefits automatic and realtime health management within healthcare, and the advancement of human shape reconstruction technologies further enhances the representation and visualization of users’
activity patterns. However, existing technologies are primarily based on visual cues, facing serious challenges
in non-light-of-sight and privacy-sensitive in-bed scenes.
Pressure-sensing bedsheets offer a promising solution for
real-time motion reconstruction. Yet, limited exploration
in model designs and data have hindered its further development. To tackle these issues, we propose a general
framework that bridges gaps in data annotation and model
design. Firstly, we introduce SMPLify-IB, an optimization
method that overcomes the depth ambiguity issue in topview scenarios through gravity constraints, enabling generating high-quality 3D human shape annotations for inbed datasets. Then we present PI-HMR, a temporal-based
human shape estimator to regress meshes from pressure
sequences. By integrating multi-scale feature fusion with
high-pressure distribution and spatial position priors, PIHMR outperforms SOTA methods with 17.01mm Mean-PerJoint-Error decrease. This work provides a whole toolchain to support the development of in-bed monitoring with
pressure contact sensing.

* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors.

Long-term and automatic in-bed monitoring draws increasing attention in recent years for the growing need
in heathcare, such as sleep studies [5], bedsore prevention [57], and detection of bed-exit and fall events [19]. The
advancement of parameterized human representation (e.g.
SMPL [35]) and human pose and shape estimation (HPS)
technologies further furnish technical underpinning for the
reconstruction and visualization of patient motions, facilitating caregivers to comprehend patients’ behavioral patterns in time. However, vision-based techniques, trained
on in-lab or in-wild public datasets, fail in in-bed scenarios
for more challenges are raised like poor illumination, occlusion by blankets, domain gaps with existing datasets (e.g.
3DPW [49]), and privacy issues in both at-home or ICUs.
Our intuition lies in that tactile serves as a crucial
medium for human perception of the surroundings. Especially for in-bed scenarios, lying postures prompt full
engagement between humans and environment; simultaneously, this tactile perception also encompasses valuable
information about their physiques. Reconstructing human
motions from this tactile feedback might provide a privacypreserving solution to automatic in-bed management for patients and elders. Thus, many efforts have been devoted
to capturing the contact pressure with a pressure-sensing
bedsheet, which integrates a pressure-sensitive sensor array
and collects matrix-formatted pressure distribution (named
pressure images), and exploring potentials of full-body human reconstruction from these tactile sensors [8, 9, 46].
However, current methods are often constrained by model

27739

