This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Color Alignment in Diffusion
Ka Chun Shum1
1

Binh-Son Hua2

Duc Thanh Nguyen3

Sai-Kit Yeung1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Trinity College Dublin 3 Deakin University

Abstract
Diffusion models have shown great promise in synthesizing visually appealing images. However, it remains challenging to condition the synthesis at a fine-grained level, for
instance, synthesizing image pixels following some generic
color pattern. Existing image synthesis methods often produce contents that fall outside the desired pixel conditions.
To address this, we introduce a novel color alignment algorithm that confines the generative process in diffusion
models within a given color pattern. Specifically, we project
diffusion terms, either imagery samples or latent representations, into a conditional color space to align with the input
color distribution. This strategy simplifies the prediction in
diffusion models within a color manifold while still allowing
plausible structures in generated contents, thus enabling the
generation of diverse contents that comply with the target
color pattern. Experimental results demonstrate our stateof-the-art performance in conditioning and controlling of
color pixels, while maintaining on-par generation quality
and diversity in comparison with regular diffusion models.

1. Introduction
Recently, diffusion models [18] and their large-scale textconditioned variants [36, 39] have demonstrated impressive
quality and diversity of generated contents in image synthesis. Subsequent works have explored leveraging this capability for possible controllability, incorporating various
constraints, such as structural [30, 35, 48] and reference constraints [14, 46], which typically serve as additional inputs.
However, due to the inherent randomness in the diffusion process, it remains challenging to control generated contents at
a fine-grained level, for instance, synthesizing image pixels
following some given content and generic color distribution.
In this paper, we focus on such a fine-grained control over
pixel colors in synthesized images to meet with three colorconditioned generation criteria: the accuracy in adhering to
given color values; the completeness of covering proportions
of the specified colors; and the disentanglement of the colors

(a) Condition

(b) Ours

(c) Baselines

Figure 1. Examples of color-conditioned generation from different methods. Color conditions (a) can be derived from imagery
(top two rows) or manual drawing (bottom two rows). Input text
prompts are “painting” and “pen” (1st & 3rd rows), and “boat” (2nd
& 4th rows). Our method (b) can generate pixels closely aligned
with the color conditions and effectively disentangle the colors into
different structures. Existing baselines [14, 36, 46, 48] (from top to
bottom) (c) struggle with either the semantics (the first two rows)
or colors (the last two rows) of generated contents.

28446

into various structures. Such a color-conditioned generation
ability would be a great aid to numerous downstream tasks
in creative artwork and graphic design [10].
Different attempts of color-conditioned image generation are visualized in Fig. 1, where previous works often
produce suboptimal results that do not align with the aforementioned criteria. In this paper, we propose an effective yet
control-easy method facilitating color alignment in diffusion
models for color-conditioned image synthesis. Specifically,

