This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Panorama Generation From NFoV Image Done Right
Dian Zheng1,∗ Cheng Zhang2 Xiao-Ming Wu1
Cao Li3,B Chengfei Lv3 Jian-Fang Hu1 Wei-Shi Zheng1,4,B
1

4

Sun Yat-sen University 2 Monash University 3 Alibaba Group
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
https://isee-laboratory.github.io/PanoDecouple/

Abstract
CVPR2022
OmniDreamer
Distort-FID: 0.52
FID: 75.14

Generating 360-degree panoramas from narrow field of
view (NFoV) image is a promising computer vision task for
Virtual Reality (VR) applications. Existing methods mostly
assess the generated panoramas with InceptionNet or CLIP
based metrics, which tend to perceive the image quality and
is not suitable for evaluating the distortion. In this work,
we first propose a distortion-specific CLIP, named DistortCLIP to accurately evaluate the panorama distortion and
discover the “visual cheating” phenomenon in previous
works (i.e., tending to improve the visual results by sacrificing distortion accuracy). This phenomenon arises because
prior methods employ a single network to learn the distinct
panorama distortion and content completion at once, which
leads the model to prioritize optimizing the latter. To address the phenomenon, we propose PanoDecouple, a decoupled diffusion model framework, which decouples the
panorama generation into distortion guidance and content
completion, aiming to generate panoramas with both accurate distortion and visual appeal. Specifically, we design a
DistortNet for distortion guidance by imposing panoramaspecific distortion prior and a modified condition registration mechanism; and a ContentNet for content completion
by imposing perspective image information. Additionally, a
distortion correction loss function with Distort-CLIP is introduced to constrain the distortion explicitly. The extensive
experiments validate that PanoDecouple surpasses existing
methods both in distortion and visual metrics.

ACMMM2023
PanoDiff
Distort-FID: 2.68
FID: 63.49

ECCV2024
2S-ODIS
Distort-FID: 8.42
FID: 72.23

PanoDecouple (Ours)
Distort-FID: 0.92
FID: 62.19

Figure 1. The image quality and distortion accuracy of existing
methods and ours by FID and Distort-FID (ours) respectively. We
project two regions in panorama (signed in corresponding color)
into perspective image to show the distortion accuracy of existing methods (i.e., no distortion and natural layout in perspective
image means good results). Recent methods improve the image
quality while significantly ruining the distortion. We named it “visual cheating” phenomenon. Zoom in for best view.

maintaining accurate distortion and ensuring consistency in
content, style with the NFoV image simultaneously, which
has a wide range of applications in Virtual Reality (VR) and
3D scene generation [2, 57].

1. Introduction
360-degree panorama generation from narrow field of view
(NFoV) image aims to outpaint the partial panorama while

Existing methods mainly utilize InceptionNet [38] or
CLIP [34] based evaluation metrics (e.g., FID, IS, etc.) to

∗ The work is done when Dian Zheng is an intern at Alibaba Group.
B corresponding authors.

Code is available

21610

