This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeISF++: Neural Incident Stokes Field for Polarized Inverse Rendering of
Conductors and Dielectrics
∗

Chenhao Li1 ,3 , Taishi Ono2 , Takeshi Uemori1 , Sho Nitta1 ,
Hajime Mihara1 , Alexander Gatto2 , Hajime Nagahara3 , Yusuke Moriuchi1
Sony Semiconductor Solutions Corporation1 ,
Ours

Sony Europe B.V.2 ,

Normal

ior (real)

ior (imag.)

Diffuse albedo

Roughness

Relit image

Osaka University3

NeISF

Normal

Roughness

Diffuse albedo

Relit image

Polarization
camera

Scene with
conductors and
dielectrics
Figure 1. Comparison of the polarized inverse rendering methods. Since NeISF [33] does not model conductors correctly, its geometry and
material reconstruction is poor. Our method estimates the complex refractive index of conductors and re-renders the image via a physicallybased pBRDF. Therefore, the reconstructed material and geometry are accurate, and the relighting result is glossy. We normalize the real
and imaginary parts of the complex refractive index ior, and visualize them separately.

Abstract
Recent inverse rendering methods have improved shape,
material, and illumination reconstruction using polarization cues. However, they only support dielectrics, ignoring
conductors, which are common in everyday life. Since conductors and dielectrics have different reflection properties,
using previous dielectrics-based methods will lead to obvious errors. In addition, conductors are glossy, which may
cause strong specular reflection and is hard to reconstruct.
To solve the above issues, we propose NeISF++, an inverse
rendering pipeline that supports conductors and dielectrics.
The key ingredient for our proposal is a general pBRDF that
describes both conductors and dielectrics. As for the strong
specular reflection problem, we propose a novel geometry
initialization method using DoLP images. This physical cue
is invariant to intensities and thus robust to strong specular
reflections. Experimental results on our synthetic and real
datasets show that our method surpasses the existing polar* Work done during an internship at Sony Semiconductor Solutions Corporation

ized inverse rendering methods for geometry and material
decomposition as well as downstream tasks like relighting.

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering is a fundamental task in computer vision and computer graphics, which aims to decompose the
target scene into 3D properties like geometry, material, and
lighting. It is crucial for applications like virtual reality,
material science, and game design. The recent progress of
inverse rendering has been dominated by neural representations [38], which utilize multilayer perceptrons (MLPs)
to efficiently represent geometry [51, 56], material [6], and
lighting [54], and greatly improve the reconstruction accuracy. However, the inherent challenge in inverse rendering,
the ambiguity problem, still exists. Recovering 3D properties from 2D images is essentially an ill-posed problem, as
different combinations of geometry, material, and lighting
may result in the same appearance.
An active research field for reducing ambiguity is ap-

26493

