This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Synthetic Visual Genome
Jae Sung Park1 , Zixian Ma1 , Linjie Li1 , Chenhao Zheng1 , Cheng-Yu Hsieh1 ,
Ximing Lu1 , Khyathi Chandu2 , Quan Kong4 ,
Norimasa Kobori4 , Ali Farhadi1,2 , Yejin Choi3 , Ranjay Krishna1,2
1

University of Washington, 2 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence,
3
Stanford University, 4 Woven by Toyota
Abstract

Reasoning over visual relationships—spatial, functional, interactional, social, etc.—is considered to be a fundamental component of human cognition. Yet, despite the major advances in visual comprehension in multimodal language models (MLMs), precise reasoning over relationships
and their generations remains a challenge. We introduce
ROBIN: an MLM instruction-tuned with densely annotated
relationships capable of constructing high-quality dense
scene graphs at scale. To train ROBIN, we curate SVG1 ,
a synthetic scene graph dataset by completing the missing
relations of selected objects in existing scene graphs using
a teacher MLM and a carefully designed filtering process
to ensure high-quality. To generate more accurate and rich
scene graphs at scale for any image, we introduce SG-E DIT:
a self-distillation framework where GPT-4o further refines
ROBIN’s predicted scene graphs by removing unlikely relations and/or suggesting relevant ones. In total, our dataset
contains 146K images and 5.6M relationships for 2.6M
objects. Results show that our ROBIN-3B model, despite
being trained on less than 3 million instances, outperforms
similar-size models trained on over 300 million instances on
relationship understanding benchmarks, and even surpasses
larger models up to 13B parameters. Notably, it achieves
state-of-the-art performance in referring expression comprehension with a score of 88.2, surpassing the previous
best of 87.4. Our results suggest that training on the refined
scene graph data is crucial to maintaining high performance
across diverse visual reasoning tasks2 .

Figure 1. Example outputs of the Synthetic Visual Genome (SVG)

dataset, the first automatically generated large-scale scene graph
dataset, featuring diverse, open-set categories, and dense relationship annotations. On average, SVG has four times as many relations
per object compared to Visual Genome [37], offering substantially
richer relationship density than existing human annotations.

make sense of new scenes by stitching together individual
objects and their pairwise relationships [6, 14, 26, 28]. For
instance, relationships allow people to describe the photo
in Figure 2 using a set of spatial (woman-above-raft), social (child-cared by-woman), functional (man-using-paddle),
interactional (woman-holding-baby) and emotional (mansharing an experience with-family) relationships. For a
while now, multimodal language model (MLM) research
has sought to develop models that can similarly comprehend such relationships [20, 29, 37, 51]. Yet despite all the
progress, frontier MLMs still struggle to accurately express
relationships; open-source MLMs perform even worse [75].

1. Introduction
Scholars have argued for decades that visual relationship
reasoning is a fundamental characteristic of human intelligence [4, 5]. By reasoning over relationships, people can
1 Synthetic Visual Genome

2 The SVG data, model checkpoints, and code are available at https:
//synthetic-visual-genome.github.io/

9073

Instruction-tuning has been established as a successful mechanism to instill specific reasoning capabilities in
MLMs [15]. However, instruction tuning an open-sourced
MLM to understand diverse relationships is not possible
today due to the lack of large-scale datasets focused on relationship understanding; existing efforts are limited to spatial
reasoning derived from synthetic data [8]. Scene graphs
could serve as potential sources for instruction tuning because they provide direct annotations of objects and their re-

