This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SimMotionEdit: Text-Based Human Motion Editing with Motion Similarity
Prediction
Zhengyuan Li1

Kai Cheng1
1

Anindita Ghosh2

Purdue University
3
Adobe Inc.

Uttaran Bhattacharya3

Liangyan Gui4

Aniket Bera1

2
4

DFKI, MPI-INF, Saarland Informatics Campus
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
Text-based 3D human motion editing is a critical yet challenging task in computer vision and graphics. While
training-free approaches have been explored, the recent release of the MotionFix dataset, which includes source-textmotion triplets, has opened new avenues for training, yielding promising results. However, existing methods struggle with precise control, often leading to misalignment between motion semantics and language instructions. In this
paper, we introduce a related task — motion similarity
prediction — and propose a multi-task training paradigm,
where we train the model jointly on motion editing and
motion similarity prediction to foster the learning of semantically meaningful representations. To complement this
task, we design an advanced Diffusion-Transformer-based
architecture that separately handles motion similarity prediction and motion editing. Extensive experiments demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of our approach in
both editing alignment and fidelity. Project URL: https:
//github.com/lzhyu/SimMotionEdit.

swing your body less

just do it once and faster

do the same wave only start it a bit faster

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Text-Based Motion Editing. Our method SimMotionEdit generates edited human motion sequences from text instructions and source motion sequences.

features, achieving effects such as style transfer and word
emphasis. However, these methods are limited in scope
due to the lack of dedicated model training and supervision.
With the release of the text-based human motion editing
dataset MotionFix [4], we can now incorporate robust supervision to develop SimMotionEdit, a system that enables
free-form text-based human motion editing.

Human motion synthesis plays a central role in diverse
applications, including character animation [5, 15, 49],
human-robot collaborations [3, 28], and autonomous driving [36]. Current approaches primarily focus on initial control signals, such as manipulating joint positions [56, 59] or
applying fine-grained language instructions [26, 65]. With
advancements in text-based motion generation [6, 14, 21,
22, 53], the ability to control and edit human motions has
emerged as the next frontier, which can enable animators to
refine motion sequences in animation workflows to fit specific requirements. In this work, we aim to address this need
by focusing on editing existing human motions rather than
generating them solely from other conditioning inputs.
Recent works [8, 41] have leveraged pre-trained motion
diffusion models with attention manipulation to edit motion

27827

The primary challenge in this task lies in aligning the
generated motion with both the source motion and the text
instructions, as they jointly define the desired outcome. Enhancing the interaction between the source motion and the
text instructions is thus crucial for improved performance.
To this end, the success of multi-task learning [67] has
demonstrated that models can achieve better generalization
by leveraging knowledge from other tasks. Auxiliary loss,
a key concept in multi-task learning, has proven effective

