This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DH-Set: Improving Vision-Language Alignment with Diverse and Hybrid
Set-Embeddings Learning

1

Kun Zhang1,2
Jingyu Li3
Zhe Li4
S.Kevin Zhou1,2,5,6 *
School of Biomedical Engineering, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, USTC
2
MIRACLE Center, Suzhou Institute for Advance Research, USTC
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
4
School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, USTC
5
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of CAS, ICT, CAS
6
State Key Laboratory of Precision and Intelligent Chemistry, USTC

{kkzhang@, jingyuli@iai., lizhe777@mail.}ustc.edu.cn, s.kevin.zhou@gmail.com

Abstract
Vision-Language (VL) alignment across image and text
modalities is a challenging task due to the inherent semantic ambiguity of data with multiple possible meanings. Existing methods typically solve it by learning multiple subrepresentation spaces to encode each input data as a set of
embeddings, and constraining diversity between whole subspaces to capture diverse semantics for accurate VL alignment. Despite their promising outcomes, existing methods
suffer two imperfections: 1) actually, specific semantics is
mainly expressed by some local dimensions within the subspace. Ignoring this intrinsic property, existing diversity
constraints imposed on the whole subspace may impair diverse embedding learning; 2) multiple embeddings are inevitably introduced, sacrificing computational and storage
efficiency. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective
Diverse and Hybrid Set-embeddings learning framework
(DH-Set), which is distinct from prior work in three aspects.
DH-Set 1) devises a novel semantic importance dissecting
method to focus on key local dimensions within each subspace; and thereby 2) not only imposes finer-grained diversity constraint to improve the accuracy of diverse embedding learning, 3) but also mixes key dimensions of all subspaces into the single hybrid embedding to boost inference
efficiency. Extensive experiments on various benchmarks
and model backbones show the superiority of DH-Set over
state-of-the-art methods, achieving substantial 2.3%-14.7%
rSum improvements while lowering computational and storage complexity.

Figure 1. (a,b) Focusing on solving the semantic ambiguity problem of data with multiple meanings in VL alignment, different
from existing set-embeddings-based (SEB) paradigm that imposes
whole-level constraints on subspace to learn diverse embeddings
and involves all of them at inference, (c) motivated by the finding that specific semantics is mainly expressed by some key local
dimensions in the space, (d) we focus on more fine-grained diversity constraints that dissect local key dimensions and combine important dimensions into hybrid embeddings in inference, thereby
achieving an effective and efficient SEB VL alignment framework.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.

Vision-Language (VL) alignment, aiming to bridge the semantic gap between heterogeneous images and texts, is fundamental research in the cross-modal field [26, 28, 29, 51–
53, 55, 61]. The common way to achieve VL alignment is to
project images and texts into a shared representation space,
and then enforce aligned image-text pair to have larger similarity than misaligned ones [10, 30, 60]. Consequently, the
alignment of cross-modal semantics is manifested through

24993

