This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event Ellipsometer: Event-based Mueller-Matrix Video Imaging
Ryota Maeda1,2
1

Yunseong Moon1

POSTECH

2

Seung-Hwan Baek1

University of Hyogo
Target

Abstract

Continuously rotate
QWP
LP

Light-matter interactions modify both the intensity and polarization state of light. Changes in polarization, represented by a Mueller matrix, encode detailed scene information. Existing optical ellipsometers capture Muellermatrix images; however, they are often limited to capturing
static scenes due to long acquisition times. Here, we introduce Event Ellipsometer, a method for acquiring a Muellermatrix video for dynamic scenes. Our imaging system employs fast-rotating quarter-wave plates (QWPs) in front of a
light source and an event camera that asynchronously captures intensity changes induced by the rotating QWPs. We
develop an ellipsometric-event image formation model, a
calibration method, and an ellipsometric-event reconstruction method. We experimentally demonstrate that Event Ellipsometer enables Mueller-matrix video imaging at 30 fps,
extending ellipsometry to dynamic scenes.

QWP
LP

Light
source
Event camera

Mueller-matrix video
(a) Overview diagram of Event Ellipsometer

(b) Capture configuration

1. Introduction

Photoelasticity

Human capture

HDR imaging

Tape detection

(c) Applications

Figure 1. Overview of Event Ellipsometer. (a) Our imaging system captures the Mueller matrix at 30 fps from event streams induced by the continuously rotating QWPs. (b) With our experimental prototype, (c) we demonstrate ellipsometric analysis for
dynamic scenes and various applications.

Polarization describes the oscillation of the electric field in
light waves, encoding valuable information about the scenes
with which light interacts. The polarization state of light
can be represented as a Stokes vector s ∈ R4×1 [17]. Polarimetric image analysis focuses on capturing complete or partial forms of the per-pixel Stokes vector and has been extensively studied for shape-from-polarization [31, 36], diffusespecular separation [19], reflection removal [41], seeing
through scattering [42], and transparent object segmentation [32].
Ellipsometry advances polarimetric imaging by analyzing the polarization state of light captured under varying polarization states of illumination. This allows for acquiring
polarimetric reflectance, represented as a Mueller matrix
M ∈ R4×4 [9], which comprehensively characterizes how
light-matter interactions alter the polarization state of incident light. Ellipsometry has been widely used in material
science [30, 38], biology [1, 23], and has recently gained
attention in computer vision and graphics for 3D shape and
reflection analysis [6, 7, 43], material acquisition [8], light
transport decomposition [5, 35], and photoelasticity analy-

21804

sis [18].
Despite the rich information provided by ellipsometry,
its applications have been mainly limited to static scenes
because conventional methods require capturing multiple
images while mechanically rotating polarizing optics. Typically, more than 20 rotation angles [8] are necessary, leading to long acquisition times and making it impractical for
capturing dynamic scenes. Although single-shot Mueller
matrix imaging techniques using conventional sensors exist [12, 33, 49], they assume planar target scenes at fixed
distances, significantly sacrifice sensor resolution, or use
custom-fabricated nano- or micro-optical elements. Additionally, conventional intensity sensors are limited in capturing high-dynamic range (HDR) scenes, often requiring
the capture of additional images with multiple exposures.
In this paper, we present Event Ellipsometer, a Mueller-

