This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SelfSplat: Pose-Free and 3D Prior-Free Generalizable 3D Gaussian Splatting
Gyeongjin Kang1 * Jisang Yoo2 * Jihyeon Park1
Sangheon Shin4 Sangpil Kim5

Seungtae Nam3 Hyeonsoo Im4
Eunbyung Park3†

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University1
Department of Intelligent Robotics, Sungkyunkwan University2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Yonsei University3
Hanhwa Systems4 Korea University5

Abstract
We propose SelfSplat, a novel 3D Gaussian Splatting model
designed to perform pose-free and 3D prior-free generalizable 3D reconstruction from unposed multi-view images.
These settings are inherently ill-posed due to the lack of
ground-truth data, learned geometric information, and the
need to achieve accurate 3D reconstruction without finetuning, making it difficult for conventional methods to achieve
high-quality results. Our model addresses these challenges
by effectively integrating explicit 3D representations with
self-supervised depth and pose estimation techniques, resulting in reciprocal improvements in both pose accuracy
and 3D reconstruction quality. Furthermore, we incorporate a matching-aware pose estimation network and a
depth refinement module to enhance geometry consistency
across views, ensuring more accurate and stable 3D reconstructions. To present the performance of our method, we
evaluated it on large-scale real-world datasets, including
RealEstate10K, ACID, and DL3DV. SelfSplat achieves superior results over previous state-of-the-art methods in both
appearance and geometry quality, also demonstrates strong
cross-dataset generalization capabilities. Extensive ablation studies and analysis also validate the effectiveness of
our proposed methods. Code and pretrained models are
available at https://gynjn.github.io/selfsplat/.

points, these methods can produce geometrically consistent
photo-realistic images, providing beneficial for various applications, such as virtual reality [23, 55], robotics [15, 38],
and semantic understanding [64, 65]. Despite their impressive capability in 3D scene representation, training NeRF
and 3D-GS requires a large set of accurately posed images as well as iterative per-scene optimization procedures,
which limits their applicability for broader use cases.
To bypass the iterative optimization steps, various
learning-based generalizable 3D reconstruction models [3,
13, 43, 53, 61] have been proposed. These models can predict 3D geometry and appearance from a few posed images
in a single forward pass. Leveraging large-scale synthetic
and real-world 3D datasets, they used pixel-aligned features to extract scene priors from input images and generate
novel views through differentiable rendering methods such
as volume rendering [35] or rasterization [27]. The generated images are then supervised with ground truth images
captured from the same camera poses. While this approach
enables 3D scene reconstruction without iterative optimization steps, a key limitation remains are as follows: it relies
on calibrated images (with accurate camera poses) for both
training and inference, thereby constraining its use with less
controlled, “in-the-wild” images or videos.
Recent efforts have integrated camera pose estimation
with 3D scene reconstruction, combining multiple tasks
within a single framework. By relaxing the constraint of
a posed multi-view setup, pose-free generalizable methods [6, 21, 29, 41] aim to learn reliable 3D geometry from
uncalibrated images and generate accurate 3D representations in a single forward pass. While these approaches have
demonstrated promising results, they still face significant
challenges. For example, [41] relies on error-prone pretrained flow model for pose estimation, often leading to inaccuracies and performance degradation. [6, 29] achieve
impressive results but require a per-scene fine-tuning stage,
making them computationally expensive for real-world ap-

1. Introduction
The recent introduction of Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [36] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) [25] had
marked a significant advancement in computer vision and
graphics, particularly in 3D reconstruction and novel view
synthesis. By training on images taken from various view* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

22012

