This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instance-wise Supervision-level Optimization in Active Learning
Shinnosuke Matsuo1 , Riku Togashi2 , Ryoma Bise1 , Seiichi Uchida1 , Masahiro Nomura2
1
Kyushu University, Japan 2 CyberAgent, Inc., Japan

Abstract

pervision [17, 26, 27]. For classification tasks, a weak supervision approach is often designed to just attach rough
class labels to individual instances. For example, instead
of attaching the exact class label “song sparrow” or “house
sparrow” to an image instance, annotators can attach a
rough class label “sparrows.” This approach drastically reduces annotation costs (budgets) because the fee paid to a
non-expert annotator, who can only assign rough class labels rather than exact ones via a crowdsourcing service, is
lower than that of an expert annotator. Hereafter, we call
rough classes as superclasses; therefore, “sparrows” is a superclass of the exact class “song sparrow.”

Active learning (AL) is a label-efficient machine learning
paradigm that focuses on selectively annotating high-value
instances to maximize learning efficiency. Its effectiveness
can be further enhanced by incorporating weak supervision, which uses rough yet cost-effective annotations instead of exact (i.e., full) but expensive annotations. We introduce a novel AL framework, Instance-wise SupervisionLevel Optimization (ISO), which not only selects the instances to annotate but also determines their optimal annotation level within a fixed annotation budget. Its optimization criterion leverages the value-to-cost ratio (VCR)
of each instance while ensuring diversity among the selected instances. In classification experiments, ISO consistently outperforms traditional AL methods and surpasses a
state-of-the-art AL approach that combines full and weak
supervision, achieving higher accuracy at a lower overall
cost. This code is available at https://github.com/matsuoshinnosuke/ISOAL.

In general, weak supervision approaches still need instances with full supervision, that is, instances with the exact class labels. This is simply because it is impossible to
determine the class boundary between, “sparrows” is a superclass of “song sparrow” without the instances with these
exact class labels. Consequently, we need to balance weak
supervision and full supervision under a pre-specified total annotation budget. In other words, we need to optimize
the supervision levels of individual instances. Since the total annotation budget is pre-specified as a constraint, the
number of instances with full supervision will be limited.
More formally, this supervision-level optimization task can
be seen as an optimal resource allocation problem with the
constraint on available resources.

1. Introduction
Machine learning technology has achieved remarkable success in recent years across various fields, including computer vision, natural language processing, and robotics.
However, a major challenge remains: creating labeled
datasets for training models often requires significant time
and cost, especially in specialized domains.
To address this issue, active learning [1, 3, 6, 8, 11,
16, 18–21, 24] has been widely studied to improve model
performance under limited budgets. In active learning, instances (data samples) for annotation are selected iteratively
from an unlabeled dataset, followed by annotation and
model retraining. This repeated cycle improves the model’s
accuracy while progressively minimizing annotation costs.
A common approach in active learning is uncertainty-based
sampling [3, 5, 8, 9, 18, 22, 24, 25], where instances with
high uncertainty, such as low confident of the model’s prediction, are selected for annotation, as these are expected to
contribute most effectively to model performance.
Another approach to reduce annotation costs is weak su-

This paper proposes a label-efficient machine learning
approach, called Instance-wise Supervision-level Optimization (ISO) for active learning, as shown in Fig. 1. Roughly
speaking, the proposed approach is a sophisticated hybrid
of weak supervision and active learning. Different from
the state-of-the-art hybrid approach [22] (reviewed in Section 2), our approach has a novel mechanism that automatically determines the optimal supervision levels of individual instances. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1, all unlabeled
instances at a certain round are automatically divided into
three categories: instances for full supervision (with exact
class annotation), instances for weak supervision (with superclass annotation), and instances that remain unlabeled.
The instances selected in the first two categories are considered to be selected for active learning; annotators, therefore, attach appropriate labels to these instances according

4939

