This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing SAM with Efﬁcient Prompting and Preference Optimization for
Semi-supervised Medical Image Segmentation
Aishik Konwer1,2*,

†

†

Zhijian Yang1 , Erhan Bas1 , Cao Xiao1 , Prateek Prasanna3 ,
Parminder Bhatia1 , Taha Kass-Hout1
1
GE Healthcare
2
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University
3
Department of Biomedical Informatics, Stony Brook University
akonwer@cs.stonybrook.edu, prateek.prasanna@stonybrook.edu

{zhijian.yang, erhan.bas, cao.xiao, parminder.bhatia, taha.kass-hout}@gehealthcare.com

Abstract
Foundational models such as the Segment Anything
Model (SAM) are gaining traction in medical imaging segmentation, supporting multiple downstream tasks. However, such models are supervised in nature, still relying
on large annotated datasets or prompts supplied by experts. Conventional techniques such as active learning to
alleviate such limitations are limited in scope and still necessitate continuous human involvement and complex domain knowledge for label reﬁnement or establishing reward
ground truth. To address these challenges, we propose an
enhanced Segment Anything Model (SAM) framework that
utilizes annotation-efﬁcient prompts generated in a fully unsupervised fashion, while still capturing essential semantic, location, and shape information through contrastive
language-image pretraining and visual question answering.
We adopt the direct preference optimization technique to design an optimal policy that enables the model to generate
high-ﬁdelity segmentations with simple ratings or rankings
provided by a virtual annotator simulating the human annotation process. State-of-the-art performance of our framework in tasks such as lung segmentation, breast tumor segmentation, and organ segmentation across various modalities, including X-ray, ultrasound, and abdominal CT, justiﬁes its effectiveness in low-annotation data scenarios.

1. Introduction
With advancements in medical image analysis, there is an
increasing need for sophisticated methods [20, 21, 29] to
leverage the vast availability of radiology datasets (such as
* Work done during internship at GE Healthcare
† Corresponding author

X-ray, CT, and MRI) for accurate organ and tumor segmentation, as well as disease classiﬁcation. The results of these
tasks are crucial for physicians in designing effective treatment plans and surgical procedures. Several state-of-the-art
deep learning-based foundational models, such as VisionLanguage Models (VLMs), are now available for these purposes, relying on custom prompting to generate relevant
predictions. However, they face two signiﬁcant challenges:
(1) despite being trained with only sparse prompts such as
points or bounding boxes, these models still require human
supervision for the prompt generation, leading to inefﬁciencies; and (2) many datasets lack comprehensive annotations, resulting in under-utilization during training of complex, data-hungry foundational architectures. Additionally,
the high cost of human annotation efforts to create ground
truth data can signiﬁcantly escalate model development expenses.
Popular architectures such as SAM and CLIP, have been
extended to medical data, and led to innovations such as
BiomedCLIP, Merlin, SAM-Med2D, and SAM-Med3D [6,
11, 47, 55]. Recently, numerous studies have focused on
enhancing SAM by replacing geometric prompts and integrating semantic and spatial knowledge in an unsupervised
manner through techniques such as (1) self-prompting, (2)
class activation maps from CLIP, and (3) object localization
models [19, 24, 57]. As shown in Fig. 1, self-prompting (b)
does not require expert-provided prompts during inference.
On the other hand, unsupervised prompts (c) in [19] are only
used for training SAM to generate pseudo-labels for weakly
supervised downstream tasks. They lack sufﬁcient location
and shape information, which could be provided by textbased prompts. Hence, the question arises: Can we come
up with more reﬁned and efﬁcient prompts that can deliver
stronger signals to foundational models without requiring
intervention from annotators in both training and testing

20990

