This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Data-Free Group-Wise Fully Quantized Winograd Convolution via Learnable
Scales
Shuokai Pan

Gerti Tuzi

Sudarshan Sreeram
Arm Inc.

Dibakar Gope

{shuokai.pan, dibakar.gope}@arm.com

1. Introduction

Abstract

In recent years, foundational pre-trained diffusion models
have gained a rapid rise in popularity in the field of image generation due to their ability to produce complex and
incredibly detailed high-quality photorealistic images from
natural language prompts [26, 28, 29, 33]. Furthermore,
foundation DMs have successfully demonstrated their flexibility in supporting and achieving high-quality performance
on a wide range of downstream computer vision tasks,
such as image edition, style transformation, image superresolution, image-to-image translation, and many others,
in contrast to previous Generative Adversarial Networksbased image generation models that suffered from unstable
training [8]. However, diffusion models typically require
many denoising steps and forward passes to convert Gaussian noises into real images using neural network layers
with over 1 billion parameters. Therefore, deploying these
large-scale diffusion models to on-device for inference has
been a significant challenge due to their unprecedented size,
memory bandwidth, and compute cost requirements [36].

Despite the revolutionary breakthroughs of large-scale textto-image diffusion models for complex vision and downstream tasks, their extremely high computational and storage costs limit their usability. Quantization of diffusion
models has been explored in recent works to reduce compute costs and memory bandwidth usage. To further improve inference time, fast convolution algorithms such as
Winograd can be used for convolution layers, which account for a significant portion of computations in diffusion
models. However, the significant quality loss of fully quantized Winograd using existing coarser-grained post-training
quantization methods, combined with the complexity and
cost of finetuning the Winograd transformation matrices for
such large models to recover quality, makes them unsuitable
for large-scale foundation models. Motivated by the presence of a large range of values in them, we investigate the
impact of finer-grained group-wise quantization in quantizing diffusion models. While group-wise quantization can
largely handle the fully quantized Winograd convolution, it
struggles to deal with the large distribution imbalance in a
sizable portion of the Winograd domain computation. To reduce range differences in the Winograd domain, we propose
finetuning only the scale parameters of the Winograd transform matrices without using any domain-specific training
data. Because our method does not depend on any training
data, the generalization performance of quantized diffusion
models is safely guaranteed. For text-to-image generation
task, the 8-bit fully-quantized diffusion model with Winograd provides near-lossless quality (FID and CLIP scores)
in comparison to the full-precision model. This, coupled
with the development of highly optimized kernels for groupwise fully quantized Winograd, improves CPU wall-clock
time by 31.3% when compared to the convolution layers
of a diffusion model. For image classification, our method
outperforms the state-of-the-art Winograd PTQ method by
1.62% and 2.56% in top-1 ImageNet accuracy on ResNet18 and ResNet-34, respectively, with Winograd F(6, 3).

Quantization has proven to be an effective method for
converting high-precision (16 or 32-bit) model weights and
activations to lower-precision values, such as 8-bit integers, reducing the model’s memory and computational requirements while maintaining accuracy, making it more
suitable for deployment on devices with limited resources.
Among different quantization methods, data-free posttraining quantization (PTQ) compresses model parameters
after training. While previous studies attempted to quantize
weights and activations in diffusion models using coarsegrained PTQ techniques [3, 11, 16, 31, 37, 40, 41, 44], such
as tensor-wise or channel-wise quantization, they often resulted in tangible loss of quality, especially under low-bit
settings. One issue with these coarser-grained quantization
approaches is that outlier values, i.e., outliers, can have a
disproportionate impact on scaling: the full range of the
lower-precision data type is not used effectively, which lowers the quantized model’s accuracy. Finer-grained groupwise quantization instead has shown great promise in suc-

4091

