This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Conformal Prediction and MLLM aided Uncertainty Quantification in Scene
Graph Generation
Sayak Nag1 , Udita Ghosh1 , Calvin-Khang Ta2 *, Sarosij Bose1 , Jiachen Li1 , Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury1
1
University of California, Riverside, USA, 2 Dolby Laboratories, USA
{snag005,ughos002,sbose007,jiachen.li}@ucr.edu, calvin.ta@dolby.com, amitrc@ece.ucr.edu

Abstract

STANDARD Scene Graph Generation
Correct Predictions

Ground Truth: Cat sitting in Box

Scene Graph Generation (SGG) aims to represent visual
scenes by identifying objects and their pairwise relationships, providing a structured understanding of image content. However, inherent challenges like long-tailed class
distributions and prediction variability necessitate uncertainty quantification in SGG for its practical viability. In
this paper, we introduce a novel Conformal Prediction
based framework, adaptive to any existing SGG method,
for quantifying their predictive uncertainty by constructing
well-calibrated prediction sets over their generated scene
graphs. These scene graph prediction sets are designed
to achieve statistically rigorous coverage guarantees under
exchangeability assumptions. Additionally, to ensure the
prediction sets contain the most practically interpretable
scene graphs, we propose an effective MLLM-based postprocessing strategy for selecting the most visually and semantically plausible scene graphs within each set. We show
that our proposed approach can produce diverse possible
scene graphs from an image, assess the reliability of SGG
methods, and improve overall SGG performance.

Incorrect Predictions

<Subject - Predicate - Object>

<Cat - standing in - Box>

Input Image
CONFORMAL Scene Graph Generation
<Subject - Predicate - Object>

<Dog - sitting in - Box>
<Cat - sitting in - Box>

<Cat - standing in - Floor>

Input Image

Figure 1. Distinction between standard and conformal SGG.
The upper half shows how a standard SGG method generates a
single prediction of a triplet in the image’s scene graph. The lower
half shows how, by adding conform prediction blocks on top of an
SGG model, we can generate prediction sets for each triplet in the
scene graph, which quantifies the underlying model’s uncertainty
and improve the chances of covering the actual ground truth.

1. Introduction

fect object detection, linguistic variations (synonyms and
homonyms) [9, 13, 29, 32], long-tailed class distributions,
and multiple viewpoint interpretations. As such, state-ofthe-art SGG models tend to produce noisy scene graphs,
raising the need to quantify their predictive uncertainty for
reliable application to downstream tasks [23].
While there have been works to incorporate uncertainty quantification (UQ) in SGG for performance improvement [54], these approaches are designed specifically
for their proposed model architectures. In contrast, this
paper focuses on a post-hoc distribution-free and modelagnostic UQ method with formal statistical coverage guarantees. Specifically, we employ Conformal Prediction
(CP) [3, 33, 50, 53] to design a model agnostic UQ framework for state-of-the-art SGG models and provide prediction sets of an image’s scene graph. The prediction sets
constructed via CP aim to provably contain the true groundtruth class with a desired probability [4]. This enables mod-

Scene graphs provide a structured semantic representation
of a scene depicted in an image. The nodes and edges
of this semantic graph structure represent the objects and
their bipartite relationships. Such semantic representation
of images bridges the gap between vision and language,
playing a crucial role in numerous multimodal reasoning
tasks such as visual question answering [48], image retreival [18], as well as dynamic safety-critical tasks such as
autonomous mobility [31] and robot path planning [1, 35].
However, despite numerous strides made in end-to-end
scene graph generation (SGG), this task remains highly
challenging due to inherent ambiguities arising from multiple sources, such as imprecise scene descriptions, imper* Work done while at UCR.

11676

