This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TANGO: Training-free Embodied AI Agents for Open-world Tasks
Filippo Ziliotto1,2∗

Luciano Serafini2

Tommaso Campari2 *

Lamberto Ballan1

1

2

University of Padova, Italy
Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK), Trento, Italy

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated excellent capabilities in composing various modules together to
create programs that can perform complex reasoning tasks
on images. In this paper, we propose TANGO, an approach
that extends the program composition via LLMs already observed for images, aiming to integrate those capabilities
into embodied agents capable of observing and acting in
the world. Specifically, by employing a simple PointGoal
Navigation model combined with a memory-based exploration policy as a foundational primitive for guiding an
agent through the world, we show how a single model can
address diverse tasks without additional training. We task
an LLM with composing the provided primitives to solve
a specific task, using only a few in-context examples in
the prompt. We evaluate our approach on three key Embodied AI tasks: Open-Set ObjectGoal Navigation, MultiModal Lifelong Navigation, and Open Embodied Question
Answering, achieving state-of-the-art results without any
specific fine-tuning in challenging zero-shot scenarios.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We introduce TANGO, a modular neuro-symbolic system for compositional embodied visual navigation. Given a few
examples of natural language instructions and the corresponding
programs composed of action primitives, TANGO can generate
executable programs, enabling the agent to perform multiple tasks
within a 3D environment.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have gained significant attention in the field of AI due to their remarkable capability
to generalize across unseen tasks [5, 24, 48, 49]. Systems
like VisProg and ViperGPT [18, 47] demonstrated strong
performance on a broad range of vision-and-language tasks
by just relying on a few numbers of in-context examples to
generate complex compositional programs without requiring any specific training. Nevertheless, the evaluation of
these concepts to Embodied AI, particularly for navigation
tasks, remains largely unexplored. This approach may be
crucial in building agents capable to navigate and operate
efficiently in unfamiliar environments.
Previously, methods such as Neural Module Networks
(NMN) [2, 19] have demonstrated promising compositional
* The authors contributed equally to the work.

properties for high-level tasks like visual question answering, via end-to-end training of networks and specialized,
differentiable neural modules. However, they required the
combination of semantic parsers and predefined templates
to learn to solve the compositional tasks. Alternative approaches leverage LLMs through predefined task modules
or APIs for action execution [22, 23, 32, 52, 58]. While effective, these methods often lack a compositional structure
to address multiple tasks or primarily focus on manipulation
and robotic planning, with limited emphasis on navigation.
In this work, we present TANGO (see Figure 1) a
novel neuro-symbolic compositional approach which uti-

24603

