This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoTAKD: Teaching Assistant Knowledge Distillation for Monocular 3D
Object Detection
Hou-I Liu1,2 *, Christine Wu2 , Jen-Hao Cheng2 , Wenhao Chai2 , Shian-Yun Wang3 , Gaowen Liu4 ,
Hugo Latapie5 , Jhih-Ciang Wu6 , Jenq-Neng Hwang2†, Hong-Han Shuai1 , Wen-Huang Cheng7
1

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, 2 University of Washington, 3 University of Southern California,
4

Cisco Systems, Inc., 5 Taijitu AI, Inc., 6 National Taiwan Normal University, 7 National Taiwan University

(a) Previous Works

Abstract

Cross-modal Dist.

Monocular 3D object detection (Mono3D) holds noteworthy promise for autonomous driving applications owing to
the cost-effectiveness and rich visual context of monocular camera sensors. However, depth ambiguity poses a
significant challenge, as it requires extracting precise 3D
scene geometry from a single image, resulting in suboptimal
performance when transferring knowledge from a LiDARbased teacher model to a camera-based student model.
To facilitate effective distillation, we introduce Monocular
Teaching Assistant Knowledge Distillation (MonoTAKD),
which proposes a camera-based teaching assistant (TA)
model to transfer robust 3D visual knowledge to the student
model, leveraging the smaller feature representation gap.
Additionally, we define 3D spatial cues as residual features
that capture the differences between the teacher and the TA
models. We then leverage these cues to improve the student
model’s 3D perception capabilities. Experimental results
show that our MonoTAKD achieves state-of-the-art performance on the KITTI3D dataset. Furthermore, we evaluate
the performance on nuScenes and KITTI raw datasets to
demonstrate the generalization of our model to multi-view
3D and unsupervised data settings. Our code is available
at https://github.com/hoiliu-0801/MonoTAKD.

Teacher Feat.

T

Ineffective Dist.

S

Student Feat.

(b) MonoTAKD
Intra-modal Dist.
TA
TA Feat.

3D Visual Knowledge
S

Effective Dist.

TA T
Residual Feat.
T

Cross-modal
Residual Dist.
LiDAR-based
Teacher

S

S
Camera-based
Student

Student Feat.
3D Spatial Cues

TA

Camera-based
Teaching Assistant

Figure 1. Comparison between previous methods and MonoTAKD
(Ours). Previous works [7, 12] face a significant challenge in the
distillation process due to a substantial gap in feature representation. Our MonoTAKD incorporates intra-modal and cross-modal
residual distillation to enhance learning across this feature representation gap. We visualize the BEV features of each model, along
with the residual features derived between the TA and T models,
highlighted in orange. Best view with zoom-in and color.

1. Introduction

ing a transformer-based decoder. However, the accuracy
of depth maps estimated from a single image remains constrained for the camera-based models, primarily due to the
absence of stereoscopic data, which is critical to the understanding of 3D scene geometry [10, 47].
To enhance the extraction and comprehension of 3D
information, a promising alternative to depth-guided approaches is to utilize the cross-modal distillation [12, 50].
This approach enables models trained with images to acquire 3D information directly from LiDAR data. For instance, CMKD [12] and UniDistill [50] employ a LiDARbased model (teacher) to extract critical 3D information and
distill this knowledge into the camera-based model (student) through the bird’s eye view (BEV) distillation [6].
Nevertheless, the feature representations from different
modalities are inherently distinct, which causes ineffective
distillation and restricts the performance of the camera-

Monocular 3D object detection (Mono3D) has garnered
significant attention in autonomous driving, driven by the
affordability and practicality of monocular camera sensors [9, 14, 24, 49, 51]. One widely used approach for improving 3D detection performance is to leverage depth maps
as auxiliary supervision. For example, MonoDTR [14] and
MonoPGC [41] apply an additional depth branch to predict
depth maps and integrate them with the visual features us* This work was done during Hou-I’s VISIT program at UW
† Corresponding email: hwang@uw.edu

22266

