This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BG-Triangle: Bézier Gaussian Triangle for 3D Vectorization and Rendering
Minye Wu1,∗

Haizhao Dai2,3,∗
Kaixin Yao2
Tinne Tuytelaars1,†
Jingyi Yu2,†
1
2
3
KU Leuven
ShanghaiTech University
Cellverse Co, Ltd.

Abstract
Differentiable rendering enables efficient optimization
by allowing gradients to be computed through the rendering process, facilitating 3D reconstruction, inverse rendering and neural scene representation learning. To ensure differentiability, existing solutions approximate or reformulate traditional rendering operations using smooth,
probabilistic proxies such as volumes or Gaussian primitives. Consequently, they struggle to preserve sharp edges
due to the lack of explicit boundary definitions. We present
a novel hybrid representation, Bézier Gaussian Triangle
(BG-Triangle), that combines Bézier triangle-based vector graphics primitives with Gaussian-based probabilistic models, to maintain accurate shape modeling while
conducting resolution-independent differentiable rendering. We present a robust and effective discontinuityaware rendering technique to reduce uncertainties at object boundaries. We also employ an adaptive densification
and pruning scheme for efficient training while reliably handling level-of-detail (LoD) variations. Experiments show
that BG-Triangle achieves comparable rendering quality as
3DGS [27] but with superior boundary preservation. More
importantly, BG-Triangle uses a much smaller number of
primitives than its alternatives, showcasing the benefits of
vectorized graphics primitives and the potential to bridge
the gap between classic and emerging representations.

Figure 1. BG-Triangle can transform multi-view images into vectorized 3D scenes, enabling the rendering of sharp novel views.

1. Introduction

gradients to flow through the rendering process, has introduced a significant shift in 3D representations. At its core,
differential rendering allows optimization algorithms to directly update the 3D representation based on a rendered image’s error (e.g., differences from a target image), making
it possible to integrate these representations into end-to-end
learning frameworks.
Neural Radiance Fields or NeRFs [39], for example,
leverage neural networks to encode radiance and density
fields in a volumetric space to overcome resolution limitations and enable view dependency in classic volume rendering. Using GPU-specific data structures and acceleration
schemes, InstantNGP [40] stores and optimizes features in
local space to achieve extremely fast training and rendering. 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [27], on the other hand,
revives point-based rendering by adopting Gaussian primitives to give the point cloud a certain volume. It combines the flexibility of explicit point clouds with the powerful expressive capability of volumetric representation for
complex scenes. 3DGS can be directly implemented using the standard rasterization pipeline, including classical
rendering tricks such as mip-mapping [58] for Level-ofDetail (LoD) controls [60]. Coupled with Structure-fromMotion, both NeRF and 3DGS can be deployed to capture
real scenes while preserving correct lighting, reflections,
and occlusions challenging for traditional techniques.
A major challenge in 3DGS and NeRF though is that

Scene representations lie at the heart of computer graphics and 3D computer vision. Over time, they have undergone significant evolution and led to profound changes
in modeling and rendering techniques as well as hardware
architectures. Traditional representations such as meshes,
point clouds, and volumes are fundamental in defining
how 3D structures are reconstructed (e.g., as point clouds
from multi-view images [20, 23, 50] or as volumes from
CT reconstruction [48]) and visualized (e.g., via rasterization [18], ray tracing [57] or volume rendering [12]). In the
era of deep learning, differentiable rendering, by enabling
* Authors contributed equally. † The corresponding authors.

16197

