This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AffordDP: Generalizable Diffusion Policy with Transferable Affordance
Shijie Wu†

Yihang Zhu†

Yunao Huang Kaizhen Zhu Jiayuan Gu
Ye Shi* Jingya Wang*
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China

Jingyi Yu

{wushj12023,zhuyh2023,huangya2024,zhukzh2024,gujy1,yujingyi,shiye,wangjingya}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

https://afforddp.github.io/
Teleoperation Data showing task “Open Cabinet Door”

Generalize to
Different Scenarios
Unseen Placement

Affordance as
Manipulation Prior

AffordDP
+30cm
Unseen Instance

Affordance

Unseen Category

Unseen Scene

Figure 1. We propose AffordDP, a novel diffusion-based imitation learning method for generalizable robotic manipulation. AffordDP
leverages rich manipulation priors from transferable affordances to enhance generalization to unseen scenarios and incorporates affordance
guidance to enable precise control.

Abstract

diffusion sampling that can refine action sequence generation. This guidance directs the generated action to gradually move towards the desired manipulation for unseen objects while keeping the generated action within the manifold of action space. Experimental results from both simulated and real-world environments demonstrate that AffordDP consistently outperforms previous diffusion-based
methods, successfully generalizing to unseen instances and
categories where others fail.

Diffusion-based policies have shown impressive performance in robotic manipulation tasks while struggling with
out-of-domain distributions. Recent efforts attempted to enhance generalization by improving the visual feature encoding for diffusion policy. However, their generalization is typically limited to the same category with similar appearances. Our key insight is that leveraging affordances—manipulation priors that define “where” and
“how” an agent interacts with an object—can substantially
enhance generalization to entirely unseen object instances
and categories. We introduce the Diffusion Policy with
transferable Affordance (AffordDP), designed for generalizable manipulation across novel categories. AffordDP models affordances through 3D contact points and post-contact
trajectories, capturing the essential static and dynamic information for complex tasks. The transferable affordance
from in-domain data to unseen objects is achieved by estimating a 6D transformation matrix using foundational vision models and point cloud registration techniques. More
importantly, we incorporate affordance guidance during

1. Introduction
Imitation learning offers an efficient solution for teaching robots a variety of skills by replicating behavior from
experts without the need to explicitly program actions or
model the environment. It has garnered significant interest
across a wide range of fields, including autonomous driving [13, 16, 21], robotic manipulation [3, 6, 15, 17, 22,
34, 36], and legged locomotion [20, 25, 26]. Recently,
diffusion-based imitation models [6, 14, 30] have gained
significant attention within the field. These models conceptualize a robot’s visuomotor policy as a conditional diffusion denoising process, facilitating the learning of conditional action distributions.

† Equal contributions.
* Corresponding authors.

6971

