This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Query-based Transformer for Continual Image Segmentation
Yuchen Zhu1∗

Cheng Shi1 * Dingyou Wang1
Jiajin Tang1
Zhengxuan Wei1
Yu Wu3
Guanbin Li2
Sibei Yang2†
1
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
2
3
Sun Yat-sen University
Wuhan University
Abstract

Class-incremental/Continual image segmentation (CIS)
aims to train an image segmenter in stages, where the set
of available categories differs at each stage. To leverage
the built-in objectness of query-based transformers, which
mitigates catastrophic forgetting of mask proposals, current
methods often decouple mask generation from the continual learning process. This study, however, identiﬁes two
key issues with decoupled frameworks: loss of plasticity
and heavy reliance on input data order. To address these,
we conduct an in-depth investigation of the built-in objectness and ﬁnd that highly aggregated image features provide a shortcut for queries to generate masks through simple feature alignment. Based on this, we propose SimCIS,
a simple yet powerful baseline for CIS. Its core idea is
to directly select image features for query assignment, ensuring “perfect alignment” to preserve objectness, while
simultaneously allowing queries to select new classes to
promote plasticity. To further combat catastrophic forgetting of categories, we introduce cross-stage consistency in
selection and an innovative “visual query”-based replay
mechanism. Experiments demonstrate that SimCIS consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods across various
segmentation tasks, settings, splits, and input data orders.
All models and codes will be made publicly available at
https://github.com/SooLab/SimCIS.

1. Introduction
Continual learning empowers models to progressively acquire, learn, and assimilate new knowledge from an everevolving environment. It serves as a fundamental task in
image classiﬁcation [4, 8, 18, 20, 25, 31, 40, 42, 48, 49,
57, 58, 60, 64, 71, 72, 75] where models are required to
recognize new classes (plasticity) and preserve old class
knowledge (avoid catastrophic forgetting). Extending be* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

sBase

New

Figure 1. Boxplots of PQ metric for our SimCIS and previous
SOTA [38] on ADE20K. We train each model on randomly shufﬂed continual data input orders and report average PQ for base
and novel classes. We observe that recent query-based transformers suffer from a loss of plasticity (low average PQ) and heavy
reliance on the input data order (high variance).

yond classiﬁcation, continual image segmentation adapts
this to the image segmentation, unlocking a myriad of
practical applications [50, 53]. However, it also confronts
more challenges: 1) Additional catastrophic forgetting
of mask prediction, beyond that of class prediction; 2)
Background semantic shift occurs when the current foreground becomes background in subsequent stages, driven
by the need for image segmentation to predict the background class and the constraint of only having class annotations from current stage. Recently, query-based transformers [10, 17, 34, 35, 55, 56, 59, 63, 79] are introduced into
continual image segmentation, as their built-in objectness
has been shown to mitigate catastrophic forgetting in mask
generation. Leveraging this built-in objectness, many studies [7, 26, 38, 74] decouple mask segmentation from the
continual learning process by freezing the parameters associated with mask proposal generation. However, we observe
two notable yet suboptimal behaviors in the aforementioned
methods.

4595

