This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LION-FS: Fast & Slow Video-Language Thinker as Online Video Assistant
Wei Li, Bing Hu, Rui Shao,* Leyang Shen, Liqiang Nie
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
liwei2024@stu.hit.edu.cn

shaorui@hit.edu.cn

https://github.com/JiuTian-VL/LION-FS

Abstract
First-person video assistants are highly anticipated to
enhance our daily lives through online video dialogue.
However, existing online video assistants often sacrifice assistant efficacy for real-time efficiency by processing lowframe-rate videos with coarse-grained visual features. To
overcome the trade-off between efficacy and efficiency,
we propose “Fast & Slow Video-Language Thinker” as
onLIne videO assistaNt, LION-FS, achieving real-time,
proactive, temporally accurate, and contextually precise responses. LION-FS adopts a two-stage optimization strategy: 1) Fast Path: Routing-Based Response Determination evaluates frame-by-frame whether an immediate response is necessary. To enhance response determination
accuracy and handle higher frame-rate inputs efficiently,
we employ Token Aggregation Routing to dynamically fuse
spatiotemporal features without increasing token numbers,
while utilizing Token Dropping Routing to eliminate redundant features, and 2) Slow Path: Multi-granularity
Keyframe Augmentation optimizes keyframes during response generation. To provide comprehensive and detailed
responses beyond atomic actions constrained by training
data, fine-grained spatial features and human-environment
interaction features are extracted through multi-granular
pooling. They are further integrated into a meticulously designed multimodal Thinking Template to guide more precise
response generation. Comprehensive evaluations of online
video tasks demonstrate that LION-FS achieves state-ofthe-art efficacy and efficiency.

Figure 1. Comparison between LIVE [5]
and LION-FS
.
LIVE processes low-frame-rate videos using coarse-grained image
tokens, resulting in suboptimal accuracy in response. LION-FS,
by efficiently handling high-frame-rate videos through Fast-Path
dynamical spatiotemporal fusion and Slow-Path multi-granular
keyframe augmentation, significantly enhances response determination accuracy and content precision.

ability to handle user queries in real-time and proactively
provide professional responses or guidance. This imposes
high demands on both efficacy and efficiency.
Although existing video understanding works [16, 21,
24, 33, 50, 69] achieve high performance in offline scenarios for tasks like video question answering [11, 51, 70, 72],
captioning [18, 61, 63], and spatiotemporal localization [3,
7, 39, 56], they are unsuitable for the online paradigm of
video assistant. VideoLLM-online [5] is a pioneering work
that introduces the video streaming dialogue framework
LIVE to video assistant, as shown in Figure 1. LIVE continuously receives incoming video streams, autonomously
determines response timing based on user queries, and provides concise responses. Despite its innovation, LIVE has
significant limitations: 1) Limited accuracy in response determination. LIVE’s visual encoding is restricted to low
frame-rate image features, which hinders the ability of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) to learn and

1. Introduction
In current popular smart glasses [13, 34, 54] or headmounted devices [35, 41], although most integrate AI applications such as voice assistant [1, 2, 53] and gesture recognition [20, 26], online video assistant [5, 59] have yet to see
mature implementation. A primary challenge is that online
video assistants require continuous reception of first-person
perspective video streams. Additionally, they must have the
* Corresponding author.

3240

