This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

T2 SG: Traffic Topology Scene Graph for Topology Reasoning
in Autonomous Driving
Changsheng Lv
Mengshi Qi*
Liang Liu
Huadong Ma
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
{lvchangsheng, qms, liangliu, mhd}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Understanding the traffic scenes and then generating highdefinition (HD) maps present significant challenges in autonomous driving. In this paper, we defined a novel Traffic
Topology Scene Graph (T2 SG), a unified scene graph explicitly modeling the lane, controlled and guided by different road signals (e.g., right turn), and topology relationships among them, which is always ignored by previous high-definition (HD) mapping methods. For the generation of T2 SG, we propose TopoFormer, a novel onestage Topology Scene Graph TransFormer with two newlydesigned layers. Specifically, TopoFormer incorporates a
Lane Aggregation Layer (LAL) that leverages the geometric distance among the centerline of lanes to guide the
aggregation of global information. Furthermore, we proposed a Counterfactual Intervention Layer (CIL) to model
the reasonable road structure (e.g., intersection, straight)
among lanes under counterfactual intervention. Then the
generated T2 SG can provide a more accurate and explainable description of the topological structure in traffic scenes. Experimental results demonstrate that TopoFormer outperforms existing methods on the T2 SG generation task, and the generated T2 SG significantly enhances
traffic topology reasoning in downstream tasks, achieving a state-of-the-art performance of 46.3 OLS on the
OpenLane-V2 benchmark. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/MICLAB-BUPT/T2SG.

1. Introduction
Understanding the traffic scene is the key component of autonomous driving. Except for detecting and recognizing individual elements, the vehicles need to infer the topology
relationship among them. Conventional traffic scene understanding tasks, such as lane perception [30], road signal elements detection [4], and high definition (HD) mapping [15]
* Corresponding author: qms@bupt.edu.cn.

Driving
Direction

(a)Traffic scene (Front-view) (b) Bird’s-Eye View of the traffic scene
Lane
Traffic
Element

Lane-Lane Topology
Lane-Traffic Element
Topology

Lane
Lane3

Lane-Lane Topology
Lane2

Lane4

Lane1
No_right_turn1
Lane5 Turn_left1

(c)Traffic Topology Relationship

(d)Traffic Topology Scene Graph

Figure 1. An example of a traffic scene understanding is illustrated
as follows: (a) The traffic scene. (b) A BEV of the traffic scene,
(c) The topology relationship proposed in TopoNet [13], (d) The
T2 SG proposed in our work. Different from TopoNet, T2 SG can
simultaneously model the whole relationships in the scene graph.

focus primarily on the isolated elements (i.e., map elements,
and road signal elements ) but miss the relationship among
them. To model the unified HD mapping for lane perception and road signal elements association, the traffic topology reasoning task on OpenLane-V2 [33] has recently been
proposed. As a map-like reasoning results shown in Figure 1(c), the reasoning task aims to create a topology graph
of the detected elements and thus facilitate decision-making
in the downstream tasks, such as ego planning [5] and motion prediction [24, 35, 45].
A primary challenge in traffic topology reasoning involves accurately modeling intricate traffic scene structures
from multi-view camera inputs. Existing HD mapping
methods [19] explicitly model the spatial relation between
lanes but overlook the control and guide relationship between road signal elements and lanes. TopoNet [13] has

17197

