This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Localized Concept Erasure for Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Using Training-Free Gated Low-Rank Adaptation

1

Byung Hyun Lee1, *, Sungjin Lim2, *, Se Young Chun1,2,3,†
Department of ECE, 2 IPAI, 3 INMC, Seoul National University
{ldlqudgus756, sjin.lim, sychun}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Fine-tuning based concept erasing has demonstrated
promising results in preventing generation of harmful contents from text-to-image diffusion models by removing target concepts while preserving remaining concepts. To maintain the generation capability of diffusion models after concept erasure, it is necessary to remove only the image region
containing the target concept when it locally appears in an
image, leaving other regions intact. However, prior arts often compromise fidelity of the other image regions in order
to erase the localized target concept appearing in a specific area, thereby reducing the overall performance of image generation. To address these limitations, we first introduce a framework called localized concept erasure, which
allows for the deletion of only the specific area containing
the target concept in the image while preserving the other
regions. As a solution for the localized concept erasure,
we propose a training-free approach, dubbed Gated Lowrank adaptation for Concept Erasure (GLoCE), that injects
a lightweight module into the diffusion model. GLoCE consists of low-rank matrices and a simple gate, determined
only by several generation steps for concepts without training. By directly applying GLoCE to image embeddings and
designing the gate to activate only for target concepts,
GLoCE can selectively remove only the region of the target concepts, even when target and remaining concepts coexist within an image. Extensive experiments demonstrated
GLoCE not only improves the image fidelity to text prompts
after erasing the localized target concepts, but also outperforms prior arts in efficacy, specificity, and robustness by
large margin and can be extended to mass concept erasure.
Code is available at https://github.com/Hyun1A/GLoCE.

1. Introduction
Large-scale Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion models have
achieved significant success in generating refined images
* Equal contribution.

† Corresponding author.

that faithfully reflect the given text prompts [6, 8, 34, 37,
43, 48, 50, 60]. Despite their success, they also raised serious risks of potentially generating images including “Not
Safe For Work (NSFW)” contents [40, 44, 51, 54], such
as copyrighted, offensive, and explicit contents. To mitigate
these risks, previous works for erasing malicious concepts
have proposed various approaches, such as dataset curation
[10, 47], post-generation filtering [26, 44], or guided inference [51]. However, these approaches require substantial
computational resources [47], introduce new biases [9], and
could be circumvented by bypassing filters and guides [44].
To overcome their susceptibilities, fine-tuning approaches have shown promising results in concept erasure
while preserving remaining concepts [11–13, 22, 29, 35,
63]. As the primary goal of concept erasing, these methods
focused on improving the efficacy of erasing target concepts
[13, 25, 59] and considered the specificity for preserving remaining concepts [5, 35, 36]. To further maintain the generation capability of diffusion models after concept erasure, it
is required to remove only the image region containing the
target concept when it locally appears in an image and leave
the other regions intact, since otherwise it reduces the overall generation capability of the diffusion models. However,
previous approaches often encounter challenges in maintaining remaining concepts while removing target concepts
present in a localized region when they exist in a same image, resulting in unintended fidelity degradation.
To address these limitations, we introduce a framework
called localized concept erasure, which deletes only the specific image region where the target concept appears, with
minimal effect on the surrounding areas. As a solution for
the localized concept erasure, we propose a training-free approach, Gated Low-rank adaptation for Concept Erasure
(GLoCE), which injects a lightweight module consisting
of low-rank matrices and a gate whose parameters are determined only by generation of few images without training. For effective erasure, we project embeddings of a target concept onto their subspace to remove principal components of the concept, and then map the reduced embeddings
to a low-rank embedding subspace of a distant but related

18596

