This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detecting Backdoor Attacks in Federated Learning via Direction Alignment
Inspection
Jiahao Xu
Zikai Zhang
Rui Hu
University of Nevada, Reno
{jiahaox,zikaiz,ruihu}@unr.edu
Abstract
The distributed nature of training makes Federated Learning (FL) vulnerable to backdoor attacks, where malicious
model updates aim to compromise the global model’s performance on specific tasks. Existing defense methods show
limited efficacy as they overlook the inconsistency between
benign and malicious model updates regarding both general and fine-grained directions. To fill this gap, we introduce AlignIns, a novel defense method designed to safeguard FL systems against backdoor attacks. AlignIns looks
into the direction of each model update through a direction alignment inspection process. Specifically, it examines
the alignment of model updates with the overall update direction and analyzes the distribution of the signs of their
significant parameters, comparing them with the principle
sign across all model updates. Model updates that exhibit
an unusual degree of alignment are considered malicious
and thus be filtered out. We provide the theoretical analysis of the robustness of AlignIns and its propagation error
in FL. Our empirical results on both independent and identically distributed (IID) and non-IID datasets demonstrate
that AlignIns achieves higher robustness compared to the
state-of-the-art defense methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/JiiahaoXU/AlignIns.

sensing [27], where local data privacy is essential.
Although promising, the distributed nature of FL systems makes them vulnerable to a range of advanced poisoning attacks [15, 26, 45]. This vulnerability primarily stems
from the server’s lack of close monitoring of the local data
and the training algorithm on clients. Consequently, this
drawback allows attackers to compromise the data of local clients or interfere with the training algorithm, enabling
them to inject malicious local model updates that distort the
performance of the global model. For example, backdoor
attacks [4, 14, 46, 48, 54] have gained significant attention due to their stealthiness and practical effectiveness. In
detail, backdoor attacks in FL seek to preserve the performance of the global model on clean inputs (i.e., the main
task), while inducing the global model to make incorrect
predictions on inputs that contain a certain predefined feature (i.e., the backdoor task). As backdoor attacks maintain the main task and the backdoor task simultaneously,
the malicious local model updates are statistically similar to
benign ones [36, 46] (poison-coupling effect [20]), making
anomaly detection more challenging on the server side.
Existing defense methods (i.e., aggregation rule) usually aim to identify malicious model updates and filter
them out to achieve better robustness by magnitude-based
metrics extracted from local model updates (e.g., Manhattan distance [19, 22] and Euclidean distance [6, 15]).
However, magnitude-based metrics are ineffective in distinguishing stealthy backdoor attacks where benign and malicious model updates are usually similar in magnitude. Additionally, when the global model tends to converge, the
magnitude of each model update becomes very small, making effective malicious manipulation on magnitude negligible. To this end, some works employ Cosine similarity
to check the pair-wise directional information of model updates [11, 36, 42]. However, pair-wise Cosine similarity
between two model updates only captures their general directional similarity and overlooks fine-grained information
(e.g., signs of parameters), resulting in limited robustness.
In addition, in FL settings with non-IID data, the pair-wise
Cosine similarity of model updates can be easily perturbed

1. Introduction
Unlike traditional centralized training methods, which require gathering and processing all data at a central location
such as a server, Federated Learning (FL) [32], as a decentralized training paradigm, allows a global model to learn
from data distributed across various local clients, thereby
achieving the goal of privacy-preserving. During training,
the server distributes the global model to local clients, and
each client trains the received global model using its local
dataset, and then submits its local model update to the server
for global model refinement. FL has been applied in various
fields, including healthcare[35], finance [28], and remote

20654

