This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InteractVLM: 3D Interaction Reasoning from 2D Foundational Models
Sai Kumar Dwivedi1 Dimitrije Antić2 Shashank Tripathi1 Omid Taheri1
Cordelia Schmid3 Michael J. Black1 Dimitrios Tzionas2
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 University of Amsterdam (UvA), the Netherlands
3
Inria, École normale supérieure, France

Figure 1. We present InteractVLM, a novel method for estimating contact points on both human bodies and objects from a single in-thewild image, shown here as red patches. Our method goes beyond traditional binary contact estimation methods by estimating contact points
on a human in relation to a specified object. We do so by leveraging the broad visual knowledge of a large Visual Language Model.

Abstract
We introduce InteractVLM, a novel method to estimate 3D
contact points on human bodies and objects from single inthe-wild images, enabling accurate human-object joint reconstruction in 3D. This is challenging due to occlusions,
depth ambiguities, and widely varying object shapes. Existing methods rely on 3D contact annotations collected
via expensive motion-capture systems or tedious manual
labeling, limiting scalability and generalization. To overcome this, InteractVLM harnesses the broad visual knowledge of large Vision-Language Models (VLMs), fine-tuned
with limited 3D contact data. However, directly applying
these models is non-trivial, as they reason “only” in 2D,
while human-object contact is inherently 3D. Thus we introduce a novel “Render-Localize-Lift” module that: (1)
embeds 3D body and object surfaces in 2D space via multiview rendering, (2) trains a novel multi-view localization
model (MV-Loc) to infer contacts in 2D, and (3) lifts these
to 3D. Additionally, we propose a new task called Semantic Human Contact estimation, where human contact predictions are conditioned explicitly on object semantics, enabling richer interaction modeling. InteractVLM outperforms existing work on contact estimation and also facilitates 3D reconstruction from an in-the-wild image. To es-

timate 3D human and object pose, we infer initial body
and object meshes, then infer contacts on both of these via
InteractVLM, and last exploit these for fitting the meshes to
image evidence. Results show that our approach performs
promisingly in the wild. Code and models are available at
https://interactvlm.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction

22605

People interact with objects routinely. Reconstructing
human-object interaction (HOI) in 3D is key for many applications, from robots to mixed reality. However, doing so
from single images is challenging due to depth ambiguity,
occlusions, and the diverse shape and appearance of objects.
There are methods that estimate 3D human bodies and
methods that estimate 3D objects, but few that put these
together. Knowing the contacts between these could significantly improve joint reconstruction. Our goal is to infer
contact points on both humans and objects from single inthe-wild images, and then use these contacts for jointly reconstructing humans and objects. However, there is a lack
of in-the-wild training images paired with ground-truth contact labels for both 3D humans and objects. Acquiring such
data is challenging and existing methods do not scale.

