This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Your ViT is Secretly an Image Segmentation Model
Tommie Kerssies1
Niccolò Cavagnero2,*
Giuseppe Averta2
Bastian Leibe3
Eindhoven University of Technology

2

3

Polytechnic of Turin

Abstract

RWTH Aachen University

ViT-Adapter + Mask2Former [12, 14]
Image

Vision Transformers (ViTs) have shown remarkable performance and scalability across various computer vision tasks.
To apply single-scale ViTs to image segmentation, existing
methods adopt a convolutional adapter to generate multiscale features, a pixel decoder to fuse these features, and
a Transformer decoder that uses the fused features to make
predictions. In this paper, we show that the inductive biases
introduced by these task-specific components can instead be
learned by the ViT itself, given sufficiently large models and
extensive pre-training. Based on these findings, we introduce the Encoder-only Mask Transformer (EoMT), which
repurposes the plain ViT architecture to conduct image segmentation. With large-scale models and pre-training, EoMT
obtains a segmentation accuracy similar to state-of-the-art
models that use task-specific components. At the same time,
EoMT is significantly faster than these methods due to its
architectural simplicity, e.g., up to 4× faster with ViT-L.
Across a range of model sizes, EoMT demonstrates an optimal balance between segmentation accuracy and prediction
speed, suggesting that compute resources are better spent
on scaling the ViT itself rather than adding architectural
complexity. Code: https://www.tue-mps.org/eomt/.

Adapter

ViT

Pixel
Decoder

EoMT (Ours)

Queries

Image

TF
Decoder

ViT

Queries

1

Alexander Hermans3
Narges Norouzi1
Gijs Dubbelman1
Daan de Geus1,3

Masks + Classes

Masks + Classes

Panoptic Quality (PQ)

58

54

50

46

42

ViT-g ViT-L ViT-B ViT-S
ViT-Adapter + Mask2Former
EoMT w/ Masked Attention
EoMT (Ours)

20

40
80
160
Frames per second (FPS) [log scale]

320

Figure 1. ViT-Adapter + Mask2Former vs. EoMT (Ours).
EoMT demonstrates an optimal balance between Panoptic Quality
(PQ) and FPS across different sizes of DINOv2 [47] pre-trained
ViTs [21]. Evaluation on COCO val2017 [40], see Tab. 3.

1. Introduction

ods, an adapter [12, 57] is first applied in parallel to the ViT,
using convolutional layers and interacting with the ViT to
extract multi-scale features. Second, these multi-scale features are fed to a Mask Transformer module [13, 14, 32, 60],
consisting of a pixel decoder and a Transformer decoder.
The pixel decoder fuses and enhances information across
multiple feature scales. The Transformer decoder then introduces learnable object queries that attend to the multiscale features via cross-attention. These queries are finally
used to generate segmentation mask and class predictions.
In this paper, we explore whether these additional components, as visualized in Fig. 1 (top left), are truly necessary to obtain state-of-the-art performance. We hypothesize
that with increasingly extensive pre-training and for larger
ViTs, the positive effect of these additional components decreases, making them nearly irrelevant. There are two key
reasons for this: (i) Large-scale pre-training, particularly

The Vision Transformer (ViT) [21] has proven to be a
strong, scalable, and generally applicable architecture for
computer vision [1, 19, 47, 61]. Recently, research has
shown that ViTs are very suitable for large-scale pretraining [5, 26, 47, 62], resulting in generalizable models
that achieve high performance on many downstream tasks.
A particularly well-researched task is image segmentation,
e.g., semantic, instance, and panoptic segmentation [36].
To achieve state-of-the-art segmentation performance with
ViTs, they are typically combined with several computationally intensive and task-specific components such as ViTAdapter and Mask2Former (M2F) [12, 14]. In these meth* Work done while visiting RWTH.

25303

