This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing 3D Gaze Estimation in the Wild using
Weak Supervision with Gaze Following Labels
Pierre Vuillecard
Jean-Marc Odobez
Idiap Research Institute, Switzerland
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland

Video

Image

{ pvuillecard, odobez}@idiap.ch

GT

Supervised (Gaze360)
image inference

ST-WSGE (Gaze360+GF)
image inference

ST-WSGE (Gaze360+GF)
video inference

Figure 1. Significance of ST-WSGE. Our self-training based weakly-supervised framework for robust 3D gaze estimation in real-world
conditions (e.g., varying appearance, extreme poses, resolution, and occlusion). All predictions used our image and video agnostic Gaze
Transformer (GaT) model. Top row: importance of the training diversity using ST-WSGE and GazeFollow (GF) for generalization compared to standard supervised methods. Bottom row: influence of temporal context between image and video inference. Circles in images
represent unit disks where 3D gaze vectors are projected onto the image plane (x, y in yellow) and a top-down view (x, z in blue). Images
from VideoAttentionTarget, GFIE, and MPIIFaceGaze datasets.

Abstract
Accurate 3D gaze estimation in unconstrained real-world
environments remains a significant challenge due to variations in appearance, head pose, occlusion, and the limited availability of in-the-wild 3D gaze datasets. To
address these challenges, we introduce a novel SelfTraining Weakly-Supervised Gaze Estimation framework
(ST-WSGE). This two-stage learning framework leverages
diverse 2D gaze datasets, such as gaze-following data,
which offer rich variations in appearances, natural scenes,
and gaze distributions, and proposes an approach to generate 3D pseudo-labels and enhance model generalization. Furthermore, traditional modality-specific models, designed separately for images or videos, limit the effective
use of available training data. To overcome this, we propose
the Gaze Transformer (GaT), a modality-agnostic architecture capable of simultaneously learning static and dynamic
gaze information from both image and video datasets. By
combining 3D video datasets with 2D gaze target labels
from gaze following tasks, our approach achieves the fol-

lowing key contributions: (i) Significant state-of-the-art improvements in within-domain and cross-domain generalization on unconstrained benchmarks like Gaze360 and GFIE,
with notable cross-modal gains in video gaze estimation;
(ii) Superior cross-domain performance on datasets such
as MPIIFaceGaze and Gaze360 compared to frontal face
methods. Code and pre-trained models will be released to
the community.

1. Introduction

13508

Non-verbal behaviors play a crucial role in human communication, often conveying more information than words
alone. Among the various forms of non-verbal cues, eye
gaze stands out as an important signal for understanding
human behavior, including attention, communication, intents, and mental state. Consequently, gaze signals have
been used in many applications. Some applications require
accurate gaze for frontal head pose such as AR/VR [5], 3D
avatar animation [45], human-computer interaction [3, 44],
and driver behavior monitoring [27]. While other applications focus on robust 3D gaze estimation from a wide range

