This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discovering Hidden Visual Concepts Beyond Linguistic Input in Infant Learning
Xueyi Ke1

Satoshi Tsutsui1

Yayun Zhang2

Bihan Wen1 *

1

2

Nanyang Technological University
The Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics

"You see this block the
triangle…"
Transcribed Parental Speech

Egocentric Video Frames

Text
Encoder
!!

Parental speech
vocab

cos(I: , T$ )

Vision
Encoder
!"

Which one is "apple" ?

0.55

0.35

0.05

!!

T#

!"

I:

0.05

(c) Inference: Parental Training Vocabulary Recognition Only
Beyond vocab

Which one is "rug"?

(a) Pre-trained Child’s View for Contrastive Learning (CVCL)

Vision
Encoder
!"

cos(I: , T$ )

!!

T#

!"

I:

can't be computed as T$ doesn't exist

"rug" Neuron's Activation
"rug" neuron
0.65
0.23
0.07
0.05
layer 4, unit 167
(b) Neuron Labeling of Internal Representation
(d) Extending Recognition Beyond Training Vocabulary
Figure 1. Inspired by the development of the infant visual system, CVCL [41] is trained on infant egocentric frames and transcribed parental speech (a)
and demonstrates object recognition ability within the vocabulary provided by parental speech (c). However, infant visual development is not limited to
parental guidance. Thus, we hypothesize that a computational model trained on an infant’s daily experiences can similarly acquire visual concepts beyond its
training parental speech. To explore this, we perform neuron labeling (b) to identify visual concept neurons, including concepts that were never mentioned
in the parental speech vocabulary (e.g., “rug”).. Based on discovered neurons, we show that the model can recognize objects beyond the training vocabulary,
akin to early infant visual development (d). Some images are cited from prior work [41] as the original data is not accessible to us.

Abstract

recognize objects beyond the model’s original vocabulary.
Furthermore, we compare the differences in representation
between infant models and those in modern computer vision
models, such as CLIP and ImageNet pre-trained model. Ultimately, our work bridges cognitive science and computer
vision by analyzing the internal representations of a computational model trained on an infant visual and linguistic inputs. Our code is available at https://github.com/
Kexueyi/discover_infant_vis.

Infants develop complex visual understanding rapidly, even
preceding of the acquisition of linguistic skills. As computer vision seeks to replicate the human vision system,
understanding infant visual development may offer valuable insights. In this paper, we present an interdisciplinary
study exploring this question: can a computational model
that imitates the infant learning process develop broader
visual concepts that extend beyond the vocabulary it has
heard, similar to how infants naturally learn? To investigate this, we analyze a recently published model in Science by Vong et al., which is trained on longitudinal, egocentric images of a single child paired with transcribed
parental speech. We perform neuron labeling to identify
visual concept neurons hidden in the model’s internal representations. We then demonstrate that these neurons can

1. Introduction
Infants are remarkable learners, sparking interest across various academic disciplines. Computer vision is no exception,
with researchers studying infant visual learning from various perspectives [1, 31, 32, 35, 41]. A recent milestone is
Child’s View for Contrastive Learning (CVCL) by Vong et
al.[41], which trains a model from scratch on longitudinal

* Corresponding Author.

4343

