This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedAWA: Adaptive Optimization of Aggregation Weights in
Federated Learning Using Client Vectors
Changlong Shi1 , He Zhao2 , Bingjie Zhang1 , Mingyuan Zhou3 , Dandan Guo1∗ , Yi Chang1 *
Jilin University, China1 CSIRO’s Data61, Australia2
The University of Texas at Austin, USA3
{shicl22,zhangbj24}@mails.jlu.edu.cn,he.zhao@data61.csiro.au
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu, {guodandan,yichang}@jlu.edu.cn
Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a promising
framework for distributed machine learning, enabling collaborative model training without sharing local data, thereby
preserving privacy and enhancing security. However, data
heterogeneity resulting from differences across user behaviors, preferences, and device characteristics poses a signiﬁcant challenge for federated learning. Most previous
works overlook the adjustment of aggregation weights, relying solely on dataset size for weight assignment, which
often leads to unstable convergence and reduced model performance. Recently, several studies have sought to reﬁne
aggregation strategies by incorporating dataset characteristics and model alignment. However, adaptively adjusting
aggregation weights while ensuring data security—without
requiring additional proxy data—remains a signiﬁcant challenge. In this work, we propose Federated learning with
Adaptive Weight Aggregation (FedAWA), a novel method
that adaptively adjusts aggregation weights based on client
vectors during the learning process. The client vector captures the direction of model updates, reﬂecting local data
variations, and is used to optimize the aggregation weight
without requiring additional datasets or violating privacy.
By assigning higher aggregation weights to local models
whose updates align closely with the global optimization direction, FedAWA enhances the stability and generalization of
the global model. Extensive experiments under diverse scenarios demonstrate the superiority of our method, providing
a promising solution to the challenges of data heterogeneity
in federated learning.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) as an innovative paradigm in machine learning, has garnered signiﬁcant attention in recent
* Corresponding authors.

years [15, 31, 46]. This distributed optimization method
leverages multiple local clients to collaboratively train a
shared global model without sharing the client data, thereby
preserving privacy and enhancing security. FL has a wide
range of applications in many areas, such as healthcare [34],
ﬁnance [4], and education [9]. The FedAvg [30] algorithm, a
cornerstone method in FL, stores a global model on a central
server. During the training process, this global model is
distributed to participating clients for local updates. After
each client updates its model, the server collects and aggregates the optimized parameters from the clients to update
the global model. In FedAvg, the aggregation weights are
determined based on the size of the local datasets. However,
the performance of the model optimized by FedAvg tends
to degrade due to data heterogeneity, which arises from user
behaviors, preferences, devices, organizations, and other diverse factors [21]. As a result, different local models tend to
optimize towards distinct local objectives, causing divergent
optimization directions and unstable convergence [22], and
ultimately degrading the overall model performance. This
phenomenon has been both theoretically and empirically
validated in [23, 39].
To mitigate the negative effects of data heterogeneity,
several approaches have been proposed that adjust the aggregation weights on the server side to reduce bias during the
model aggregation process. FedDisco [43] leverages both
dataset size and the discrepancy between local and global
category distributions to determine more distinguishing aggregation weights. Similar to FedAvg, FedDisco also uses
ﬁxed aggregation weights throughout the training process,
which limits its ability to adapt to the dynamic optimization
process. L-DAWA [33] employs cosine similarity between
local models and the global model as aggregation weights,
preventing deviations in the aggregation process from the
global optimization direction. However, the similarity between models may not fully capture the relationship between
clients, and directly using it as aggregation weights may lack
sufﬁcient adaptability. FedLAW [24] identiﬁes the global

30651

