This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VDocRAG: Retrieval-Augmented Generation over Visually-Rich Documents
Ryota Tanaka1,2 Taichi Iki1 Taku Hasegawa1 Kyosuke Nishida1 Kuniko Saito1 Jun Suzuki2
1
NTT Human Informatics Laboratories, NTT Corporation 2 Tohoku University
https://vdocrag.github.io
Abstract

Input: Who was the First Pick in the draft of the league
where Chicago Bears belongs to in the year 2007?

We aim to develop a retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)
framework that answers questions over a corpus of visuallyrich documents presented in mixed modalities (e.g., charts,
tables) and diverse formats (e.g., PDF, PPTX). In this paper, we introduce a new RAG framework, VDocRAG, which
can directly understand varied documents and modalities in
a unified image format to prevent missing information that
occurs by parsing documents to obtain text. To improve the
performance, we propose novel self-supervised pre-training
tasks that adapt large vision-language models for retrieval
by compressing visual information into dense token representations while aligning them with textual content in documents. Furthermore, we introduce OpenDocVQA, the first
unified collection of open-domain document visual question
answering datasets, encompassing diverse document types
and formats. OpenDocVQA provides a comprehensive resource for training and evaluating retrieval and question
answering models on visually-rich documents in an opendomain setting. Experiments show that VDocRAG substantially outperforms conventional text-based RAG and has
strong generalization capability, highlighting the potential
of an effective RAG paradigm for real-world documents.

VDocRAG
VDocRetriever

Large Collection of
Document Images

VDocGenerator

Output:
JaMarcus
Russell

Figure 1. Our framework of VDocRAG and examples from OpenDocVQA. VDocRAG consists of VDocRetirver and VDocGenerator, which can retrieve relevant documents and generate answers
by understanding the original appearance of documents.

1. Introduction

tions depending on diverse formats and types.
Thus, document visual question answering (DocumentVQA) [42, 43, 56, 57] aims to build an agent capable of reading and comprehending document images to
answer the question. Here, most existing DocumentVQA
questions operate in a closed setting without requiring any
retrieval. While this definition simplifies the QA model,
it does not reflect many real-world use cases where the
question is asked through some open-domain natural language interface, such as QA systems searching information across in-house documents or customer service chatbots on e-commerce websites. To address this limitation,
recent works have introduced retrieval tasks on document
images [17, 37]. However, these cannot fully develop models that effectively integrate the retrieved information into
the final output. This gap hinders the application of DocumentVQA models in more realistic, open-domain scenarios.
In this paper, we introduce a new RAG framework,
VDocRAG, which can directly understand varied docu-

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance on diverse natural language tasks [2, 16,
24, 55]. These models struggle with factual errors despite
their increased model and data scale [39, 40]. To remedy this problem, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)
methods [18, 31] can retrieve knowledge from an external corpus, potentially reducing hallucination and increasing knowledge coverage. Most previous RAG frameworks
assume the context is composed entirely of text, with no
graphical elements. In contrast, a significant amount of
real-world information is stored in visually-rich documents,
such as charts, tables, web pages, and office documents.
These documents often contain both textual and visual objects, with content spread structurally across various loca-

24827

