This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Summarization with Large Language Models
Min Jung Lee1,2
1

Dayoung Gong1

Minsu Cho1

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH)
Abstract

0.88

The exponential increase in video content poses significant
challenges in terms of efficient navigation, search, and retrieval, thus requiring advanced video summarization techniques. Existing video summarization methods, which heavily rely on visual features and temporal dynamics, often
fail to capture the semantics of video content, resulting in
incomplete or incoherent summaries. To tackle the challenge, we propose a new video summarization framework
that leverages the capabilities of recent Large Language
Models (LLMs), expecting that the knowledge learned from
massive data enables LLMs to evaluate video frames in a
manner that better aligns with diverse semantics and human
judgments, effectively addressing the inherent subjectivity in
defining keyframes. Our method, dubbed LLM-based Video
Summarization (LLMVS), translates video frames into a
sequence of captions using a Muti-modal Large Language
Model (M-LLM) and then assesses the importance of each
frame using an LLM, based on the captions in its local context. These local importance scores are refined through a
global attention mechanism in the entire context of video
captions, ensuring that our summaries effectively reflect both
the details and the overarching narrative. Our experimental
results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method
over existing ones in standard benchmarks, highlighting the
potential of LLMs in the processing of multimedia content.

1. Introduction
Video summarization is essential in multimedia content processing, particularly as the exponential growth in video data
has far exceeded human capacity for consumption. Every
day, millions of videos are uploaded across platforms, posing significant challenges in efficient navigation, search, and
retrieval of video content. Video summarization addresses
these challenges by condensing lengthy videos into concise
summaries that capture the essential content. In response,
researchers have explored automatic video summarization
techniques aimed at producing videos that are shorter, more
digestible, and appealing to users. However, summarizing

2

GenGenAI

0.17

0.59

Global context aggregator
“score: 8”
Local importance scoring

LLM
“A woman is cooking
an egg in a pan.”

Text description generation

M-LLM

𝑡−1

“score: 2”

“score: 6”

“Assess the importance score
of the central frame”

“A woman is holding
a pan of food.”

“A person is stirring
a pot of food.”

“Describe this frame”

𝑡
Video

𝑡+1

Figure 1. Video summarization with (M-)LLMs. Given the input
video frames, captions for each frame are generated using M-LLM.
For each frame at time-step t, the generated captions within a local
window are grouped and provided as input to the LLM. The LLM
is prompted to assess the importance score of the frame at time
step t by considering this local context. Finally, a global context
aggregator produces the final predictions by taking into account the
overall context of the entire video. Note that, in this illustration,
the local window size is set to 3.

video content remains complex due to its varied nature and
the subjective elements of effective summarization.
Previous video summarization methods [5, 11, 12, 18, 35,
59] have primarily focused on selecting important frames
solely based on visual features. Recent multi-modal methods [6, 14, 22, 28] integrate both visual and language modalities to leverage the contextual richness of natural language.
However, these methods still prioritize visual features, incorporating textual data via an attention mechanism [44],
where visual features serve as queries and language features
as keys and values. While textual data helps to enhance the
visual features, the main focus of video summarization still
remains on visual content.

18981

