This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Full-DoF Egomotion Estimation for Event Cameras Using Geometric Solvers
Ji Zhao1
1

Banglei Guan2(B)

Zibin Liu2

Laurent Kneip3

Independent Researcher, Beijing, China. 2 College of Aerospace Science and Engineering,

National University of Defense Technology, China. 3 Mobile Perception Lab, ShanghaiTech University, China.

Abstract
For event cameras, current sparse geometric solvers for
egomotion estimation assume that the rotational displacements are known, such as those provided by an IMU. Thus,
they can only recover the translational motion parameters.
Recovering full-DoF motion parameters using a sparse geometric solver is a more challenging task, and has not
yet been investigated. In this paper, we propose several
solvers to estimate both rotational and translational velocities within a unified framework. Our method leverages event manifolds induced by line segments. The problem formulations are based on either an incidence relation for lines or a novel coplanarity relation for normal
vectors. We demonstrate the possibility of recovering fullDoF egomotion parameters for both angular and linear
velocities without requiring extra sensor measurements or
motion priors. To achieve efficient optimization, we exploit the Adam framework with a first-order approximation of rotations for quick initialization. Experiments on
both synthetic and real-world data demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. The code is available at https:
//github.com/jizhaox/relpose-event.

warped events [7–9], exploiting normal flow [33, 44, 46],
coupling with frame-based cameras or an inertial measurement unit (IMU) [36, 55], and by using learning-based
methods [14, 25, 39, 40, 54, 56].
Of particular interest to the present work are sparse geometric solvers for motion estimation from samples of raw
events. The most relevant work to ours is given by Gao
et al. [12, 13], who introduce a manifold for line events,
called eventail. Based on the theoretical foundation of eventails and the assumption of locally constant velocity, temporal asynchronous events can be used for linear velocity
estimation. Gao et al. develop a minimal solver to recover
the linear velocity of the event camera and line structures.
By eliminating the scale-ambiguity of translation and scene
structure, the problem has 5 unknown DoFs, thus requiring
a minimum of 5 events. Later, an efficient N -point linear
solver was developed [13]. However, in the aforementioned
methods, angular velocities are measured by an IMU. The
direct estimation of rotational parameters from events remains yet to be explored.

1. Introduction

Despite their success, previous mainstream methods estimate either rotational parameters, as seen in [7–9], or translational parameters, as in [12, 13, 33]. By contrast, this
paper estimates egomotion containing both rotational and
translational parameters. To achieve this goal, we propose a
full-DoF egomotion estimation method using the geometry
of eventail manifolds [13]. When the unknown angular velocity is involved, the minimum number of events required
increases to 8, making the problem more complex compared
to the case where rotational displacement is known. Besides
this direct extension, we also develop a novel geometry for
eventail manifolds relying on the normal flow and yielding
good overall performance.

In recent years, neuromorphic event-based cameras have
drawn increasing attention [10]. They capture pixel-wise
intensity changes and generate asynchronous event streams
indicating relative brightness changes, and thereby create
favorable bandwidth latency trade-offs. The present paper
looks at the fundamental task of event-based motion and
structure estimation.
Compared against traditional frame-based cameras,
event cameras capture a different encoding of visual information. As a result, new algorithms need to be developed
to process event streams. The recovery of egomotion for
event cameras has for example been achieved by aligning
B: Corresponding author.
Email: zhaoji84@gmail.com, guanbanglei12@nudt.edu.cn,
liuzibin19@nudt.edu.cn, lkneip@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Though this paper focuses on egomotion estimation using event streams, the proposed geometry and formulations
can be understood as a general framework for infinitesimal motion estimation. Whenever a visual sensor is moving under a locally constant velocity and samples (either
asynchronously or synchronously) from image gradients or
normal flow of edgelets are generated, the present framework can be used to recover angular and linear velocities.

11515

