This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlexUOD: The Answer to Real-world Unsupervised Image Outlier Detection
Zhonghang Liu
SMU, Singapore

Kun Zhou
SmartMore Corporation, China

Changshuo Wang
NTU, Singapore

zhliu.2020@phdcs.smu.edu.sg

zhoukun303808@gmail.com

wangchangshuo1@gmail.com

Wen-Yan Lin
SMU, Singapore

Jiangbo Lu
SmartMore Corporation, China

linwenyan.daniel@gmail.com

jiangbo.lu@gmail.com

Abstract

1.00

AUC

0.95
0.90
FlexUOD (Ours)
LVAD

0.85
0.80

1.00

0.1

0.0

0.2
0.3
Contamination Factor

0.4

0.5

(b) Average AUC Results on Various Benchmark Datasets
FlexUOD
LVAD

0.95
AUC

How many outliers are within an unlabeled and contaminated dataset? Despite a series of unsupervised outlier detection (UOD) approaches have been proposed, they cannot correctly answer this critical question, resulting in their
performance instability across various real-world (varying
contamination factor) scenarios. To address this problem,
we propose FlexUOD, with a novel contamination factor
estimation perspective. FlexUOD not only achieves its remarkable robustness but also is a general and plug-andplay framework, which can significantly improve the performance of existing UOD methods. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that FlexUOD achieves state-of-the-art results
as well as high efficacy on diverse evaluation benchmarks.

(a) AUC Results on STL-10 with Varying Contamination Factors

0.90
0.85
0.80

STL-10

(ResNet-50)

STL-10
(CLIP)

CIFAR-10

(ResNet-50)

CIFAR-10
(CLIP)

MNIST
(Pixel)

Benchmark Dataset

1. Introduction
UOD for images plays an important role in improving data
quality [29] and supports a wide range of visual applications [62]. It aims to identify unusual samples within an
unlabeled dataset. Despite significant progress that has
been achieved, existing approaches often exhibit instability across different scenarios (Fig. 1). This work attributes
the major instability to the dependence on the crucial but
unknown contamination factor γ 1 , and proposes a solution
that can be implemented into real-world scenarios, eliminating the dependency of γ.
We first clarify the γ-instability: when γ is low, the contaminated dataset is primarily composed of inliers that can
be effectively addressed by inlier/normal-manifold learning
methods [36, 51, 65]. In contrast, the learned inlier manifolds undergo substantial shifts when γ is high, rendering
these models ineffective. Nevertheless, a higher proportion

Figure 1. Comparison between our FlexUOD framework and
LVAD [36]. (a) demonstrates that our solution maintains stability across varying contamination factors, while (b) highlights its
consistent performance across different benchmarks.

1 This term [44] is also known as the outlier ratio/percentage.

of outliers benefits certain outlier-based techniques [34, 56].
Based on the above analysis, it is challenging for a single method to solve varying γ-scenarios. Thus, estimating γ is our major objective. Currently, the mainstream
γ-estimators [44, 45] are threshold learning-based, focusing on determining a boundary on a series of given outlier
scores. However, we argue that without prior knowledge of
the outlier scores, e.g., ranking accuracy and distribution,
learning an optimal threshold becomes an ill-posed problem. To address the issues arising from the inconsistency
between γ-estimation and outlier scoring, this study introduces a novel perspective.
We propose FlexUOD, a framework that can flexibly

15183

