This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot Styled Text Image Generation, but Make It Autoregressive
∗

Vittorio Pippi1

∗

Silvia Cascianelli1 Alessio Tonioni2
Fabio Quattrini1
1
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia 2 Google

Abstract
Styled Handwritten Text Generation (HTG) has recently
received attention from the computer vision and document
analysis communities, which have developed several solutions, either GAN- or diffusion-based, that achieved promising results. Nonetheless, these strategies fail to generalize
to novel styles and have technical constraints, particularly
in terms of maximum output length and training efficiency.
To overcome these limitations, in this work, we propose a
novel framework for text image generation, dubbed Emuru.
Our approach leverages a powerful text image representation model (a variational autoencoder) combined with an
autoregressive Transformer. Our approach enables the generation of styled text images conditioned on textual content
and style examples, such as specific fonts or handwriting
styles. We train our model solely on a diverse, synthetic
dataset of English text rendered in over 100,000 typewritten and calligraphy fonts, which gives it the capability to
reproduce unseen styles (both fonts and users’ handwriting)
in zero-shot. To the best of our knowledge, Emuru is the
first autoregressive model for HTG, and the first designed
specifically for generalization to novel styles. Moreover,
our model generates images without background artifacts,
which are easier to use for downstream applications. Extensive evaluation on both typewritten and handwritten, anylength text image generation scenarios demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
The Styled Handwritten Text Generation (HTG) task entails
generating images containing user-specified text rendered in
a handwriting style resembling one or more reference style
samples. In recent years, this task has regained significant
attention from the Document Analysis and Computer Vision
communities, especially due to its potential applications,
ranging from generating synthetic data for other Document
Analysis tasks to reproducing written styles to be used in
graphic design and assistive technologies [5, 18, 40]. From
a technical point of view, handwriting can be treated as a
∗ Equal contribution.

Rita Cucchiara1

“NO MORE PARTIES I’M EMURU:
BORN TO MAKE MISTAKES,
NOT TO FAKE PERFECTION.”

Emuru

Figure 1. Our proposed Emuru model can generate images of anylength text lines mimicking out-of-distribution handwriting styles.

sequence of strokes, as in the Online HTG paradigm, or as
a static image, as in the Offline HTG paradigm. Note that
Online HTG entails giving the model a style input in the
form of strokes trajectories, and letting the model generate
strokes trajectories to be rendered on an image. Therefore,
Online HTG models are implemented as sequential models [1, 2, 8, 17, 31, 46]. Note that collecting data to train
and use Online HTG models involves using digital pens and
pads, which is cumbersome and costly and cannot be applied in scenarios where the style to reproduce is from an
existing manuscript, e.g., historical documents. For these
reasons, Offline HTG, where the style input and the generated output are both static images, has gained more popularity and is also the focus of this work.
Despite the increasing research efforts in Offline HTG,
generating synthetic images of handwritten text in a writerspecific style is still challenging. Specifically, current Stateof-the-Art models: A. Struggle to generalize to handwriting
styles that are significantly different from those encountered
in training; B. Are implemented by making some datasetspecific assumptions due to technical limitations of the architecture adopted, e.g., normalizing character width or en-

7910

