This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Epistemic and Aleatoric Uncertainty for Active Open-Set
Annotation: An Energy-Based Approach
Chen-Chen Zong, Sheng-Jun Huang*
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Nanjing, 211106, China
{chencz,huangsj}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Active learning (AL), which iteratively queries the most informative examples from a large pool of unlabeled candidates for model training, faces significant challenges in the
presence of open-set classes. Existing methods either prioritize query examples likely to belong to known classes, indicating low epistemic uncertainty (EU), or focus on querying those with highly uncertain predictions, reflecting high
aleatoric uncertainty (AU). However, they both yield suboptimal performance, as low EU corresponds to limited useful
information, and closed-set AU metrics for unknown class
examples are less meaningful. In this paper, we propose an
Energy-based Active Open-set Annotation (EAOA) framework, which effectively integrates EU and AU to achieve
superior performance. EAOA features a (C + 1)-class detector and a target classifier, incorporating an energy-based
EU measure and a margin-based energy loss designed for
the detector, alongside an energy-based AU measure for the
target classifier. Another crucial component is the targetdriven adaptive sampling strategy. It first forms a smaller
candidate set with low EU scores to ensure closed-set properties, making AU metrics meaningful. Subsequently, examples with high AU scores are queried to form the final query
set, with the candidate set size adjusted adaptively. Extensive experiments show that EAOA achieves state-of-the-art
performance while maintaining high query precision and
low training overhead. The code is available at this link.

Figure 1. Dataset: CIFAR-10; mismatch ratio: 40%. Our motivation: in open-set scenarios, querying examples with low epistemic uncertainty yields high query precision, but the overall information content is low, resulting in poor model performance.
Focusing on examples with high aleatoric uncertainty also leads to
poor performance, as the model’s assessment of this uncertainty
becomes meaningless for open-set examples. Nevertheless, an effective combination of the two can lead to a superior outcome.

1. Introduction

techniques that leverage limited and insufficiently labeled
data [30, 37, 46]. Among them, active learning (AL) has
emerged as a popular framework, which iteratively selects
the most informative examples from the unlabeled data pool
and queries their labels from the Oracle [12, 30, 34].
Existing AL methods can be categorized into three types
based on their sampling strategies: uncertainty-based [2, 10,
42, 50], diversity-based [25, 33, 40], and hybrid strategies
[1, 11, 31]. Most of these methods operate under the closed
set assumption, which posits that the classes in the unlabeled data match those in the labeled data. However, in
real-world scenarios, it is challenging and often costly to
ensure that no open-set classes are present in the unlabeled
data. Meanwhile, several studies [6, 26, 28, 31] have shown
that these methods perform poorly when open-set classes
are involved, as such examples tend to receive uncertain
model predictions and exhibit distinct features. Therefore,
developing effective AL methods for open-world scenarios,
where open-set classes exist, is of significant importance.
Recently, this emerging research problem has garnered

The success of deep neural networks (DNNs) is largely fueled by large-scale, accurately labeled datasets [16, 49].
However, acquiring such data is often expensive and timeconsuming primarily due to the labor-intensive nature of
manual labeling [30, 50]. To save labeling costs, recent research has focused on developing effective model training
* Corresponding Author

10153

