This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Any-Resolution AI-Generated Image Detection by Spectral Learning
Dimitrios Karageorgiou1,2 Symeon Papadopoulos1 Ioannis Kompatsiaris1
1
Information Technologies Institute, CERTH, Greece
2
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
3
Archimedes/Athena RC, Greece
{dkarageo,papadop,ikom}@iti.gr

Efstratios Gavves2,3

{d.karageorgiou,e.gavves}@uva.nl

Abstract
Recent works have established that AI models introduce
spectral artifacts into generated images and propose approaches for learning to capture them using labeled data.
However, the significant differences in such artifacts among
different generative models hinder these approaches from
generalizing to generators not seen during training. In this
work, we build upon the key idea that the spectral distribution of real images constitutes both an invariant and
highly discriminative pattern for AI-generated image detection. To model this under a self-supervised setup, we employ masked spectral learning using the pretext task of frequency reconstruction. Since generated images constitute
out-of-distribution samples for this model, we propose spectral reconstruction similarity to capture this divergence.
Moreover, we introduce spectral context attention, which
enables our approach to efficiently capture subtle spectral
inconsistencies in images of any resolution. Our spectral
AI-generated image detection approach (SPAI) achieves a
5.5% absolute improvement in AUC over the previous stateof-the-art across 13 recent generative approaches, while exhibiting robustness against common online perturbations.
Code is available on https://mever-team.github.io/spai.

Figure 1. SPAI employs spectral learning to learn the spectral distribution of real images under a self-supervised setup. Then, using
the spectral reconstruction similarity it detects AI-generated images as out-of-distribution samples of this learned model.

thetic imagery on the Internet [16], which calls for robust
AI-generated Image Detection (AID) approaches.
To this end, the image forensics community has established that generative models introduce subtle artifacts to
the generated images [61, 66, 70] and proposed several AID
methods for capturing them [46]. However, even generators with minimal differences introduce significantly different artifacts [1, 68]. Consequently, existing detectors
poorly generalize to images originating from generators not
seen during training [9, 68], while, due to the large number of available generative models, it is very difficult, if
not intractable, to maintain an exhaustive up-to-date training dataset. Thus, current AID approaches perform poorly
when tested outside of lab-controlled environments[16, 36].

1. Introduction
Generative AI technology advances at an outstanding pace
[18]. Early AI approaches for image synthesis, primarily
based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [12],
have recently been superseded by Diffusion Models (DMs)
[10], capable of producing high-fidelity imagery, while supporting advanced conditioning schemes [4]. Recent methods for efficient training [33, 37] have further lowered the
barrier for creating new generative models. In this landscape of numerous accessible high-performing commercial
and open-source models, making strong assumptions about
safeguards implemented at the model level [44] seems intractable, leading to an increasing numbers of harmful syn-

Recently, the idea of modeling the distribution of real
images emerged as an alternative to learning to capture the
artifacts introduced by specific detectors [9]. Under this

18706

