This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Can’t Slow Me Down: Learning Robust and Hardware-Adaptive Object
Detectors against Latency Attacks for Edge Devices
Tianyi Wang, Zichen Wang, Cong Wang*, Yuanchao Shu, Ruilong Deng, Peng Cheng, Jiming Chen
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China,
{wty1998, withnorman, cwang85, ycshu, dengruilong, lunarheart, cjm}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Object detection is a fundamental enabler for many realtime downstream applications such as autonomous driving,
augmented reality and supply chain management. However,
the algorithmic backbone of neural networks is brittle to imperceptible perturbations in the system inputs, which were
generally known as misclassifying attacks. By targeting the
real-time processing capability, a new class of latency attacks has been reported recently. They exploit new attack
surfaces in object detectors by creating a computational
bottleneck in the post-processing module, which leads to
cascading failure and puts the real-time downstream tasks
at risk. In this work, we take an initial attempt to defend against this attack via background-attentive adversarial training that is also cognizant of the underlying hardware capabilities. We first draw system-level connections
between latency attacks and hardware capacity across heterogeneous GPU devices. Based on the particular adversarial behaviors, we utilize objectness loss as a proxy and build
background attention into the adversarial training pipeline,
and achieve a favorable balance between clean and robust
accuracy. The extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the defense in restoring real-time processing capability from 13 FPS to 43 FPS on Jetson Orin NX, with a
better trade-off between the clean and robust accuracy. The
source code is available at: https://github.com/Hill-Wu1998/underload.

1. Introduction
Real-time object detection lies at the heart of a wide
range of downstream applications such as autonomous driving [16], drone navigation [36], and video surveillance [20,
29]. From the early detectors such as (Faster) RCNN [9, 26]
to the latest versions of the YOLO family [25, 33, 34], we
have seen remarkable improvements in performance and
efficiency, e.g., reaching 56-60% mAP on the MS-COCO
* Corresponding Author

(a) Original Image

(b) Latency Attack

(c) Proposed Defense

Figure 1. Visualization of the latency attack [28] that generates an
overwhelming number of “phantom objects” and the effectiveness
of the proposed defense.

benchmark with more than 30 FPS on embedded NVIDIA
Jetson boards.
However, in the shadow of these tremendous successes, a
new threat called latency attacks lurk to impair the real-time
processing capability of object detectors [3, 21, 30, 35],
which employ hand-crafted Non-Maximum Suppression
(NMS) to eliminate duplicate objects in the post-processing
stage. By targeting the computational bottleneck inside the
NMS module [12], these attacks create more than thousands of “phantom objects” with gradient-based adversarial techniques to congest the NMS processing pipeline as
shown in Fig. 1. In addition to the known attacks against object detectors such as disappearing, misclassifying and mislocation [6, 15, 41], they expand the attacker’s weapon arsenal with high risks of jeopardizing real-time applications
on edge systems. E.g., any latency in detecting an obstacle
in autonomous driving could lead to cascading failure in the
sensor fusion, decision and steering control subsystems.
Unfortunately, with the arms race on the attack side, we
have seen a paucity of research to defend against these

19230

