This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PartRM: Modeling Part-Level Dynamics with Large Cross-State Reconstruction
Model
Mingju Gao*1 , Yike Pan*1,2 , Huan-ang Gao*1,4 , Zongzheng Zhang1 , Wenyi Li1 ,
Hao Dong3 , Hao Tang3 , Li Yi1 , Hao Zhao†1,4
1
Tsinghua University 2 University of Michigan 3 Peking University 4 BAAI
Project Page: https://PartRM.c7w.tech/
(a) Puppet-Master

(b) PartRM

Input

Input

PSNR = 24.42dB Time = 64.9s

PSNR = 28.15dB Time = 4.2s

Figure 1. We present PartRM, given a single-view image and user-specific drags, PartRM can efficiently models appearance, geometry,
and part-level motion in a feed-forward manner. Unlike the previous state-of-the-art, Puppet-Master [23], PartRM achieves higher PSNR
and significantly faster inference times. As shown in (b) compared to (a), PartRM produces 3D-aware, part-level motions with enhanced
multi-view consistency, delivering more realistic and coherent results across different viewpoints.

Abstract

hance the model’s understanding of interaction conditions
with a multi-scale drag embedding module that captures dynamics at varying granularities. To prevent catastrophic
forgetting during fine-tuning, we implement a two-stage
training process that focuses sequentially on motion and appearance learning. Experimental results show that PartRM
establishes a new state-of-the-art in part-level motion learning and can be applied in manipulation tasks in robotics.
Our code, data, and models are publicly available to facilitate future research.

As interest grows in world models that predict future states
from current observations and actions, accurately modeling
part-level dynamics has become increasingly relevant for
various applications. Existing approaches, such as PuppetMaster, rely on fine-tuning large-scale pre-trained video
diffusion models, which are impractical for real-world use
due to the limitations of 2D video representation and slow
processing times. To overcome these challenges, we present
PartRM, a novel 4D reconstruction framework that simultaneously models appearance, geometry, and part-level motion
from multi-view images of a static object. PartRM builds
upon large 3D Gaussian reconstruction models, leveraging
their extensive knowledge of appearance and geometry in
static objects. To address data scarcity in 4D, we introduce
the PartDrag-4D dataset, providing multi-view observations
of part-level dynamics across over 20,000 states. We en-

1. Introduction
World models are essential for predicting future states based
on current observations and actions, enabling machines to
understand and interact with the physical world. They play
a crucial role in a variety of applications, including robotics
[11, 30, 48, 62], AR/VR, and beyond. Recently, there
has been a growing interest in modeling part-level dynamics—the ability to generate realistic, fine-grained motion at

0* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Author.

7004

