This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Harnessing Global-Local Collaborative Adversarial Perturbation for
Anti-Customization
Long Xu1 , Jiakai Wang2∗, Haojie Hao1 , Haotong Qin3 , Jiejie Zhao2 , Xianglong Liu1,2
1
Beihang University, 2 Zhongguancun Laboratory, 3 ETH Zürich
{xulonguuid, haojiehao, xlliu}@buaa.edu.cn, {wangjk, zhaojiejie}@zgclab.edu.cn
haotong.qin@pbl.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract

1 Global Feature Correlation Disruption

represents the key feature correlation

Though achieving significant success in personalized image synthesis, Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) pose substantial social risks caused by unauthorized misuse (e.g.,
face theft). To counter these threats, the Anti-Customization
(AC) method that exploits adversarial perturbations was
proposed. Unfortunately, existing AC methods show insufficient defense ability due to the ignorance of hierarchical characteristics, i.e., global feature correlations and local facial attributes, leading to weak resistance to concept
transfer and semantic theft in customization methods. To
address these limitations, we are motivated to propose a
Global-Local Collaborated Anti-Customization (GoodAC)
framework to generate powerful adversarial perturbations
by disturbing both feature correlations and facial attributes.
To enhance the ability to resist concept transfer, we disrupt
the spatial correlation of perceptual features that form the
basis of model generation at a global level, thereby creating highly concept-transfer-resistant adversarial camouflage. To improve the ability to resist semantic theft, leveraging the fact that facial attributes are personalized, we
designed a personalized and precise facial attribute distortion strategy locally, focusing the attack on the individual’s
image structure to generate strong camouflage. Extensive
experiments on various customization methods, including
Dreambooth and LoRA, have strongly demonstrated that
our GoodAC outperforms other state-of-the-art approaches
by large margins, e.g., over 50% improvements on ISM. 1

2

Local Facial Attribute Distortion
contains precise facial attributes

Without 1
transfer naturally

With 1
unable to achieve transfer

Without 2
preserve facial features

With 2
unable to model precise face

(a) SimAC

(b) GoodAC

Figure 1. Comparison of SimAC and GoodAC. Our method further boosts its ability to de-identity.

as an emerging and efficient theoretical framework. The
open-source nature of the Stable Diffusion models enables
users to thoroughly understand and explore the innovative
potential of LDM [28, 42]. Users can build personalized
LDMs with just a few images depicting a specific concept
(e.g., a particular person) and a unique identifier (e.g., “a
sks person”). By finely adjusting the unique identifier, the
model can efficiently produce high-quality images showcasing special themes, i.e., image customization [9].

1. Introduction

However, as the saying goes, every coin has two sides,
these innovative techniques in image generation also bring
potential social risks, involving personal rights such as portrait information and reputation. Hackers, with easy access to publicly available data, can effortlessly collect a
few images from social media profiles of public figures, often without permission, and employ them to generate false
yet remarkably believable images, as seen in the case of
Dreambooth [27]. Once created, these images can be maliciously posted online, potentially causing public relations
crises or even political upheavals. Such nefarious activities
will severely undermine the credibility of online information and pose serious threats to social safety [39]. These

The Latent Diffusion Model (LDM), which excels at generating highly realistic visual content, has garnered significant attention in recent years within the academic community [7, 12, 14, 25, 43], recognized by many researchers
∗ Corresponding author
1 Codes can be found at https://github.com/xl-yaoyi/GoodAC.

13414

