This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sim-to-Real Causal Transfer:
A Metric Learning Approach to Causally-Aware Interaction Representations
Ahmad Rahimi*1 Po-Chien Luan*1 Yuejiang Liu*2 Frano Rajic3 Alexandre Alahi1
1
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 2 Stanford University, 3 ETH Zurich
{ahmad.rahimi, po-chien.luan, alexandre.alahi}@epfl.ch

Abstract
what if

Modeling spatial-temporal interactions among neighboring agents is at the heart of multi-agent problems such as
motion forecasting and crowd navigation. Despite notable
progress, it remains unclear to which extent modern representations can capture the causal relationships behind agent
interactions. In this work, we take an in-depth look at the
causal awareness of these representations, from computational formalism to real-world practice. First, we revisit
the notion of non-causal robustness studied in the recent
CausalAgents benchmark [56]. We show that existing representations are already partially resilient to perturbations of
non-causal agents, and yet modeling indirect causal effects
involving mediator agents remains challenging. To address
this challenge, we introduce a metric learning approach
that regularizes latent representations with causal annotations. Our controlled experiments show that this approach
not only leads to higher degrees of causal awareness but
also yields stronger out-of-distribution robustness. To further operationalize it in practice, we propose a sim-to-real
causal transfer method via cross-domain multi-task learning. Experiments on trajectory prediction datasets show
that our method can significantly boost generalization, even
in the absence of real-world causal annotations, where we
acquire higher prediction accuracy by only using 25% of
real-world data. We hope our work provides a new perspective on the challenges and potential pathways toward
causally-aware representations of multi-agent interactions.
Our code is available at https://github.com/vitaepfl/CausalSim2Real.

1. Introduction
Modeling multi-agent interactions with deep neural networks
has made great strides in the past few years [2, 11, 23, 24,
31, 46, 61, 68, 69]. Yet, existing representations still face
tremendous challenges in handling changing environments:
they often suffer from substantial accuracy drops under mild

?

Figure 1. Illustration of causal relations in multi-agent interactions. The behavior of the ego agent is causally influenced by
some neighboring agents. Our research explores the depth of causal
understanding within trajectory prediction models, introduces novel
causal regularizers to refine this understanding, and details a simto-real approach that effectively transfers this causal knowledge to
practical real-world scenarios.

environmental changes [4, 39] and require a large number
of examples for adaptation to new contexts [33, 51]. These
challenges are arguably rooted in the nature of the learning
approach that seeks statistical correlations in the training
data, regardless of their stability and reusability across distributions [4, 7]. One promising approach is to develop
causally-aware representations—latent features that capture
the invariant causal dependencies in agent interactions.
However, discovering causal knowledge from observational data is often exceptionally difficult [63, 64]. Most
prior works resort to additional information, such as structural knowledge [9, 45] and domain labels [4, 28, 40]. While
these attempts have been shown effective in certain out-ofdistribution scenarios, they still fall short of explicitly accounting for causal relationships between interactive agents.
More recently, CausalAgents [56] made an effort to collect
annotations of agent relations (causal or non-causal) in the
Waymo dataset [20], providing a new benchmark focused on
the robustness issue under non-causal agent perturbations.
Nevertheless, the reason behind the robustness issue remains
unclear, as does the potential use of the collected annotations
for representation learning.
The goal of this work is to provide an in-depth analysis of
the challenges and opportunities of learning causally-aware
representations in the multi-agent context. To this end, we
first take an in-depth look at the recent CausalAgents benchmark [56]. We find that its labeling procedure and evaluation
protocol present subtle yet critical caveats, thereby resulting

17271

