This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Audio-Visual Segmentation with Vision-Centric Transformer
Shaofei Huang1,2 * Rui Ling3 Tianrui Hui1† Hongyu Li4
Xu Zhou5 Shifeng Zhang5 Si Liu4† Richang Hong1 Meng Wang1
1
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
2
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University 5 Sangfor Technologies
Abstract

Mixed Audio Clip

Audio-Visual Segmentation (AVS) aims to segment soundproducing objects in video frames based on the associated audio signal. Prevailing AVS methods typically adopt
an audio-centric Transformer architecture, where object
queries are derived from audio features. However, audiocentric Transformers suffer from two limitations: perception ambiguity caused by the mixed nature of audio,
and weakened dense prediction ability due to visual detail loss. To address these limitations, we propose a new
Vision-Centric Transformer (VCT) framework that leverages vision-derived queries to iteratively fetch corresponding audio and visual information, enabling queries to better
distinguish between different sounding objects from mixed
audio and accurately delineate their contours. Additionally, we also introduce a Prototype Prompted Query Generation (PPQG) module within our VCT framework to generate vision-derived queries that are both semantically aware
and visually rich through audio prototype prompting and
pixel context grouping, facilitating audio-visual information aggregation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our VCT framework achieves new state-of-the-art performances on three subsets of the AVSBench dataset.

Query

Generation

Mixed Audio Queries

Ambiguous Visual Perception

(a) Audio-Centric Transformer

Grouped Pixel Context

Query

Generation

Distinguishable Vision Queries

Corresponding Audio Fetching

(b) Vision-Centric Transformer

Figure 1. Motivation of our method. (a) Previous methods typically rely on audio-centric Transformers, where queries are derived from mixed sources of audio features, causing ambiguity
in the sounding object perception process. (b) We propose the
Vision-Centric Transformer, where queries are derived from visual features of different regions and interact with audio features
to fetch corresponding audio information, achieving more accurate
sound source distinguishment and object segmentation.

(SSL) [13, 14, 33], AVS places greater emphasis on finegrained audio-visual understanding and pixel-level perception accuracy. Based on these properties, the AVS task
holds potential value in various application scenarios, including video understanding and editing, augmented and
virtual reality, intelligent surveillance systems, etc.
Prevailing AVS methods [9, 21, 37, 41] typically employ
an audio-centric Transformer architecture [4, 35], where
audio features are used as or integrated into object queries
to identify the sounding objects in the video through layerby-layer audio-visual interactions. However, audio-centric
Transformers present two main limitations. First, audio information is typically a mixture of various sound sources in
real-world scenarios, including both semantically distinct

1. Introduction
Audio-Visual Segmentation (AVS) [43, 44] is designed to
identify and generate pixel-level segmentation masks of
sound-emitting objects within visual frames by utilizing audio signals from the video. This task requires models to
determine regions associated with the sound source and to
delineate the shape and boundaries of the sound-producing
objects precisely. Compared to Sound Source Localization
* Visiting scholar at Hefei University of Technology.
† Corresponding authors.

8352

