This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sketchy Bounding-box Supervision for 3D Instance Segmentation
Qian Deng1 , Le Hui2 , Jin Xie3,4 ,* Jian Yang1
1
PCA Lab, College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
3
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
4
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou, China
dengqian@mail.nankai.edu.cn; huile@nwpu.edu.cn; csjxie@nju.edu.cn; csjyang@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Bounding box supervision has gained considerable attention in weakly supervised 3D instance segmentation. While
this approach alleviates the need for extensive point-level
annotations, obtaining accurate bounding boxes in practical
applications remains challenging. To this end, we explore
the inaccurate bounding box, named sketchy bounding box,
which is imitated through perturbing ground truth bounding box by adding scaling, translation, and rotation. In
this paper, we propose Sketchy-3DIS, a novel weakly 3D instance segmentation framework, which jointly learns pseudo
labeler and segmentator to improve the performance under the sketchy bounding-box supervisions. Specifically, we
first propose an adaptive box-to-point pseudo labeler that
adaptively learns to assign points located in the overlapped
parts between two sketchy bounding boxes to the correct
instance, resulting in compact and pure pseudo instance
labels. Then, we present a coarse-to-fine instance segmentator that first predicts coarse instances from the entire point
cloud and then learns fine instances based on the region
of coarse instances. Finally, by using the pseudo instance
labels to supervise the instance segmentator, we can gradually generate high-quality instances through joint training.
Extensive experiments show that our method achieves stateof-the-art performance on both the ScanNetV2 and S3DIS
benchmarks, and even outperforms several fully supervised
methods using sketchy bounding boxes. Code is available at
https://github.com/dengq7/Sketchy-3DIS.

Figure 1. (a) illustrates the inputs of bounding box supervised 3D instance segmentation. (b) compares the performances of GaPro [29]
and our Sketchy-3DIS under both accurate and scaled sketchy
boxes supervision on ScanNetV2 validation set.

instance segmentation is both fundamental and challenging,
as it involves recognizing the category of each object within
a point cloud and delineating its individual mask. Current
3D instance segmentation methods [2, 13, 14, 30, 34, 36, 41]
have demonstrated impressive performance, primarily rely
on data-hungry deep learning approaches that require substantial training data and dense point-level manual annotations. Notably, point-level fully supervised instance annotation in ScanNet takes approximately 22.3 minutes [6] per
scene, while labeling a 3D box in ScanNet takes about 1.93
minutes [38] per scene. Therefore, bounding box annotation
stands out as it provides substantial instance-level information while maintaining a reasonable annotation cost, making
it a favorable annotation choice for weakly supervised 3D
instance segmentation.
Many weakly supervised methods have emerged to tackle
the 3D instance segmentation task. Semi-supervised 3D instance segmentation methods [5, 12, 23, 45] use training data
with partial labels, while others [5, 12, 23, 45] utilize indirect
labels, such as 2D image annotations. Additionally, objectlevel annotations, like marking a single point [7, 24, 37, 38]
or drawing a bounding box [4, 8, 29, 49] for each object, are
employed. Bounding box supervision is another important

1. Introduction
With the rise of 3D datasets and the growing need for 3D
scene understanding, various 3D computer vision tasks [19,
25, 28–31, 33, 34, 36, 42–44, 50, 51] have gained significant
attention from both academia and industry. Among these, 3D
* Corresponding author

8879

