This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interactive Medical Image Analysis with Concept-based Similarity Reasoning
Ta Duc Huy†

Sen Kim Tran

Anton van den Hengel†

Phan Nguyen
Zhibin Liao†

Nguyen Hoang Tran
Johan W. Verjans†

Tran Bao Sam

Minh-Son To† ‡

Vu Minh Hieu Phan † *
†

Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide, ‡ Flinders University

Abstract
The ability to interpret and intervene model decisions is important for the adoption of computer-aided diagnosis methods in clinical workflows. Recent concept-based methods
link the model predictions with interpretable concepts and
modify their activation scores to interact with the model.
However, these concepts are at the image level, which hinders the model from pinpointing the exact patches the concepts are activated. Alternatively, prototype-based methods learn representations from training image patches and
compare these with test image patches, using the similarity scores for final class prediction. However, interpreting the underlying concepts of these patches can be challenging and often necessitates post-hoc guesswork. To address this issue, this paper introduces the novel Conceptbased Similarity Reasoning network (CSR), which offers (i)
patch-level prototype with intrinsic concept interpretation,
and (ii) spatial interactivity. First, the proposed CSR provides localized explanation by grounding prototypes of each
concept on image regions. Second, our model introduces
novel spatial-level interaction, allowing doctors to engage
directly with specific image areas, making it an intuitive and
transparent tool for medical imaging. CSR improves upon
prior state-of-the-art interpretable methods by up to 4.5%
across three biomedical datasets. Our code is released at
https://github.com/tadeephuy/InteractCSR.

1. Introduction
Despite the success of deep neural networks in medical
image analysis [8, 9, 14, 22, 24, 29], their “black-box”
nature limits their adoption in safety-critical clinical settings. Attribution-based methods [3, 30, 31, 34, 38] generate saliency maps to identify influential image regions.
However, recent studies raised concerns about the reliability
and accuracy of visual interpretation, potentially compro* Corresponding author.

mising decision-making [19, 26]. To address this, Concept
Bottleneck Models (CBM) predict the interpretable concepts first and use them to predict the label [10, 11, 21, 36].
CBM allows human intervention in the predicted concepts,
which is shown to significantly benefit performance. Alternatively, prototype-based methods are proposed to learn
visual part prototypes to explain the classification decision.
Specifically, ProtoPNet [2] and its derivatives [1, 6, 17, 18,
27, 28, 33] learn prototypical parts from training data and
compare test images with these parts to compute similarity
scores for final predictions.
Despite their inherent interpretability, concept-based
methods only offer image-level explanations by linking images to global concepts, without identifying specific local patches correlated with these concepts. In contrast,
prototype-based methods deliver patch-level explanations
but necessitate post-hoc analysis to correlate visual patches
with semantically meaningful concepts. This challenge intensifies in medical imaging, where subtle visual medical
findings make concept assignments particularly difficult.
How to create concept-based models that enable patch-level
explanation for medical imaging is an open-ended question.
In radiological imaging, radiologists routinely reference
an atlas of visual examples, depicting distinctive concepts
of a pathology, such as opacity, fluid presence in the lung,
enlarged heart shadow to aid diagnosis. Inspired by this
observation, we propose a novel Concept-based Similarity Reasoning network, which offers two unique contributions. First, our CSR gives patch-level and interpretableby-design concepts without requiring post-hoc analysis, in
contrast to prototype-based methods [2, 18, 28]. We classify a disease by searching locally for the presence of visual exemplars of its concepts on the image. For example, a
cancer diagnosis on chest X-ray could involve a radiologist
comparing a suspected tumor with other known malignant
tumors to assess its severity [7]. The presence of the tumor
is a concept to predict the target cancer. Our framework
trains a model to search locally for the presence of similar
tumor exemplars (or prototypes) on every patch of the im-

30797

