This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoInstance: Enhancing Monocular Priors via Multi-view Instance Alignment
for Neural Rendering and Reconstruction
Wenyuan Zhang1 , Yixiao Yang1 , Han Huang1 , Liang Han1 , Kanle Shi2 ,
Yu-Shen Liu1 * , Zhizhong Han3
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China1
Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China2
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA3
{zhangwen21,yangyixi21,h-huang20,hanl23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
shikanle@kuaishou.com, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn, h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
Monocular depth priors have been widely adopted by neural rendering in multi-view based tasks such as 3D reconstruction and novel view synthesis. However, due to the
inconsistent prediction on each view, how to more effectively
leverage monocular cues in a multi-view context remains
a challenge. Current methods treat the entire estimated
depth map indiscriminately, and use it as ground truth supervision, while ignoring the inherent inaccuracy and crossview inconsistency in monocular priors. To resolve these
issues, we propose MonoInstance, a general approach that
explores the uncertainty of monocular depths to provide
enhanced geometric priors for neural rendering and reconstruction. Our key insight lies in aligning each segmented
instance depths from multiple views within a common 3D
space, thereby casting the uncertainty estimation of monocular depths into a density measure within noisy point clouds.
For high-uncertainty areas where depth priors are unreliable, we further introduce a constraint term that encourages
the projected instances to align with corresponding instance
masks on nearby views. MonoInstance is a versatile strategy which can be seamlessly integrated into various multiview neural rendering frameworks. Our experimental results
demonstrate that MonoInstance significantly improves the
performance in both reconstruction and novel view synthesis
under various benchmarks. Project page: https://wenyuan-zhang.github.io/MonoInstance/.

1. Introduction
Learning scene representations from multiple posed RGB
images is a foundational task in computer vision and graph* The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu.

ics [2, 27, 80, 96], with numerous applications across diverse
domains such as virtual reality, robotics and autonomous
driving. Bridging the gap between 2D images and 3D representations has become a central challenge in the field. Traditional approaches like Multi-View Stereo (MVS) [75, 89],
address this issue by matching features between adjacent
views, followed by dense depth estimation and point cloud
fusion. Recent methods tackle this problem more effectively
through volume rendering. By learning neural representations, either implicit or explicit ones, like NeRF [40] and
3D Gaussians [20], we can conduct volume rendering to
rendered these neural representations into images. The rendering results are then supervised by ground truth ones to
optimize the neural representations accordingly. Although
these methods are capable of generating plausible 3D meshes
or novel views [11, 46, 62], they struggle to recover finegrained geometric details. This limitation arises since that
the photometric consistency from color images can not ensure perfect geometric clues, which is further complicated
by the shape-radiance ambiguity [83].
To overcome these obstacles, recent solutions typically
incorporate monocular priors as additional supervision, such
as depths [57, 80, 97] and normals [8, 33, 61]. However, the
effectiveness of monocular priors becomes a bottleneck hindering the performance of these methods, primarily due to
two factors. One is that the predictions from monocular priors are not perfectly accurate due to domain gaps. The other
is that monocular priors are inferred independently from each
RGB image, leading to geometry inconsistency across different viewpoints. MVS-based methods [3, 19, 63] mitigate
these issues by deriving the uncertainty through comparing
the predicted depths with the projected ones from adjacent
views, which is puzzled by view occlusions. While the latest
methods [6, 71] incorporate an additional branch within the
rendering framework to predict the uncertainty. However,

21642

