This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AIGV-Assessor: Benchmarking and Evaluating the Perceptual Quality of
Text-to-Video Generation with LMM
Jiarui Wang1 ,

Huiyu Duan1,2 ,
Guangtao Zhai1,2 ,
Juntong Wang1 ,
1
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering,
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China

Abstract
The rapid advancement of large multimodal models
(LMMs) has led to the rapid expansion of artificial intelligence generated videos (AIGVs), which highlights the
pressing need for effective video quality assessment (VQA)
models designed specifically for AIGVs. Current VQA models generally fall short in accurately assessing the perceptual quality of AIGVs due to the presence of unique distortions, such as unrealistic objects, unnatural movements, or
inconsistent visual elements. To address this challenge, we
first present AIGVQA-DB, a large-scale dataset comprising 36,576 AIGVs generated by 15 advanced text-to-video
models using 1,048 diverse prompts. With these AIGVs, a
systematic annotation pipeline including scoring and ranking processes is devised, which collects 370k expert ratings
to date. Based on AIGVQA-DB, we further introduce AIGVAssessor, a novel VQA model that leverages spatiotemporal features and LMM frameworks to capture the intricate
quality attributes of AIGVs, thereby accurately predicting
precise video quality scores and video pair preferences.
Through comprehensive experiments on both AIGVQA-DB
and existing AIGV databases, AIGV-Assessor demonstrates
state-of-the-art performance, significantly surpassing existing scoring or evaluation methods in terms of multiple perceptual quality dimensions. The dataset and code are released at https://github.com/IntMeGroup/AIGV-Assessor.

1. Introduction
Text-to-video generative models [12, 27, 44, 64, 73], including auto-regressive [23, 81] and diffusion-based [12, 27, 55]
approaches, have experienced rapid advancements in recent years with the explosion of large multimodal models
* Corresponding Author.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62271312, 62132006, 62401365, 62225112,
and in part by STCSM under Grant 22DZ2229005.

Xiongkuo Min1 *,

(LMMs). Given appropriate text prompts, these models
can generate high-fidelity and semantically-aligned videos,
commonly referred to as AI-generated videos (AIGVs),
which have significantly facilitated the content creation
in various domains, including entertainment, art, design,
and advertising, etc [11, 13, 43]. Despite the significant
progress, current AIGVs are still far from satisfactory. Unlike natural videos, which are usually affected by low-level
distortions, such as noise, blur, low-light, etc, AIGVs generally suffer from degradations such as unrealistic objects, unnatural movements, inconsistent visual elements, and misalignment with text descriptions [25, 31, 43, 65, 79, 84, 85].
The unique distortions in AIGVs also bring challenges to
the video evaluation. Traditional video quality assessment
(VQA) methods [10, 18, 33, 35, 57, 70, 71] mainly focus on
evaluating the quality of professionally-generated content
(PGC) and user-generated content (UGC), thus struggling
to address the specific distortions associated with AIGVs,
such as spatial artifacts, temporal inconsistencies, and misalignment between generated content and text prompts. For
evaluation of AIGVs, some metrics such as Inception Score
(IS) [52] and Fréchet Video Distance (FVD) [61] have
been widely used, which are computed over distributions of
videos and may not reflect the human preference for an individual video. Moreover, these metrics mainly evaluate the
fidelity of videos, while failing to assess the text-video correspondence. Vision-language pre-training models, such as
CLIPScore [22], BLIPScore [37], and AestheticScore [53]
are frequently employed to evaluate the alignment between
generated videos and their text prompts. However, these
models mainly consider the text-video alignment at the image level, while ignoring the dynamic diversity and motion
consistency of visual elements that are crucial to the videoviewing experience.
In this paper, to facilitate the development of more comprehensive and precise metrics for evaluating AI-generated
videos, we present AIGVQA-DB, a large-scale VQA
dataset, including 36,576 AIGVs generated by 15 advanced
text-to-video models using 1,048 diverse prompts. An

18869

