This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mamba-Adaptor: State Space Model Adaptor for Visual Recognition
Fei Xie1

Jiahao Nie2 *

Yujin Tan1 Wenkang Zhang3
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Hangzhou Dianzi University
3
Southeast University

Hongshen Zhao3

jaffe0319@gmail.com, jhnie@hdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent State Space Models (SSM), especially Mamba, have
demonstrated impressive performance in visual modeling
and possess superior model efﬁciency. However, the application of Mamba to visual tasks suffers inferior performance due to three main constraints existing in the sequential model: 1) Casual computing is incapable of accessing global context; 2) Long-range forgetting when computing the current hidden states; 3) Weak spatial structural
modeling due to the transformed sequential input. To address these issues, we investigate a simple yet powerful vision task adapter for Mamba models, which consists of two
functional modules: Adaptor-T and Adapator-S. When solving the hidden states for SSM, we apply a lightweight prediction module Adaptor-T to select a set of learnable locations as memory augmentations to ease long-range forgetting issues. Moreover, we leverage Adapator-S, composed of multi-scale dilated convolutional kernels, to enhance the spatial modeling and introduce the image inductive bias into the feature output. Both modules can enlarge the context modeling in casual computing, as the output is enhanced by the inaccessible features. We explore
three usages of Mamba-Adaptor: A general visual backbone for various vision tasks; A booster module to raise
the performance of pretrained backbones; A highly efﬁcient
ﬁne-tuning module that adapts the base model for transfer learning tasks. Extensive experiments verify the effectiveness of Mamba-Adapter in three settings. Notably, our
Mamba-Adapter achieves state-of-the-art performance on
the ImageNet and COCO benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The architecture of Structured State Space Models
(SSMs) [13–15, 38] has gained popularity in language tasks
because of their efﬁciency in modeling long sequences. Re* Corresponding author.

Cls/Det/Seg

ImageNet, COCO,
ADE20K

Mamba-Adapter

Usage 1: Training from scratch as backbone network
Prior-knowledge
ImageNet

ImageNet

Vision Mamba

Mamba-Adapter

Large-scale
Cls

Usage 2: Continue to train as booster network
Prior-knowledge
ImageNet
CIFAR, SVNH,
Food101

Vision Mamba
Mamba-Adapter

Small-scale
Cls

Usage 3: Transfer learning as adaptor network

Figure 1. Our Mamba-Adaptor has multiple usages. It can serve
as a general visual backbone network, a booster module for pretrained backbone, and an adaptor for transfer learning.

cently, SSMs, especially the Mamba variant [13], have been
applied to vision tasks after the tremendous success of the
vision transformers [7, 33, 39, 49, 53, 55, 64, 67]. While
the Mamba-based visual models show potential in various
downstream tasks [62, 63, 65, 75], such as dense prediction [24, 32, 72, 78], image synthesis [6, 36], and generative tasks [8, 50, 66], the further application and adaptation
of Mamba models for the vision ﬁeld remain largely unexplored.
Despite the superior linear computation complexity with
respect to long token length, vision Mamba models have not
attained optimal performance in various vision tasks [30,
43, 61, 76] because of three inherent constraints in the SSM
mechanism. Firstly, the inherent RNN [20] mechanism of
SSM recurrently computes the next time step output using the previously stored memory, also dubbed as hidden
states. Thus, the casual computing pipeline is incapable
of accessing future output states, while the 2D visual data
is a non-casual style. Existing vision Mamba [78] mod-

20124

