This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning with Noisy Triplet Correspondence for Composed Image Retrieval‡
Shuxian Li1 ,* Changhao He1 ,* Xiting Liu2 ,

Joey Tianyi Zhou3,4 ,

Xi Peng1,5 ,

Peng Hu1†

1

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China. 2 Georgia Insitute of Technology, USA.
3
Centre for Frontier Al Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore.
4
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore.
5
National Key Laboratory of Fundamental Algorithms and Models for Engineering Simulation, China.

Abstract
Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) enables editable image search by integrating a query pair—a reference image
ref and a textual modification mod—to retrieve a target
image tar that reflects the intended change. While existing CIR methods have shown promising performance using well-annotated triplets ⟨ref, mod, tar⟩, almost all of
them implicitly assume these triplets are accurately associated with each other. In practice, however, this assumption is often violated due to the limited knowledge
of annotators, inevitably leading to incorrect textual modifications and resulting in a practical yet less-touched
problem: noisy triplet correspondence (NTC). To tackle
this challenge, we propose a Task-oriented Modification
Enhancement framework (TME) to learn robustly from
noisy triplets, which comprises three key modules: Robust
Fusion Query (RFQ), Pseudo Text Enhancement (PTE), and
Task-Oriented Prompt (TOP). Specifically, to mitigate the
adverse impact of noise, RFQ employs a sample selection
strategy to divide the training triplets into clean and noisy
sets, thus enhancing the reliability of the training data for
robust learning. To further leverage the noisy data instead
of discarding it, PTE unifies the triplet noise as an adapter
mismatch problem, thereby adjusting mod to align with
ref and tar in the mismatched triplet. Finally, TOP replaces ref in the clean set with a trainable prompt, which
is then concatenated with mod to form a query independent of the visual reference, aiming to mitigate visually
irrelevant noise. Extensive experiments on two domainspecific datasets demonstrate the robustness and superiority
of TME, particularly in noisy scenarios.

Manual annotation

🔥

web-scraped

Reference Image

Target Image

Image Encoder
Projection

“darker”

🔥

“is blue”

ViT
“have chimneys”

Visual variation

(a) Partial Matching

Reference Image

adapter

Target Image

Target Image

Reference Image

“ shorter length”
“shorter length”

“purple and pink”

“purple and pink”

web-scraped
web-scraped

(b) Incorrect Matching

(c) Modification Enhancement

Figure 1. The illustration of noisy triplet correspondence (NTC)
in CIR task (left) and our adapter enhancement strategy (right).
(a) Example from the CIRR dataset [21]: when mod in a triplet
only partially describes the variation from ref to mod, a partial
matching problem arises, resulting in partially matched triplets.
(b) Example from the FashionIQ dataset [40]: where the arrows
above and below represent two manually annotated modifications
within each triplet. When mod does not describe the features in
tar at all, it leads to an incorrect matching problem, resulting in
completely mismatched triplets. (c) Our key idea is to reframe
both types of noisy triplets as an adapter mismatch problem and
employ explicit modeling of visual variation to capture authentic
modifications, thereby facilitating the semantic alignment of the
adapter at the visual level.

1. Introduction

age or text) increasingly struggles to meet the diverse needs
of users [5, 33]. Recently, Composed Image Retrieval
(CIR) has emerged as a promising solution in this field, offering flexible image retrieval [36]. However, CIR faces
challenges in bridging the cross-modal gap while unifying
multimodal queries into common representations that accurately align with target images.
To address these challenges, various methods have been
proposed to improve the fusion and alignment processes,
primarily falling into two main categories. One straightforward approach is to project image-text pairs into com-

With the rise of e-commerce and the advancement of multimodal search engines, single-modality retrieval (e.g., im* The first two authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author: Peng Hu (penghu.ml@gmail.com).
‡ Code is available at https://github.com/CharlesNeilWilliams/TME.

19628

