This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AdaptCMVC: Robust Adaption to Incremental Views in
Continual Multi-view Clustering
Jing Wang1 , Songhe Feng1 *, Kristoffer Knutsen Wickstrøm2 , Michael C. Kampffmeyer2
1
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Department of Physics and Technology, UiT The Arctic University of Norway
{jing w,shfeng}@bjtu.edu.cn, {kristoffer.k.wickstrom, michael.c.kampffmeyer}@uit.no

Abstract
Most Multi-view Clustering approaches assume that all
views are available for clustering. However, this assumption is often unrealistic as views are incrementally accumulated over time, leading to a need for continual multi-view
clustering (CMVC) methods. Current approaches to CMVC
leverage late fusion-based approaches, where a new model
is typically learned individually for each view to obtain the
corresponding partition matrix, and then used to update a
consensus matrix via a moving average. These approaches
are prone to view-specific noise and struggle to adapt to
large gaps between different views. To address these shortcomings, we reconsider CMVC from the perspective of domain adaptation and propose AdaptCMVC, which learns
how to incrementally accumulate knowledge of new views
as they become available and prevents catastrophic forgetting. Specifically, a self-training framework is introduced to
extend the model to new views, particularly designed to be
robust to view-specific noise. Further, to combat catastrophic
forgetting, a structure alignment mechanism is proposed to
enable the model to explore the global group structure across
multiple views. Experiments on several multi-view benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method
on the CMVC task. The code is available at: AdaptCMVC.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, more and more data originating from multiple views, or multiple modalities offer plentiful information for multi-view applications, such as cross-modal image retrieval [56], visual question answering [8], and multimodal 3D object detection [26]. As a cornerstone of multiview learning, Multi-View Clustering (MVC) aims to discover underlying groups of data by leveraging the complementary information from multiple views. Existing multiview clustering algorithms can be classified into four pop* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Graphical comparison between the existing CMVC
paradigm and our proposed AdaptCMVC.

ular paradigms, including multi-view subspace clustering
(MVSC) [43, 45, 50, 57, 62], multi-view graph clustering (MVGC) [9, 38, 51, 52], multiple kernel clustering
(MKC) [22, 53], and deep multi-view clustering (DMVC)
[20, 22, 40, 41].
Although the current multi-view clustering algorithms
[59, 61] have achieved excellent performance, they normally
focus on clustering static multi-view data [24], which is unrealistic in many real-life settings. In many practical scenarios,
different views of data arise in a continuous, incremental
manner, where the number of views is unfixed and only the
data of the current session can be accessed. For instance, in a
medical diagnostic scenario, due to limitations in a patient’s
physical condition or medical equipment availability, different types of multimodal data (such as MRI, CT, and X-ray)
are often collected at separate stages throughout the examination process. Similarly, in federated learning, data from
edge devices are used exclusively for local model training,
helping to prevent potential data breaches. In these cases,
when a new view arrives, existing MVC methods need access to all historical views of the data in order to reuse them
with the new view in order to retrain the model. This leads to
high time and space complexity and can violate data privacy
regulations. Thus, these methods struggle when deployed to
continual multi-view clustering.

10285

