This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LinGen: Towards High-Resolution Minute-Length Text-to-Video Generation
with Linear Computational Complexity
Hongjie Wang1 *, Chih-Yao Ma2 , Yen-Cheng Liu2 , Ji Hou2 , Tao Xu2 , Jialiang Wang2 , Felix Juefei-Xu2 ,
Yaqiao Luo2 , Peizhao Zhang2 , Tingbo Hou2 , Peter Vajda2 , Niraj K. Jha1 , Xiaoliang Dai2
1
Princeton University, 2 Meta

Abstract
Text-to-video generation enhances content creation but
is highly computationally intensive: The computational cost
of Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) scales quadratically in the
number of pixels. This makes minute-length video generation extremely expensive, limiting most existing models to
generating videos of only 10-20 seconds length. We propose a Linear-complexity text-to-video Generation (LinGen) framework whose cost scales linearly in the number
of pixels. For the first time, LinGen enables high-resolution
minute-length video generation on a single GPU without
compromising quality. It replaces the computationallydominant and quadratic-complexity block, self-attention,
with a linear-complexity block called MATE, which consists of an MA-branch and a TE-branch. The MA-branch
targets short-to-long-range correlations, combining a bidirectional Mamba2 block with our token rearrangement
method, Rotary Major Scan, and our review tokens developed for long video generation. The TE-branch is a novel
TEmporal Swin Attention block that focuses on temporal
correlations between adjacent tokens and medium-range tokens. The MATE block addresses the adjacency preservation issue of Mamba and improves the consistency of
generated videos significantly. Experimental results show
that LinGen outperforms DiT (with a 75.6% win rate) in
video quality with up to 15× (11.5×) FLOPs (latency) reduction. Furthermore, both automatic metrics and human
evaluation demonstrate that our LinGen-4B yields comparable video quality to state-of-the-art models (with a 50.5%,
52.1%, 49.1% win rate with respect to Gen-3, LumaLabs,
and Kling, respectively). This paves the way for hour-length
movie generation and real-time interactive video generation. Project website: https://lineargen.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Diffusion Models (DMs) [12, 42] have exhibited superior
performance on various generative tasks, including image
* Work was partly done during an internship at Meta.

generation [5, 31, 36, 38], image editing [4, 16, 39, 56],
3D shape generation [25, 45], and video generation [1, 9,
32, 59]. Among them, high-resolution text-to-video generation is widely regarded as one of the most challenging tasks
due to two key factors: (1) the immense complexity of predicting the values of hundreds of millions of pixels and (2)
the human eye’s acute sensitivity to inconsistencies across
frames. Sora [1] and Movie Gen [32] achieve highly consistent video generation by scaling Diffusion Transformers
(DiTs) [30] to tens of billions of parameters. However,
the computational cost of DiTs scales quadratically in the
resolution and length of generated videos, making it extremely expensive to generate long videos and limiting the
raw video length of most existing models to 10-20 seconds.
Numerous existing studies have focused on improving
the efficiency of video generation. This can be categorized into two approaches: (1) sampling distillation [20, 49],
which reduces the number of sampling steps, and (2) efficient architectural designs that lower the computational
cost of each sampling step, which includes factorized attention [2, 48] and State Space Models (SSMs) [8, 28].
However, they either retain quadratic complexity or are
restricted to generating low-resolution, short videos. It
is challenging to perform high-resolution long video generation solely based on the linear-complexity SSMs like
Mamba [10], due to its adjacency preservation issue [8].
Mamba was originally designed for language tasks, where
the inputs are natively sequences. When it is adapted to the
vision modality, rearranging 2D (images) or 3D (videos)
tensors into a 1D sequence becomes a necessity. This rearrangement causes spatially and temporally adjacent tokens to become distant in the sequence. This significantly
hurts the quality of generated images and videos [14] due
to the inherent decay when Mamba calculates long-range
correlations [10]. Although more sophisticated rearrangement methods [11, 14, 35] could alleviate this issue, they
can hardly ensure consistency across frames when scaled to
high-resolution long video generation.
To address the above challenge, we propose a Linearcomplexity text-to-video Generation (LinGen) frame-

2578

