This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unlearning through Knowledge Overwriting: Reversible Federated Unlearning
via Selective Sparse Adapter
Zhengyi Zhong1 , Weidong Bao1 , Ji Wang1 *, Shuai Zhang1 , Jingxuan Zhou1 ,
Lingjuan Lyu2 , Wei Yang Bryan Lim3
1
Laboratory for Big Data and Decision, National University of Defense Technology, China.
2
Sony AI, Japan.3 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
{zhongzhengyi20, wdbao, wangji, zhangshuai20, zhoujingxuan}@nudt.edu.cn,
lingjuanlvsmile@gmail.com, bryan.limwy@ntu.edu.sg
https://github.com/Zhong-Zhengyi/FUSED-Code

Abstract
Federated Learning is a promising paradigm for privacypreserving collaborative model training. In practice, it is
essential not only to continuously train the model to acquire new knowledge but also to guarantee old knowledge
the right to be forgotten (i.e., federated unlearning), especially for privacy-sensitive information or harmful knowledge. However, current federated unlearning methods face
several challenges, including indiscriminate unlearning of
cross-client knowledge, irreversibility of unlearning, and
significant unlearning costs. To this end, we propose a
method named FUSED, which first identifies critical layers by analyzing each layer’s sensitivity to knowledge and
constructs sparse unlearning adapters for sensitive ones.
Then, the adapters are trained without altering the original parameters, overwriting the unlearning knowledge with
the remaining knowledge. This knowledge overwriting process enables FUSED to mitigate the effects of indiscriminate unlearning. Moreover, the introduction of independent adapters makes unlearning reversible and significantly
reduces the unlearning costs. Finally, extensive experiments on three datasets across various unlearning scenarios demonstrate that FUSED’s effectiveness is comparable
to Retraining, surpassing all other baselines while greatly
reducing unlearning costs.

1. Introduction
Background. Federated Learning (FL) [25, 30, 46] has
emerged as a promising paradigm for privacy-preserving
collaborative model training. In practice, FL models need
to acquire new knowledge continuously while also ensuring
* Corresponding Author: Ji Wang

the “right to be forgotten” for previously used training data
[12, 37]. For example, a year after the launch of ChatGPT,
The New York Times accused OpenAI and Microsoft of the
unauthorized use of its media data for training, demanding that they delete the acquired knowledge from its models [10]. Furthermore, malicious clients may inject harmful
data during training, potentially poisoning the global model.
As a result, it is crucial for the global model to eliminate
such harmful knowledge. This leads to the concept of Federated Unlearning (FU).
Challenges. In the field of FU, two primary categories
of methods have emerged: retraining-based methods [29]
and model manipulation-based methods [38]. Among these,
retraining-based methods are widely regarded as the stateof-the-art (SoTA) for achieving model unlearning. This approach involves removing the data designated for unlearning and retraining the model from scratch until convergence.
Conversely, model manipulation methods modify the model
directly using techniques such as gradient ascent, knowledge distillation, and setting parameters. However, existing
methods still face several challenges:
• Indiscriminate unlearning: In scenarios where knowledge overlaps occur among clients, traditional methods
indiscriminately remove shared knowledge during the unlearning process, leading to a substantial decline in the
performance of other clients.
• Irreversible unlearning: In FL systems, clients’ unlearning requests may change dynamically. When a client
no longer needs to forget certain knowledge, traditional
methods cannot recover that memory quickly.
• Significant unlearning costs: The retraining-based
method requires multiple iterations, resulting in significant computational and communication costs. Even simple adjustments to model parameters can demand a significant amount of storage as a compensatory cost.

30661

