This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detecting Open World Objects via Partial Attribute Assignment
final version for camera ready, style aligned

Muli Yang1 Gabriel James Goenawan1 Huaiyuan Qin1 Kai Han2 Xi Peng3 Yanhua Yang4 Hongyuan Zhu1†
1

Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), A*STAR, Singapore
2
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR 3 Sichuan University, China 4 Xidian University, China
{yangml, goenawan, qinhy, zhuh}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, kaihanx@hku.hk, pengxi@scu.edu.cn, yanhyang@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

“umbrella-like”

Despite being trained on massive data, today’s vision foundation models still fall short in detecting open world objects. Apart from recognizing known objects from training,
a successful Open World Object Detection (OWOD) system
must also be able to detect unknown objects never seen before, without confusing them with the backgrounds. Unlike
prevailing prior works that rely on probability models to
learn “objectness”, we focus on learning fine-grained, classagnostic attributes, allowing the detection of both known
and unknown objects in an explainable manner. In this paper,
we propose Partial Attribute Assignment (PASS), aiming to
automatically select and optimize a small, relevant subset of
attributes from a large attribute pool. Specifically, we model
attribute selection as a Partial Optimal Transport (POT)
problem between known visual objects and the attribute pool,
in which more relevant attributes signify more transported
mass. PASS follows a curriculum schedule that progressively
selects and optimizes a targeted subset of attributes during training, promoting stability and accuracy. Our method
enjoys end-to-end optimization by minimizing the POT distance and the classification loss on known visual objects,
demonstrating high training efficiency and superior OWOD
performance among extensive experimental evaluations.‡

“u m

b re

lla

-l i k

(a)

“l o

n

a
g -h

nd

e”

le ”

“transparent”
Known Objects

Unknown Objects

(b)

… protective elegant

yellow transparent elliptic sweet hexagonal …

Figure 1. The role of attributes in Open World Object Detection
(OWOD). (a) Unknown objects can be detected via shared visual/
functional attributes with known objects. (b) Our method is able
to automatically identify and optimize a small subset of relevant
attributes from a large pool, effectively enabling the detection of
both known and unknown objects.

1. Introduction
Deep learning and foundation models have emerged as critical AI technologies [1, 55], impacting various aspects of
modern life. However, their success has been largely based
on the closed-world assumption, which presumes a static and
well-defined environment [76]. In practice, this assumption
is difficult to uphold, as real-world conditions are dynamic
and unpredictable, with unforeseen situations and unseen
objects regularly appearing. Open World Object Detection
(OWOD) [22] has emerged as a remedy to deliver reliable
detection in the face of new environments with unknown ob-

jects. In addition to recognizing known objects that appeared
in training, a successful OWOD system must also detect and
continually learn previously unseen objects without mistakenly classifying them as backgrounds.
Recent works mainly use probability distribution estimation to model the “objectness” information, i.e., the probability of a candidate proposal being an object rather than
backgrounds [79]. In this way, OWOD can be decomposed
into two sub-tasks that respectively focus on objectness estimation and known class recognition [54]. Although this
approach has significantly improved the detection of unknown objects, it has certain limitations in explainability
and ambiguity. On the one hand, the learned probabilistic

† Corresponding author. ‡ Code: https://github.com/muliyangm/PASS

20318

