This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EBS-EKF: Accurate and High Frequency Event-based Star Tracking
Albert W. Reed,* Connor Hashemi,* Dennis Melamed,* Nitesh Menon, Keigo Hirakawa†, and Scott McCloskey
Kitware
connor.hashemi@kitware.com

University of Dayton†
keigo.hirakawa@udayton.edu

a) Novel Event-based
Star Centroiding

b) Synchronized Event Camera and
APS Test Platform
Night Sky

345°

APS Pixels

RA

Existing
Centroiding
Techniques

c) Performance Comparison on Our
Contributed Dataset

298°
65°
Dec

True
Our
Centroid
Centroiding
Technique

CMOS APS
Star Tracker

Event Pixels
APS Measurements
Ng et al.
Proposed

53°

Tilt/Pan
Motorized
Stage

EVK4-HD
Event
Camera

Roll

-70°

Positive Events
Negative Events

-74°
0

seconds

40

Figure 1. We present EBS-EKF, an event-based star tracking algorithm that combines a novel centroiding technique with an extended
Kalman filter and is validated using the first ground-truthed dataset of event streams from real stars. (a) Our centroiding technique accounts
for event camera behavior in low light, enabling more accurate tracking. (b) We develop a data collection setup of a EVK4-HD event
camera that is rigidly mounted and synchronized with a space-ready APS star tracker. The insets show APS (top) and event camera
(bottom) pixels for 8 Cygni, a subgiant star in the constellation Cygnus. (c) We demonstrate that our attitude estimates (red) are more
accurate than existing methods (purple) [29], and that we can operate above the 3 deg/sec cutoff of the APS star tracker, highlighting the
utility of our method for high-frequency star tracking.

Abstract

nal modeling and state estimation, while providing more
frequent updates and greater motion tolerance than conventional APS trackers. We provide all code* and the first
dataset of events synchronized with APS solutions.

Event-based sensors (EBS) are a promising new technology for star tracking due to their low latency and power
efficiency, but prior work has thus far been evaluated exclusively in simulation with simplified signal models. We
propose a novel algorithm for event-based star tracking,
grounded in an analysis of the EBS circuit and an extended
Kalman filter (EKF). We quantitatively evaluate our method
using real night sky data, comparing its results with those
from a space-ready active-pixel sensor (APS) star tracker.
We demonstrate that our method is an order-of-magnitude
more accurate than existing methods due to improved sig-

1. Introduction
Star trackers estimate the precise attitude — right ascension
(RA), declination (Dec), and roll — of a camera with respect to the celestial coordinate frame, making them a standard sensor for space navigation. Compared to other sensors, star trackers provide highly accurate measurements,

* Denotes equal contribution.

* https://gitlab.kitware.com/nest-public/kw ebs star tracking#

6510

