This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spectral Informed Mamba for Robust Point Cloud Processing
Ali Bahri *
Moslem Yazdanpanah
Mehrdad Noori
Sahar Dastani
Milad Cheraghalikhani
Gustavo Adolfo Vargas Hakim
David Osowiechi
Farzad Beizaee
Ismail Ben Ayed
Christian Desrosiers
LIVIA, ÉTS Montréal, Canada
International Laboratory on Learning Systems (ILLS)

Abstract

Start

State Space Models (SSMs) have shown significant promise
in Natural Language Processing (NLP) and, more recently,
computer vision. This paper introduces a new methodology that leverages Mamba and Masked Autoencoder (MAE)
networks for point-cloud data in both supervised and selfsupervised learning. We propose three key contributions to
enhance Mamba’s capability in processing complex pointcloud structures. First, we exploit the spectrum of a
graph Laplacian to capture patch connectivity, defining an
isometry-invariant traversal order that is robust to viewpoints and captures shape manifolds better than traditional
3D grid-based traversals. Second, we adapt segmentation via a recursive patch partitioning strategy informed by
Laplacian spectral components, allowing finer integration
and segment analysis. Third, we address token placement in
MAE for Mamba by restoring tokens to their original positions, which preserves essential order and improves learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate the improvements
that our approach brings over state-of-the-art baselines in
classification, segmentation, and few-shot tasks. The implementation is available at: https://github.com/
AliBahri94/SI-Mamba.git.

End
a

b

c

Figure 1. (a) Surface-Aware Spectral Traversing (SAST) applied
to the patched point clouds of a mesh surface. (b) Traversal from
left to right, based on the first to fourth non-constant smallest
eigenvectors. (c) Traversal based on the largest eigenvector, forming a non-continuous sequence of tokens.

1. Introduction

are particularly well suited for the unordered nature of point
clouds. However, the quadratic complexity of this mechanism, requiring the computation of a weight between each
pair of tokens, impedes the application of these networks to
large-sized inputs (e.g., 2D images or 3D point clouds represented by many patches). This has prompted researchers
to explore more efficient solutions, including the Set Transformer [24], Sparse Transformer [7], Longformer [4] and
Sinkhorn Transformer [43].
Recently, methods based on Structured State Space Sequence (S4) [16] such as Mamba [14] have gained significant traction as a more efficient alternative to Transformers [29, 60]. So far, very few studies have investigated the
potential of S4 approaches such as Mamba for 3D point
clouds. Existing methods like Point-Mamba [26] and PCM
[57] extend the 2D grid-based traversal used for images to a
3D grid. However, this straightforward adaptation to point
clouds suffers from three crucial problems. First: whereas
patches from 2D images have adjacency information, which
could be exploited by the grid-based traversal, the 3D point
patches in point clouds offer a sparse representation of the
object’s surface, and nearby patches on a 3D grid are not
necessarily adjacent on this surface. Second: in the absence of self-attention, task-specific performance is highly
influenced by the nature of the token traversal strategy. For
example, a traversal suitable for point cloud classification
may not be effective for a local task such as point-level classification (i.e., segmentation). Third: due to the “directionsensitive” nature of Mamba, the self-supervised MAE pre-

The analysis of 3D point cloud data is fundamental for various applications, including autonomous driving [36, 41],
VR/AR [18], and robotics [39]. Compared to the organized structure of 2D images, point clouds consist of 3D
coordinates without direct adjacency information forming
an unordered bag. In recent years, considerable efforts have
been dedicated to adapt deep learning models such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and Transformers to this
type of data [2, 3, 32, 35, 54, 55]. Due to their permutationinvariant self-attention mechanism, Transformer networks
* Correspondence to ali.bahri.1@ens.etsmtl.ca

11799

