This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Synthetic-to-Real Self-supervised Robust Depth Estimation
via Learning with Motion and Structure Priors
Weilong Yan1

Ming Li3

Haipeng Li4

Shuwei Shao5

Robby T. Tan1,2

1

2
National University of Singapore
ASUS Intelligent Cloud Services
3
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ)
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
5
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University

yanweilong@u.nus.edu

Abstract
Self-supervised depth estimation from monocular cameras
in diverse outdoor conditions, such as daytime, rain, and
nighttime, is challenging due to the difficulty of learning
universal representations and the severe lack of labeled
real-world adverse data. Previous methods either rely on
synthetic inputs and pseudo-depth labels or directly apply
daytime strategies to adverse conditions, resulting in suboptimal results. In this paper, we present the first syntheticto-real robust depth estimation framework, incorporating
motion and structure priors to capture real-world knowledge effectively. In the synthetic adaptation, we transfer
motion-structure knowledge inside cost volumes for better
robust representation, using a frozen daytime model to train
a depth estimator in synthetic adverse conditions. In the innovative real adaptation, which targets to fix synthetic-real
gaps, models trained earlier identify the weather-insensitive
regions with a designed consistency-reweighting strategy to
emphasize valid pseudo-labels. We introduce a new regularization by gathering explicit depth distribution to constrain the model facing real-world data. Experiments show
that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art across diverse conditions in multi-frame and single-frame evaluations. We achieve improvements of 7.5% and 4.3% in AbsRel and RMSE on average for nuScenes and Robotcar
datasets (daytime, nighttime, rain). In zero-shot evaluation
of DrivingStereo (rain, fog), our method generalizes better
than previous ones. The code is at Syn2Real-Depth.

Figure 1. Visual comparison between the previous [8] and ours.
The first and second rows correspond to nighttime and rain, where
ours provides more robust estimations especially for the vehicles.

1. Introduction

of obtaining reliable ground truth, self-supervised methods focusing on photometric and geometric consistency
[4, 10, 20, 31, 32, 39, 42, 48] have been developed to reduce
dependence on expensive hardware. Early self-supervised
methods perform depth inference on single images [10, 48],
while recent multi-frame methods [3, 6, 12, 33, 34] for
monocular videos achieve improved accuracy. However,
these methods generally assume daytime conditions, limiting their generalizability to various adverse scenarios.
Predicting depth in adverse conditions within a single
model faces two major challenges: (1) the diverse types
of degradation make it difficult to learn a unified representation; (2) the lack of labeled real data makes it difficult to learn in adverse conditions in the real world. To
overcome these challenges, many methods are designed for
depth estimation in adverse conditions within an unsupervised domain adaptive (UDA) manner [8, 22, 25, 28, 29].
They aim to adapt knowledge from daytime to different adverse conditions and can be divided into single-condition
and multi-condition categories. Single-condition methods
[23, 26, 30, 44] focus on a particular case (e.g., nighttime)
with specific designs, but are quite limited to work under
multiple conditions in real-world applications. Some methods [18, 27] aim to address both daytime and nighttime
conditions but exhibit limited performance across these do-

Depth estimation from monocular cameras is a fundamental
task in computer vision, essential for applications such as
autonomous driving, robotics, and closely connected with
segmentation [40]. Due to the high cost and difficulty

21880

