This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Automated Generation of Challenging Multiple-Choice Questions for
Vision Language Model Evaluation
Yuhui Zhang1 * Yuchang Su2→ Yiming Liu2 Xiaohan Wang1 James Burgess1
Elaine Sui1 Chenyu Wang3 Josiah Aklilu1 Alejandro Lozano1 Anjiang Wei1
Ludwig Schmidt1† Serena Yeung-Levy1†
1
Stanford University 2 Tsinghua University 3 MIT
Abstract
The rapid development of vision language models
(VLMs) demands rigorous and reliable evaluation. However, current visual question answering (VQA) benchmarks
often depend on open-ended questions, making accurate
evaluation difficult due to the variability in natural language responses. To address this, we introduce AutoConverter, an agentic framework that automatically converts these open-ended questions into multiple-choice format, enabling objective evaluation while reducing the costly
multiple-choice question creation process. Our experiments
demonstrate that AutoConverter can generate correct and
challenging multiple-choice questions, with VLMs demonstrating consistently similar or lower accuracy on these
questions compared to human-created ones. Using AutoConverter, we construct VMCBench, a benchmark created by transforming 20 existing VQA datasets into a unified multiple-choice format, totaling 9,018 questions. We
comprehensively evaluate 33 state-of-the-art VLMs on VMCBench, setting a new standard for scalable, consistent,
and reproducible VLM evaluation.

are in open-ended format [10, 23] because of the complexity and extensive resources required to design high-quality
multiple-choice questions.
We revisit current evaluation strategies for open-ended
questions, focusing on the challenge of measuring semantic similarity between model-generated and ground-truth
answers (§3). Two main evaluation methods exist: rulebased, which evaluates word or phrase level overlap, and
model-based, which uses large language models (e.g., GPT4o) for semantic matching. While rule-based evaluation is
computationally efficient, our experiments on the VQAv2
dataset [13] demonstrate that it fails to capture semantic
nuances and formatting differences, yielding a poor correlation (0.09) with true VLM performance. In contrast,
model-based metrics, though more semantically accurate,
are costly and unstable — updates in model versions (e.g.,
GPT-4o from 0513 to 0806) constantly increase scores by
6% on the MMVet dataset [58], making results incomparable and raising future reproducibility issues.
To mitigate these issues, we propose an alternative for
VLM evaluation by converting open-ended VQA questions
into multiple-choice format. This shift allows for more objective and reproducible assessment by providing defined
options and simplifying answer validation. Nonetheless,
creating multiple-choice questions is inherently complex,
particularly in generating distractor options that are plausible yet challenging given the correct answer — a process
traditionally requiring extensive human expertise and effort
to simulate different errors students could make.
We introduce AutoConverter (§4), a novel multi-agent
system powered by GPT-4o, designed to automatically
convert open-ended questions into challenging yet correct
multiple-choice questions. To enhance difficulty, specialized distractor proposer agents collaborate with a reviewer
agent in an iterative manner to generate a large pool of
challenging distractors focused on common error types, including conceptual misunderstandings, visual misinterpretations, and reasoning errors. A selector agent then chooses
the most challenging distractors. To ensure correctness, a

1. Introduction
With the rapid advancements in vision language models
(VLMs) [2, 27, 40, 51], rigorous and reliable evaluation
methods are critical to gauge model performance and guide
further research. Visual question answering (VQA) has
emerged as a standard evaluation protocol, typically structured with open-ended or multiple-choice questions. Openended questions [13, 35, 58] allow models to generate freeform, natural language responses, while multiple-choice
questions [31, 47, 59] ask models to choose the answer
from predefined options. Most existing VQA benchmarks
† Equal advising.
contribution.
Correspondence to:
{yuhuiz,suyc,ludwigsc,syyeung}@stanford.edu.
Project page: https : / / yuhui - zh15 . github . io /
AutoConverter-Website/.
* Equal

29580

