This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Bijective Surface Parameterization for Inferring Signed Distance
Functions from Sparse Point Clouds with Grid Deformation
Chao Chen1∗
Junsheng Zhou1 Weiqi Zhang1
1†
Yu-Shen Liu
Zhizhong Han2
1
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
Takeshi Noda1 *

{yeth24,zhou-js24,zwq23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
chenchao19@tsinghua.org.cn

liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

h312h@wayne.edu

Inferring signed distance functions (SDFs) from sparse
point clouds remains a challenge in surface reconstruction. The key lies in the lack of detailed geometric information in sparse point clouds, which is essential for learning a continuous field. To resolve this issue, we present a
novel approach that learns a dynamic deformation network
to predict SDFs in an end-to-end manner. To parameterize a continuous surface from sparse points, we propose
a bijective surface parameterization (BSP) that learns the
global shape from local patches. Specifically, we construct
a bijective mapping for sparse points from the parametric
domain to 3D local patches, integrating patches into the
global surface. Meanwhile, we introduce grid deformation optimization (GDO) into the surface approximation to
optimize the deformation of grid points and further refine
the parametric surfaces. Experimental results on synthetic
and real scanned datasets demonstrate that our method
significantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art methods. Project page: https://takeshie.github.
io/Bijective-SDF

SDFs learned from dense point clouds are continuous and
complete, which allow us to obtain robust isosurfaces of
discrete scalar fields using the Marching-cubes algorithm
[33]. However, when confronted with sparse point clouds,
current approaches fail to accurately predict a signed distance field around the surface, impacting their performance
on the real-world scenario where only sparse point clouds
are available.
Previous works [13, 22, 40, 46] which infer the SDFs
from raw point clouds typically require ground truth signed
distances or dense point clouds as supervision. With sparse
point clouds, current state-of-the-art methods [3] obtain
shape priors from large scale supervision to handle the
sparsity. Although prior-based methods can leverage datadriven information to infer SDFs with simple topological
structures, they still struggle to deal with real-world diverse
sparse inputs containing complex geometries. Some methods learn self-supervised priors from sparse point clouds to
maintain the shape integrity [8, 43]. However, these approaches still do not work well with sparse points, making
it remain challenging to recover the complete geometries.
To address this issue, we propose Bijective Surface Parameterization (BSP) for learning a continuous global surface. Unlike previous approaches, we construct a continuous bijective mapping between the canonical spherical parametric domain and the 3D space. For each 3D point, we
transform it into a code on the sphere manifold in the parameter space, and then regard the code as a center to densify
the patch it locates by sampling more codes on the sphere.
With the learned BSP, we transform each densified patch in
the parameter space back into 3D space, leading to a 3D
shape with denser points. Compared to methods which directly upsample a global shape, we train local patches with
a shared network to recover more details on patches.
Based on the densified points, we propose a Grid Deformation Optimization (GDO) strategy to estimate the SDFs.

1. Introduction
Surface reconstruction from 3D point clouds is an important
task in 3D computer vision. Continuous surfaces are widely
used in downstream applications, such as autonomous driving, VR, and robotics. With the development of deep
learning [2, 17, 18, 27, 50, 68, 72, 73], significant breakthroughs have been made in learning signed distance functions (SDFs) to represent continuous surfaces [12, 24]. The
* Equal contribution. † The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. This
work was partially supported by Deep Earth Probe and Mineral Resources Exploration — National Science and Technology Major Project
(2024ZD1003405), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(62272263).

22139

