This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LIRM: Large Inverse Rendering Model for Progressive Reconstruction of Shape,
Materials and View-dependent Radiance Fields
Zhengqin Li1 Dilin Wang1 Ka Chen1 Zhaoyang Lv1 Thu Nguyen-Phuoc1 Milim Lee1 Jia-Bin Huang12
Lei Xiao1 Yufeng Zhu1 Carl S. Marshall1 Yuheng Ren1 Richard Newcombe1 Zhao Dong1
1
2
Meta Reality Labs
University of Maryland, College Park
1st set
LIRM
transformer

Albedo

Normal

Metallic

Roughness

mth set
Real input images

Progressive
reconstruction

View-dependent radiance fields

Materials and geometry

Relighting

Figure 1. Given small sets of images (e.g., 4 to 8), LIRM progressively reconstructs view-dependent radiance fields, geometry and material
reflectance in less than a second through a feed-forward transformer, enabling realistic rendering under novel lighting conditions.

Abstract

has numerous important industrial applications in gaming,
film, architecture, robotics, and AR/VR. Recent advancements in neural 3D representations [32, 53, 59, 60] and generative modeling [26, 70] have led to the development of
more robust and efficient inverse rendering methods. These
advancements help democratize 3D content creation. Modern inverse rendering methods [5–7, 19, 24, 29, 30, 46,
61, 68, 72, 91, 97, 98, 102–104] can jointly reconstruct
shape, materials and even lighting from multiple images
captured in arbitrary natural illuminations with reasonable
accuracy. This is often achieved by minimizing a rendering loss through a carefully designed optimization process.
This is a great step forward from traditional measurementbased methods [14, 56, 57] that require specialized devices and highly constrained environments. However, these
optimization-based methods still suffer from long reconstruction time and require densely captured images. They
also lack inductive bias to disambiguate lighting, materials
and geometry, which often causes shadows and highlights
to be baked into reconstructed materials.

We present Large Inverse Rendering Model (LIRM), a transformer architecture that jointly reconstructs high-quality
shape, materials, and radiance fields with view-dependent
effects in less than a second. Our model builds upon the
recent Large Reconstruction Models (LRMs) that achieve
state-of-the-art sparse-view reconstruction quality. However, existing LRMs struggle to reconstruct unseen parts
accurately and cannot recover glossy appearance or generate relightable 3D contents that can be consumed by standard Graphics engines. To address these limitations, we
make three key technical contributions to build a more practical multi-view 3D reconstruction framework. First, we
introduce an update model that allows us to progressively
add more input views to improve our reconstruction. Second, we propose a hexa-plane neural SDF representation
to better recover detailed textures, geometry and material
parameters. Third, we develop a novel neural directionalembedding mechanism to handle view-dependent effects.
Trained on a large-scale shape and material dataset with a
tailored coarse-to-fine training scheme, our model achieves
compelling results. It compares favorably to optimizationbased dense-view inverse rendering methods in terms of geometry and relighting accuracy, while requiring only a fraction of the inference time.

We present Large Inverse Rendering Model (LIRM), the
first feed-forward transformer that takes less than 1 second to jointly reconstruct high-quality shape, materials,
and view-dependent radiance fields of a full 3D object. It
can achieve this from as few as 3 to 6 posed images captured in arbitrary, unconstrained environments. Without increasing GPU memory consumption, LIRM can progressively refine its prediction results by incorporating additional input views, allowing for the addition of missing textures and specular highlights in previously unseen regions
or from novel view angles. Inverse rendering from sparse
inputs is an extremely ill-posed problem. State-of-the-art

1. Introduction
High-quality reconstruction of shape and materials from
multi-view images, often referred to as inverse rendering,
is a fundamental challenge in computer vision research. It

505

