This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DoF-Gaussian: Controllable Depth-of-Field for 3D Gaussian Splatting
Liao Shen1,2 Tianqi Liu1,2 Huiqiang Sun1,2 Jiaqi Li1 Zhiguo Cao1 Wei Li2 * Chen Change Loy2
1
School of AIA, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
leoshen@hust.edu.cn

Shallow
DoF Inputs

Change aperture size and focus distance

DoF-Gaussian
(Ours)

DoF-NeRF

BAGS

Ours

Change camera poses and zoom-in

Change aperture shape

Figure 1. Given a set of multi-view input images with shallow DoF, DoF-Gaussian can reconstruct a 3D-GS representation of a sharp
scene. Thanks to our lens-based design, we can also achieve controllable DoF effects for a variety of applications. The example input
images are taken from [55] for illustration purposes. (Zoom-in for best view)

Abstract

able at https://dof-gaussian.github.io/.

Recent advances in 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) have
shown remarkable success in representing 3D scenes and
generating high-quality, novel views in real-time. However,
3D-GS and its variants assume that input images are captured based on pinhole imaging and are fully in focus. This
assumption limits their applicability, as real-world images
often feature shallow depth-of-field (DoF). In this paper,
we introduce DoF-Gaussian, a controllable depth-of-field
method for 3D-GS. We develop a lens-based imaging model
based on geometric optics principles to control DoF effects.
To ensure accurate scene geometry, we incorporate depth
priors adjusted per scene, and we apply defocus-to-focus
adaptation to minimize the gap in the circle of confusion.
We also introduce a synthetic dataset to assess refocusing
capabilities and the model’s ability to learn precise lens parameters. Our framework is customizable and supports various interactive applications. Extensive experiments confirm the effectiveness of our method. Our project is avail* Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Depth-of-field (DoF) refers to the distance between the
closest and farthest objects in a photo that appears acceptably sharp. In practice, photographers can control the DoF
by adjusting the camera’s aperture size or focus distance
to capture images with either a wide DoF (all-in-focus) or
shallow DoF (defocused). The shallow DoF effect is an important technique in photography, as it draws the viewers’
attention to the focal region by blurring the surrounding areas. Meanwhile, novel view synthesis aims to create realistic images from novel viewpoints based on a set of source
images. However, novel view synthesis typically requires
all-in-focus input images and lacks the capability to render
varied DoF effects, limiting its applications. In this work,
we aim to render novel views with controllable DoF, adding
cinematic quality to the results.
Images captured from the real world sometimes have
shallow DoF. Specifically, points of light that do not lie on

26462

