This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedCALM: Conflict-aware Layer-wise Mitigation for
Selective Aggregation in Deeper Personalized Federated Learning

1

Hao Zheng1,2 , Zhigang Hu1 , Liu Yang1 *, Meiguang Zheng1 , Aikun Xu1 , Boyu Wang2 *
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada
{zhenghao, zghu, yangliu, zhengmeiguang, aikunxu}@csu.edu.cn; bwang@csd.uwo.ca

Abstract
Server aggregation conflict is a key challenge in personalized federated learning (PFL). While existing PFL methods
have achieved significant progress with shallow base models (e.g., four-layer CNNs), they often overlook the negative
impacts of deeper base models on personalization mechanisms. In this paper, we identify the phenomenon of deep
model degradation in PFL, where as base model depth increases, the model becomes more sensitive to local client
data distributions, thereby exacerbating server aggregation conflicts and ultimately reducing overall model performance. Moreover, we show that these conflicts manifest in
insufficient global average updates and mutual constraints
between clients. Motivated by our analysis, we proposed
a two-stage conflict-aware layer-wise mitigation algorithm
(FedCALM), which first constructs a conflict-free global update to alleviate negative conflicts, and then maximizes the
benefits of all clients through a conflict-aware strategy. Notably, our method naturally leads to a selective mechanism
that balances the tradeoff between clients involved in aggregation and the tolerance for conflicts. Consequently, it
can boost the positive contribution to the clients even with
the greatest conflicts with the global update. Extensive experiments across multiple datasets and deeper base models demonstrate that FedCALM outperforms four state-ofthe-art (SOTA) methods by up to 9.88% and seamlessly integrates into existing PFL methods with performance improvements of up to 9.01%.

(a) Accuracy Decline vs. Increasing Base Model Depth with four
SOTA PFL methods on the CIFAR10 Dataset.

(b) Increasing Conflict Rate vs. Increasing Base Model Depth across
three datasets using the FedRep method.

Figure 1. The impact on accuracy and conflict rate with increasing
base model depth in the four SOTA methods.

1. Introduction

rithms, while only uploading model parameters to the server
for aggregation and updates, thereby preserving privacy
[9, 18, 27, 46]. However, a key challenge in FL is the statistical heterogeneity of client data, specifically non-IID data
and class imbalance [6, 8, 12, 14, 34, 47]. This significantly
varied data distribution can cause the global model to deviate from local client, making it challenging to obtain a
single global model that generalizes well across all clients.
Existing PFL methods address statistical heterogeneity
in FL by balancing global collaboration with local personalization [5, 7, 38, 39]. The core idea is to tailor a per-

Federated Learning (FL) is an innovative decentralized
paradigm that facilitates collaborative training across multiple machine learning models [23, 26, 29, 36]. FL enables the extraction of client-specific data features and performs local training using various machine learning algo* Corresponding authors: Liu Yang, Boyu Wang

15444

