This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diff-Palm: Realistic Palmprint Generation with Polynomial Creases
and Intra-Class Variation Controllable Diffusion Models
Jianlong Jin1 *, Chenglong Zhao2 *, Ruixin Zhang2 , Sheng Shang1 , Jianqing Xu2 , Jingyun Zhang3 ,
ShaoMing Wang3 , Yang Zhao1 , Shouhong Ding2†, Wei Jia1†, Yunsheng Wu2
1

Hefei University of Technology, 2 Tencent Youtu Lab, 3 Tencent WeChat Pay Lab33
jianlong@mail.hfut.edu.cn, lornezhao@tencent.com

Figure 1. Comparison between PCE-Palm [20] and the proposed Diff-Palm. (a) PCE-Palm adopts conditional GAN with Bézier creases
[44] as input to generate palmprint datasets. Diff-Palm introduces a polynomial crease and a novel diffusion model for synthesizing datasets
with adjustable intra-class variations. (b) The average performance of recognition models, trained on three types of datasets (real data, PCEPalm generated, and Diff-Palm generated) and evaluated on five public datasets. (FT: Fine-tune) Code: https://github.com/Ukuer/Diff-Palm

Abstract
Palmprint recognition is significantly limited by the lack of
large-scale publicly available datasets. Previous methods
have adopted Bézier curves to simulate the palm creases,
which then serve as input for conditional GANs to generate realistic palmprints. However, without employing real
data fine-tuning, the performance of the recognition model
trained on these synthetic datasets would drastically decline, indicating a large gap between generated and real
palmprints. This is primarily due to the utilization of an inaccurate palm crease representation and challenges in balancing intra-class variation with identity consistency. To
address this, we introduce a polynomial-based palm crease
representation that provides a new palm crease generation
mechanism more closely aligned with the real distribution.
We also propose the palm creases conditioned diffusion
model with a novel intra-class variation control method. By
applying our proposed K-step noise-sharing sampling, we
are able to synthesize palmprint datasets with large intraclass variation and high identity consistency. Experimen-

tal results show that, for the first time, recognition models
trained solely on our synthetic datasets, without any finetuning, outperform those trained on real datasets. Furthermore, our approach achieves superior recognition performance as the number of generated identities increases.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

Palmprint recognition has gained widespread interest for
its highly discriminative, user-friendly, and privacy-friendly
nature [11]. However, its further development is severely
limited by the lack of large-scale public datasets. With
the remarkable results achieved by deep generative models,
such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [15] and
Diffusion models [18], generating datasets for recognition
tasks is a promising and valuable approach to replace the
collection of large-scale real datasets [21].
Although existing palmprint generation methods, including RPG-Palm [33] and PCE-Palm [20] have obtained impressive results, they still rely on fine-tuning with real data
to obtain good recognition performance. Specifically, they
generate large-scale data to pre-train the recognition mod-

26367

