This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Temporally Consistent Video Depth from Video Diffusion Priors
Jiahao Shao1* Yuanbo Yang1* Hongyu Zhou1 Youmin Zhang2, 6 Yujun Shen4
Vitor Guizilini5 Yue Wang3 Matteo Poggi2 Yiyi Liao1†
1

Zhejiang University
4
Ant Group

2

University of Bologna 3 University of Southern California
5
Toyota Research Institute 6 Rock Universe AI

Marigold

Input Video

Ours

Figure 1. We present ChronoDepth, a novel method derived from video diffusion model. It can estimate video depth from arbitrarylength open-world videos while exhibiting high spatial accuracy and state-of-the-art temporal consistency.

Abstract
This work addresses the challenge of streamed video depth
estimation, which expects not only per-frame accuracy but,
more importantly, cross-frame consistency. We argue that
sharing contextual information between frames or clips is
pivotal in fostering temporal consistency. Therefore, we
reformulate depth prediction into a conditional generation
problem to provide contextual information within a clip and
across clips. Specifically, we propose a consistent contextaware training and inference strategy for arbitrarily long
videos to provide cross-clip context. We sample independent noise levels for each frame within a clip during training while using a sliding window strategy and initializing
overlapping frames with previously predicted frames without adding noise. Moreover, we design an effective training
strategy to provide context within a clip. Extensive experimental results validate our design choices and demonstrate
the superiority of our approach, dubbed ChronoDepth.
Project page: xdimlab.github.io/ChronoDepth.

progresses in spatial precision [19, 22, 27, 40, 55, 56, 74,
75, 79, 82], these single-image depth estimation methods
are built based on an i.i.d. assumption between frames.
As there is no contextual information before or after each
frame, this approach is inherently prone to flickering and
temporal inconsistency. In the meantime, many applications
in AR/VR, robotics, and video editing require an estimation
of consistent depth over time, which calls for video depth
estimation tools that exhibit both spatial accuracy and temporal consistency.
For arbitrarily long videos, given the purpose of autoregressive inference and the limitation of computing resources, it is necessary to split it into multiple smaller video
clips to process them in a streamed manner. Existing methods [69, 73] leverage the attention mechanism in a generalizable manner to aggregate contextual information for each
video clip. However, such approaches cannot fully encode
contextual information between clips. Therefore, flickering issues still persist across clips. Another line of methods leverages test-time training (TTT) paradigms [43, 48,
64, 70, 85] to alleviate this issue, wherein they fine-tune a
single-image depth model on the testing videos and inject
temporal context through test-time optimization. However,
these approaches heavily hinge on precise camera poses and
require a long optimization time.
Recent advancements in video generative models [8, 9,
15, 31] have demonstrated significant growth, achieving

1. Introduction
Monocular image depth estimation methods have achieved
significant advancements in recent years. Despite notable
→ denotes equal contribution.

† corresponding author.

22841

