This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unveil Inversion and Invariance in Flow Transformer for Versatile Image Editing
Pengcheng Xu1,2 Boyuan Jiang2 Xiaobin Hu2† Donghao Luo2 Qingdong He2
Jiangning Zhang2 Chengjie Wang2 Yunsheng Wu2 Charles Ling1 Boyu Wang1 *
1

Western University

2

Tencent
Quantity

Visual Text

Pose

Shape

Diffusion → Flow

Look left side

Rectangle → Circle

Three → Four

Replacement

Removal

Addition

Style

Mountain → City

Remove moon

Gold chain and star

Cartoon

Figure 1. Our framework reconciles the invariance control for rigid and non-rigid editing, enabling versatile editing via flow transformer.

Abstract

1. Introduction

The success of the diffusion model (DM) in large-scale
text-to-image generation [33, 35, 38] enables editing images with flexible text-guided interface and rich expressiveness [11, 18, 28, 30]. Image editing requires the model conditioning on the input image. The instruction-based methods retrain the text-to-image (T2I) DM by the triplet data
of the original-and-edited images, and the editing instruction [4, 8]. However, manually crafting such triples is not
scalable and may cause bias [53]. In contrast, tuning-free
methods leverage the model itself to implicitly construct the
input image condition, which eliminates additional training and ensures scalability with the large T2I model. This
approach has recently garnered significant research interest. Despite this, most studies focus on DM editing, while
the potential of recent flow-based T2I models (FMs), which
incorporate transformer architecture (i.e., DiT [31]), richer
data priors, and better text-to-image alignment [6], remains
underexplored.
In this paper, we investigate tuning-free image editing
within the context of the flow transformer from two key
aspects: inversion and invariance control. The inversion process projects the image into the model’s domain as
an initial noisy latent, while invariance control determines
which contents from the original image should be preserved
during the regeneration of the edited image. The principle
of inversion aims to enhance the faithfulness of the recovered original image and editing ability. Although inversions
based on the DDIM [41] in DM have been extensively stud-

Leveraging the large generative prior of the flow transformer for tuning-free image editing requires authentic inversion to project the image into the model’s domain and
a flexible invariance control mechanism to preserve nontarget contents. However, the prevailing diffusion inversion
performs deficiently in flow-based models, and the invariance control cannot reconcile diverse rigid and non-rigid
editing tasks. To address these, we systematically analyze the inversion and invariance control based on the flow
transformer. Specifically, we unveil that the Euler inversion shares a similar structure to DDIM yet is more susceptible to the approximation error. Thus, we propose a
two-stage inversion to first refine the velocity estimation and
then compensate for the leftover error, which pivots closely
to the model prior and benefits editing. Meanwhile, we propose the invariance control that manipulates the text features within the adaptive layer normalization, connecting
the changes in the text prompt to image semantics. This
mechanism can simultaneously preserve the non-target contents while allowing rigid and non-rigid manipulation, enabling a wide range of editing types such as visual text,
quantity, facial expression, etc. Experiments on versatile
scenarios validate that our framework achieves flexible and
accurate editing, unlocking the potential of the flow transformer for versatile image editing. Project Page is here.
⇤ Corresponding author.

† Project lead.

28479

