This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Minimal Interaction Separated Tuning: A New Paradigm for Visual Adaptation
Ningyuan Tang, Minghao Fu, Jianxin Wu*
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
tangny@lamda.nju.edu.cn, fumh@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@gmail.com

Abstract
The rapid scaling of large vision pretrained models makes
fine-tuning tasks more and more difficult on devices with
low computational resources. We explore a new visual
adaptation paradigm called separated tuning, which treats
large pretrained models as standalone feature extractors
that run on powerful cloud servers. The fine-tuning carries out on devices which possess only low computational
resources (slow CPU, no GPU, small memory, etc.) Existing methods that are potentially suitable for our separated
tuning paradigm are discussed. But, three major drawbacks hinder their application in separated tuning: low
adaptation capability, large adapter network, and in particular, high information transfer overhead. To address
these issues, we propose Minimal Interaction Separated
Tuning, or MIST, which reveals that the sum of intermediate features from pretrained models not only has minimal
information transfer but also has high adaptation capability. With a lightweight attention-based adaptor network,
MIST achieves information transfer efficiency, parameter
efficiency, computational and memory efficiency, and at the
same time demonstrates competitive results on various visual adaptation benchmarks.

visual task. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods [14, 15, 19, 28, 33] are proposed to fine-tune large pretrained models with only a small set of trainable parameters, by either inserting small learnable blocks, adding few
learnable tokens, or learning low-rank decomposition of extra parameters. These methods achieve competitive results
on various downstream adaptation tasks with less than 1%
trainable parameters compared to full fine-tuning.
While PEFT methods partially solved the storage cost
of fine-tuned models, other problems remain. As the scale
of pretrained models grows with a blazing fast speed, finetuning or even inference itself is becoming unaffordable, especially on devices with limited computational resources.
On the other hand, the need for fine-tuning and inference
on such devices (e.g., personal computers, mobile phones
or even cameras) rather than on the cloud AI infrastructure
is increasing rapidly.
In this paper, we propose a new visual adaptation
paradigm: separated tuning, which enables low-resource
devices to fine-tune downstream visual tasks with a small
side network (cf . Figure 1). The side network merely receives intermediate features/activations from a pretrained
model, such that the huge pretrained network is not required to be (either forward or backward) computed on
low-resource devices. Upon the proposed paradigm, we
design a new visual adaptation method: Minimal Interaction Separated Tuning, which is based on the side-tuning
idea [27, 29]. Methods in this style potentially enables separated tuning, but the interaction (i.e., features transferred)
from the pretrained network to the low-resource device is
too large for a low-resource device to handle. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a new visual adaptation paradigm: separated
tuning, where the pretrained model works as a service in
a cloud server, and low-resource devices fine-tune small
side networks to transfer the pretrained large model towards specific downstream tasks.
• To reduce interaction between server and low-resource
devices, we reveal that sum of intermediate features effectively capture essence of the pretrained network, which

1. Introduction
Pretraining a large model [3, 9, 10, 22] on general-purpose
data and fine-tuning it on specific downstream tasks is
emerging as the mainstream methodology for computer vision tasks. Knowledge or representation learned from the
pretraining makes adaptation to a target domain much easier than training from scratch.
However, some paradoxes begin to emerge within this
process or learning paradigm. One natural issue is: if the
downstream dataset is small, we cannot afford to and should
not store one new fine-tuned model for each downstream
* J. Wu is the corresponding author. This paper was partly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under grant
62276123.

25208

