This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hazy Low-Quality Satellite Video Restoration Via Learning Optimal Joint
Degradation Patterns and Continuous-Scale Super-Resolution Reconstruction
Ning Ni
Libao Zhang*
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China
ningni@mail.bnu.edu.cn

libaozhang@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract

(a)

Currently, the demand for higher video quality has
grown significantly. However, satellite video has low resolution, complex motion, and weak textures. Haze interference further exacerbates the loss of motion information
and texture details, hindering effective spatiotemporal feature fusion and fine-grained feature mining. This presents
significant challenges for subsequent super-resolution (SR)
reconstruction, especially at continuous scales. To address
these problems, this paper models the double-degradation
process of hazy low-quality satellite videos and proposes a
novel network to learn the optimal joint degradation pattern
(ODPNet) for continuous-scale SR of hazy satellite videos.
First, we design a prior-based feature soft dehazing module to eliminate haze interference at the feature level. Second, we develop a spatiotemporal self-attention (SSA) to
capture long-range feature dependencies, thereby achieving effective spatiotemporal feature fusion. Third, we devise a tri-branch cross-aggregation block (TCB) to enhance
feature representations of weak textures in satellite videos
by effectively aggregating contextual information. Finally,
we propose a cross-scale feature Top-k selection Transformer (CFTST), which aims to adaptively select and aggregate cross-scale latent codes to learn feature representations of satellite videos at arbitrary resolutions, thus enabling continuous-scale SR. Experiments show that ODPNet outperforms existing methods and achieves a better balance between model parameters and performance.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of remote sensing data processing technology, the demand for high-quality satellite video
has grown increasingly urgent. However, on the one hand,
the spatial resolution of satellite video is inherently low due
to the influence of the data acquisition and transmission pro* Corresponding Author. This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62271060 and 61571050.

(b)
Dehazing

SR

Hazy LR
Frame

LR Frame

Hazy LR Frame

Ground Truth

Model

SR Frame

Hazy LR
Frame

(i)

(ii)

SR Frame

(c)

(iii)

Figure 1. (a) Description of the two-stage process. (b) Description of the end-to-end process. (c) Sample results of our method
compared with others. (i) FFANet + LGTD [25, 41]. (ii) DehazeFormer + MSDTGP [30, 40]. (iii) ODPNet (Ours).

cess; on the other hand, satellite video imaging is easily
affected by haze, resulting in blurred scenes and loss of details. To overcome these issues, dehazing and video superresolution (VSR) techniques are usually used to improve
video quality, thereby providing high-quality data for subsequent tasks or applications such as target tracking [27, 49],
object segmentation [15, 47], and moving vehicle detection [24, 43]. Existing satellite VSR methods are designed
for single-degraded factors and can achieve admirable results when applied to specific single-degraded conditions.
When faced with hazy low-resolution (LR) satellite videos
with complex double-degradation, existing VSR methods
[2, 21, 31, 35, 48] cannot effectively achieve dehazing and
VSR at the same time, and lack the ability to solve the
double-degradation in a unified framework.
To achieve hazy satellite VSR, a simple idea is to separate dehazing and VSR into two independent tasks and then
cascade their methods and process them in stages, which
is called a two-stage process (TSP). The specific process
of TSP is shown in Fig. 1. However, TSP methods cannot directly learn the mapping relationship between doubledegraded data and the corresponding high-quality label,
which easily leads to the continuous accumulation of estimation errors in each stage. Specifically, satellite video
have weak textures, and the haze will further weaken the
details, making it difficult to capture and fuse inter-frame

12690

