This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ROICtrl: Boosting Instance Control for Visual Generation
Yuchao Gu1,2 , Yipin Zhou2 , Yunfan Ye2 , Yixin Nie2 , Licheng Yu2 ,
Pingchuan Ma3 , Kevin Qinghong Lin1 , Mike Zheng Shou1 *
1

Show Lab, National University of Singapore 2 GenAI, Meta
https://roictrl.github.io/

3

MIT

Abstract
Natural language often struggles to accurately associate
positional and attribute information with multiple instances, which limits current text-based visual generation
models to simpler compositions featuring only a few dominant instances. To address this limitation, this work enhances diffusion models by introducing regional instance
control, where each instance is governed by a bounding
box paired with a free-form caption. Previous methods
in this area typically rely on implicit position encoding
or explicit attention masks to separate regions of interest
(ROIs), resulting in either inaccurate coordinate injection
or large computational overhead. Inspired by ROI-Align
in object detection, we introduce a complementary operation called ROI-Unpool. Together, ROI-Align and ROIUnpool enable explicit, efficient, and accurate ROI manipulation on high-resolution feature maps for visual generation. Building on ROI-Unpool, we propose ROICtrl,
an adapter for pretrained diffusion models that enables
precise regional instance control. ROICtrl is compatible with community-finetuned diffusion models, as well as
with existing spatial-based add-ons (e.g., ControlNet, T2IAdapter) and embedding-based add-ons (e.g., IP-Adapter,
ED-LoRA), extending their applications to multi-instance
generation. Experiments show that ROICtrl achieves superior performance in regional instance control while significantly reducing computational costs.

Figure 1. Grid test for instance control. (a) We structure the region
positions and instance captions into a single plain caption, then
prompt DALL-E 3 to generate a nine-grid image. (b) We apply
ROICtrl to generate a nine-grid image based on instance captions.

1. Introduction

sual world complicates the precise description of spatial positions and attributes of multiple instances using language
alone, often leading to linguistic ambiguity [9]. As a result, current text-based diffusion models are more effective
at generating images of simple composition with a limited
number of dominant instance. Inspired by the “chihuahua
or muffin” grid test [8], which assesses the fine-grained visual recognition ability of multi-modal large language models, we use instance grids to evaluate the state-of-the-art
text-to-image generation system DALL-E 3 [2]. As shown
in Fig. 1, we structure region positions and their corresponding caption into a sentence. However, DALL-E 3 struggle
to generate accurate nine-grid results, highlighting the challenge of using natural language alone to solve regional instance control in visual generation.

Recent text-based diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in generating images [6, 32, 33] and videos
[11, 18, 38, 42] by scaling up data and computational resources. However, effectively controlling these text-based
generative models continues to be a major challenge. The
large information gap between natural language and the vi-

Much like the evolution in visual recognition, which
has transitioned from concentrating on single dominant in-

* Corresponding Author.

23658

