This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RDD: Robust Feature Detector and Descriptor using Deformable Transformer
Gonglin Chen1,2 , Tianwen Fu1,2 , Haiwei Chen1,2 , Wenbin Teng1,2 , Hanyuan Xiao1,2 , Yajie Zhao1,2 *
1
2
Institute for Creative Technologies
University of Southern California
{gonglinc, tianwenf}@usc.edu, chenh@ict.usc.edu,
{wenbinte, hanyuanx}@usc.edu, zhao@ict.usc.edu

Abstract
As a core step in structure-from-motion and SLAM, robust
feature detection and description under challenging scenarios such as significant viewpoint changes remain unresolved despite their ubiquity. While recent works have identified the importance of local features in modeling geometric transformations, these methods fail to learn the visual
cues present in long-range relationships. We present Robust
Deformable Detector (RDD), a novel and robust keypoint
detector/descriptor leveraging the deformable transformer,
which captures global context and geometric invariance
through deformable self-attention mechanisms. Specifically, we observed that deformable attention focuses on
key locations, effectively reducing the search space complexity and modeling the geometric invariance. Furthermore, we collected an Air-to-Ground dataset for training
in addition to the standard MegaDepth dataset. Our proposed method outperforms all state-of-the-art keypoint detection/description methods in sparse matching tasks and is
also capable of semi-dense matching. To ensure comprehensive evaluation, we introduce two challenging benchmarks: one emphasizing large viewpoint and scale variations, and the other being an Air-to-Ground benchmark
— an evaluation setting that has recently gaining popularity for 3D reconstruction across different altitudes. Project
page: https://xtcpete.github.io/rdd/.

Sparse: RDD

Semi-Dense: RDD*

Large Scale Change

Ari-to-Ground Cross View

Figure 1. Our proposed method effectively performs both sparse
and semi-dense feature matching, referred to as RDD and RDD*,
respectively, as shown in the top section. RDD demonstrates its
ability to extract accurate keypoints and robust descriptors, enabling reliable matching even under significant scale and viewpoint variations, as illustrated in the bottom section.

Historically, feature detection and description methods
relied on rule-based techniques such as SIFT , SURF, and
ORB [3, 25, 35]. However, these methods oftenf struggled with the aforementioned challenges. To better address
these issues, recent works [6, 13, 41, 46] leverage deep
neural networks based on data-driven approaches which often extract more robust and discriminative descriptors than
the rule-based ones. Despite the enhanced robustness that
learning-based methods have, they often rely on regular
convolutions to encode images [6, 13, 32, 41, 46], which
ignore the geometric invariance and long-distance awareness critical for robust description under challenging conditions. Subsequently, [26, 28, 45] have partially addressed
geometric invariance by estimating the scale and orientation of keypoint descriptors to model affine transformations.
ALIKED [47] and ASLFeat [28] advanced this approach by
using deformable convolutions capable of modeling any geometric transformations. However, these methods are limited to modeling transformations within local windows; features learned with the localized kernels of convolution operators fall short of learning important visual cues that depend
on long-range relationships (e.g. vanishing lines).

1. Introduction
Keypoint detection and description are central to numerous
3D computer vision tasks, including structure-from-motion
(SfM), visual localization, and simultaneous localization
and mapping (SLAM). These tasks depend on reliable keypoints and descriptors to establish accurate tracks, which
are crucial for downstream algorithms to interpret spatial
relationships—a requirement in fields from robotics to augmented reality [20]. When applied to real-world tasks, these
systems face challenges such as significant viewpoint shifts,
lighting variations, and scale changes.
* Corresponding author.

6394

