This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Recover and Match: Open-Vocabulary Multi-Label Recognition through
Knowledge-Constrained Optimal Transport
Hao Tan1,2 *, Zichang Tan3,4 *, Jun Li2 , Ajian Liu2 , Jun Wan2,5†, Zhen Lei1,2,5,6
1
SAIS, UCAS 2 MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
SIAT, Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Sangfor Technologies Inc.
5
SAI, UCAS 6 CAIR, HKISI, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{tanhao2023, jun.wan, zhen.lei}@ia.ac.cn, tanzichang@foxmail.com

Abstract

cus on the transfer of CLIP [40], using different techniques
such as PEFT [58] and knowledge distillation [12]. Specifically, it is common that multiple objects appear in different image regions. Mismatching between regions and labels
leads to spurious predictions from irrelevant areas. Therefore, how to construct effective regional features, and how
to associate these regional features to their corresponding
labels are determinative to the final performance. However,
these two major challenges have been neglected by current
approaches [6, 11, 14, 30, 48, 60]: (1) The local semantics in the image encoder are lost [6, 23, 46, 59]. As evidenced in Figure 1 (a), the original CLIP exhibits noisy
local responses to labels. Existing methods directly apply
these local features, leading to unreliable predictions. (2)
The matching property between image regions and candidate labels is overlooked. Instead, they rely on naive region
aggregations, e.g., (a) mean pooling in [11, 60], (b) softmax
re-weighting in [14, 48] and cross-attention in [16, 29, 32].
These approaches all fall into independent re-weighting
since they only consider assignments for each label individually, which exhibits “extraneous high-response” phenomenon as shown in Figure 1 (b), i.e., always emphasizing particular regions for each label including non-GT. Such
phenomenon results in noisy region aggregations.

Identifying multiple novel classes in an image, known as
open-vocabulary multi-label recognition, is a challenging
task in computer vision. Recent studies explore the transfer of powerful vision-language models such as CLIP. However, these approaches face two critical challenges: (1) The
local semantics of CLIP are disrupted due to its global pretraining objectives, resulting in unreliable regional predictions. (2) The matching property between image regions
and candidate labels has been neglected, relying instead on
naive feature aggregation such as average pooling, which
leads to spurious predictions from irrelevant regions. In
this paper, we present RAM (Recover And Match), a novel
framework that effectively addresses the above issues. To
tackle the first problem, we propose Ladder Local Adapter
(LLA) to enforce refocusing on local regions, recovering
local semantics in a memory-friendly way. For the second
issue, we propose Knowledge-Constrained Optimal Transport (KCOT) to suppress meaningless matching to non-GT
labels by formulating the task as an optimal transport problem. As a result, RAM achieves state-of-the-art performance on various datasets from three distinct domains, and
shows great potential to boost the existing methods. Code:
https://github.com/EricTan7/RAM .

Based on the above investigations, we propose RAM
(Recover And Match), a conceptually simple yet effective
framework, which addresses the above issues through first
recovering the local semantics of CLIP and then reformulating the matching as an optimal transport problem.

1. Introduction
Open-vocabulary multi-label recognition (OVMLR) [11,
30, 48, 53, 60] is an emerging task in the field of computer
vision. Unlike traditional multi-label or single-label recognition, OVMLR aims to recognize all semantics labels and
potential new categories in an image, which offers essential
capabilities in vastly changing real-world applications.
With the remarkable progress of vision-language models
(VLMs) [17, 40], recent efforts [6, 11, 14, 30, 48, 53, 60] fo∗ Equal contribution.

To address the first issue, we propose a Ladder Local
Adapter (LLA) to recover local semantics in an efficient
way. Specifically, we enforce the model to refocus on
the local context through redesigning the self-attention map
and incorporating convolution mechanisms. Different from
most adapters [28, 50], LLA is set as a ladder side network
following [49], which controls the memory cost and preserves the pre-trained knowledge. As compared in the last

† Corresponding author.

4650

