This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reducing Class-wise Confusion for Incremental Learning
with Disentangled Manifolds
Huitong Chen, Yu Wang*, Yan Fan, Guosong Jiang, Qinghua Hu
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
Haihe Laboratory of Information Technology Application Innovation (Haihe Lab of ITAI), Tianjin, China
{chtcs, wang.yu, fyan 0411, jiangggss, huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Class incremental learning (CIL) aims to enable models
to continuously learn new classes without catastrophically
forgetting old ones. A promising direction is to learn and
use prototypes of classes during incremental updates. Despite simplicity and intuition, we find that such methods
suffer from inadequate representation capability and unsatisfied feature overlap. These two factors cause classwise confusion and limited performance. In this paper,
we develop a Confusion-REduced AuTo-Encoder classifier
(CREATE) for CIL. Specifically, our method employs a
lightweight auto-encoder module to learn compact manifold for each class in the latent subspace, constraining
samples to be well reconstructed only on the semantically
correct auto-encoder. Thus, the representation stability
and capability of class distributions are enhanced, alleviating the potential class-wise confusion problem. To
further distinguish the overlapped features, we propose a
confusion-aware latent space separation loss that ensures
samples are closely distributed in their corresponding lowdimensional manifold while keeping away from the distributions of features from other classes. Our method demonstrates stronger representational capacity and discrimination ability by learning disentangled manifolds and reduces
class confusion. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets
and settings show that CREATE outperforms other stateof-the-art methods up to 5.41%. The code is available at
https://github.com/lilyht/CREATE.

system should gradually adapt to new environments, infrastructures, and traffic patterns in different countries without forgetting its previous driving capabilities. A fundamental challenge in CIL is to tackle catastrophic forgetting
[7, 13, 18], where the performance of previously learned
knowledge significantly deteriorates when the model adapts
to new class instances.
Existing studies are dedicated to mitigating this problem and primarily address the issue from three perspectives.
Specifically, knowledge retention-based approaches [2,
5, 6, 8, 23, 29, 38] aim to discover and maintain inherent knowledge structures through regularization, thereby reducing changes in the model’s intrinsic knowledge structure and alleviating the forgetting of old knowledge. Such
methods impose significant constraints on the model’s old
knowledge, creating challenges in knowledge refinement
when new knowledge is introduced. Therefore, model
expansion-based approaches [27, 28, 30] are designed to
dynamically adjust the representational capacity of a model
to adapt to new tasks. However, this type of approach typically involves a large number of parameters, and there is
redundancy between the newly expanded and old branches.
Prototype-based approaches [20, 21, 35] construct and
update prototypes, transforming inference into a matching
between features and prototypes to reduce forgetting. Such
approaches are straightforward, intuitive, and require only
a small number of parameters, which have recently shown
promising prospects. However, prototype-based methods
cannot effectively classify samples with unsatisfied discriminative representations. We further analyze this limitation of
prototype-based methods, discuss two key factors that contribute to this issue, and argue that this ultimately leads to a
class-wise confusion problem.
Firstly, real data often resides on a manifold structure
within latent spaces [9, 10, 19, 26]. As observed in Fig.
1(a), class 7 forms two distinct clusters in the latent feature space, while the prototype lies only in one of the clusters. This shows that a single discriminative vector has
limited representation capability and fails to fit the mani-

1. Introduction
Class Incremental Learning (CIL) aims to enable deep
learning models to continuously learn new classes while
maintaining old knowledge. It has significant implications in intelligent systems that require continuous evolution. For example, in an autonomous driving scenario, the
* Corresponding author

10121

