This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robotic Visual Instruction
Yanbang Li 1† Ziyang Gong 2 Haoyang Li 3 Xiaoqi Huang 4
Guangping Bai 1 Xianzheng Ma 1
1

Independent Researcher 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 UCSD
5
South China University of Technology
†
Corresponding Author

Haolan Kang 5
4

VIVO

Figure 1. (Left) Robotic visual instruction is a hand-drawn approach for commanding robots, utilizing circles and arrows to convey task
definition. In long-horizon tasks, green and blue sketches denote the first and second task steps, respectively. (Right) It illustrates the action
sequences output via VIEW. Our method exhibits robust generalization to real-world manipulation tasks, including (a) trajectory-following
tasks, (b) cluttered environments with disturbances, and (c) multi-step operations.

Abstract
Recently, natural language has been the primary medium
for human-robot interaction. However, its inherent lack of
spatial precision for robotic control introduces challenges
such as ambiguity and verbosity. To address these limitations, we introduce the Robotic Visual Instruction (RoVI),
a novel paradigm to guide robotic tasks through an objectcentric, hand-drawn symbolic representation. RoVI effectively encodes spatial-temporal information into humaninterpretable visual instructions through 2D sketches, utilizing arrows, circles, colors, and numbers to direct 3D
robotic manipulation. To enable robots to understand RoVI
better and generate precise actions based on RoVI, we
present Visual Instruction Embodied Workflow (VIEW), a
pipeline formulated for RoVI-conditioned policies. This approach leverages Vision-Language Models (VLMs) to interpret RoVI inputs, decode spatial and temporal constraints
from 2D pixel space via keypoint extraction, and then trans-

form them into executable 3D action sequences. We additionally curate a specialized dataset of 15K instances to
fine-tune small VLMs for edge deployment, enabling them
to effectively learn RoVI capabilities. Our approach is rigorously validated across 11 novel tasks in both real and simulated environments, demonstrating significant generalization capability. Notably, VIEW achieves an 87.5% success
rate in real-world scenarios involving unseen tasks that feature multi-step actions, with disturbances, and trajectoryfollowing requirements. Code and Datasets in this paper
will be released soon.

1. Introduction

12155

Natural language, is not always the optimal medium between humans and robots. Alternatively, sketching visual
instructions convey more precise spatiotemporal information. Traditionally, communication between humans and
robots relies on natural language, leveraging the advances

