This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VI3 NR: Variance Informed Initialization for Implicit Neural Representations
Chamin Hewa Koneputugodage1 * Yizhak Ben-Shabat1,2 * Sameera Ramasinghe3
1

The Australian National University

2

Roblox

3

Stephen Gould1

Pluralis AI

{chamin.hewa, stephen.gould}@anu.edu.au sitzikbs@gmail.com sameera@pluralis.ai
https://chumbyte.github.io/vi3nr-site/

Abstract
Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) are a versatile and
powerful tool for encoding various forms of data, including images, videos, sound, and 3D shapes. A critical factor
in the success of INRs is the initialization of the network,
which can significantly impact the convergence and accuracy of the learned model. Unfortunately, commonly used
neural network initializations are not widely applicable for
many activation functions, especially those used by INRs. In
this paper, we improve upon previous initialization methods
by deriving an initialization that has stable variance across
layers, and applies to any activation function. We show that
this generalizes many previous initialization methods, and
has even better stability for well studied activations. We
also show that our initialization leads to improved results
with INR activation functions in multiple signal modalities.
Our approach is particularly effective for Gaussian INRs,
where we demonstrate that the theory of our initialization
matches with task performance in multiple experiments, allowing us to achieve improvements in image, audio, and 3D
surface reconstruction.

tial to preserve key properties, such as the distribution of
values between layers and control of gradient magnitude.
Without this careful balance, the network’s effectiveness in
capturing complex signals and converging efficiently may
be significantly compromised.
Prior work on initialization [7, 9, 11] has largely focused
on deep learning models with sigmoid or ReLU activations
for classification. These initialization techniques have become the default choice in many models, often without reconsidering their underlying assumptions. However, INRs
differ significantly in focus, as they are centered on signal
reconstruction rather than generalizability. In this context,
the ability to capture high-frequency information is crucial,
making it necessary to modify the activation functions. As
a result, many of the assumptions of previous initialization
approaches no longer hold, and new initialization methods
are required to ensure effective learning.

1. Introduction

We propose a novel multilayer perceptions (MLP) initialization that generalizes many previous methods [7, 9–
11, 23] with minimal assumptions, making it applicable to
any activation function. Similar to prior work, it requires
computing activation statistics, which is difficult to do analytically. We show, however, that they can be efficiently
estimated empirically, outperforming prior approximations.
We evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed initialization
across diverse applications, including image, audio, and 3D
surface reconstruction.

Implicit neural representations (INRs) encode diverse signals, including images, videos, 3D models, and audio, as
continuous functions rather than discrete samples [23, 24].
Given a coordinate input, a fully connected network predicts the signal value at that location. INRs excel at fitting
complex, high-dimensional signals, making them ideal for
3D reconstruction [2, 3, 5, 8, 14, 17], novel-view synthesis
[4, 16], neural rendering [25], and pixel alignment [20].
Despite their power, INR performance depends heavily
on the choice of activation function, affecting optimization, signal fitting, and learning stability. Although previous works have extensively explored the choice of activation function [19, 21–23], introducing new ones requires
careful weight initialization. Proper initialization is essen-

The key contributions of our work are as follows:

* Equal contribution.

• We propose a principled weight initialization for INRs
that preserves preactivation distribution across layers and
allows control of that distribution.
• We derive a condition for stable gradient variance across
layers, guiding distribution selection for deep networks.
• We analyze two promising but unstable INR activation
functions (Gaussian and sinc), demonstrating that our initialization significantly improves their stability and performance in multiple reconstruction tasks.

13477

