This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-View Pose-Agnostic Change Localization with Zero Labels
Chamuditha Jayanga Galappaththige1,2 Jason Lai3 Lloyd Windrim2,4
Donald Dansereau2,3 Niko Sünderhauf1,2 Dimity Miller1,2
1
Queensland University of Technology 2 ARIAM∗ 3 ACFR, University of Sydney 4 Abyss Solutions
{chamuditha.galappaththige, d24.miller}@.qut.edu.au

Abstract
Autonomous agents often require accurate methods for detecting and localizing changes in their environment, particularly when observations are captured from unconstrained
and inconsistent viewpoints. We propose a novel label-free,
pose-agnostic change detection method that integrates information from multiple viewpoints to construct a changeaware 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) representation of
the scene. With as few as 5 images of the post-change
scene, our approach can learn an additional change channel in a 3DGS and produce change masks that outperform
single-view techniques. Our change-aware 3D scene representation additionally enables the generation of accurate
change masks for unseen viewpoints. Experimental results
demonstrate state-of-the-art performance in complex multiobject scenes, achieving a 1.7× and 1.5× improvement in
Mean Intersection Over Union and F1 score respectively
over other baselines. We also contribute a new real-world
dataset to benchmark change detection in diverse challenging scenes in the presence of lighting variations. Our code
and the dataset are available at MV-3DCD.github.io.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Our multi-view approach to visual change detection
(second row from bottom) enforces consistency of the predicted
changes across multiple viewpoints by embedding change information in a 3D Gaussian Splatting model of the scene. This effectively suppresses many of the false-positive detections exhibited
by current single-view methods (middle row).

There is increasing effort to develop autonomous agents that
assist us with complex tasks, from handling daily chores to
performing undesirable work. Capable autonomous agents
require the ability to detect and interpret changes in their environment, enabling them to update maps and re-plan tasks
or perform applied tasks such as infrastructure or environment monitoring. Change detection remains a challenging
task in 3D scenes, particularly when an agent observes the
scene from two sets of views that have no constraint on the
poses (i.e. consider a robot that captures images of a scene
following a random trajectory at each inspection round).

Many established change detection methods rely on
precise alignment between a pre-change image and postchange image to localize the change [3, 7, 8, 12], limiting
their applicability to scenes without viewpoint consistency.
Some approaches extend to detect changes in images with
inconsistent viewpoints [17, 21, 32], but learn viewpoint invariance by training on image pairs labeled with changes
and showcasing viewpoint discrepancy. Supervised learning can have limitations for change detection, including the
cost of labeling datasets and significant performance drops
under distribution shift (such as environments not present
in the dataset) [3, 12, 40, 42]. In this paper, we address the
problem of label-free, pose-agnostic change localization,
where changes are detected between a pre-change scene
and a post-change scene, without labeled data for training
or aligned viewpoints for observations between the scenes.

* This

work was supported by the ARC Research Hub in Intelligent Robotic Systems for Real-Time Asset Management (ARIAM)
(IH210100030) and Abyss Solutions. C.J., N.S., and D.M. also acknowledge ongoing support from the QUT Centre for Robotics.

11600

