This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stretching Each Dollar: Diffusion Training from Scratch on a Micro-Budget
Vikash Sehwag1 Xianghao Kong2 * Jingtao Li1 Michael Spranger1 Lingjuan Lyu1†
1
Sony AI, 2 University of California, Riverside
Abstract
As scaling laws in generative AI push performance, they simultaneously concentrate the development of these models
among actors with large computational resources. With a
focus on text-to-image (T2I) generative models, we aim to
unlock this bottleneck by demonstrating very low-cost training of large-scale T2I diffusion transformer models. As the
computational cost of transformers increases with the number of patches in each image, we propose randomly masking up to 75% of the image patches during training. We
propose a deferred masking strategy that preprocesses all
patches using a patch-mixer before masking, thus significantly reducing the performance degradation with masking, making it superior to model downscaling in reducing computational cost. We also incorporate the latest improvements in transformer architecture, such as the use of
mixture-of-experts layers, to improve performance and further identify the critical benefit of using synthetic images
in micro-budget training. Finally, using only 37M publicly
available real and synthetic images, we train a 1.16 billion
parameter sparse transformer with only $1,890 economical cost and achieve a 12.7 FID in zero-shot generation
on the COCO dataset. Notably, our model achieves competitive performance across both automated and humancentric evaluations, as well as high-quality generations,
while incurring 118→ lower costs than Stable Diffusion
models and 14→ lower costs than the current state-of-theart approach, which costs $28,400. We also further investigate the influence of synthetic images on performance
and demonstrate that micro-budget training on only synthetic images is sufficient for achieving high-quality data
generation. Our end-to-end training pipeline and model
checkpoints are available at https://github.com/
SonyResearch/micro_diffusion.

eration of more than a billion images each year [82], the
cost and effort of training these models from scratch remain very high [58, 60, 61]. In text-to-image diffusion
models (T2I) [32, 72, 74], some previous works have successfully scaled down the computational cost compared to
the 200,000 A100 GPU hours used by Stable Diffusion
2.1 [8, 24, 53, 60]. However, the computational cost of even
the state-of-the-art approaches (18,000 A100 GPU hours)
remains very high [8], requiring more than a month of training time on the leading 8→H100 GPU machine. Furthermore, previous works either leverage larger-scale datasets
spanning on the order of a billion images or use proprietary
datasets to enhance performance [8, 60, 61, 87]. The high
training cost and the dataset requirements create an inaccessible barrier to participating in the development of largescale diffusion models. In this work, we aim to address
this issue by developing a low-cost and end-to-end pipeline
for competitive text-to-image diffusion models that achieve
more than an order of magnitude reduction in training cost
than the state-of-the-art while not requiring access to billions of training images or proprietary datasets.
We consider vision transformer based latent diffusion
models for text-to-image generation [16, 52], mainly due
to their simplified design and wide adoption across the latest large-scale diffusion models [4, 8, 17]. To reduce the
computational cost, we exploit the strong dependence of
the transformer’s computational cost on the input sequence
size, i.e., number of patches per image. We aim to reduce
the effective number of patches processed per image by the
transformer during training. This can be easily achieved by
randomly masking a fraction of the tokens at the input layer
of the transformer. However, existing masking approaches
fail to scale beyond a 50% masking ratio without drastically degrading performance [91], particularly because, at
high masking ratios, a large fraction of input patches are
completely unobserved by the diffusion transformer.
To mitigate the massive performance degradation with
masking, we propose a deferred masking strategy where
all patches are preprocessed by a lightweight patch-mixer
before being transferred to the diffusion transformer. The
patch mixer comprises a fraction of the number of parameters in the diffusion transformer. In contrast to naive mask-

1. Introduction
While modern visual generative models excel at creating
photorealistic visual content and have propelled the gen* Work conducted during an internship at Sony AI.
† Corresponding to: lingjuan.lv@sony.com

28596

