This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EIDT-V: Exploiting Intersections in Diffusion Trajectories for Model-Agnostic,
Zero-Shot, Training-Free Text-to-Video Generation
Diljeet Jagpal1 , Xi Chen1,2,∗ , and Vinay P. Namboodiri1
1

University of Bath; 2 Fudan University

{dkjj20, xc841, vpn22}@bath.ac.uk, x chen@fudan.edu.cn

Eight equally spaced frames from 24-frame GIFs generated by our EIDT-V model. Top row shows SD3 Medium [8] results for prompt:
“A peacock displaying its feathers”. Bottom row shows SDXL [32] results for prompt: “A child blowing bubbles that float and pop
gently”. These examples highlight the model’s ability to generate high-quality videos with semantic and temporal coherence.

mance while being more flexible when working with diverse
image-generation models. The empirical analysis using
quantitative metrics and user studies confirms our model’s
superior temporal consistency, visual fidelity and user satisfaction, thus providing a novel way to obtain trainingfree, image-based text-to-video generation. Further examples and code at https://djagpal02.github.io/EIDT-V/

Abstract
Zero-shot, training-free, image-based text-to-video generation is an emerging area that aims to generate videos using
existing image-based diffusion models. Current methods in
this space require specific architectural changes to imagegeneration models, which limit their adaptability and scalability. In contrast to such methods, we provide a modelagnostic approach. We use intersections in diffusion trajectories, working only with the latent values. We could not
obtain localized frame-wise coherence and diversity using
only the intersection of trajectories. Thus, we instead use a
grid-based approach. An in-context trained LLM is used to
generate coherent frame-wise prompts; another is used to
identify differences between frames. Based on these, we obtain a CLIP-based attention mask that controls the timing
of switching the prompts for each grid cell. Earlier switching results in higher variance, while later switching results
in more coherence. Therefore, Our approach can ensure
appropriate control between coherence and variance for
the frames. Our approach results in state-of-the-art perfor-

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.
Supported by EPSRC (EP/T518013/1, EP/Y021614/1); AAM available under a CC BY licence.

Recent advances in image generation have established diffusion models as state-of-the-art (SOTA) tools for producing visually compelling and coherent images. Open source
techniques such as Stable Diffusion [8, 32, 35] and Flux
[10] show efficient high-quality outputs made possible by
the diffusion models [23, 41]. Despite this, extending these
capabilities to video remains challenging due to the unique
temporal coherence and dynamic motion requirements.
SOTA, such as OpenAI’s Sora [1] and Meta’s MovieGen
[33], have made significant progress in high-quality text-tovideo generation. However, they rely on extensive training and complex architectures, which limits accessibility.
These models typically require high-end GPUs or sit behind paywalls, making them out of reach for most users.
Although lower cost models [2–4, 12, 14, 15, 18, 19, 26,

18219

