This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DKDM: Data-Free Knowledge Distillation for Diffusion Models with Any
Architecture

1

Qianlong Xiang1 , Miao Zhang1,†, Yuzhang Shang2 , Jianlong Wu1 , Yan Yan3 , Liqiang Nie1,†
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) 2 Illinois Institute of Technology 3 University of Illinois Chicago
https://github.com/qianlong0502/DKDM

Abstract

Diffusion Models

Diffusion models (DMs) have demonstrated exceptional
generative capabilities across various domains, including
image, video, and so on. A key factor contributing to their
effectiveness is the high quantity and quality of data used
during training. However, mainstream DMs now consume
increasingly large amounts of data. For example, training a Stable Diffusion model requires billions of image-text
pairs. This enormous data requirement poses significant
challenges for training large DMs due to high data acquisition costs and storage expenses. To alleviate this data burden, we propose a novel scenario: using existing DMs as
data sources to train new DMs with any architecture. We
refer to this scenario as Data-Free Knowledge Distillation
for Diffusion Models (DKDM), where the generative ability of DMs is transferred to new ones in a data-free manner. To tackle this challenge, we make two main contributions. First, we introduce a DKDM objective that enables
the training of new DMs via distillation, without requiring
access to the data. Second, we develop a dynamic iterative distillation method that efficiently extracts time-domain
knowledge from existing DMs, enabling direct retrieval of
training data without the need for a prolonged generative
process. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to explore this scenario. Experimental results demonstrate that
our data-free approach not only achieves competitive generative performance but also, in some instances, outperforms models trained with the entire dataset.

Standard
Training

Highly
Data-Dependent

DKDM

Data-Free

PAPHAEL

Pretrain

DALL·E 2
SD 1.5

ADM

GLIDE

Large-Scale Datasets

LDM
Imagen
……

Existing Models

Figure 1. Illustration of our DKDM concept: utilizing pretrained
diffusion models to train new ones, thus avoiding the high costs
associated with increasingly large datasets.

and audio [4, 17, 61]. One reason for their superior performance is their training on large-scale, high-quality datasets.
However, this advantage also entails a drawback: training DMs requires substantial storage capacity, as shown in
Tab. 1. For instance, training a Stable Diffusion model necessitates the use of billions of image-text pairs [44].
To alleviate this data burden, considering that numerous
pretrained DMs have been trained and released by various
organizations, we pose a novel question:

1. Introduction

Can we train new diffusion models by using existing
pretrained diffusion models as the data source, thereby
eliminating the need to access or store any dataset?

The advent of Diffusion Models (DMs) [16, 51, 53] heralds
a new era in the generative domain, garnering widespread
acclaim for their exceptional capability in producing samples of remarkable quality [8, 36, 44]. These models have
rapidly ascended to a pivotal role across a spectrum of generative applications, notably in the fields of image, video

Fig. 1 illustrates the concept of this scenario. Traditionally,
training DMs requires access to large datasets. In contrast,
in this paper, we explore how to utilize existing DMs to
train new models without any data. We formalize this scenario as the Data-Free Knowledge Distillation for Diffusion

† Corresponding authors

2955

