This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HeMoRa: Unsupervised Heuristic Consensus Sampling for Robust
Point Cloud Registration
Shaocheng Yan1
Yiming Wang2
Kaiyan Zhao3
3
4
Pengcheng Shi
Zhenjun Zhao
Yongjun Zhang1
Jiayuan Li1†
1
School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University
2
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City, University of Macau
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
4
Mechanical and Automation Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{shaochengyan, shipc, ljy}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract

HeGen

Sampling
(Action)

Subsets

Inlier Ratio
30%

optimize

Heuristic information for consensus set sampling is essential for correspondence-based point cloud registration, but
existing approaches typically rely on supervised learning
or expert-driven parameter tuning. In this work, we propose HeMoRa, a new unsupervised framework that trains a
Heuristic information Generator (HeGen) to estimate sampling probabilities for correspondences using a Multi-order
Reward Aggregator (MoRa) loss. The core of MoRa is to
train HeGen through extensive trials and feedback, enabling
unsupervised learning. While this process can be implemented using policy optimization, directly applying the policy gradient to optimize HeGen presents challenges such as
sensitivity to noise and low reward efficiency. To address
these issues, we propose a Maximal Reward Propagation
(MRP) mechanism that enhances the training process by prioritizing noise-free signals and improving reward utilization.
Experimental results show that equipped with HeMoRa, the
consensus set sampler achieves improvements in both robustness and accuracy. For example, on the 3DMatch dataset
with FCGF feature, the registration recall of our unsupervised methods (Ours+SM and Ours+SC2 ) even outperforms
the state-of-the-art supervised method VBreg. Our code is
available at HeMoRa.

Correspondences

MoRa

Unsupervised
Training

loss

Feedback
(Reward)

80%

10%

Figure 1. HeMoRa: HeGen trained via MoRa. Inspired by reinforcement learning, where an agent learns through iterative actions
and reward feedback, MoRa optimizes HeGen by extensively sampling correspondence subsets and using the inlier ratio as feedback
to guide more effective sampling.

increasing attention. These methods typically involve two
stages: keypoint matching and transformation estimation
[4, 9, 40, 42, 51, 61, 66]. First, 3D keypoint correspondences
are identified, and then a six-degree-of-freedom (6-DoF)
transformation is estimated to align the input point clouds.
Recent developments, particularly those driven by deep learning, have significantly improved keypoint matching accuracy.
However, the presence of noise and low overlap ratios in the
data often leads to a high proportion of outliers, posing substantial challenges to robust estimation [30, 66].
Traditional algorithms like RANSAC [18] pioneered this
field by addressing the problem through a hypothesis-andverification framework. It alternates between random sample
fitting (hypothesis) and model consensus calculation (verification) until meeting the stopping criterion of the iterative
process. While RANSAC has been successful, it suffers from
slow convergence and instability, particularly when handling
high outlier ratios. To overcome these limitations, various
algorithms incorporate spatial compatibility as a heuristic to
enhance subset sampling [9, 41, 48, 54, 66, 69]. For instance,

1. Introduction
Point Cloud Registration (PCR) refers to the process of aligning two point clouds captured from different scans of the
same scene. It plays a crucial role in various applications
such as SLAM [32, 35, 36, 47, 67, 68] and 3D reconstruction [11, 34]. In PCR, correspondence-based approaches,
which do not require prior initializations, have garnered
† indicates the corresponding author (Jiayuan Li).

1363

