This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-quality Point Cloud Oriented Normal Estimation via Hybrid Angular and
Euclidean Distance Encoding
Yuanqi Li∗ , Jingcheng Huang*, Hongshen Wang, Peiyuan Lv, Yansong Liu, Jiuming Zheng,
Jie Guo, and Yanwen Guo†
Nanjing University
{yuanqili, guojie, ywguo}@nju.edu.cn,
{jingchenghuang,hongshenwang,peiyuanlv,yansongliu,211830115}@smail.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

Ray
Normal
θ direction
ϕ direction

The proliferation of Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) technology has facilitated the acquisition of threedimensional point clouds, which are integral to applications
in VR, AR, and Digital Twin. Oriented normals, critical for
3D reconstruction and scene analysis, cannot be directly
extracted from scenes using LiDAR due to its operational
principles. Previous traditional or learning-based methods
are prone to inaccuracies due to uneven distribution and
noise due to the dependence on local geometry features.
This paper addresses the challenge of estimating oriented
point normals by introducing a point cloud normal estimation framework via hybrid angular and Euclidean distance
encoding (HAE). Our method overcomes the limitations of
local geometric information by combining angular and Euclidean spaces to extract features from both point cloud coordinates and light rays, leading to more accurate normal
estimation. The core of our network consists of an angular distance encoding module, which leverages both ray directions and point coordinates for unoriented normal refinement, and a ray feature fusion module for normal orientation, that is robust to noise. We also provide a point
cloud dataset with ground truth normals, generated a virtual scanner, which reflects real scanning distributions and
noise profiles.

Figure 1. Points are not uniformly distributed in Euclidean space,
but follow a uniform distribution in angular space.

exerting a pivotal influence on point cloud-based 3D reconstruction [22, 23], 3D scene understanding [9, 16, 42], as
well as 3D shape analysis [15, 35]. However, due to limitations inherent in the principles of data acquisition, devices such as LiDAR are incapable of directly extracting
normal information from scenes. Calculating normals directly from point clouds using methods such as Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) is susceptible to the adverse effects from uneven point cloud distribution and noise. Consequently, estimating normal vectors from the xyz coordinates of point clouds is a highly valuable research question. Researchers have proposed various methods for estimating unoriented point normals [13, 24, 32, 47]. However, tasks such as high-precision surface reconstruction have
a more pronounced demand for oriented normals. In recent years, several studies on oriented normal estimation
have been introduced, including a series of algorithms based
on global optimization [37, 50]. Nevertheless, these algorithms require the input to be a watertight model, which is
rarely the case with data captured by scanning devices such
as LiDAR, thereby limiting the practicality of these methods. Moreover, researchers have also proposed several deep
learning-based approaches that estimate unoriented normals
and then calibrate their direction [31, 32]. However, existing deep learning-based methods rely on local geometric information of the point cloud for normal prediction, failing
to fully utilize the characteristics of scanning devices.

1. Introduction
With the advancement of devices such as LiDAR, the acquisition of three-dimensional point clouds has become increasingly convenient[12, 17, 51], playing an increasingly
significant role in applications such as Virtual Reality (VR),
Augmented Reality (AR), and Digital Twin. Normal vectors are among the most crucial features of point clouds,
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding author.

1287

