This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ANNEXE: Unified Analyzing, Answering, and Pixel Grounding
for Egocentric Interaction
Yuejiao Su, Yi Wang*, Qiongyang Hu, Chuang Yang, Lap-Pui Chau*
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR
{yuejiao.su,qiongyang.hu}@connect.polyu.hk,{yi-eie.wang,c1yang,lap-pui.chau}@polyu.edu.hk

https://yuggiehk.github.io/annexe/

Abstract

Egocentric Interaction Reasoning
and Pixel Grounding (Ego-IRG)

Egocentric interaction perception is one of the essential
branches in investigating human-environment interaction,
which lays the basis for developing next-generation intelligent systems. However, existing egocentric interaction understanding methods cannot yield coherent textual
and pixel-level responses simultaneously according to user
queries, which lacks flexibility for varying downstream
application requirements. To comprehend egocentric interactions exhaustively, this paper presents a novel task
named Egocentric Interaction Reasoning and pixel Grounding (Ego-IRG). Taking an egocentric image with the query
as input, Ego-IRG is the first task that aims to resolve the
interactions through three crucial steps: analyzing, answering, and pixel grounding, which results in fluent textual
and fine-grained pixel-level responses. Another challenge
is that existing datasets cannot meet the conditions for the
Ego-IRG task. To address this limitation, this paper creates
the Ego-IRGBench dataset based on extensive manual efforts, which includes over 20k egocentric images with 1.6
million queries and corresponding multimodal responses
about interactions. Moreover, we design a unified ANNEXE
model to generate text- and pixel-level outputs utilizing multimodal large language models, which enables a comprehensive interpretation of egocentric interactions. The experiments on the Ego-IRGBench exhibit the effectiveness of
our ANNEXE model compared with other works.

Query:
Please analyze the interaction
in the image and segment the
active objects in the image.

Query:
Please find out which object
is active and which hand is
interacting with it?

RIS
Query: The red car.

EHOI

< hand, hold, cup >

EgoVQA
Analysis: A toy car is held by
the right hand of the person in
this image.
Answer & Grounding:
The mask of the active toy car
is < MSK >.

Analysis: A pink bucket is
being interacted by two hands.

Query:
Answer:
What am Holding a
I doing? pink bucket.

Answer & Grounding:
The mask of the active bucket
is < MSK_0 >, the mask of left
hand is < MSK_1 >, the mask
of right hand is < MSK_2 >.

Figure 1. Ego-IRG task versus other related tasks. The Ego-IRG
task advances the interaction understanding compared with other
related tasks such as Referring Image Segmentation (RIS), Egocentric Hand-Object Interaction detection (EHOI), and Egocentric
Question Answering (EgoVQA).

tial progress through evolving various tasks such as humanobject interaction detection (HOI-det) [30, 53] and action
recognition [11, 82]. Recently, a growing number of users
spontaneously post videos and images taken from egocentric or first-person view (FPV) [34] on social media platforms due to the development of head-mounted devices
(HMD) and GoPro. These egocentric data provide a unique
perspective by showing visual signals from the perspective
of the camera wearer, emphasizing individual behavior in
different situations. The study of hand-object interaction
from an egocentric perspective can gain deeper insights into
human interaction, which has a wide range of applications
such as augmented reality (AR) [8], embodied AI [66], and
industrial human-assistive systems [32].

1. Introduction
Understanding how humans interact with the environment
or objects through visual information has always been a
pivotal focus in computer vision, which can contribute to
constructing next-generation agent systems. Traditionally,
studies in this area have concentrated on exocentric or thirdperson view (TPV) interaction analysis, achieving substan* Corresponding author.

9027

