This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GroundingFace: Fine-grained Face Understanding via Pixel Grounding
Multimodal Large Language Model

Fine-Grained Part Mask

Yue Han1 , Jiangning Zhang→,1,2 , Junwei Zhu2 , Runze Hou3 ,
Xiaozhong Ji2 , Chuming Lin2 , Xiaobin Hu2 , Zhucun Xue1 , Yong Liu†,1,4
1
Zhejiang University 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent 3 Tsinghua University
4
State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology

Comprehensive Caption
 Gathering discrete face
attribute

Describe the face of the person in detail.

……(Comprehensive face caption showing in left)

22132041@zju.edu.cn, yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn
Grounded Caption

Fine-grained Face Part Mask

Comprehensive Face Caption
Short Description (Previous)

Hairline

Nose
Bridge

Eye
Shadow
Eyeliner

Face painting
Cheekbo
ne
Brown
Spot

Face stickers
Nose Ring
Jawline

Pixel Grounded
Face Caption

Sure, it is [SEG]. The person's face is partially obscured by
a bandage on their nose and several stickers on their cheeks.

------- Grounded Caption ------Describe the makeup and decoration of the face in
detail. Please output interleaved segmentation mask.
……(Omit pixel grounded face caption showing in left)

---------- Grounded QA ---------What impresses you in this image and where is it evident?
Please output interleaved segmentation mask.

Detailed Description (Ours)

Forehea
d
Eye Socket

Lower Eyelid
Crease

Eyelid
Cheek
Nose Tip

Overall Description (Ours)
Jaw
Chin

Overall Evaluation and Reasoning:
The person in the image has a youthful and
playful appearance, which is reflected in …

----- Referring Segmentation ---Can you segment what occludes her face?

General Appearance:
The person in the image appears to be a
young adult female…
Background, Lightning, Occlusion
The lighting is... The background is …
The person's face is partially obscured by a
bandage on their nose...
Pose, Gaze, Emotion:
The person looks happy and is making a
peace sign with the right hand, slightly
raised. The head is tilted …, and the person
are looking directly at the camera.

Skin condition:
The individual has normal skin with a tan
complexion, and exhibits mild brown spot…
Makeup and Decoration:
The face is adorned with paintings and
various stickers, including... Additionally, the
person has a small silver nose ring…
Emotion-Expression Reasoning:
The person in the image appears to be in a
cheerful and playful mood. The facial
expression is characterized by a broad smile,
with the corners…

Grounded Hierarchical Semantic QA

What impresses me the most is the playful and whimsical
makeup and face decoration style of the individual in the
image. The face is adorned……(Omit Pixel grounded face
caption showing in left)

Makeup and Decoration:
The face is adorned with paintings and various
stickers, including... Additionally, the person has a
small silver nose ring on the nostril, adding to the
eclectic and creative aesthetic. The eyes are
accentuated with dark eyeliner and eyeshadow,
giving a dramatic and expressive look. The lips are
subtly colored with a natural shade.
FacePlayGround-240K

Figure 1. We propose FacePlayGround-240K for fine-grained face understanding, which includes meticulously annotated fine-grained
face part masks and comprehensive face captions. This dataset supports various downstream face-related tasks, and our proposed facial
pixel grounding GroundingFace achieves impressive results across multiple tasks, while current open-source models fail.

Abstract

work, specifically designed to enhance fine-grained face understanding. This framework significantly augments the capabilities of existing grounding models in face part segmentation, face attribute comprehension, while preserving general scene understanding. Comprehensive experiments validate that our approach surpasses current state-of-the-art
models in pixel-grounded face captioning/QA and various
downstream tasks, including face captioning, referring segmentation, and zero-shot face attribute recognition.

Multimodal Language Learning Models (MLLMs) have
shown remarkable performance in image understanding,
generation, and editing, with recent advancements achieving pixel-level grounding with reasoning. However, these
models for common objects struggle with fine-grained
face understanding. In this work, we introduce the
FacePlayGround-240K dataset, the first pioneering largescale, pixel-grounded face caption and question-answer
(QA) dataset that includes 240K images, 47 mask categories, 5.4M mask annotations, and 7.3M grounded regions, meticulously curated for alignment pretraining and
instruction-tuning. We present the GroundingFace frame-

1. Introduction
Multimodal Language Learning Models (MLLMs) have
demonstrated impressive performance in image understanding, generation, and editing. Recently, grounding

→ Project lead.

† Corresponding author.

3942

