This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OpenSDI: Spotting Diffusion-Generated Images in the Open World
Yabin Wang
Xi’an Jiaotong University

Zhiwu Huang*
University of Southampton

Xiaopeng Hong
Harbin Institute of Technology

iamwangyabin@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Zhiwu.Huang@soton.ac.uk

hongxiaopeng@ieee.org

(1) User Diversity

Abstract

(2) Model Innovation
SD1.5, SD2.1
SDXL, SD3

LLaVA

This paper identifies OpenSDI, a challenge for spotting
diffusion-generated images in open-world settings. In response to this challenge, we define a new benchmark, the
OpenSDI dataset (OpenSDID), which stands out from existing datasets due to its diverse use of large vision-language
models that simulate open-world diffusion-based manipulations. Another outstanding feature of OpenSDID is its
inclusion of both detection and localization tasks for images manipulated globally and locally by diffusion models.
To address the OpenSDI challenge, we propose a Synergizing Pretrained Models (SPM) scheme to build up a mixture of foundation models. This approach exploits a collaboration mechanism with multiple pretrained foundation
models to enhance generalization in the OpenSDI context,
moving beyond traditional training by synergizing multiple
pretrained models through prompting and attending strategies. Building on this scheme, we introduce MaskCLIP, an
SPM-based model that aligns Contrastive Language-Image
Pre-Training (CLIP) with Masked Autoencoder (MAE). Extensive evaluations on OpenSDID show that MaskCLIP significantly outperforms current state-of-the-art methods for
the OpenSDI challenge, achieving remarkable relative improvements of 14.23% in IoU (14.11% in F1) and 2.05%
in accuracy (2.38% in F1) compared to the second-best
model in localization and detection tasks, respectively. Our
dataset and code are available at https://github.
com/iamwangyabin/OpenSDI.

(3) Manipulation Scope

Erased by Flux.1

real

fake

Edited by SDXL

real

fake

Changed by SD2.1

real

fake

Generated

Generated

fake

fake

by SD1.5

by SD3

Figure 1. Three open-world settings of the OpenSDI challenge:
(1) user diversity by simulating a range of user preferences, (2)
model innovation through the use of multiple advanced diffusion
models, and (3) a full manipulation scope that enables both global
and local generation.

ing it increasingly difficult to ensure content authenticity.
Addressing this challenge requires detectors that can handle three essential open-world settings (Figure 1): (1) the
wide range of user preferences (user diversity), covering diverse styles, subjects, and creative intentions; (2) the rapid
evolution of diffusion models (model innovation), introducing significant variability in generated images; and (3)
the extensive T2I generation (manipulation scope), from
a broad spectrum of global image synthesis to precise local changes, object insertions, and background manipulations [46, 62, 63]. We identify this challenge as Open-world
Spotting of Diffusion Images (OpenSDI).

1. Introduction
The rise of advanced text-to-image (T2I) generation models, such as Stable Diffusion [9, 41, 45] and other diffusionbased frameworks [27, 47, 61], has profoundly transformed
digital content creation, enabling users to produce remarkably lifelike images from simple text prompts. This capability, while expanding creative possibilities, has blurred
the boundary between real and AI-generated content, mak-

In response to the OpenSDI challenge, we introduce
OpenSDID, a large-scale dataset specifically designed to
address the scarcity of suitable public datasets for benchmarking OpenSDI (Table 1). Our approach incorporates
the three essential dimensions of OpenSDI to create a comprehensive and realistic dataset. To reflect user diversity,
we use multiple large vision-language models (VLMs) [1,

* Corresponding author.

4291

