This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language-Guided Salient Object Ranking
Fang Liu

Yuhao Liu Ke Xu Shuquan Ye Gerhard Petrus Hancke Rynson W.H. Lau
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{fawnliu2333, yuhaoLiu7456, kkangwing, shuquanye}@gmail.com
{gp.hancke, Rynson.Lau}@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Salient Object Ranking (SOR) aims to study human attention
shifts across different objects in the scene. It is a challenging
task, as it requires comprehension of the relations among
the salient objects in the scene. However, existing works
often overlook such relations or model them implicitly. In
this work, we observe that when Large Vision-Language
Models (LVLMs) describe a scene, they usually focus on the
most salient object first, and then discuss the relations as
they move on to the next (less salient) one. Based on this
observation, we propose a novel Language-Guided Salient
Object Ranking approach (named LG-SOR), which utilizes
the internal knowledge within the LVLM-generated language
descriptions, i.e., semantic relation cues and the implicit entity order cues, to facilitate saliency ranking. Specifically,
we first propose a novel Text-Guided Visual Modulation
(TGVM) module to incorporate semantic information in the
description for saliency ranking. TGVM controls the flow of
linguistic information to the visual features, suppresses noisy
background image features, and enables the propagation of
useful textual features. We then propose a novel Text-Aware
Visual Reasoning (TAVR) module to enhance model reasoning in object ranking, by explicitly learning a multimodal
graph based on the entity and relation cues derived from
the description. Extensive experiments demonstrate superior
performances of our model on two SOR benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The Salient Object Ranking (SOR) task is recently proposed
to study how humans shift their attention across different
objects in a scene. By mimicking how humans sequentially
perceive the scene, SOR models can facilitate many downstream tasks, including autonomous driving [12, 47], important people detection [46, 59], and scene understanding [15].
Siris et al. [48] first propose to model the relations among
salient objects and global scene context for saliency rank
prediction across the objects. Tian et al. [53] propose to
jointly model object-based and spatial attention for inferring

the saliency rank. Sun et al. [51] propose to first partition
salient objects into different groups and then model their
relations based on a dense pyramid transformer. Guan and
Lau [14] explore human pose cues to learn high-level interactions between humans and surrounding objects for ranking
prediction. Despite their success, these methods often produce inconsistent saliency ranks with respect to those from
humans. For example, existing methods may predict a higher
saliency rank for the relatively larger motorcycle rather than
the rider (Fig. 1(A)), or neglect some small salient objects
but include those noisy background objects (Fig. 1(B)). The
main reason for this limitation is that unlike humans who
can easily identify/associate high-level semantic relations
among objects (e.g., “riding” and “playing table tennis” for
the two examples in Fig. 1) when they determine the viewing
order, existing methods do not consider such cues explicitly.
We observe that when Large Vision-Language Models
(LVLMs) [5, 19, 35] describe a scene, they tend to start with
the most salient object in the image and interpret rich semantic information (i.e., attributes and relationships). For
example, the caption generated by an LVLM [5] for Fig. 1(A)
starts from the most salient object (i.e., “A man”), and describes not only the spatial relation (i.e., “next to”) but also
the semantic relation (i.e., “ride”) to the other object (i.e.,
“motorcycle”). In Fig. 1(B), we can also see that the LVLM [5]
describes the semantic relation (i.e., “playing table tennis”)
and mimics humans’ attention shifts to describe objects sequentially, i.e., from “one holding a paddle” to “the other
standing in front of him” and “other people observing the
game”. This observation inspires us to incorporate the semantic relations and implicit orders from the descriptions
generated by LVLMs for salient object ranking.
Based on the above observation, we propose in this paper a novel language-guided salient object ranking method
(called LG-SOR), which takes an image and a language description (generated by an LVLM) as input and learns to condition the ranking process on the extracted visual stimuli and
semantic guidance. LG-SOR includes two novel modules.
First, we propose a novel Text-Guided Visual Modulation
(TGVM) module to incorporate the semantic information

29803

