This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InterAct: Advancing Large-Scale Versatile 3D Human-Object Interaction
Generation
Sirui Xu† Dongting Li† Yucheng Zhang† Xiyan Xu† Qi Long† Ziyin Wang†
Yunzhi Lu Shuchang Dong Hezi Jiang Akshat Gupta Yu-Xiong Wang‡ Liang-Yan Gui‡
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
†
Equal Contribution ‡ Equal Advising
https://sirui-xu.github.io/InterAct
A person stands next to a soccer ball, spins the soccer ball with their
right foot, and then kicks the soccer ball slightly with their left foot.

Text-to-Interaction

Human-to-Object

Interaction Prediction

Object-to-Human

Interaction Imitation

Lift.

Action-to-Interaction

Figure 1. An overview of InterAct, our large-scale 3D human-object interaction (HOI) benchmark, covering six HOI generation tasks.

Abstract

performance. Extensive experiments validate the utility of
our dataset as a foundational resource for advancing 3D
human-object interaction generation. The dataset will be
publicly accessible to support further research in the field.

While large-scale human motion capture datasets have advanced human motion generation, modeling and generating dynamic 3D human-object interactions (HOIs) remain
challenging due to dataset limitations. Existing datasets
often lack extensive, high-quality motion and annotation
and exhibit artifacts such as contact penetration, floating,
and incorrect hand motions. To address these issues, we
introduce InterAct, a large-scale 3D HOI benchmark featuring dataset and methodological advancements. First, we
consolidate and standardize 21.81 hours of HOI data from diverse sources, enriching it with detailed textual annotations.
Second, we propose a unified optimization framework to enhance data quality by reducing artifacts and correcting hand
motions. Leveraging the principle of contact invariance, we
maintain human-object relationships while introducing motion variations, expanding the dataset to 30.70 hours. Third,
we define six benchmarking tasks and develop a unified HOI
generative modeling perspective, achieving state-of-the-art

1. Introduction
Recent advances in human motion modeling have significantly benefited from extensive motion capture (MoCap)
datasets [22, 41, 50, 67, 69], enabling the creation of scalable
generative models for diverse human movements. Building
upon this foundation, researchers are increasingly turning
to the more intricate challenge of generating human-object
interactions (HOIs) [102–104]. This emerging area holds
considerable promise for applications in robotics, animation,
and computer vision.
However, high-quality HOI generation faces notable obstacles due to factors such as increased degrees of freedom
introduced by objects, varied object geometries, dynamic in-

7048

