This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BooW-VTON: Boosting In-the-Wild Virtual Try-On via
Mask-Free Pseudo Data Training
Xuanpu Zhang1,2 *, Dan Song1†, Pengxin Zhan2 , Tianyu Chang3 ,
Jianhao Zeng4 , Qingguo Chen2 , Weihua Luo2 , An-An Liu1†
1

Tianjin University

2

Alibaba Group

3

University of Science and Technology of China

4

Westlake University

Figure 1. Boow-VTON achieves realistic virtual try-on results for in-the-wild scenarios, with complex foreground and background elements. While performing natural try-ons for garments, we faithfully preserve the details of the person (such as accessories, muscles, and
skin) and the style of the image (including lighting, shadows, and artistic style).

Abstract
Image-based virtual try-on is an increasingly popular
and important task to generate realistic try-on images of the
specific person. Recent methods model virtual try-on as image mask-inpaint task, which requires masking the person
image and results in significant loss of spatial information.
Especially, for in-the-wild try-on scenarios with complex
poses and occlusions, mask-based methods often introduce
noticeable artifacts. Our research found that a mask-free
approach can fully leverage spatial and lighting information from the original person image, enabling high-quality
virtual try-on. Consequently, we propose a novel training paradigm for a mask-free try-on diffusion model. We
ensure the model’s mask-free try-on capability by creating

high-quality pseudo-data and further enhance its handling
of complex spatial information through effective in-the-wild
data augmentation. Besides, a try-on localization loss is
designed to concentrate on try-on area while suppressing
garment features in non-try-on areas, ensuring precise rendering of garments and preservation of fore/back-ground.
In the end, we introduce BooW-VTON, the mask-free virtual
try-on diffusion model, which delivers SOTA try-on quality
without parsing cost. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments have demonstrated superior performance
in wild scenarios with such a low-demand input.

1. Introduction

* Paper work done during an internship at Alibaba.
† Corresponding author. The research is supported in part by the

Image-based virtual try-on (VTON), which aims to generate realistic try-on images of a specific person while preserving the original pose and body feature in source images, is an increasingly popular and important task for online shopping. A key challenge lies in naturally rendering garments onto the correct human body parts while pre-

National Natural Science Foundation of China (62425307, U21B2024,
61902277).

26399

