This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

APT: Adaptive Personalized Training for Diffusion Models with Limited Data
JungWoo Chae1 * Jiyoon Kim1 * JaeWoong Choi1
1

LGCNS AI Research

2

Kyungyul Kim1

Sangheum Hwang2†

Department of Data Science, Seoul National University of Science and Technology

{cjwoolgcns, jiyoonkim, jaewoong choi, kyungyul.kim }@lgcns.com
shwang@ds.seoultech.ac.kr

Score matching loss

SDXL (prior)
DreamBooth
DCO
APT (ours)

Reference

SDXL (prior)

DreamBooth
Diffusion time
SDXL (prior)
DCO
DreamBooth

DCO
APT (ours)
APT (ours)
Predicted

Oil painting of backpack A monster toy is lifting
in front of Nashville skyline a barbel at the gym
during snowy full moon night

with “A astronaut sneaker, walking on surface of Mars”

A robot toy in a
dramatic action scene
in retro comic book

Figure 1. Given a few reference images, APT personalizes diffusion models with less overfitting: (Left) By comparing diffusion trajectories
using the score matching loss [6], we observe that our method maintains the original denoising path. The predicted x0 images from APT
closely resemble SDXL (prior) during early steps, preserving the overall layout and scene context. (Right) APT effectively incorporates
contextual elements from the prior, such as generating a backpack with a person without explicitly mentioning “person” and preserves
stylistic elements like comic book aesthetics. In contrast, other methods either focus excessively on reference images or fail to maintain
the prior’s style. This demonstrates that APT successfully maintains the pretrained model’s capabilities for text alignment and stylization.

Abstract
Personalizing diffusion models using limited data
presents significant challenges, including overfitting, loss of
prior knowledge, and degradation of text alignment. Overfitting leads to shifts in the noise prediction distribution, disrupting the denoising trajectory and causing the model to
lose semantic coherence. In this paper, we propose Adap-

tive Personalized Training (APT), a novel framework that
mitigates overfitting by employing adaptive training strategies and regularizing the model’s internal representations
during fine-tuning. APT consists of three key components:
(1) Adaptive Training Adjustment, which introduces an
overfitting indicator to detect the degree of overfitting at
each time step bin and applies adaptive data augmentation
and adaptive loss weighting based on this indicator; (2)
Representation Stabilization, which regularizes the mean
and variance of intermediate feature maps to prevent exces-

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

28619

