This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Resilient Sensor Fusion under Adverse Sensor Failures via Multi-Modal Expert
Fusion

1

Konyul Park1∗ Yecheol Kim2,3∗‡ Daehun Kim2
Seoul National University 2 Hanyang University

Jun Won Choi1†
LG AI Research

3

kypark@spa.snu.ac.kr, {yckim, dhkim}@spa.hanyang.ac.kr, junwchoi@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Modern autonomous driving perception systems utilize
complementary multi-modal sensors, such as LiDAR and
cameras. Although sensor fusion architectures enhance
performance in challenging environments, they still suffer
significant performance drops under severe sensor failures,
such as LiDAR beam reduction, LiDAR drop, limited field
of view, camera drop, and occlusion. This limitation stems
from inter-modality dependencies in current sensor fusion
frameworks. In this study, we introduce an efficient and
robust LiDAR-camera 3D object detector, referred to as
MoME, which can achieve robust performance through a
mixture of experts approach. Our MoME fully decouples
modality dependencies using three parallel expert decoders,
which use camera features, LiDAR features, or a combination of both to decode object queries, respectively. We propose Multi-Expert Decoding (MED) framework, where each
query is decoded selectively using one of three expert decoders. MoME utilizes an Adaptive Query Router (AQR) to
select the most appropriate expert decoder for each query
based on the quality of camera and LiDAR features. This
ensures that each query is processed by the best-suited expert, resulting in robust performance across diverse sensor failure scenarios. We evaluated the performance of
MoME on the nuScenes-R benchmark. Our MoME achieved
state-of-the-art performance in extreme weather and sensor
failure conditions, significantly outperforming the existing
models across various sensor failure scenarios.

Figure 1. Comparisons of several LiDAR-camera fusion methods. (a) Single decoder, (b) Separate decoder, and (c) Proposed
MoME. MoME utilizes three parallel decoders, each processing
camera features, LiDAR features, or a combination of both, to decouple dependencies between the modalities. It adaptively routes
each query to the most suitable decoder based on the quality of the
camera and LiDAR features.

1. Introduction
acteristics of different sensors [21, 22, 29, 33]. Each sensor
modality brings distinct benefits: cameras capture rich semantic information, LiDAR provides precise 3D geometric
details, and radar ensures reliable long-range detection even
under adverse weather conditions. Consequently, sensor fusion plays a pivotal role in enhancing perception robustness.
Recent advances in multi-modal perception have mainly
focused on intermediate-level fusion strategies, which com-

Accurate 3D perception is crucial for the safe and reliable operation of autonomous vehicles [1, 12, 30]. Multimodal perception systems enable more reliable understanding of environments by leveraging the complementary char∗ Equal contributions
‡ Work done during an internship at LG AI Research
† Corresponding author

6720

