This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SceneFactor: Factored Latent 3D Diffusion for Controllable
3D Scene Generation
Alexey Bokhovkin
Technical University of Munich

Quan Meng
Technical University of Munich

Shubham Tulsiani
Carnegie Mellon University

Angela Dai
Technical University of Munich

Figure 1. SceneFactor factors the complex task of text-guided 3D scene generation into forming a coarse semantic structure, followed by
refined geometric synthesis. Rather than require a learned model to decide the location, type, size, and local geometry of scene elements
directly, our generation of a coarse semantic box layout enables training a simpler task of layout-guided geometric synthesis. To achieve
this factorized generation, we train semantic and geometric latent diffusion models. Crucially, the proxy semantic map generation enables
user-friendly localized editing of generated scenes by editing in the semantic map with simple box operations (by clicking two box corners),
without requiring re-synthesis of the full scene. Note that input text is colored by semantic categories for visualization purposes only.

Abstract

fidelity 3D scene synthesis with effective controllable editing through our factored diffusion approach.
Project page: alexeybokhovkin . github . io /
scenefactor/

We present SceneFactor, a diffusion-based approach for
large-scale 3D scene generation that enables controllable
generation and effortless editing. SceneFactor enables
text-guided 3D scene synthesis through our factored diffusion formulation, leveraging latent semantic and geometric manifolds for generation of arbitrary-sized 3D scenes.
While text input enables easy, controllable generation, text
guidance remains imprecise for intuitive, localized editing
and manipulation of the generated 3D scenes. Our factored semantic diffusion generates a proxy semantic space
composed of semantic 3D boxes that enables controllable
editing of generated scenes by adding, removing, changing the size of the semantic 3D proxy boxes that guides
high-fidelity, consistent 3D geometric editing. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our approach enables high-

1. Introduction
3D editable generative modeling is crucial to create immersive environments for many applications, such as augmented or virtual reality, video games and films, architectural design, or creating interactive simulations. Such content creation is inherently creative by nature, and is typically
performed in an iterative process controlled by the user,
with the ability to control and edit in localized regions to
produce the desired output. Thus, a key requirement in generative 3D modeling is an underlying representation that en-

628

