This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MIMO: Controllable Character Video Synthesis with Spatial Decomposed
Modeling
Yifang Men, Yuan Yao, Miaomiao Cui, Liefeng Bo
Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group
https://menyifang.github.io/projects/MIMO/index.html

Figure 1. Given a single reference image of character, MIMO can synthesize animated avatars in driving 3D poses (visualized as skeleton
sequences) retrieved from motion datasets (left) or extracted from in-the-wild videos (right). Real-world scenes from driving videos
can also be integrated into the synthesis with natural human-object interactions. MIMO simultaneously achieves advanced scalability to
arbitrary characters, generality to novel 3D motions, and applicability to interactive real-world scenes in a unified framework.

Abstract
Character video synthesis aims to produce realistic
videos of animatable characters within lifelike scenes. As
a fundamental problem in the computer vision and graphics
community, 3D works typically require multi-view captures
for per-case training, which severely limits their applicability of modeling arbitrary characters in a short time. Recent 2D methods break this limitation via pre-trained diffusion models, but they struggle for flexible controls, pose
generality and scene interaction. To this end, we propose
MIMO, a novel framework which can not only synthesize
realistic character videos with controllable attributes (i.e.,
character, motion and scene) provided by simple user in-

puts, but also simultaneously achieve advanced scalability
to arbitrary characters, generality to novel 3D motions, and
applicability to interactive real-world scenes in a unified
framework. The core idea is to encode the 2D video to compact spatial codes, considering the inherent 3D nature of
video occurrence. Concretely, we lift the 2D frame pixels
into 3D using monocular depth estimators, and decompose
the video clip into three spatial components (i.e., main human, underlying scene, and floating occlusion) in hierarchical layers based on the 3D depth. These components
are further encoded to canonical identity code, structured
motion code and full scene code, which are utilized as control signals of the synthesis process. The design of spatial
decomposed modeling enables flexible user control, com-

21181

