This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decoder Gradient Shield: Provable and High-Fidelity Prevention of
Gradient-Based Box-Free Watermark Removal
Haonan An1 * Guang Hua2 *† Zhengru Fang1 Guowen Xu3 Susanto Rahardja2 Yuguang Fang1†
1
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 2 Singapore Institute of Technology, Singapore 828608
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
(haonanan2-c, zhefang4-c)@my.cityu.edu.hk, (ghua, susantorahardja)@ieee.org,
guowen.xu@uestc.edu.cn, my.fang@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
The intellectual property of deep image-to-image models can
be protected by the so-called box-free watermarking. It uses
an encoder and a decoder, respectively, to embed into and
extract from the model’s output images invisible copyright
marks. Prior works have improved watermark robustness,
focusing on the design of better watermark encoders. In this
paper, we reveal an overlooked vulnerability of the unprotected watermark decoder which is jointly trained with the
encoder and can be exploited to train a watermark removal
network. To defend against such an attack, we propose the
decoder gradient shield (DGS) as a protection layer in the
decoder API to prevent gradient-based watermark removal
with a closed-form solution. The fundamental idea is inspired by the classical adversarial attack, but is utilized
for the first time as a defensive mechanism in the box-free
model watermarking. We then demonstrate that DGS can
reorient and rescale the gradient directions of watermarked
queries and stop the watermark remover’s training loss from
converging to the level without DGS, while retaining decoder output image quality. Experimental results verify the
effectiveness of the proposed method. Code of paper is
available at https://github.com/haonanAN309/CVPR-2025Official-Implementation-Decoder-Gradient-Shield.

1. Introduction
Today’s deep learning models can provide exceptional performance across a wide range of tasks, even surpassing human
capability. However, these resource-intensive models are
also subject to the risk of intellectual property infringement.
To address this problem, model watermarking has been developed to verify model ownership or detect model theft.
According to how the watermark is extracted, model watermarking can be classified into white-box, black-box, and
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

Black Box API with 𝕄 Protected

Image-to-Image
Model 𝕄

𝑊

+

Watermark Encoder 𝔼

𝑋

𝑋0
𝑊0

Watermark Decoder 𝔻
Black Box API

𝑌
𝑊

Figure 1. Flowchart of box-free model watermarking for imageto-image models. The thin black arrows represent the black-box
querying flow (processing and watermarking), while the thick colored arrows represent potential watermark extraction, and each
colored arrow pair corresponds to a single input-output pair for D.

box-free methods. White-box methods [16, 26, 27] require
access to the protected model’s internal content in which the
watermark is encoded. Black-box methods [1, 7, 11], also
known as backdoor watermarking, require querying the protected model for watermark extraction since they encode the
watermark into the model’s input-output mapping. Box-free
methods, however, extract the watermark directly from the
protected model’s outputs, which are more flexible and are
specially suitable for models that generate high-entropic content, e.g., encoder-decoder image models [29, 33, 34] and
generative adversarial networks (GANs) [5, 13]. Since only
box-free methods embed watermarks into generated outputs,
they present a viable solution to the growing demand for
AI-generated content attribution.
The typical workflow of box-free watermarking for imageto-image models is depicted in Figure 1 [33]. Considering
a model M that takes an input X0 ∈ X0 and generates an
output X ∈ X , box-free watermarking creates a watermark

13424

