This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FineLIP: Extending CLIP’s Reach via Fine-Grained Alignment with Longer
Text Inputs
Mothilal Asokan*, Kebin Wu†, Fatima Albreiki
Technology Innovation Institute (TII), United Arab Emirates
Mothilal.Asokan@mbzuai.ac.ae, {kebin.wu, fatima.albreiki}@tii.ae

Abstract
As a pioneering vision-language model, CLIP (Contrastive
Language-Image Pre-training) has achieved significant
success across various domains and a wide range of downstream vision-language tasks. However, the text encoders
in popular CLIP models are limited to processing only 77
text tokens, which constrains their ability to effectively handle longer, detail-rich captions. Additionally, CLIP models
often struggle to effectively capture detailed visual and textual information, which hampers their performance on tasks
that require fine-grained analysis. To address these limitations, we present a novel approach, FineLIP, that extends
the capabilities of CLIP. FineLIP enhances cross-modal
text-image mapping by incorporating Fine-grained alignment with Longer text input within the CLIP-style framework. FineLIP first extends the positional embeddings to
handle longer text, followed by the dynamic aggregation
of local image and text tokens. The aggregated results
are then used to enforce fine-grained token-to-token crossmodal alignment. We validate our model on datasets with
long, detailed captions across two tasks: zero-shot crossmodal retrieval and text-to-image generation. Quantitative
and qualitative experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of FineLIP, outperforming existing state-of-the-art
approaches. Furthermore, comprehensive ablation studies
validate the benefits of key design elements within FineLIP.
The code will be available at https://github.com/
tiiuae/FineLIP.

Figure 1. Top-5 text-to-image retrieval results on Urban1k dataset
[36] for L/14 variants of CLIP, Baseline and FineLIP (Ours), with
image retrieval scores. The correct retrieved images are marked
with green boxes. CLIP ignores the caption in bold due to the 77token limit.

1. Introduction

positive pairs in the embedding space while pushing negative pairs apart through contrastive loss, contributing to its
strong zero-shot performance across various downstream
tasks. Furthermore, CLIP’s vision encoder has become
a foundational component in many large vision-language
models (LVLMs) [4, 16], serving as a key tool for extracting
visual features. While CLIP has been successful in many areas, it is primarily trained with image-caption pairs where
the captions are typically short. However, recent studies
reveal that images often convey richer visual details than
the short captions can encapsulate [31, 36, 37], including
intricate relationships and attributes like colors, locations,
and sizes [20]. In response, new datasets have been introduced, pairing images with longer and more detailed captions, created either through manual annotation or by lever-

Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) [24] has
set a high standard for vision-language models (VLMs),
particularly by leveraging a dual-stream architecture with
separate encoders for visual and textual inputs. Trained
on 400 million web-sourced image-text pairs, CLIP aligns
* This work is done when Mothilal Asokan works as an intern at TII.
† Corresponding author

14495

