This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3DGUT: Enabling Distorted Cameras and Secondary Rays in Gaussian Splatting
Qi Wu1 *, Janick Martinez Esturo1 *, Ashkan Mirzaei1,2 , Nicolas Moenne-Loccoz1 , Zan Gojcic1
1

NVIDIA, 2 University of Toronto

https://research.nvidia.com/labs/toronto-ai/3DGUT
Ground Truth

Trained w/ Undistorted Views

Secondary Effects

Trained w/ Original Views

Reflections

Refractions

Figure 1. We extend 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) to support nonlinear camera projections and secondary rays for simulating phenomena
such as reflections and refractions. By replacing EWA splatting rasterization with the Unscented Transform, our approach retains real-time
efficiency while accommodating complex camera effects like rolling shutter. (Left) A comparison of our model trained on undistorted
views vs. the original distorted fisheye views, showing that training on the full set of pixels improves visual quality. (Right) Two synthetic
objects, a reflective sphere and a refractive statue, inserted into a scene reconstructed with our model.

1. Introduction

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) enables efficient reconstruction and high-fidelity real-time rendering of complex scenes
on consumer hardware. However, due to its rasterizationbased formulation, 3DGS is constrained to ideal pinhole
cameras and lacks support for secondary lighting effects.
Recent methods address these limitations by tracing the
particles instead, but, this comes at the cost of significantly
slower rendering. In this work, we propose 3D Gaussian
Unscented Transform (3DGUT), replacing the EWA splatting formulation with the Unscented Transform that approximates the particles through sigma points, which can be projected exactly under any nonlinear projection function. This
modification enables trivial support of distorted cameras
with time dependent effects such as rolling shutter, while
retaining the efficiency of rasterization. Additionally, we
align our rendering formulation with that of tracing-based
methods, enabling secondary ray tracing required to represent phenomena such as reflections and refraction within
the same 3D representation. The source code is available
at: https://github.com/nv-tlabs/3dgrut.

Multiview 3D reconstruction and novel view synthesis is
a classical problem in computer vision, for which several
scene representations have been proposed in recent years,
including points [22, 40], surfaces [5, 39, 53], and volumetric fields [33, 35, 50, 52]. Most recently, driven by 3D Gaussian Splatting [18] (3DGS), volumetric particle-based representations have gained significant popularity due to their
high visual fidelity and fast rendering speeds. The core idea
of 3DGS is to model scenes as an unstructured collection
of fuzzy 3D Gaussian particles, each defined by its location, scale, rotation, opacity, and appearance. These particles can be rendered differentiably in real time via rasterization, allowing their parameters to be optimized through a
re-rendering loss function.
High frame-rates of 3DGS, especially compared to volumetric ray marching methods, can be largely accredited
to the efficient rasterization of particles. However, this reliance on rasterization also imposes some inherent limitations. The EWA splatting formulation [57] does not support
highly-distorted cameras with complex time dependent effects such as rolling shutter. Additionally, rasterization cannot simulate secondary rays required for representing phenomena like reflection, refraction, and shadows.
Instead of rasterization, recent works have proposed to

⇤ denotes equal contribution.

26036

