This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniManip: Towards General Robotic Manipulation via Object-Centric
Interaction Primitives as Spatial Constraints
Mingjie Pan1,2∗ , Jiyao Zhang1,2∗ , Tianshu Wu1 , Yinghao Zhao3 , Wenlong Gao3 , Hao Dong1,2†
1
CFCS, School of CS, Peking University 2 PKU-AgiBot Lab 3 AgiBot
https://omnimanip.github.io
Pour tea into the cup.

“Recycle battery”

“Open drawer”

“Press button with hammer”

“Insert flower into vase”

“Insert pen into holder”

“Close drawer”

“Press green button”

“Pick up cup on dish”

“Put the lid on the teapot”

“Close lid of laptop”

“Open bottle”

“Pour tea into the cup”

Active

Passive

Figure 1. We proposed OmniManip, an open-vocabulary manipulation method that bridges the gap between the high-level reasoning of
vision-language models (VLM) and the low-level precision, featuring closed-loop capabilities in both planning and execution.

Abstract
The development of general robotic systems capable
of manipulating in unstructured environments is a significant challenge. While Vision-Language Models(VLM) excel in high-level commonsense reasoning, they lack the finegrained 3D spatial understanding required for precise manipulation tasks. Fine-tuning VLM on robotic datasets to
create Vision-Language-Action Models(VLA) is a potential
solution, but it is hindered by high data collection costs and
generalization issues. To address these challenges, we propose a novel object-centric representation that bridges the
gap between VLM’s high-level reasoning and the low-level
precision required for manipulation. Our key insight is that
an object’s canonical space, defined by its functional affordances, provides a structured and semantically meaningful
way to describe interaction primitives, such as points and
directions. These primitives act as a bridge, translating
VLM’s commonsense reasoning into actionable 3D spatial
constraints. In this context, we introduce a dual closed-

loop, open-vocabulary robotic manipulation system: one
loop for high-level planning through primitive resampling,
interaction rendering and VLM checking, and another for
low-level execution via 6D pose tracking. This design ensures robust, real-time control without requiring VLM finetuning. Extensive experiments demonstrate strong zero-shot
generalization across diverse robotic manipulation tasks,
highlighting the potential of this approach for automating
large-scale data generation.

1. Introduction

*: Equal contributions. †: Corresponding author

Developing a general robotic manipulation system has long
been a challenging task, primarily due to the complexity and
variability of real-world [26, 49, 50]. Inspired by the rapid
advancements in Large Language Models (LLM)[1, 43] and
Vision-Language Models (VLM) [25, 28, 34, 56], which
leverage vast amounts of internet data to acquire rich commonsense knowledge, researchers have recently turned attention to exploring their application in robotics[14, 55].
Most existing works focus on utilizing this knowledge
for high-level task planning, such as semantic reasoning

17359

