This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Data-free Universal Adversarial Perturbation with Pseudo-semantic Prior
Chanhui Lee

Yeonghwan Song
AI Graduate School, GIST

{as584868, yeonghwan.song}@gm.gist.ac.kr

Jeany Son
jeany@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
Data-free Universal Adversarial Perturbation (UAP) is an
image-agnostic adversarial attack that deceives deep neural networks using a single perturbation generated solely
from random noise without relying on data priors. However, traditional data-free UAP methods often suffer from
limited transferability due to the absence of semantic content in random noise. To address this issue, we propose a
novel data-free universal attack method that recursively extracts pseudo-semantic priors directly from the UAPs during training to enrich the semantic content within the datafree UAP framework. Our approach effectively leverages
latent semantic information within UAPs via region sampling, enabling successful input transformations—typically
ineffective in traditional data-free UAP methods due to the
lack of semantic cues—and significantly enhancing blackbox transferability. Furthermore, we introduce a sample reweighting technique to mitigate potential imbalances
from random sampling and transformations, emphasizing
hard examples less affected by the UAPs. Comprehensive
experiments on ImageNet show that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance in average fooling rate by a
substantial margin, notably improves attack transferability across various CNN architectures compared to existing
data-free UAP methods, and even surpasses data-dependent
UAP methods. Code is available at: https://github.
com/ChnanChan/PSP-UAP.

Ski: 96.7%

Dogsled: 42.8%

Grey whale: 26.4%

Ski: 99.9%

Safe: 75.8%

Brain coral: 53.0%

Puck: 70.6%

Slot: 20.4%

(a) Whole image

(b) Cropped and resized images

Figure 1. Diverse semantic contents in both a real-image and UAP:
(a) Whole images from the ImageNet dataset (top) and our generated data-free UAP (bottom) using DenseNet-121, shown at iteration 900 during the training phase. The Top-1 class and its score
are shown below each image. (b) Cropped regions from the whole
image (top) and our UAP (bottom). Those regions contain diverse
semantics that differ from the class of the original images.

1. Introduction

and has led to increased research into adversarial attacks
that generate adversarial examples.
To craft the adversarial examples with high transferability across various DNN architectures, there have been
many adversarial attack methods using a specific target image [3, 6, 11, 18, 32, 39]. However, these methods generate
a unique perturbation for each target image, which is timeconsuming, impractical for real-world scenarios, and limits
their generalization to other images. To tackle this limitation, the Universal Adversarial Perturbation (UAP) [19]
introduced an image-agnostic attack that generates a single image-agnostic adversarial perturbation, which is capable of attacking a wide range of unknown images. Many
studies [15, 22, 24, 30] focus on developing data-dependent
UAPs that target unknown models, thereby enhancing transferability across diverse and unseen scenarios. While these
UAPs deceive diverse categories of images with a single
perturbation, they still rely on large-scale data samples and
their labels from the target domain to capture diverse semantics, such as the ImageNet [28] dataset.
Accessing data priors from the target domain is often

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become widely used in
computer vision, achieving remarkable performance across
a diverse range of tasks, such as image classification [7, 34],
object detection [25, 26], semantic segmentation [27], and
visual tracking [1, 42]. Despite these successes, DNNs are
vulnerable to carefully crafted, imperceptible perturbations
in input data, causing the model to make highly confident
yet incorrect predictions. This vulnerability poses significant challenges for deploying DNNs in critical applications,
such as autonomous driving [5] and security systems [2],

13907

