This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reasoning Mamba: Hypergraph-Guided Region Relation Calculating for
Weakly Supervised Affordance Grounding
Yuxuan Wang1 , Aming Wu1 , Muli Yang2 , Yukuan Min1 , Yihang Zhu1 , Cheng Deng†1
1
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xian 710071, China
2
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), A*STAR, Singapore
{wangyuxuan, ykmin, zhuyihang}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, yangml@i2r.a-star.edu.sg,
amwu@xidian.edu.cn, chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Vertex

This paper pays attention to Weakly Supervised Affordance
Grounding (WSAG) task that aims to train model to identify
affordance regions using human-object interaction images
and egocentric images without the need for costly pixellevel annotations. Most existing methods usually consider
the affordance regions to be isolated and directly employ
class activation maps to conduct localization, ignoring the
relationships with other object components and weakening the performance. For example, a cup’s handle is combined with its body to achieve the pouring ability. Obviously, capturing the region relationships is beneficial for
improving the localization accuracy of affordance regions.
To this end, we first explore exploiting hypergraph to discover these relations and propose a Reasoning Mamba (RMamba) framework. We first extract feature embeddings
from exocentric and egocentric images to construct the hypergraphs consisting of multiple vertices and hyperedges,
which capture the in-context local region relationships between different visual components. Subsequently, we design
a Hypergraph-guided State Space (HSS) block to reorganize
these local relationships from the global perspective. By
this mechanism, the model could leverage the captured relationships to improve the localization accuracy of affordance
regions. Extensive experiments and visualization analyses
demonstrate the superiority of our method.

Egocentric Image

Hyperedge
Feature

Image Encoder

Exocentric Image

R-Mamba
Localization

➕

Vertex Scan

Hyperedge Scan

Affordance
Label: Pour

Hypergraph

HSS

Figure 1. Affordance regions do not exist in isolation but need to
rely on the correlation with other object components for localization. To this end, we propose the R-Mamba framework. We first
construct hypergraphs to capture the in-context local relationships
between visual components. Then, we design HSS block to reorganize these local relationships from the global perspective.

1. Introduction

actions is insufficient for intelligent agents to effectively engage with their environment. Accurately modeling the relationships between objects and their affordances is essential.
To this end, affordance grounding is introduced to localize
regions of an object that are relevant to specific action. This
is also a critical component of computer vision, robotic perception and interaction systems [1, 2].
Training models to learn affordance knowledge is a challenging task. Early research [8, 12, 32] in this field primarily focused on fully supervised settings, leveraging network
architectures designed for semantic segmentation. However, these approaches face challenges such as the need for
costly pixel-level annotations and the potential for subjec-

Affordance refers to the potential actions an object enables,
which originates from ecological psychology [18]. For example, a chair can be used for sitting, while a handle can
be used for pulling. However, simply knowing the potential
† The corresponding author.

27618

