This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EntropyMark: Towards More Harmless Backdoor Watermark via
Entropy-based Constraint for Open-source Dataset Copyright Protection
Ming Sun1,2 , Rui Wang1,2*, Zixuan Zhu1,2 , Lihua Jing1,2 , Yuanfang Guo3
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
{sunming, wangrui, zhuzixuan, jinglihua}@iie.ac.cn, andyguo@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

Watermarked Dataset

High-quality open-source datasets are essential for advancing deep neural networks. However, the unauthorized commercial use of these datasets has raised significant concerns about copyright protection. One promising approach is backdoor watermark-based dataset ownership veriﬁcation (BW-DOV), in which dataset protectors implant speciﬁc backdoors into illicit models through
dataset watermarking, enabling the tracing of these models through abnormal prediction behaviors. Unfortunately,
the targeted nature of these BW-DOV methods can be maliciously exploited, potentially leading to harmful side effects. While existing harmless methods attempt to mitigate these risks, watermarked datasets can still negatively
affect prediction results, partially compromising dataset
functionality. In this paper, we propose a more harmless backdoor watermark, called EntropyMark, which improves prediction conﬁdence without altering the ﬁnal prediction results. For this purpose, an entropy-based constraint is introduced to regulate the probability distribution. Speciﬁcally, we design an iterative clean-label dataset
watermarking framework. Our framework employs gradient matching and adaptive data selection to optimize
backdoor injection. In parallel, we introduce a hypothesis test method grounded in entropy inconsistency to verify
dataset ownership. Extensive experiments on benchmark
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness, transferability, and
defense resistance of our approach. Our code is available
at https://github.com/AaronSun2000/EntropyMark.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have rapidly
advanced and been widely deployed in numerous realworld applications, such as autonomous driving [8] and face

Benign Sample
Cat
Resultinconsistent

···

Dog
Backdoored DNN

Backdoored DNN
Malicious Sample

Harmful Results

Conspicuous watermark
Stealthy watermark

Harmless Results
Benign Sample
Cat

···

Resultpreserving

Backdoored DNN
Watermarked Dataset (ours)
(ours)

Cat
Backdoored DNN
Malicious Sample (ours)

I. Training

II. Inference

Figure 1. Comparison of EntropyMark with existing backdoor watermarks: Existing watermarks alter the prediction results of backdoored models and produce conspicuous modiﬁcations on datasets. In contrast, EntropyMark preserves the original
results and is signiﬁcantly more stealthy.

recognition [39]. The prosperity of DNNs largely depends
on the availability of high-quality datasets (e.g., CIFAR [18]
and ImageNet [5]). Researchers use open-source datasets
to evaluate and iteratively optimize their proposed methods.
However, the value of these datasets has attracted dataset
stealers who illegally copy, distribute and use them without permission. Currently, most open-source datasets are
intended solely for educational or research purposes and explicitly prohibit unauthorized commercial use1 . Therefore,
copyright protection for open-source datasets has become
an urgent and necessary topic.
Unfortunately, classic data protection methods, including differential privacy [1, 44], encryption [4, 40], and digital watermarking [11, 15], are not well-suited for open1 See IMDb data policy for details.

* Corresponding author

30692

