This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BiomedCoOp: Learning to Prompt for Biomedical Vision-Language Models
Taha Koleilat*

Hojat Asgariandehkordi

Hassan Rivaz

Yiming Xiao

Concordia University, Montreal, Canada
{taha.koleilat, hojat.asgariandehkordi, hassan.rivaz, yiming.xiao}@concordia.ca

Abstract
Recent advancements in vision-language models
(VLMs), such as CLIP, have demonstrated substantial success in self-supervised representation learning for vision
tasks. However, effectively adapting VLMs to downstream
applications remains challenging, as their accuracy often
depends on time-intensive and expertise-demanding prompt
engineering, while full model fine-tuning is costly. This
is particularly true for biomedical images, which, unlike
natural images, typically suffer from limited annotated
datasets, unintuitive image contrasts, and nuanced visual features. Recent prompt learning techniques, such
as Context Optimization (CoOp) intend to tackle these
issues, but still fall short in generalizability. Meanwhile,
explorations in prompt learning for biomedical image
analysis are still highly limited. In this work, we propose BiomedCoOp, a novel prompt learning framework
that enables efficient adaptation of BiomedCLIP for
accurate and highly generalizable few-shot biomedical
image classification. Our approach achieves effective
prompt context learning by leveraging semantic consistency with average prompt ensembles from Large
Language Models (LLMs) and knowledge distillation
with a statistics-based prompt selection strategy. We
conducted comprehensive validation of our proposed
framework on 11 medical datasets across 9 modalities
and 10 organs against existing state-of-the-art methods,
demonstrating significant improvements in both accuracy
and generalizability. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/HealthX-Lab/BiomedCoOp.

training (CLIP) [37], which align visual and textual information through contrastive pre-training, allow the exploration of open-set visual concepts, thanks to the adoption
of natural language supervision. However, the success of
these models often relies heavily on the quality of the textual prompts that guide their predictions while full-model
fine-tuning for large-scale VLMs is impractical. To mitigate these, prompt learning that optimizes textual prompts
in vision-language models [25, 50, 51] has emerged as one
of the critical techniques to enhance performance without
the need for extensive fine-tuning. Notably, the pioneering work of Context Optimization (CoOp) [51] introduced
this approach for CLIP by treating text prompts as learnable context vectors and preserving the pre-trained model
weights. Meanwhile, other approaches [16, 19, 47] focus on
lightweight few-shot adaptation through Adapters [18] and
Linear Probes [37] to offer parameter-efficient solutions for
model adaptation in downstream tasks.
Different from natural images, biomedical images include a wide range of contrasts and modalities, depending
on the image acquisition devices and parameters. These images, such as MRI and ultrasound, often have unique visual
appearances that can be more difficult to interpret than typical photographs. In addition, image features (e.g., color,
texture, shape, and anatomical context) that are related to
physiological and pathological changes are more nuanced
and complex to describe, and can differ between image
modalities. Finally, due to privacy concerns and the high
requirement for clinical expertise, large datasets of wellannotated biomedical images are scarce for developing clinical deep learning models. While VLMs and the associated prompt learning techniques have shown success across
natural image datasets and benchmarks, their application in
the biomedical imaging domain (e.g., diagnosis), which has
distinct challenges, remains largely under-explored.
Due to the unique domain knowledge of biomedical images, the backbone vision-language model for prompt learning may require tailored pre-training for the best outcome.
Biomed-specific VLMs, such as BiomedCLIP [48]—pretrained on 15 million biomedical image-text pairs from
internet resources—are better suited for biomedical tasks

1. Introduction
The latest breakthroughs in vision-language models
(VLMs) have opened new possibilities for leveraging
multi-modal data in diverse applications. Unlike traditional supervised learning that focuses on closed-set visual
concepts, models like Contrastive Language-Image Pre* Corresponding author

14766

