This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MLLM-as-a-Judge for Image Safety without Human Labeling
Zhenting Wang1,2 Shuming Hu1 * Shiyu Zhao1,2 Xiaowen Lin1 Felix Juefei-Xu1
Zhuowei Li2 Ligong Han2 Harihar Subramanyam1 Li Chen1 Jianfa Chen1
Nan Jiang1 Lingjuan Lyu3 Shiqing Ma4 Dimitris N. Metaxas2 Ankit Jain1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Image content safety has become a significant challenge
with the rise of visual media on online platforms. Meanwhile, in the age of AI-generated content (AIGC), many image generation models are capable of producing harmful
content, such as images containing sexual or violent material. Thus, it becomes crucial to identify such unsafe images
based on established safety rules. Pre-trained Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs) offer potential in this regard, given their strong pattern recognition abilities. Existing approaches typically fine-tune MLLMs with humanlabeled datasets, which however brings a series of drawbacks. First, relying on human annotators to label data following intricate and detailed guidelines is both expensive
and labor-intensive. Furthermore, users of safety judgment
systems may need to frequently update safety rules, making
fine-tuning on human-based annotation more challenging.
This raises the research question: Can we detect unsafe
images by querying MLLMs in a zero-shot setting using a
predefined safety constitution (a set of safety rules)? Our
research showed that simply querying pre-trained MLLMs
does not yield satisfactory results. This lack of effectiveness
stems from factors such as the subjectivity of safety rules,
the complexity of lengthy constitutions, and the inherent biases in the models. To address these challenges, we propose
a MLLM-based method includes objectifying safety rules,
assessing the relevance between rules and images, making quick judgments based on debiased token probabilities
with logically complete yet simplified precondition chains
for safety rules, and conducting more in-depth reasoning
with cascaded chain-of-thought processes if necessary. Experiment results demonstrate that our method is highly effective for zero-shot image safety judgment tasks.

* Corresponding Author. Email: smhu@meta.com
1 GenAI @ Meta
2 Rutgers University
3 Independent Researcher
4 UMass Amherst

The rapid rise of visual media on online platforms has made
image content safety a pressing concern, especially with the
ever-increasing volume of content being shared daily [5].
Inappropriate or harmful imagery, including those containing explicit sexual content, graphic violence, or other forms
of disturbing material, poses significant challenges for platform moderation and user safety. This issue becomes even
more critical in the age of AI-generated content (AIGC),
where highly capable image generation models can easily
produce unsafe content [27, 32, 34]. Therefore, the approach to detect and mitigate the spread of harmful visual
material based on a safety constitution [4, 15] (i.e., a set of
rules defining unsafe images) is important.
Existing solutions for image safety judgment, whether
using traditional classifiers or Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLM) [7, 9, 23, 33, 35], largely depend on human annotators [2, 13, 29, 32], who manually label unsafe
content based on established safety constitution. While effective, this process is both time-consuming and resourceintensive, making it difficult to scale. Furthermore, the
complexity and intricacy of modern safety guidelines make
it challenging for human annotators to consistently apply
them without extensive training and supervision. Also,
users of safety assessment systems may need to frequently
modify guidelines, making human annotation based solutions sigficantly more challenging. Therefore, there is a
growing interest in leveraging the capabilities of pre-trained
MLLMs for automating image safety judgments in a zeroshot manner based on a set of safety rules. If successful, it
could significantly reduce the costs associated with collecting training samples and human annotations.
We find that simply querying pre-trained MLLMs alone
on the safety constitution is insufficient for reliable image
safety detection. This unsatisfactory performance can be
attributed to the following factors. Challenge 1: The subjective or ambiguous safety rules (e.g., “should not depict
sexual images”) influence the effectiveness of the zero-shot
safety judgment (see example in Figure 1a). Challenge 2:
Current MLLMs struggle to reason with complex, lengthy
safety rules (see example in Figure 1b). Challenge 3: There

14657

