This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Align-A-Video: Deterministic Reward Tuning of Image Diffusion Models for
Consistent Video Editing
Shengzhi Wang1 , Yingkang Zhong2 , Jiangchuan Mu1 , Kai Wu3 , Mingliang Xiong2 , Wen Fang2 ,
Mingqing Liu2 , Hao Deng2 , Bin He1 , Gang Li1 , and Qingwen Liu * 1,2
1

Shanghai Research Institute for Autonomous Intelligent Systems, Tongji University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University
3
ByteDance

To ĀSuperman is skiingā

Abstract
Due to control limitations in the denoising process and
the lack of training, zero-shot video editing methods often
struggle to meet user instructions, resulting in generated
videos that are visually unappealing and fail to fully satisfy
expectations. To address this problem, we propose AlignA-Video, a video editing pipeline that incorporates human
feedback through reward ﬁne-tuning. Our approach consists of two key steps: 1) Deterministic Reward Fine-tuning.
To reduce optimization costs for expected noise distributions, we propose a deterministic reward tuning strategy.
This method improves tuning stability by increasing sample
determinism, allowing the tuning process to be completed
in minutes; 2) Feature Propagation Across Frames. We optimize a selected anchor frame and propagate its features to
the remaining frames, improving both visual quality and semantic ﬁdelity. This approach avoids temporal consistency
degradation from reward optimization. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments conﬁrm the effectiveness
of using reward ﬁne-tuning in Align-A-Video, signiﬁcantly
improving the overall quality of generated videos.

Input Video

Flatten

TokenFlow

Align-A-Video(Ours)

Figure 1. Given a source input video and a text prompt, we utilize
a pre-trained image diffusion model [24] to edit the video. Stateof-the-art zero-shot video editing methods, such as Flatten [5] and
TokenFlow [10], struggle to generate content that is align with the
text prompt. Our proposed method achieves improved text alignment and better visual quality.

resources [37, 45]. To avoid learning temporal dynamics from scratch, zero-shot video editing methods leverage pre-trained image diffusion models to transform source
videos into new ones while preserving the original motion [5, 10, 18, 22, 44, 49]. However, successfully applying image diffusion models to the video domain is a challenging task. It requires addressing the following key aspects: 1) Temporal consistency : cross-frame constraints
for motion consistency; 2) Semantic ﬁdelity: generated
content matches the input text descriptions; 3) Visual quality: aligns with the user’s aesthetic preferences.
Current state-of-the-art methods [5, 10, 41, 44, 49]
achieve temporal consistency by imposing strict control
conditions, such as DDIM inversion [31], attention feature
injection [35], depth guidance [46], and optical-ﬂow constraints [43]. While these techniques successfully stabilize

1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of diffusion models [11, 28, 31, 47]
has signiﬁcantly enhanced image generation technologies,
enabling precise manipulation of various image attributes
[2, 14]. However, diffusion models have yet to achieve
high-quality performance in video generation. Due to the
complexity of temporal motion in videos, training a video
diffusion model requires substantial data and computational
* Corresponding author.
Note: Research Institute for Autonomous Intelligent Systems & School of
Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University (co-ﬁrst afﬁliations).

2074

