This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RANGE: Retrieval Augmented Neural Fields for Multi-Resolution
Geo-Embeddings
Aayush Dhakal1 Srikumar Sastry1 Subash Khanal1 Adeel Ahmad1,2 Eric Xing1 Nathan Jacobs1
Washington University in St. Louis1

Taylor Geospatial Institute2

Abstract
The choice of representation for geographic location significantly impacts the accuracy of models for a broad range
of geospatial tasks, including fine-grained species classification, population density estimation, and biome classification. Recent works like SatCLIP and GeoCLIP learn such
representations by contrastively aligning geolocation with
co-located images. While these methods work exceptionally well, in this paper, we posit that the current training
strategies fail to fully capture the important visual features.
We provide an information theoretic perspective on why the
resulting embeddings from these methods discard crucial
visual information that is important for many downstream
tasks. To solve this problem, we propose a novel retrievalaugmented strategy called RANGE. We build our method
on the intuition that the visual features of a location can
be estimated by combining the visual features from multiple
similar-looking locations. We evaluate our method across
a wide variety of tasks. Our results show that RANGE
outperforms the existing state-of-the-art models with significant margins in most tasks. We show gains of up to
13.1% on classification tasks and 0.145 R2 on regression
tasks. All our code and models will be made available at:
https://github.com/mvrl/RANGE.

Figure 1. Adding explicit visual features allows us to generate
more high-resolution location embeddings. We use a retrieval
strategy that allows us to generate multi-resolution retrievalaugmented neural field of geo-embeddings (RANGE).

1. Introduction

Previous work [33] has shown that using location directly (represented as two floating point numbers of latitude and longitude) as an input to a machine learning model
yields poor performance. Therefore, several works have attempted to find better ways to represent location data. Some
of these approaches [10, 25] use a non-parametric method to
encode location. However, recent works [18, 27, 39] have
shown that it is possible to learn a general-purpose location representation by learning a parametric model (often
a neural network) in a self-supervised setting. There are
several strategies that can be used to train the parametric
model. A common approach used by state-of-the-art models [18, 27, 39] involves learning visual cues associated with
a given geolocation. Two recent state-of-the-art models,
GeoCLIP [39] and SatCLIP [18], use contrastive training
to align geo-embeddings with co-located images; the former aligns them with ground-level images while the latter
aligns them with satellite images. Images of a location capture dense information about the area, such as the landcover,
landuse, etc. Therefore, learning location representations
that capture this dense information is beneficial for solving geospatial tasks. Prior work [18] has shown that rep-

Several machine learning tasks require the use of geolocation as an input feature. Multiple works have shown the
benefits of using geolocation to solve vital ecological, geographical, and geological tasks. SINR [5] used location
as input to predict species distribution, Lang et al. [20]
used location with satellite image to learn a global canopy
height model, and SatCLIP [18] used location to solve several geospatial tasks such as biome classification, population density estimation, housing price prediction, etc. Since
location is a ubiquitous input variable in all geospatial settings, finding good representations for it is fundamental
when solving geospatial tasks.

24680

