This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lux Post Facto: Learning Portrait Performance Relighting with
Conditional Video Diffusion and a Hybrid Dataset
Yiqun Mei1,2 Mingming He1 Li Ma1 Julien Philip1 Wenqi Xian1 David M George1
Xueming Yu1 Gabriel Dedic1 Ahmet Levent Taşel1 Ning Yu1 Vishal M. Patel2 Paul Debevec1
1

Input

“Vestibule”

Input Video

Netflix Eyeline Studios

2

“Cape Hill”

Johns Hopkins University
“Park Parking”

“Old Hall”

Point Lights

Rim Light

“Greenwich Park”

Figure 1. Lux Post Facto offers portrait relighting as a simple post-production process. Users can edit the lighting of portrait images (first
row) and videos (second row) with high fidelity using any HDR map. Our method is temporally stable and highly photorealistic.

Abstract

relighting problem. Our technique uses a hybrid dataset
consisting of static expression OLAT data and in-the-wild
portrait performance videos to jointly learn relighting and
temporal modeling. This avoids the need to acquire paired
video data in different lighting conditions. Our extensive
experiments show that our model produces state-of-the-art
results both in terms of photorealism and temporal consistency. Video results can be found on our project page.

Video portrait relighting remains challenging because
the results need to be both photorealistic and temporally
stable. This typically requires a strong model design that
can capture complex facial reflections as well as intensive
training on a high-quality paired video dataset, such as
dynamic one-light-at-a-time (OLAT). In this work, we introduce Lux Post Facto, a novel portrait video relighting
method that produces both photorealistic and temporally
consistent lighting effects. From the model side, we design
a new conditional video diffusion model built upon state-ofthe-art pre-trained video diffusion model, alongside a new
lighting injection mechanism to enable precise control. This
way we leverage strong spatial and temporal generative
capability to generate plausible solutions to the ill-posed

1. Introduction
Lighting is a crucial element in visual storytelling, shaping
the scene, adding depth, and creating emotional impact. Because of this, lighting receives considerable attention in the
filming process, marked by professional expertise, expen-

5510

