This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAP4D: Creating Animatable 4D Portrait Avatars
with Morphable Multi-View Diffusion Models
Felix Taubner1,2

Ruihang Zhang1
1

University of Toronto

2

Mathieu Tuli3
Vector Institute

3

David B. Lindell1,2

LG Electronics

https://felixtaubner.github.io/cap4d

Abstract
Reconstructing photorealistic and dynamic portrait avatars
from images is essential to many applications, including
advertising, visual effects, and virtual reality. Depending
on the application, avatar reconstruction involves different
capture setups and constraints—for example, visual effects
studios use camera arrays to capture hundreds of reference
images, while content creators may seek to animate a single portrait image downloaded from the internet. As such,
there is a large and heterogeneous ecosystem of methods
for avatar reconstruction. Techniques based on multi-view
stereo or neural rendering achieve the highest quality results, but require hundreds of reference images. Recent generative models produce convincing avatars from a single
reference image, but visual fidelity lags behind multi-view
techniques. Here, we present CAP4D: an approach that
uses a morphable multi-view diffusion model to reconstruct
photoreal 4D (dynamic 3D) portrait avatars from any number of reference images (i.e., one to 100) and animate and
render them in real time. Our approach demonstrates stateof-the-art performance for single-, few-, and multi-image
4D portrait avatar reconstruction, and takes steps to bridge
the gap in visual fidelity between single-image and multiview reconstruction techniques.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing realistic human avatars from images is a
sought-after capability for applications including advertising, cinema, content creation, teleconferencing, and virtual reality. Depending on the application, avatar reconstruction involves different capture setups and constraints—
from elaborate visual effects workflows involving hundreds
of reference images [2] to more constrained settings where
content creators seek to animate a single “in-the-wild” image [81]. In every application, photorealism and fidelity
to the subject’s likeness are paramount. In this paper, we
seek a general method to reconstruct photorealistic 4D (dynamic 3D) portrait avatars consistent with the likeness of
any number of input reference images—e.g., from one to
100—while enabling real-time animation and rendering.

Conventional methods for reconstructing photorealistic, animatable avatars rely on setups involving camera arrays [2, 50, 53, 58] or monocular video sequences [30, 32,
44, 93, 117]. These setups aim to capture sufficient variation in poses and expressions to enable 4D avatar reconstruction, often through multi-view stereo [29] or neural
rendering techniques [86]. However, these methods struggle to produce accurate results if the captured reference images lack sufficient diversity in poses or expressions.
To address this limitation, recent techniques leverage
large datasets of 2D portrait images [45, 66, 94] and 3D
scans [20, 33, 101, 118] to train diffusion models that capture robust priors on human appearance, enabling the reconstruction of 2D [87], 3D [36, 70], or 4D avatars [18] from
a single reference image. Still, most diffusion-based methods focus on 2D representations [17, 24, 36, 87, 95], and
inference with diffusion models is computationally expensive, which is a major obstacle to real-time rendering and
animation. Moreover, no existing technique for 4D avatar
reconstruction scales seamlessly from one to hundreds of
reference images with consistently photorealistic results.
Here, we introduce CAP4D, a method that uses a morphable multi-view diffusion model (MMDM) to reconstruct
photoreal 4D avatars that are based on any number of reference images and that are animated and rendered in real time
(see Fig. 1). Similar to other multi-view diffusion models [18, 31, 57, 80], MMDMs generate novel views of a
scene based on reference images and pose conditioning. We
use a 3D morphable model (3DMM) [9, 53] to provide pose
and expression conditioning for the reference images [85]
and to control the appearance of the generated images.
CAP4D reconstructs 4D avatars in two stages. In the
first stage, the MMDM uses an iterated generation process
to synthesize hundreds of images from novel viewpoints
with a wide range of expressions. While the MMDM nominally supports only a limited number of reference and generated images, we lift this restriction through a stochastic
input/output (I/O) conditioning procedure inspired by recent work on view synthesis [92] and video generation [52].
Specifically, at different steps of the reverse diffusion process [82], we condition the diffusion model on different in-

5318

