This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PSA-SSL: Pose and Size-aware Self-Supervised Learning on LiDAR Point
Clouds
Barza Nisar, Steven L. Waslander
University of Toronto Robotics Institute
Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) on 3D point clouds has the
potential to learn feature representations that can transfer to diverse sensors and multiple downstream perception
tasks. However, recent SSL approaches fail to deﬁne pretext tasks that retain geometric information such as object
pose and scale, which can be detrimental to the performance of downstream localization and geometry-sensitive
3D scene understanding tasks, such as 3D semantic segmentation and 3D object detection. We propose PSA-SSL,
a novel extension to point cloud SSL that learns object pose
and size-aware (PSA) features. Our approach deﬁnes a selfsupervised bounding box regression pretext task, which retains object pose and size information. Furthermore, we
incorporate LiDAR beam pattern augmentation on input
point clouds, which encourages learning sensor-agnostic
features. Our experiments demonstrate that with a single
pretrained model, our light-weight yet effective extensions
achieve signiﬁcant improvements on 3D semantic segmentation with limited labels across popular autonomous driving datasets (Waymo, nuScenes, SemanticKITTI). Moreover, our approach outperforms other state-of-the-art SSL
methods on 3D semantic segmentation (using up to 10 times
less labels), as well as on 3D object detection. Our code will
be released on https://github.com/TRAILab/PSA-SSL.

Figure 1. Comparison of qualitative semantic segmentation results
of PSA-DepthContrast and PSA-SegContrast against their original baselines [18, 38] on SemanticKITTI validation scan. Our
approach can capture the full extent of objects in the scene, thus
exhibiting the least label confusion within a single object.

1. Introduction
Autonomous vehicles often rely on LiDAR to obtain accurate 3D geometry and location of objects in the scene.
LiDAR-based scene perception tasks, such as 3D semantic segmentation and 3D object detection, require learning from large labelled datasets. However, annotating 3D
point cloud scenes is both time-consuming and expensive.
Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) on point clouds
has gained popularity as useful and transferable representations can be learned directly from large unlabeled datasets
[18, 23, 29, 34, 38], obviating the need for extensive labelling efforts when changing domains.
Learning transferable representations on point clouds ne-

cessitates designing a single SSL framework that can learn
features generalizable across various downstream tasks and
LiDAR sensors. A commonality among 3D perception
tasks, such as semantic segmentation and object detection,
is that they are object pose and geometry sensitive. However, recent SSL approaches for point clouds which employ
contrastive learning (CL) [18, 19, 23, 38] fail to encode such
critical geometric information. CL maximizes the similarity between differently rotated, translated or scaled versions
of the same point cloud instance. The point cloud instance
can be a single point, voxel, region, object or an entire
scene. The learned features, thereby, become invariant to

6670

