This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SF3D: Stable Fast 3D Mesh Reconstruction with UV-unwrapping and
Illumination Disentanglement
Mark Boss1

†

Zixuan Huang1,2
1

Aaryaman Vasishta1
2

Stability AI

Varun Jampani1

UIUC

Figure 1. SF3D Creates High-quality Object Meshes from Single Images with Materials, Delighting and UV-unwrapped textured
meshes in 0.3 s. Here, we show sample SF3D results from different input images. SF3D handles both realistic and non-realistic styles well.

Abstract
We present SF3D, a novel method for rapid and high-quality
textured object mesh reconstruction from a single image in
just 0.3 seconds. Unlike most existing approaches, SF3D is
explicitly trained for mesh generation, incorporating a fast
UV unwrapping technique that enables swift texture generation rather than relying on vertex colors. The method also
learns to predict material parameters and normal maps to
enhance the visual quality of the reconstructed 3D meshes.
Furthermore, SF3D integrates a delighting step to effectively remove low-frequency illumination effects, ensuring
that the reconstructed meshes can be easily used in novel
illumination conditions. Experiments demonstrate the su† Work done during internship at Stability AI.

perior performance of SF3D over the existing techniques.
Project page with code and model: https : / /
stable-fast-3d.github.io

1. Introduction
High-quality object meshes are essential for various use
cases in movies, gaming, e-commerce, and AR/VR. In this
work, we tackle the problem of generating high-quality 3D
object mesh from a single image. This is an ill-posed and
challenging problem as this requires reasoning about the object’s 3D shape and texture from only a single 2D projection
(image) of that object. Single-image object generation can
simplify the tedious and manual object creation process.
The quality of object mesh generation from a single image has dramatically improved in the past couple of years

16240

