This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Simple Data Augmentation for Feature Distribution
Skewed Federated Learning
Yunlu Yan1 , Huazhu Fu2 , Yuexiang Li3 , Jinheng Xie4 , Jun Ma1,6 , Guang Yang5 , Lei Zhu1,6 *
1
3

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)

Guangxi Medical University
6

4

National University of Singapore

5

2

IHPC, A*STAR

Imperial College London

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) facilitates collaborative learning
among multiple clients in a distributed manner and ensures
the security of privacy. However, its performance inevitably
degrades with non-Independent and Identically Distributed
(non-IID) data. In this paper, we focus on the feature distribution skewed FL scenario, a common non-IID situation in
real-world applications where data from different clients exhibit varying underlying distributions. This variation leads
to feature shift, which is a key issue of this scenario. While
previous works have made notable progress, few pay attention to the data itself, i.e., the root of this issue. The primary
goal of this paper is to mitigate feature shift from the perspective of data. To this end, we propose a simple yet remarkably effective input-level data augmentation method,
namely FedRDN, which randomly injects the statistical information of the local distribution from the entire federation
into the client’s data. This is beneficial to improve the generalization of local feature representations, thereby mitigating feature shift. Moreover, our FedRDN is a plug-and-play
component, which can be seamlessly integrated into the
data augmentation flow with only a few lines of code. Extensive experiments on several datasets show that the performance of various representative FL methods can be further
improved by integrating our FedRDN, demonstrating its effectiveness, strong compatibility and generalizability. Code
is available at https://github.com/IAMJackYan/FedRDN.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning [17, 20, 25] (FL) has been a de facto
solution for distributed learning and attracted wide attention
from various communities [2, 3, 13, 29]. It utilizes a credible server to communicate the privacy irrelevant information, e.g., model parameters, thereby collaboratively training the model on multiple distributed data clients, while the
* Lei Zhu (leizhu@ust.hk) is the corresponding author.

local data of each client is invisible to others. Such a design
is simple yet can achieve superior performance and preserve
privacy. However, it is inevitable to suffer non-Independent
and Identically Distributed (non-IID) data when we deploy
FL in real-world applications, which will greatly degrade
the performance of the trained model [9, 21, 26].
Since non-IID data is widely common in many realworld cases, many researchers try to address this issue and
improve the practicability of FL [6, 9, 21, 31]. However,
most of them try to design a general FL method that can
handle different non-IID scenarios. In fact, this is suboptimal due to the discrepancy among various non-IID scenarios, such as feature distribution skew and label distribution skew [18]. Hence, recent studies try to design special FL algorithms for different non-IID scenarios [44, 48].
In this work, we focus on solving feature distribution skew
(Definition in §3.1), a typical non-IID scenario in FL, as
the data of discrete clients are always collected from different devices or environments, incurring different underlying
distributions. For instance, different hospitals possess MR
images scanned by different devices, and different phones
store images in different styles (e.g., cartoon images and
natural images). Such data situation leads to inconsistent
feature distribution across different clients, namely feature
shift [22, 48], resulting in serious performance degradation.
To address this problem, FedBN [22] learns the specific
batch normalization layer parameters for each client. HarmoFL [8] utilizes the potential knowledge of medical images in the frequency domain to mitigate feature shift.
While feature distribution skew has been explored in FL,
little attention has been paid to the data itself. When it
comes to data processing, the common practice [8, 22, 48] is
to integrate some traditional data operations in the data augmentation flow (e.g., transforms.Compose() in Pytorch) of
each client like flipping, cropping and rotating. This overlooks the effectiveness of data augmentation for FL at the
input level, i.e., data augmentation flow, which leaves an alternative space to explore. Since the root cause of feature
shift lies in the divergence of local data distributions, we ask

25749

