This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ManiVideo: Generating Hand-Object Manipulation Video with Dexterous and
Generalizable Grasping
Youxin Pang1
Yun Liu1

Ruizhi Shao1
Jiajun Zhang2
Hanzhang Tu1
1
3
Boyao Zhou
Hongwen Zhang
Yebin Liu1 *
1
Tsinghua University
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Beijing Normal University

Figure 1. ManiVideo: We propose a novel framework for generalizable and dexterous hand-object manipulation video generation. Left:
Given several reference images of unseen objects, our method generates realistic and plausible manipulation videos driven by hand-object
signals. By integrating multiple datasets, ManiVideo supports applications such as human-centered manipulation video generation. Driving
signals are shown in the corner. Right: To ensure hand-object consistency, we introduce a multi-layer occlusion representation capable of
learning 3D occlusion relationships from occlusion-free normal maps and occlusion confidence maps.

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce ManiVideo, a novel method
for generating consistent and temporally coherent bimanual hand-object manipulation videos from given motion sequences of hands and objects. The core idea of ManiVideo is
the construction of a multi-layer occlusion (MLO) representation that learns 3D occlusion relationships from occlusionfree normal maps and occlusion confidence maps. By embedding the MLO structure into the UNet in two forms, the
model enhances the 3D consistency of dexterous hand-object
manipulation. To further achieve the generalizable grasping of objects, we integrate Objaverse, a large-scale 3D
object dataset, to address the scarcity of video data, thereby
facilitating the learning of extensive object consistency. Additionally, we propose an innovative training strategy that
effectively integrates multiple datasets, supporting downstream tasks such as human-centric hand-object manipulation video generation. Through extensive experiments, we
demonstrate that our approach not only achieves video gen-

eration with plausible hand-object interaction and generalizable objects, but also outperforms existing SOTA methods.
Project: https://carlyx.github.io/manivideo/

1. Introduction

* Corresponding Authors.

Manipulating objects with bimanual hands is a fundamental component of human activities. A deep understanding
of hand-object interaction (HOI) during manipulation has
been a long-standing challenge in computer vision, playing
a crucial role in downstream applications such as HOI reconstruction [18, 52] and virtual reality [16, 48]. The key
challenge of hand-object manipulation lies in generating
realistic hands and objects while maintaining their natural
interactions and temporal consistency.
Recently, methods [15, 53, 57] leveraging the generation
capabilities of diffusion models have demonstrated success
in generating a large number of realistic HOI images. A
common paradigm in these methods is to leverage geometric
representations of hands and objects as conditioning signals
to ensure visual plausibility and 3D consistency. Specifi-

12209

