This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Style Quantization for Data-Efﬁcient GAN Training
Jian Wang*, Xin Lan∗ , Jizhe Zhou, Yuxin Tian, Jiancheng Lv†
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
Engineering Research Center of Machine Learning and Industry Intelligence, Ministry of Education
Abstract


Under limited data setting, GANs often struggle to navigate
and effectively exploit the input latent space. Consequently,
images generated from adjacent variables in a sparse input
latent space may exhibit signiﬁcant discrepancies in realism, leading to suboptimal consistency regularization (CR)
outcomes. To address this, we propose SQ-GAN, a novel
approach that enhances CR by introducing a style space
quantization scheme. This method transforms the sparse,
continuous input latent space into a compact, structured
discrete proxy space, allowing each element to correspond
to a speciﬁc real data point, thereby improving CR performance. Instead of direct quantization, we ﬁrst map the input
latent variables into a less entangled “style” space and apply quantization using a learnable codebook. This enables
each quantized code to control distinct factors of variation.
Additionally, we optimize the optimal transport distance to
align the codebook codes with features extracted from the
training data by a foundation model, embedding external
knowledge into the codebook and establishing a semantically rich vocabulary that properly describes the training
dataset. Extensive experiments demonstrate signiﬁcant improvements in both discriminator robustness and generation quality with our method.












   
















      







  






   

      

   
  



 

  


  



Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed style quantization GAN (SQGAN) framework. (I) The input latent variables z are mapped to
an intermediate latent space W, which is quantized into a compact
and structured proxy space W q by a learnable codebook C. The
quantized codes wq ∈ W q are then fed into the synthesis network to generate images. (II) The codebook initialization aligns
the codebook codes with features extracted from the training data,
embedding external knowledge into the codebook.

Recently, numerous studies [13, 14, 19, 26, 30, 32, 51,
60] have utilized Generative adversarial networks (GANs)
to train models with limited image samples, showcasing a
promising future. A core issue they aim to address is the
discriminator’s overﬁtting problem when trained with limited data. The most direct solution is augmentation, including traditional [50, 61], differentiable [60], and adaptive [30] methods to augment real or generated data. However, these methods require customized manual design for
different datasets, lack scalability, and limit augmentation
types to a ﬁnite range [30]. Additionally, augmentations
may distort the original image semantics (see Fig. 4a),
leading to a decline in generation quality. As a complement, model regularization techniques address discriminator degradation by enhancing robustness [14, 32, 38, 58, 62]
and diversity [13, 14, 32] of the discriminator’s representations, stabilizing learning dynamics during training [19, 51].
Among these, robust representations of the discriminator
are paramount.
Consistency regularization (CR) methods [58, 62] offer
an alternative perspective to encourage the discriminator to

1. Introduction
Generative models have made signiﬁcant strides in creating human-like natural language [7], high-quality images [18, 29, 40], and diverse human speech [52] and music [17]. A key factor behind these achievements is the extensive amount of training data required to capture the distribution of real data. However, data collection can be challenging due to issues related to subject matter, privacy, or
copyright. Consequently, training generative models with
limited data has garnered increasing attention from the research community.
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

7696

