This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MDP: Multidimensional Vision Model Pruning with Latency Constraint
Xinglong Sun, Barath Lakshmanan, Maying Shen, Shiyi Lan, Jingde Chen, Jose M. Alvarez
NVIDIA

Pruning CNNs on ImageNet

Pruning Transformers on ImageNet Pruning 3D Detection Model on NuScenes

Figure 1. MDP exhibits Pareto dominance with both CNNs and Transformers in tasks ranging from ImageNet classification to NuScenes
3D detection. Speedup are shown relative to the dense model. [Left] On ImageNet pruning ResNet50, we achieve a 28% speed increase
alongside a +1.4 improvement in Top-1 compared with prior art [58]. [Middle] On ImageNet pruning DEIT-Base, compared with very
recent Isomorphic Pruning (ECCV’24)[23], our method further accelerates the baseline by an additional 37% while yielding a +0.7 gain
in Top-1. [Right] For 3D object detection, we obtain higher speed (×1.18) and mAP (0.451 vs. 0.449) compared to the dense baseline.

Abstract
Current structural pruning methods face two significant
limitations: (i) they often limit pruning to finer-grained
levels like channels, making aggressive parameter reduction challenging, and (ii) they focus heavily on parameter
and FLOP reduction, with existing latency-aware methods
frequently relying on simplistic, suboptimal linear models
that fail to generalize well to transformers, where multiple
interacting dimensions impact latency. In this paper, we
address both limitations by introducing Multi-Dimensional
Pruning(MDP), a novel paradigm that jointly optimizes
across a variety of pruning granularities—including channels, query/key, heads, embeddings, and blocks. MDP employs an advanced latency modeling technique to accurately capture latency variations across all prunable dimensions, achieving an optimal balance between latency
and accuracy. By reformulating pruning as a Mixed-Integer
Nonlinear Program (MINLP), MDP efficiently identifies the
optimal pruned structure across all prunable dimensions
while respecting latency constraints. This versatile framework supports both CNNs and transformers. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MDP significantly outperforms

previous methods, especially at high pruning ratios. On ImageNet, MDP achieves a 28% speed increase with a +1.4
Top-1 accuracy improvement over prior work like HALP for
ResNet50 pruning. Against the latest transformer pruning
method, Isomorphic, MDP delivers an additional 37% acceleration with a +0.7 Top-1 accuracy improvement.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have become the de-facto standards
of advanced computer vision applications [17, 27, 30,
48, 52, 64, 65, 72]. Both convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [30, 48] and vision transformers [17, 72] have
demonstrated exceptional effectiveness across a wide range
of tasks. As the performance advances, the models swell in
size correspondingly, containing millions or even billions of
parameters [36]. This growth in model size presents challenges for deployment on resource-constrained edge devices, hinders real-time inference tasks such as autonomous
driving.
Structural pruning [23, 56, 58, 66, 78], which reduces
redundant parameters in a structured manner—such as re-

20113

