This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stop learning it all to mitigate visual hallucination,
Focus on the hallucination target.
Dokyoon Yoon,

Youngsook Song,
SIONIC AI

Woomyong Park*

dokyoon, song, max@sionic.ai

Abstract
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) frequently
suffer from hallucination issues, generating information
about objects that are not present in input images during
vision-language tasks. These hallucinations particularly
undermine model reliability in practical applications requiring accurate object identification. To address this challenge, we propose TL-DPO, a preference learning approach
that mitigates hallucinations by focusing on targeted areas
where they occur. To implement this, we build a dataset
containing hallucinated responses, correct responses, and
target information (i.e., objects present in the images and
the corresponding chunk positions in responses affected by
hallucinations). By applying a preference learning method
restricted to these specific targets, the model can filter out
irrelevant signals and focus on correcting hallucinations.
This allows the model to produce more factual responses by
concentrating solely on relevant information. Experimental
results demonstrate that TL-DPO effectively reduces hallucinations across multiple vision hallucination tasks, improving the reliability and performance of MLLMs without
diminishing overall performance.

Figure 1. Visualization of attention maps for hallucination mitigation shows how preference learning influences model’s attention. (a) illustrates hallucinations caused by focusing on incorrect objects or missing relevant ones. Ideally, as in (b), preference
learning would guide attention to the correct objects, but in reality,
there is a risk of overfitting to text rather than object-based information, as shown in (c). Additional analysis is in Appendix A.

1. Introduction
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have
achieved remarkable performance in multimodal tasks by
leveraging extensive training and fine-tuning on large-scale
image-text pairs, which has significantly enhanced their
contextual understanding and instruction-following abilities
[2, 4, 8, 13]. However, during the integration of text and
vision modalities, a new type of hallucination issue has
emerged, where the model generates object information that
does not exist in the images or creates inaccurate spatial representations [1, 3, 6, 7, 17].
To address these issues, recent studies have introduced
preference-based learning methods, most notably Rein-

forcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF), to improve alignment across modalities and correct hallucinations [12, 14–16, 18]. However, the problem of object-level
hallucinations within images remains unresolved [11, 17].
Although preference-based learning has contributed to reducing distribution gaps across modalities and enhancing
factuality, its global feature-centric learning poses limitations in addressing object-level hallucinations.
While humans tend to correct only specific areas when
they misdraw a region in an illustration or use an incorrect
word in writing, previous approaches to addressing halluci-

* Corresponding author

4200

