This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards More General Video-based Deepfake Detection through Facial
Component Guided Adaptation for Foundation Model
Yue-Hua Han1,3,4 , Tai-Ming Huang1,3,4 , Kai-Lung Hua2,4 , Jun-Cheng Chen1
1
Academia Sinica 2 Microsoft 3 National Taiwan University
4
National Taiwan University of Science and Technology

Abstract

Full Fine-Tuning

The current deep generative models have enabled the creation of synthetic facial images with remarkable photorealism, raising significant societal concerns over their potential misuse. Despite rapid advancements in the field
of deepfake detection, developing an efficient and effective
approach for the generalized deepfake detection of unseen
forgery samples remains challenging. To address this challenge, we leverage the rich semantic priors of foundation
models and propose a novel side-network-based decoder
that extracts spatial and temporal cues using the CLIP image encoder for generalized video-based Deepfake detection. Additionally, we introduce Facial Component Guidance (FCG) to enhance spatial learning generalizability by
encouraging the model to focus on key facial regions. By
leveraging the generic features of a vision-language foundation model, our approach demonstrates promising generalizability on challenging Deepfake datasets while also
exhibiting superiority in training data efficiency, parameter
efficiency, and model robustness. The source code is available at: https://github.com/aiiu-lab/DFD-FCG

: Tunable Weights
CLIP
Image
Encoder

: Frozen Weights

Linear
Layer

‘REAL’

FAKE

Decreased Generalizability + High VRAM Cost
Our Proposed Method
CLIP
Image
Encoder
FAKE

FCG Spatial
Module
Temporal
Module

‘FAKE’

Increased Generalizability + Low VRAM Cost + Data Efficient

Figure 1. Our proposed method incorporates a Facial Component
Guided (FCG) spatial module and a temporal module to adapt the
foundational CLIP image encoder for the task of Deepfake detection. This approach enhances model generalizability by guiding it
to focus on nuanced artifacts that appear in specific facial component regions rather than arbitrary areas.

1. Introduction

addressed the generalization problem from various angles,
such as utilizing specific facial features for Deepfake detection [12, 26], generating pseudo-Deepfake samples for selfsupervised learning [2, 44], detecting temporal inconsistencies in Deepfake videos [55], and fine-tuning pre-trained expert models [13]. Despite these efforts, recent methods still
face challenges, often learning dataset-specific cues that fail
to detect unseen forgery samples.
Foundation Models (FMs) [23, 36, 38] – generic models trained on web-scale datasets – have demonstrated remarkable zero-shot performance and can be quickly adapted
to various downstream tasks with few additional tuning
cost. In terms of general synthetic image detection, Ojha
et al. [35] has adapted the Contrastive Language-Image
Pretraining (CLIP) [38] with an additional linear layer
and achieved an impressive performance. However, its
effectiveness in detecting Deepfakes (synthetic facial images/videos) remains largely unexplored. From our pilot
study as shown in Figure 1, the full fine-tuned CLIP-based
detector tends to focus its attention on the generic regions

With advancements in deep learning, generative models [15, 18, 20, 21, 34, 39, 41] have empowered the general public to create realistic synthetic images. In the wrong
hands, these tools can easily be used to mislead viewers, incite social unrest and pose significant threats for personal
reputation. In recent years, research on Deepfake detection has gained momentum to counter the growing risks
posed by synthetic contents. However, many existing detection methods struggle to recognize Deepfakes, synthetic facial images and videos, generated by newer synthesis techniques [8, 12, 26, 27, 44, 56]. This underscores the importance of developing models with robust generalization capabilities that can accurately differentiate between real and
Deepfake samples under unfamiliar scenarios.
Previous works [2, 4, 9, 12–14, 26, 44, 51–53] have

22995

