This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Separation of powers: On segregating knowledge from observation in
LLM-enabled knowledge-based visual question answering
Zhen Yang1,2 * Zhuo Tao1,2 * Qi Chen3 Liang Li1† Yuankai Qi4†
Anton van den Hengel3 Qingming Huang1,2
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 University of Adelaide
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Macquarie University
LJS

Abstract

Image

Enc

Dec

Enc

QAFD

Dec

Knowledge-based visual question answering (KBVQA) separates image interpretation and knowledge retrieval into
separate processes, motivated in part by the fact that they
are very different tasks. In this paper, we transform the KBVQA into linguistic question-answering tasks so that we can
leverage the rich world knowledge and strong reasoning
abilities of Large Language Models (LLMs). The captionthen-question approach to KBVQA has been effective, but
relies on the captioning method to describe the detail required to answer every possible question. We propose instead a Question-Aware Captioner (QACap), which uses
the question as guidance to extract correlated visual information from the image and generate a question-related
caption. To train such a model, we utilize GPT-4 to build a
corresponding high-quality question-aware caption dataset
on top of existing KBVQA datasets. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our QACap model and dataset significantly improve KBVQA performance. Our method, QACap, achieves 68.2% accuracy on the OKVQA validation
set, 73.4% on the direct-answer part of the A-OKVQA validation set, and 74.8% on the multiple-choice part, all setting new SOTA benchmarks.

Question

BLIP: a boy is sitting in a
Q: “What toy is this?”
GT Answer: Stuffed animal pew.

QACap: a boy holds a
stuffed animal in his
backpack.

Q: “Can you guess to
which part of body this
dish is good?”
GT Answer: Eye

QACap: a group of four
people, including a man
with carrots in his mouth,
standing by a brick wall.

BLIP: four people standing
against a brick wall eating
food.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Comparative illustration of predictions on the OKVQA
dataset generated by BLIP and our proposed QACap. Using GradCAM, we visualize the focus areas of each model during the generation of question-aware captions. It shows our underlying motivation of QACap: by integrating the question into the captioning
process, the model is guided to attend to the more relevant regions
of the image, thereby producing more appropriate captions that
align with the given question.

Visual Question Answering (VQA) requires a model to answer open-set questions about a given image, bridging the
gap between visual perception and language understanding. Traditional VQA tasks [2, 9] focus solely on the
content within the image, requiring basic image comprehension, such as object detection and identifying visual
attributes. Knowledge-Based Visual Question Answering
(KBVQA) [37] expands this task by incorporating external
world knowledge into the reasoning process [24, 29, 38].

For example, in Figure 2, if shown an image of a natural landscape in the wild and asked “What South American
country usually has this climate?”, a KBVQA system needs
to recognize the landscape and retrieve knowledge about its
location. Thus, the key challenges in KBVQA are: 1) accurately identifying information in the image relevant to the
question, and 2) effectively integrating relevant background
knowledge not directly present in the image for reasoning.
To retrieve question-relevant background knowledge,
prior methods such as [25, 40, 45] have leveraged external
databases. However, these approaches often fall short due
to the limited scale, domain-specific focus, and low retrieval
efficiency of these knowledge bases. To address these chal-

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

24753

