This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Skip Tuning: Pre-trained Vision-Language Models are
Effective and Efficient Adapters Themselves
Shihan Wu1
1

Ji Zhang2 * Pengpeng Zeng3 Lianli Gao3 Jingkuan Song4 Heng Tao Shen4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC)
2
Southwest Jiaotong University
3
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, UESTC
4
Tongji University
{shihan.wu.koorye@outlook.com,jizhang.jim@gmail.com}

Abstract
Prompt tuning (PT) has long been recognized as an effective
and efficient paradigm for transferring large pre-trained
vision-language models (VLMs) to downstream tasks by
learning a tiny set of context vectors. Nevertheless, in this
work, we reveal that freezing the parameters of VLMs during learning the context vectors neither facilitates the transferability of pre-trained knowledge nor improves the memory and time efficiency significantly. Upon further investigation, we find that reducing both the length and width
of the feature-gradient propagation flows of the full finetuning (FT) baseline is key to achieving effective and efficient knowledge transfer. Motivated by this, we propose
Skip Tuning, a novel paradigm for adapting VLMs to downstream tasks. Unlike existing PT or adapter-based methods,
Skip Tuning applies Layer-wise Skipping (LSkip) and Classwise Skipping (CSkip) upon the FT baseline without introducing extra context vectors or adapter modules. Extensive
experiments across a wide spectrum of benchmarks demonstrate the superior effectiveness and efficiency of our Skip
Tuning over both PT and adapter-based methods. Code:
https://github.com/Koorye/SkipTuning.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Comparison of our devised Skip Tuning with state-ofthe-art prompt tuning methods in terms of training time (seconds),
memory cost (M), and classification accuracy (%) across base-tonew generalization, cross-dataset generalization, domain generalization, and few-shot learning benchmarks. × indicates the performance improvement over the state-of-the-art. Comparison results
with the adapter-based methods are reported in Table 5.

There have recently been significant advancements in large
pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) [1, 24, 29].
One notable achievement is the CLIP model [24], which
leverages an image-text matching (ITM) loss to align images with their corresponding textual descriptions in a common feature space. While VLMs have proven impressive
capabilities in recognizing open-set visual concepts, their
zero-shot generalization performance declines significantly
* Corresponding author.

when encountering category, distribution, or domain shifts
between upstream training data and downstream tasks.
Prompt tuning (PT) has long been recognized as an effective and efficient paradigm for transferring large pre-trained
vision-language models (VLMs) to downstream tasks. The
core concept of PT is to learn a task-specific prompt (i.e.,
a small number of context vectors) for the target task, using a limited amount of training data, while keeping the
pre-trained VLM parameters fixed. Although many PT ap-

14723

