This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Selective Re-learning Mechanism for Hyperspectral Fusion Imaging
Yuanye Liu1
Jinyang Liu3
Renwei Dian1,2 *
Shutao Li3
1
The School of Robotics, Hunan University, China
2
Industrial Design and Machine Intelligence Innovation Research Institute,
Quanzhou-Hunan University, China
3
The College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Hunan University, China
{yuanye liu, jinyangliu, drw, shutao li}@hnu.edu.cn

https://github.com/YuanyeLiu/SRLF-Net

49.5
1

G

R

B

Rresponse

49

Pseudo-MSI

Spatially distorted
feature points

Spatial
re-learning

Preliminary
fusion feature

High spatial
fidelity

GT

GT

Re

Re

Value

Spectral
response

PSNR (dB)

48.5
Bands

MIMO-SST Mog-DCN

48

LRTN

47.5

DHIF-Net

DSPNet

47

Value

0

SRLF-Net
(ours)

FusionMamba
46.5

Bands

Spatial
response

Pseudo-LRHSI

Bands

Spectrally distorted Spectral
feature points
re-learning

High spectral
fidelity

(a) Spatial-Spectral Structure-Guided Selective Re-learning Mechanism

DAEM
40

0

5

10

15

Params (M)

20

25

(b) PSNR-FLOPs-Params Comparisons

Figure 1. The diagram of the Spatial-Spectral Structure-Guided Selective Re-learning Mechanism (SSG-SRL) and PSNR-FLOPs-Params
Comparisons. (a) SSG-SRL adaptively filters out distorted feature points from the preliminary fusion feature for targeted learning. (b) The
PSNR-FLOPs-Params Comparisons evaluate different methods from three aspects: the quality of the fused image (vertical axis), model
size (horizontal axis), and computational complexity (circle radius). SRLF-Net outperforms other state-of-the-art methods while requiring
fewer floating-point operations (FLOPs).

Abstract
Hyperspectral fusion imaging is challenged by high computational cost due to the abundant spectral information.
We find that pixels in regions with smooth spatial-spectral
structure can be reconstructed well using a shallow network, while only those in regions with complex spatialspectral structure require a deeper network. However, existing methods process all pixels uniformly, which ignores
this property. To leverage this property, we propose a Selective Re-learning Fusion Network (SRLF) that initially extracts features from all pixels uniformly and then selectively
refines distorted feature points. Specifically, SRLF first
employs a Preliminary Fusion Module with robust global
*Corresponding author. This paper is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62422108, No. 62221002,
and No. 62201205), the Natural Science Foundation of Chongqing
(No. CSTB2024NSCQ-MSX0240), the Fujian Provincial Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 2024J01227), and by the 2024 open project fund
of the National Key Laboratory of Electromagnetic Space Security.

modeling capability to generate a preliminary fusion feature. Afterward, it applies a Selective Re-learning Module
to focus on improving distorted feature points in the preliminary fusion feature. To achieve targeted learning, we
present a novel Spatial-Spectral Structure-Guided Selective
Re-learning Mechanism (SSG-SRL) that integrates the observation model to identify the feature points with spatial or
spectral distortions. Only these distorted points are sent to
the corresponding re-learning blocks, reducing both computational cost and the risk of overfitting. Finally, we develop an SRLF-Net, composed of multiple cascaded SRLFs,
which surpasses multiple state-of-the-art methods on several datasets with minimal computational cost.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging technology is widely used in remote
sensing [18, 19], environmental monitoring [27, 47], agriculture [21, 34], and various other fields due to its rich

7437

