This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TimeTracker: Event-based Continuous Point Tracking for Video Frame
Interpolation with Non-linear Motion
Haoyue Liu1 , Jinghan Xu1 , Yi Chang1 *, Hanyu Zhou1 , Haozhi Zhao1 , Lin Wang2 , Lunxin Yan1
1
National Key Lab of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
{liuhy, xujinghan, yichang}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Video frame interpolation (VFI) that leverages the bioinspired event cameras as guidance has recently shown better performance and memory efficiency than the frame-based
methods, thanks to the event cameras’ advantages, such as
high temporal resolution. A hurdle for event-based VFI is
how to effectively deal with non-linear motion, caused by
the dynamic changes in motion direction and speed within
the scene. Existing methods either use events to estimate
sparse optical flow or fuse events with image features to
estimate dense optical flow. Unfortunately, motion errors
often degrade the VFI quality as the continuous motion cues
from events do not align with the dense spatial information
of images in the temporal dimension. In this paper, we find
that object motion is continuous in space, tracking local
regions over continuous time enables more accurate identification of spatiotemporal feature correlations. In light of
this, we propose a novel continuous point tracking-based
VFI framework, named TimeTracker. Specifically, we first
design a Scene-Aware Region Segmentation (SARS) module
to divide the scene into similar patches. Then, a Continuous
Trajectory guided Motion Estimation (CTME) module is
proposed to track the continuous motion trajectory of each
patch through events. Finally, intermediate frames at any
given time are generated through global motion optimization
and frame refinement. Moreover, we collect a real-world
dataset that features fast non-linear motion. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms prior arts in
both motion estimation and frame interpolation quality.

1. Introduction
High-frame-rate imaging is invaluable in scientific research,
industrial inspection, security surveillance, and other fields.
However, high-speed cameras produce massive data volumes, necessitating high-performance computing equipment

events

(a) Overlaid inputs

(b) SuperSlomo

(c) PerVFI

(d) TimeLens

(e) TimeLens-XL

(f) TimeTracker (ours)

Figure 1. Visual comparison of our method with other SOTA methods. (b) and (c) estimate optical flow from images, (d) estimates
optical flow from events, and (e) fuses image and event information
to estimate optical flow. Our method, based on continuous point
tracking for optical flow estimation, achieves the best performance.

for processing and storage, which adds to operational complexity and maintenance. VFI offers a cost-effective alternative for high frame rate imaging by inferring intermediate
frames from spatiotemporal cues in neighboring frames, enabling the temporal upsampling of video frames.
Optical flow estimation [1, 2] provides per-pixel displacement fields between frames, making it a widely used approach in VFI tasks [3–7]. However, the loss of inter-frame
information makes it challenging to capture the motion of
the scene accurately. Existing methods typically assume
linear motion between frames, but this assumption is often inadequate for real-world scenes with complex motion.
To improve motion estimation accuracy, [8–11] employs
quadratic or cubic motion models, yet accurately capturing
complex nonlinear motion between frames remains challenging. Inaccurate motion assumptions can lead to reconstruction artifacts, as shown in Fig. 2 (a1) and (b1).
Event cameras [14, 15] independently activate each pixel
based on changes in brightness, capturing continuous motion edge information of objects. This characteristic offers
several notable advantages, including high temporal reso-

17649

