This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rotation-Equivariant Self-Supervised Method in Image Denoising
Hanze Liu1

Jiahong Fu1
Qi Xie1,†
Deyu Meng1,2,3
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Macau University of Science and Technology, Taipa, Macao

Abstract
Self-supervised image denoising methods have garnered
significant research attention in recent years, for this kind of
method reduces the requirement of large training datasets.
Compared to supervised methods, self-supervised methods
rely more on the prior embedded in deep networks themselves. As a result, most of the self-supervised methods
are designed with Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) architectures, which well capture one of the most important
image prior, translation equivariant prior. Inspired by the
great success achieved by the introduction of translational
equivariance, in this paper, we explore the way to further
incorporate another important image prior. Specifically, we
first apply high-accuracy rotation equivariant convolution
to self-supervised image denoising. Through rigorous theoretical analysis, we have proved that simply replacing all
the convolution layers with rotation equivariant convolution
layers would modify the network into its rotation equivariant version. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
time that rotation equivariant image prior is introduced to
self-supervised image denoising at the network architecture
level with a comprehensive theoretical analysis of equivariance errors, which offers a new perspective to the field
of self-supervised image denoising. Moreover, to further
improve the performance, we design a new mask mechanism to fusion the output of rotation equivariant network
and vanilla CNN-based network, and construct an adaptive
rotation equivariant framework. Through extensive experiments on three typical methods, we have demonstrated the
effectiveness of the proposed method. The code is available
at: https://github.com/liuhanze623/AdaReNet.

(a) Input image

(b) CNN output

(c) Equ. conv. output

Figure 1. Illustration of the output feature map of a typical image
obtained by standard CNN and our used rotation equivariant convolution neural network. Both networks are initialized randomly.

nique designed to address the standard inverse problem
in image processing and is widely utilized across various
fields. With the rapid advancement of deep learning (DL),
denoisers based on different deep networks have achieved
outstanding results.
Early, it was believed that the success of deep learning is
primarily due to the exhaustive utilization of training data.
Thus most early DL-based image denoising are in supervised manner [2, 7, 14, 20, 34, 42, 56, 57], where models
are trained on extensive datasets that include pairs of clean
and noisy images, thereby learning the transformation from
noisy to clean images. However, in reality, compiling such
comprehensive datasets is both costly and time-intensive,
posing substantial challenges [1, 35, 50].

1. Introduction

Self-supervised approaches thus achieved significant research attention in recent years. These approaches rely less
on extensive supervised datasets, but pay more attention to
the full utilization of the prior information inherent in deep
networks [3, 6, 18, 21, 26, 32, 33, 44, 51, 55]. Notably,
Lehtinen et al. introduced the innovative self-supervised
learning approach called Noise2Noise [26], which enables
training on pairs of noisy images depicting the identical scene. [26] was the first self-supervised algorithm
that achieved performance comparable to supervised image denoising. Other methods involve training denoising
models on single noisy images by designing blind-spot
networks [3, 21, 22, 48], while some approaches devise
strategies to generate training image pairs from noisy im-

During the process of capturing and transmitting images,
unexpected noises are frequently introduced [16, 28]. Such
noise can severely degrade image quality and disrupt subsequent image processing tasks. Image denoising is a tech† Corresponding author.

12720

