This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LoRASculpt: Sculpting LoRA for Harmonizing General and Specialized
Knowledge in Multimodal Large Language Models
Jian Liang,* Wenke Huang,* Guancheng Wan,* Qu Yang, Mang Ye†
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University.
{jianliang, wenkehuang, yemang}@whu.edu.cn
https://github.com/LiangJian24/LoRASculpt

Abstract

"

While Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) excel at generalizing across modalities and tasks, effectively
adapting them to specific downstream tasks while simultaneously retaining both general and specialized knowledge remains challenging. Although Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) is widely used to efficiently acquire specialized knowledge in MLLMs, it introduces substantial harmful redundancy during visual instruction tuning, which exacerbates the forgetting of general knowledge and degrades downstream task performance. To address this issue,
we propose LoRASculpt to eliminate harmful redundant
parameters, thereby harmonizing general and specialized
knowledge. Specifically, under theoretical guarantees, we
introduce sparse updates into LoRA to discard redundant
parameters effectively. Furthermore, we propose a Conflict Mitigation Regularizer to refine the update trajectory
of LoRA, mitigating knowledge conflicts with the pretrained
weights. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that
even at very high degree of sparsity (→ 5%), our method
simultaneously enhances generalization and downstream
task performance. This confirms that our approach effectively mitigates the catastrophic forgetting issue and further
promotes knowledge harmonization in MLLMs.

❄
⭐

❄

(a) Pruning Harmful Redundancy in LoRA

❄
"

(b) Pruning Redundancy Enhance Source and Target

❄
(c) Catastrophic Forgetting (! ) in MLLM

Figure 1. Motivation. Fine-tuning MLLM with LoRA on downstream tasks generates numerous harmful redundancy. (a) Illustration of post-pruning LoRA to reduce redundancy. (b) Simply pruning harmful redundancy in LoRA based on magnitude reduces
forgetting of pretrained knowledge (Source), and even enhances
downstream task performance (Target). (c) Current MLLMs suffer from catastrophic forgetting in both LLM and connector with
fewer parameters, as detailed in Sec. 4.3.1.

39, 79] have gained popularity for their efficiency, preserving the model architecture without additional inference
costs. While LoRA induces less forgetting than full finetuning [3, 50], merging it with the pretrained model still
modifies all parameters, posing a risk of severe generalization loss. The phenomenon of catastrophic forgetting
in LoRA has been widely observed across several studies
[9, 14, 69, 72, 84]. Furthermore, this problem is especially
pronounced in MLLMs due to their complex architectures,
cross-modal data differences, and task interference, posing heightened challenges in maintaining general knowl-

1. Introduction
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) are known
for their strong generalization abilities, making them adaptable across modalities and tasks [7, 31, 35, 37, 63]. Visual instruction tuning [38] is often applied to enhance
performance on specific downstream tasks. However, as
the model size grows, full fine-tuning becomes resourceintensive. Consequently, LoRA-based methods [17, 30,
* Equal contributions
† Corresponding Author

26170

