This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NightAdapter: Learning a Frequency Adapter for
Generalizable Night-time Scene Segmentation
Qi Bi1,3 , Jingjun Yi2 , Huimin Huang2 , Hao Zheng2 , Haolan Zhan4 , Yawen Huang2 ,
Yuexiang Li5 , Xian Wu2 , Yefeng Zheng1
1
2
Westlake University, China
Jarvis Research Center, Tencent Youtu Lab, China
3
4
University of Amsterdam, Netherland
Monash University, Australia
5
Macau University, Macau
huiminhuang@tencent.com, yuexiang.li@ieee.org, zhengyefeng@westlake.edu.cn

Night Domain 1

Abstract
Night-time scene segmentation is a critical yet challenging
task in the real-world applications, primarily due to the
complicated lighting conditions. However, existing methods lack sufficient generalization ability to unseen nighttime scenes with varying illumination. In light of this issue, we focus on investigating generalizable paradigms for
night-time scene segmentation and propose an efficient finetuning scheme, dubbed NightAdapter, alleviating the
domain gap across various scenes. Interestingly, different properties embedded in the day-time and night-time
features can be characterized by the bands after discrete
sine transform, which can be categorized into illuminationsensitive/-insensitive bands. Hence, our NightAdapter
is powered by two appealing designs: (1) IlluminationInsensitive Band Adaptation that provides a foundation for
understanding the prior, enhancing the robustness to illumination shifts; (2) Illumination-Sensitive Band Adaptation that fine-tunes the randomized frequency bands, mitigating the domain gap between the day-time and various night-time scenes. As a consequence, illuminationinsensitive enhancement improves the domain invariance,
while illumination-sensitive diminution strengthens the domain shift between different scenes. NightAdapter yields
significant improvements over the state-of-the-art methods
under various day-to-night, night-to-night, and in-domain
night segmentation experiments. Source code is available at
https://github.com/BiQiWHU/NightAdapter.

1. Introduction
Outdoor scene segmentation has achieved notable advances
for day-time scenarios with sufficient lighting, from convolutional neural network [9, 10, 34, 50], Vision Transformer
[13, 35, 36, 49] to Vision Foundation Model (VFM) [39, 53].

Night Domain N

Night Domain 2

...

Day Source

Finetune

Frequency
Adapter

Inference

VFM
Night Source

...
Night Pred 1

Night Pred 2

Night Pred N

Figure 1. Motivation of NightAdapter. A specific source domain, either a day-time or night-time scene, is utilized to fine-tune
the VFM integrated with a frequency adapter, enabling inference on
arbitrary unseen night-time scenes within a generalized paradigm.

Despite the success of day-time scene segmentation, visual
systems still encounter performance drops when confronted
with the night-time scenarios due to lighting discrepancies,
resulting in unique challenges for night conditions.
Recently, an increasing number of researches have
emerged in night-time scene segmentation, which can be
principally categorized as: (1) fully-supervised paradigm
that devises a segmentation model specialized for the nighttime scenes [55, 70, 75], aiming to annotate more night-time
scenes for further supervision [17, 62, 65], which is based
on the assumption that the night-time scenes for training and
inference follow the independent and identical distribution
(i.i.d.); (2) domain adaptation paradigm [16, 40, 59, 60, 72]
that transfers abundant semantic information in the day-time
domain to the night-time domain that is observable during
the training phase. However, both paradigms fail to achieve
sufficient generalization ability required for the unseen nighttime scenes, leaving a limited exploration of illumination
conditions that differ from those in the training images. In
this paper, we explore the innovative principles of generalizable paradigms for night-time scene segmentation, via

23838

