This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MCCD: Multi-Agent Collaboration-based Compositional Diffusion for
Complex Text-to-Image Generation
Mingcheng Li1,2* Xiaolu Hou1,2* Ziyang Liu3 Dingkang Yang1,2§ Ziyun Qian1,2
Jiawei Chen1,2 Jinjie Wei1,2 Yue Jiang1,2 Qingyao Xu1,2 Lihua Zhang1,2,4,5§
1

Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University 2 Cognition and Intelligent Technology Laboratory (CIT Lab)
3
4

School of Future Science and Engineering, Soochow University, Suzhou, China

Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligence Science and Engineering, Changchun, China

5

Engineering Research Center of AI and Robotics, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, China

{mingchengli21, xlhou23}@m.fudan.edu.cn, dkyang20@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

precisely align multiple objects with different attributes and
complex relationships involved in compositional prompts.

Diffusion models have shown excellent performance in textto-image generation. Nevertheless, existing methods often
suffer from performance bottlenecks when handling complex prompts that involve multiple objects, characteristics, and relations. Therefore, we propose a Multi-agent
Collaboration-based Compositional Diffusion (MCCD) for
text-to-image generation for complex scenes. Speciﬁcally,
we design a multi-agent collaboration-based scene parsing
module that generates an agent system comprising multiple
agents with distinct tasks, utilizing MLLMs to extract various scene elements effectively. In addition, Hierarchical
Compositional diffusion utilizes a Gaussian mask and ﬁltering to reﬁne bounding box regions and enhance objects
through region enhancement, resulting in the accurate and
high-ﬁdelity generation of complex scenes. Comprehensive
experiments demonstrate that our MCCD signiﬁcantly improves the performance of the baseline models in a trainingfree manner, providing a substantial advantage in complex
scene generation.

Some studies attempt to introduce additional conditions
to solve the problems above, which can be divided into two
parts: (i) spatial information-based methods [19, 20, 26, 40,
42], and (ii) feedback-based methods. Spatial informationbased methods utilize additional spatial information (e.g.,
layouts and boxes) as conditions to enhance the compositionality of T2I generation. For example, GLIGEN [19]
introduces trainable gated self-attention layers to integrate
spatial inputs based on the pre-trained stable diffusion models. ReCo [40] utilizes additional sets of positional tokens for T2I generation to achieve effective region control and ﬁne-tune the pre-trained T2I models. Feedbackbased methods [9, 15–17, 32, 35] use the generated images
as feedback to optimize the T2I generation. For instance,
DreamSync [32] utilizes a visual question answer model
and an aesthetic quality evaluation model to recognize ﬁnegrained discrepancies between the generated image and the
textual input, thus enhancing the semantic alignment capabilities of the T2I model. GORS [15] ﬁne-tunes pretrained T2I models leveraging generated images aligned to
the text prompt and text-image alignment reward-weighted
loss. Parrot [17] jointly optimizes the T2I model with a
multi-reward optimization strategy to improve the quality
of image generation. However, the above methods suffer
from the following limitations: (i) lacking ﬁne-grained and
precise spatial information guidance, resulting in unrealistic spatial locations and relations in the generated images.
(ii) Difﬁculty in obtaining high-quality image feedback to
effectively optimize the image generation. (iii) Fine-tuning
of the T2I model (e.g., stable diffusion) results in a large
amount of computational and time overheads.

1. Introduction
Recently, diffusion models [7, 29, 31, 37] have shown signiﬁcant advancements in Text-to-Image (T2I) generation,
such as Stable Diffusion [29], Imagen [30] and DALL-E
2/3 [2, 28]. However, despite their noteworthy performance
in generating realistic images consistent with text prompts,
these models have large limitations in processing complex
textual prompts and generating complex scenes, leading to
unsatisfactory image generation [10, 20, 22]. Therefore,
T2I models require powerful spatial perceptions that can
§ Corresponding authors. * Equal contributions.

To address the above-mentioned problems, we propose
a Multi-agent Collaboration-based Compositional Diffu-

13263

