This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Knowledge-Aligned Counterfactual-Enhancement Diffusion Perception
for Unsupervised Cross-Domain Visual Emotion Recognition
Wen Yin1 , Yong Wang1 , Guiduo Duan1,2 , Dongyang Zhang1 , Xin Hu1 , Yuan-Fang Li3 , Tao He1,2 *
1
The Laboratory of Intelligent Collaborative Computing of UESTC
2
Ubiquitous Intelligence and Trusted Services Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province
3
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University
{yinwen1999,cla,guiduo.duan,dyzhang,202411900415}@uestc.edu.cn
yuanfang.li@monash.edu, tao.he01@hotmail.com

Happy

Abstract
Visual Emotion Recognition (VER) is a critical yet challenging task aimed at inferring emotional states of individuals based on visual cues. However, existing works focus
on single domains, e.g., realistic images or stickers, limiting VER models’ cross-domain generalizability. To fill
this gap, we introduce an Unsupervised Cross-Domain Visual Emotion Recognition (UCDVER) task, which aims to
generalize visual emotion recognition from the source domain (e.g., realistic images) to the low-resource target domain (e.g., stickers) in an unsupervised manner. Compared to the conventional unsupervised domain adaptation problems, UCDVER presents two key challenges: a
significant emotional expression variability and an affective distribution shift. To mitigate these issues, we propose the Knowledge-aligned Counterfactual-enhancement
Diffusion Perception (KCDP) framework. Specifically,
KCDP leverages a VLM to align emotional representations in a shared knowledge space and guides diffusion
models for improved visual affective perception. Furthermore, a Counterfactual-Enhanced Language-image Emotional Alignment (CLIEA) method generates high-quality
pseudo-labels for the target domain. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our model surpasses SOTA models in both
perceptibility and generalization, e.g., gaining 12% improvements over SOTA VER model TGCA-PVT. The project
page is at https://yinwen2019.github.io/ucdver/.

Expression
Generalization

Diffusion
Model
(a) Emotional Expression Variability
Surprise

Knowledge
Space
Domain
Alignment

(b) Affective Distribution Shift

(c) Our proposed KCDP

Figure 1. Illustration of two significant challenges of UCDVER
in (a) and (b). Our proposed Knowledge-aligned Counterfactualenhancement Diffusion Perception (KCDP) (in Figure c) aligns
different domains in a shared knowledge space which guides the
diffusion model to bridge the domain gap.

cial expressions [61], body language [56], and contextual
scene features [50]. Existing VER methods [38, 48, 49,
51, 54, 55, 57] typically focus on realistic images and have
gained considerable advancements on a suite of datasets
such as EmoSet [52] and Emotion6 [34]. With the rapid
uptake of social media and messaging apps, emojis, stickers, and cartoon characters have been widely used in social
media messages. Unfortunately, current VER models cannot handle emotion recognition in these new domains due
to the significant emotional expression variability between
domains and an affective distribution shift [4].
Although pre-trained VLMs such as BLIP [23], LLaVa
[26], and InstructBLIP [5], which have been pre-trained
on diverse, multi-domain data, including both realistic images and stickers. However, as demonstrated by our empirical results in Table 2, vanilla VLMs underperform in
cross-domain visual emotion recognition. We hypothesize

1. Introduction
Visual Emotion Recognition (VER), a fundamental task in
artificial intelligence and human-computer interaction, aims
to identify human emotions through visual cues, such as fa* Corresponding author.

3888

