This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FLAVC: Learned Video Compression with Feature Level Attention
Chun Zhang1 , Heming Sun2 ,* Jiro Katto1
1
Department of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan
2
Facalty of Engineering, Yokohama National University, Kanagawa, Japan
{zhangchun@toki.,katto@}waseda.jp, hemingsun@ieee.org

Abstract
Learned Video Compression (LVC) aims to reduce redundancy in sequential data through deep learning approaches.
Recent advances have significantly boosted LVC performance by shifting compression operations to the feature
domain, often combining Motion Estimation and Motion
Compensation modules (MEMC) with CNN-based context
extraction. However, reliance on motions and convolutiondriven context models limits generalizability and global
perception. To address these issues, we propose a Featurelevel Attention (FLA) module within a Transformer-based
framework that explicitly perceives full-frame, thus bypassing confined motion signatures. FLA accomplishes global
perception by converting high-level local patch embeddings
into one-dimensional batch-wise vectors and replacing traditional attention weights to a global context matrix. Additionally, a dense overlapping patcher (DP) is introduced
to retain local features before embedding projection. Furthermore, a Transformer-CNN mixed encoder is applied to
alleviate the spatial feature bottleneck without increasing
latent size. Experiments demonstrate excellent generalizability with universally efficient redundancy reduction in
different scenarios. Extensive tests on four video compression datasets show that our method achieves state-of-theart Rate-Distortion performance compared to existing LVC
methods and traditional codecs. A down-scaled version of
our model reduced computation overhead by a great margin
while maintained strong performance. The code is available at https://github.com/Z-CV-code/FLAVC.

Figure 1. Computation-performance trade-off across various LVC
models. The proposed models (FLAVC and FLAVC-S) are highlighted in dark and light red. Computational cost is measured in
kMACs per pixel. BD-rates are evaluated on the UVG dataset
using HM-16.26 codec as the baseline. A more detailed table is
provided in Section 4.

1. Introduction

the rise of Learned Video Compression (LVC). With rapid
developments in computer vision [6], LVC has begun to
outperform widely used traditional video compression algorithms, such as HM-16.26 1 (HEVC) and VTM-13.22
(VVC).
Traditional codecs aim to reduce redundancy by encoding and transmitting only the differences between adjacent
frames, employing specialized algorithms to target these regions. Early hybrid LVC models integrated many traditional
components [3, 27] while incorporating optical flow networks [23] to extract additional motion information. Soon,
fully deep learning-based frameworks emerged [18], leading to an LVC category known as residual coding. However,
residual coding is still limited by its reliance on static subtraction operations.
To overcome these limitations, DCVC[12] introduced a
new paradigm known as conditional coding. DCVC extends
simple optical flow modules into more sophisticated motion
estimation and compensation (MEMC), refined within the

The primary objective of video compression is to minimize
transmission and storage costs while preserving as much
visual information as possible. Achieving this goal depends on effectively reducing data redundancy. The advent of deep learning has introduced the benefits of nonlinear transformations and data-driven training, facilitating

1 https://vcgit.hhi.fraunhofer.de/jvet/HM/
2 https://vcgit.hhi.fraunhofer.de/jvet/VVCSoftware VTM/

* Heming Sun is the corresponding author.

28019

