This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpatialDreamer: Self-supervised Stereo Video Synthesis from Monocular Input
Zhen Lv1 , Yangqi Long1 , Congzhentao Huang1 , Cao Li1 , Chengfei Lv1† , Hao Ren1 , Dian Zheng2
1
Alibaba Group; 2 Sun Yat-sen University

Abstract
Stereo video synthesis from monocular input is challenging in spatial computing and virtual reality due to the lack
of high-quality stereo video pairs for training and the difficulty of maintaining spatio-temporal consistency between
frames. Existing methods primarily address these issues by
directly applying novel view synthesis (NVS) techniques to
video, while facing limitations such as the inability to effectively represent dynamic scenes and the requirement for
extensive training data. In this paper, we introduce a novel
self-supervised stereo video synthesis paradigm via a video
diffusion model, termed SpatialDreamer, which meets the
challenges head-on. Firstly, to address the stereo video data
insufficiency, we propose a Depth based Video Generation
module DVG, which employs a forward-backward rendering mechanism to generate paired videos with geometric
and temporal priors. Leveraging data generated by DVG,
we propose RefinerNet along with a self-supervised synthetic framework designed to facilitate efficient and dedicated training. More importantly, we devise a consistency control module, which consists of a metric of stereo
deviation strength and a Temporal Interaction Learning
module TIL for geometric and temporal consistency ensurance respectively. We evaluated the proposed method
against various benchmark methods, with the results showcasing its superior performance. Our project website is at:
https://spatialdreamer.github.io.

Figure 1. Visualization of the temporal consistency in stereo video
generated by different methods. We extract the yellow line of each
frame and stack them together. A good result should show a natural transition in the t dimension.

the challenge of preserving the geometric consistency between two views as well as maintaining the temporal consistency across generated frames. Traditional methods for
generating stereo content involve capturing scenes using
dual-camera setups [52, 59, 70, 76]. However, the acquisition of these images involves the use of a professionalgrade camera, resulting in substantial costs. Recent advancements in deep learning mainly handle these problems
by directly applying single to stereo or multi-view image
generation techniques to video, while often facing challenges related to geometric and spatio-temporal inconsistencies [21, 32, 41, 50, 66, 67]. As shown in Fig 1, methods based on NVS are challenging to maintain accurate
spatio-temporal consistency, and even the recently released
AVP 3D photo converter [2] may inevitably result in content
flickering and inconsistency when applied to video synthesis. This is due to the difficulty of handling the temporal
coherence between frames and the spatial information between paired views in complex dynamic scenes.

1. Introduction
Stereo video synthesis from a monocular input aims to
generate the target-view video based on the given view
with geometric and spatio–temporal consistency, which
has a wide range of applications in 3D model reconstruction [6], 3D movie production [18, 40], and Apple Vision
Pro (AVP) [44] like virtual reality content.
The primary difficulties of this task stem from the lack of
adequate high-quality paired stereo videos for training, and
† Corresponding author.

811

