This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DIFFER: Disentangling Identity Features via Semantic Cues
for Clothes-Changing Person Re-ID
Xin Liang Yogesh S Rawat
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
xin.liang@ucf.edu, yogesh@ucf.edu

Abstract

Visual & Textual
Joint Space

Clothes-changing person re-identification (CC-ReID) aims
to recognize individuals under different clothing scenarios.
Current CC-ReID approaches either concentrate on modeling body shape using additional modalities including silhouette, pose, and body mesh, potentially causing the model
to overlook other critical biometric traits such as gender,
age, and style, or they incorporate supervision through additional labels that the model tries to disregard or emphasize, such as clothing or personal attributes. However, these
annotations are discrete in nature and do not capture comprehensive descriptions.
In this work, we propose DIFFER: Disentangle Identity
Features From Entangled Representations, a novel adversarial learning method that leverages textual descriptions
to disentangle identity features. Recognizing that image
features inherently mix inseparable information, DIFFER
introduces NBDetach, a mechanism designed for feature
disentanglement by leveraging the separable nature of text
descriptions as supervision. It partitions the feature space
into distinct subspaces and, through gradient reversal layers, effectively separates identity-related features from nonbiometric features. We evaluate DIFFER on 4 different
benchmark datasets (LTCC, PRCC, CelebreID-Light, and
CCVID) to demonstrate its effectiveness and provide stateof-the-art performance across all the benchmarks. DIFFER consistently outperforms the baseline method, with improvements in top-1 accuracy of 3.6% on LTCC, 3.4% on
PRCC, 2.5% on CelebReID-Light, and 1% on CCVID. Our
code can be found here.

Encode

Detach

Bio

Describe

Disentangled
subspace

Pose

Disentangle
Supervision

Non-Bio

Cloth
Hair

Bio

Text

Figure 1. Motivation behind DIFFER. Encoded image features
often entangle a multitude of information. By leveraging the separable nature of text descriptions, we guide the model to disentangle
the feature space into distinct subspaces. This allows us to detach
non-biometric factors and preserve the crucial biometric features.

1. Introduction

tems. Traditional ReID methods primarily rely on visual
cues such as appearance and clothing, assuming that individuals wear the same outfit across different observations. However, this assumption is often unrealistic, particularly in real-world settings where people frequently
change their clothes. Clothes-changing re-identification
(CC-ReID) studies a more challenging problem for realworld situations, where the goal is to recognize individuals
despite changes in their clothing. In this work, we focus on
CC-ReID to identify the person over a long time period and
in a more dynamic environment.
Existing works on CC-ReID have introduced various
strategies to tackle the challenges posed by significant
changes in appearance. Many multi-modal approaches rely
on external modalities, such as pose [35], silhouette [19],
clothing removal [31], or body shape modeling [25], to
capture identity-related features. While these methods can
improve performance, they introduce additional computational overhead during inference and are often prone to errors due to the dependency on external models, which may
fail in complex or unconstrained environments. Moreover,
by largely relying on body shape information, these models
may not adequately capture other pertinent biometric infor-

Person re-identification (ReID) [18, 23] is an important
task in computer vision, aiming to match individuals across
different camera views and environments. ReID plays a
significant role in various real-world applications, including surveillance, security, and intelligent transportation sys-

13980

