This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Large-Scale Text-to-Image Model with Inpainting is a Zero-Shot Subject-Driven
Image Generator
Chaehun Shin1
Jooyoung Choi1
Heeseung Kim1
Sungroh Yoon1,2,∗
1
Data Science and AI Laboratory, ECE, Seoul National University
2
AIIS, ASRI, INMC, ISRC, and Interdisciplinary Program in AI, Seoul National University
{chaehuny, jy choi, gmltmd789, sryoon}@snu.ac.kr
https://diptychprompting.github.io

(a) Diptych Generation

(b) Inpainting-based Diptych Prompting

Figure 1. Given a single reference image, our Diptych Prompting performs zero-shot subject-driven text-to-image generation through
diptych inpainting. Building on the (a) diptych generation capability of FLUX [23], we extend it to diptych inpainting with a separate
module, resulting in (b) versatility across various tasks including subject-driven text-to-image generation, stylized image generation, and
subject-driven image editing.

Abstract

complete diptych with the reference image in the left panel,
and performs text-conditioned inpainting on the right panel.
We further prevent unwanted content leakage by removing
the background in the reference image and improve finegrained details in the generated subject by enhancing attention weights between the panels during inpainting. Experimental results confirm that our approach significantly
outperforms zero-shot image prompting methods, resulting
in images that are visually preferred by users. Additionally, our method supports not only subject-driven generation but also stylized image generation and subject-driven
image editing, demonstrating versatility across diverse image generation applications.

Subject-driven text-to-image generation aims to produce
images of a new subject within a desired context by accurately capturing both the visual characteristics of the subject and the semantic content of a text prompt. Traditional
methods rely on time- and resource-intensive fine-tuning
for subject alignment, while recent zero-shot approaches
leverage on-the-fly image prompting, often sacrificing subject alignment. In this paper, we introduce Diptych Prompting, a novel zero-shot approach that reinterprets as an inpainting task with precise subject alignment by leveraging
the emergent property of diptych generation in large-scale
text-to-image models. Diptych Prompting arranges an in∗ Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon (sryoon@snu.ac.kr)

7986

