This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Phase Distortion with Selective State Space Models
for Video Turbulence Mitigation
Xingguang Zhang Nicholas Chimitt Xijun Wang Yu Yuan Stanley H. Chan
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University
{zhan3275, nchimitt, wang6661, yuan418, stanchan}@purdue.edu

Abstract

[14, 91]. To solve this problem, deep learning-based turbulence mitigation (TM) methods have been developed recently with synthetic datasets produced by physics-based
[7, 11, 12, 56] or visual effect-based [1, 34, 73] simulators.
Although recent data-driven video TM methods [34,
92, 93] have shown impressive generalization capabilities,
they heavily depend on training datasets and lack an interpretable understanding of turbulence degradation dynamics.
In single-frame TM methods, to inject degradation awareness in training and improve adaptivity during training,
[32, 57, 83] propose to learn a re-degradation function that
leverages both physics-based simulators and real-world images. However, the re-degradation function in [57, 83] lacks
clear physics-based interpretation. In contrast, [32] used a
differentiable simulation engine [12] to incorporate turbulence properties into the network. Despite this, adapting
this approach to video TM networks is challenging. First, it
requires knowledge of degradation parameters during training, limiting its applicability to datasets lacking such information. Second, the simulator [12] uses large kernel depthwise convolution, which is slow in an efficient restoration
pipeline. Third, the blur kernel size in [12] varies with turbulence conditions and is not differentiable. Finally, [12]
relies on Zernike polynomials [63] to represent degradation, but estimating pixel-wise Zernike coefficients from a
degraded image is highly ill-posed since different Zernike
coefficient fields can produce the same degradation pattern.
To efficiently impose the interpretable degradation
awareness, we proposed to reparameterize the physicsbased turbulence simulator [12] with a conditional variational autoencoder [37] (VAE). Specifically, our VAE encodes the phase distortion (PD), represented by the classical Zernike coefficient random field, into a latent map
and conditionally decodes it into spatially varying blur patterns based on the input Zernike coefficients. This approach bypasses the undifferentiable kernel size and the
slow large-kernel depth-wise convolution. Additionally, the
space of all possible Zernike random fields corresponding to
the same blur pattern is mapped to a more tractable Gaussian distribution. The mean and variance of this distribu-

Atmospheric turbulence is a major source of image degradation in long-range imaging systems. Although numerous deep learning-based turbulence mitigation (TM) methods have been proposed, many are slow, memory-hungry,
and do not generalize well. In the spatial domain, methods based on convolutional operators have a limited receptive field, so they cannot handle a large spatial dependency
required by turbulence. In the temporal domain, methods
relying on self-attention can, in theory, leverage the lucky
effects of turbulence, but their quadratic complexity makes
it difficult to scale to many frames. Traditional recurrent
aggregation methods face parallelization challenges.
In this paper, we present a new TM method based on two
concepts: (1) A turbulence mitigation network based on the
Selective State Space Model (MambaTM). MambaTM provides a global receptive field in each layer across spatial
and temporal dimensions while maintaining linear computational complexity. (2) Learned Latent Phase Distortion
(LPD). LPD guides the state space model. Unlike classical Zernike-based representations of phase distortion, the
new LPD map uniquely captures the actual effects of turbulence, significantly improving the model’s capability to estimate degradation by reducing the ill-posedness. Our proposed method exceeds current state-of-the-art networks on
various synthetic and real-world TM benchmarks with significantly faster inference speed. The code is available at
https://github.com/xg416/MambaTM.

1. Introduction
Images captured from long-range distances often suffer
from degradation caused by atmospheric turbulence. The
spatiotemporal varying pixel displacement and blur introduced by the accumulation of wavefront phase distortion
over long distance [20] create an unsatisfying visual effect and severely degrade downstream vision tasks such as
detection or recognition that rely on the captured image

2127

