This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Noise-Consistent Siamese-Diffusion for Medical Image
Synthesis and Segmentation
Kunpeng Qiu1,2†, Zhiqiang Gao3 *, Zhiying Zhou1,2†, Mingjie Sun4 *, Yongxin Guo1,2,5 *
1

National University of Singapore, 2 National University of Singapore Suzhou Research Institute, 3 Wenzhou-Kean University
4

Soochow University, 5 City University of Hong Kong

kunpeng qiu@u.nus.edu, zgao@kean.edu, elezzy@nus.edu.sg,
mjsun@suda.edu.cn, yongxin.guo@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Deep learning has revolutionized medical image segmentation, yet its full potential remains constrained by the
paucity of annotated datasets. While diffusion models have
emerged as a promising approach for generating synthetic
image-mask pairs to augment these datasets, they paradoxically suffer from the same data scarcity challenges
they aim to mitigate. Traditional mask-only models frequently yield low-fidelity images due to their inability to
adequately capture morphological intricacies, which can
critically compromise the robustness and reliability of segmentation models. To alleviate this limitation, we introduce
Siamese-Diffusion, a novel dual-component model comprising Mask-Diffusion and Image-Diffusion. During training, a Noise Consistency Loss is introduced between these
components to enhance the morphological fidelity of MaskDiffusion in the parameter space. During sampling, only
Mask-Diffusion is used, ensuring diversity and scalability.
Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of
our method. Siamese-Diffusion boosts SANet’s mDice and
mIoU by 3.6% and 4.4% on the Polyps, while UNet improves by 1.52% and 1.64% on the ISIC2018.
Figure 1. (a) Workflow comparisons between our method and existing ones during the training and sampling phases. (b) Differences in synthesized images across methods. Mask-only methods
(yellow) lack morphological characteristics (e.g., surface texture),
resulting in low fidelity. Mask-image methods (red) produce highfidelity images; however, their reliance on extra image prior control results in low diversity and scalability. Our method (blue)
enhances morphological fidelity while preserving diversity.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have led to unprecedented
success in medical image analysis [1, 35, 52, 54]. However, the full potential of segmentation remains untapped
due to limited annotated datasets [53]. Unfortunately, medical data annotation is often costly, and acquiring images
can be difficult or impossible due to privacy and copyright
concerns. To overcome these challenges, diffusion models
[21, 36, 45] have emerged as effective tools to generate image mask pairs, widely used to expand data sets for medical
image segmentation tasks [14, 33, 40].
* Corresponding Authors. † Equal Contribution.

Typically, generating medical images involves using
masks to indicate the lesion areas as prior controls injected
into the diffusion model [31, 59]. However, obtaining highfidelity synthetic medical images relies on large-scale train-

15672

