This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Steepest Descent Density Control for Compact 3D Gaussian Splatting
Peihao Wang1 * †, Yuehao Wang1 ,* Dilin Wang2 , Sreyas Mohan2 , Zhiwen Fan1 , Lemeng Wu2 ,
Ruisi Cai1 , Yu-Ying Yeh2 , Zhangyang Wang1 , Qiang Liu1 , Rakesh Ranjan2
1
The University of Texas at Austin, 2 Meta Reality Labs
{peihaowang, yuehao, zhiwenfan, ruisi.cai, atlaswang}@utexas.edu,

lqiang@cs.utexas.edu, {wdilin, sreyasmohan, lmwu, yyyeh, rakeshr}@meta.com
vita-group.github.io/SteepGS

Gradient Descent

3DGS

Densification

SteepGS (ours)

Figure 1. We theoretically investigate density control in 3DGS. As training via gradient descent progresses, many Gaussian primitives are
observed to become stationary while failing to reconstruct the regions they cover (e.g. the cyan-colored blobs in the top-left figure marked
with ). From an optimization-theoretic perspective (see figure on the right), we reveal that these primitives are trapped in saddle points, the
regions in the loss landscape where gradients are insufficient to further reduce loss, leaving parameters sub-optimal locally. To address this,
we introduce SteepGS, which efficiently identifies Gaussian points located in saddle area, splits them into two off-springs, and displaces
new primitives along the steepest descent directions. This restores the effectiveness of successive gradient-based updates by escaping the
saddle area (e.g. the orange-colored blobs in the top-left figure marked with become optimizable after densification). As shown in the
bottom-left visualization, SteepGS achieves a more compact parameterization while preserving the fidelity of fine geometric details.

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has emerged as a powerful
technique for real-time, high-resolution novel view synthesis.
By representing scenes as a mixture of Gaussian primitives,
3DGS leverages GPU rasterization pipelines for efficient
rendering and reconstruction. To optimize scene coverage
and capture fine details, 3DGS employs a densification algorithm to generate additional points. However, this process
often leads to redundant point clouds, resulting in excessive
memory usage, slower performance, and substantial storage
demands–posing significant challenges for deployment on
resource-constrained devices. To address this limitation, we

propose a theoretical framework that demystifies and improves density control in 3DGS. Our analysis reveals that
splitting is crucial for escaping saddle points. Through an
optimization-theoretic approach, we establish the necessary
conditions for densification, determine the minimal number of offspring Gaussians, identify the optimal parameter
update direction, and provide an analytical solution for normalizing off-spring opacity. Building on these insights, we
introduce SteepGS, incorporating steepest density control, a
principled strategy that minimizes loss while maintaining a
compact point cloud. SteepGS achieves a ⇠ 50% reduction
in Gaussian points without compromising rendering quality,
significantly enhancing both efficiency and scalability.

* Equal contribution.
† Work done during an internship with Meta Reality Labs.

26663

