This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uni-Renderer: Unifying Rendering and Inverse Rendering Via Dual Stream
Diffusion
Zhifei Chen1,∗ , Tianshuo Xu1,∗ , Wenhang Ge1, ∗ , Leyi Wu1 , Dongyu Yan1 , Jing He1 , Luozhou Wang1 ,
Lu Zeng3 , Shunsi Zhang3 , Yingcong Chen1,2,† ,
1
HKUST(GZ), 2 HKUST, 3 Quwan
{zchen379, txu647}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn; yingcongchen@ust.hk

Figure 1. Our framework, Uni-renderer, empowers the generative model to function both as a renderer and an inverse renderer by
approximating the rendering equation using a data-driven approach. Given intrinsic attributes, Uni-renderer generates photo-realistic images,
functioning as a renderer. When provided with a single RGB image, it effectively decomposes the intrinsic properties, functioning as an
inverse renderer. Top: Uni-renderer generates smooth variations as renderer. Setting the roughness value to 1.0 results in the “dog” case,
shown at the top, lacking specular highlights. Conversely, setting the metallic value to 1 makes the “hat” case appear metallic. Bottom
Left: When functioning as an inverse renderer, Uni-renderer decomposes the intrinsic properties of a single RGB image. Bottom Right:
Uni-renderer generates relighting results under different environment lighitngs.

Abstract
Rendering and inverse rendering are pivotal tasks in both
computer vision and graphics. The rendering equation is the
core of the two tasks, as an ideal conditional distribution
transfer function from intrinsic properties to RGB images.
Despite achieving promising results of existing rendering
methods, they merely approximate the ideal estimation for
a specific scene and come with a high computational cost.
Additionally, the inverse conditional distribution transfer is
intractable due to the inherent ambiguity. To address these
challenges, we propose a data-driven method that jointly
models rendering and inverse rendering as two conditional

generation tasks within a single diffusion framework. Inspired by UniDiffuser, we utilize two distinct time schedules
to model both tasks, and with a tailored dual streaming module, we achieve cross-conditioning of two pre-trained diffusion models. This unified approach, named Uni-Renderer,
allows the two processes to facilitate each other through a
cycle-consistent constrain, mitigating ambiguity by enforcing consistency between intrinsic properties and rendered
images. Combined with a meticulously prepared dataset,
our method effectively decomposition of intrinsic properties
and demonstrating a strong capability to recognize changes
during rendering.

∗ Equal contribution. †Corresponding Author.
This project is supported by Quwan Technology.

26504

