This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Holmes-VAU: Towards Long-term Video Anomaly Understanding
at Any Granularity
Huaxin Zhang1 Xiaohao Xu2 Xiang Wang1 Jialong Zuo1 Xiaonan Huang2 Changxin Gao1
Shanjun Zhang3 Li Yu1 Nong Sang1 *
1
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
3
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
Kanagawa University
{zhanghuaxin,wxiang,cgao,hustlyu,nsang}@hust.edu.cn, {xiaohaox,xiaonanh}@umich.edu, {chiyoz01}@kanagawa-u.ac.jp

Q
5s

15s

10s

Q:Describe this video

Q:Provide a caption

A:The public gathers

A:A group of guards

together, creating a
scene of disorder

stands in front of a
damaged glass door

…

35s
Q
A

5s

35s

Q:Summarize the anomaly-related event in the video
A:Individuals on the street are marching and
vandalizing the surrounding buildings, while
group of uniformed guards is maintaining order.

…

79s 84s

a

89s

Q

Q

A

A

…

117s

A

117s
… 79s
Q:Provide a summary of the video
A:The

video begins with a
burning car, smoke and flames
filling the air, creating a
chaotic atmosphere.

130s

0s

Q:Summarize the anomaly events in the video
A:The anomaly events depict chaotic and violent scenes, including individuals holding firearms,
people throwing objects at a car, a person being restrained by police officers, a burning
object, a car engulfed in flames, and a person smashing a glass door.

Temporal Anomaly Granularity:

Anomaly-focused
Temporal Sampler

Q

Clip-level

Event-level

Multi-modal LLM

A

A

Caption Judgement
Description
Analysis

A
Judgement
Description
Analysis

Video-level

Figure 1. Motivation. Left: Existing datasets lack the hierarchical structure to capture transient and sustained anomalies across varying
temporal scales. Our HIVAU-70k dataset addresses this by providing multi-granularity annotations—clip, event, and video levels—that
enable detailed anomaly analysis in complex real-world scenarios. Right: Inspired by Sherlock Holmes’s knack for zeroing in on critical
details, our Holmes-VAU method integrates an Anomaly-focused Temporal Sampler with a multi-modal LLM, directing model attention
to anomaly-rich segments, which enables models to decode complex, long-term video anomalies efficiently.

Abstract
How can we enable models to comprehend video anomalies occurring over varying temporal scales and contexts?
Traditional Video Anomaly Understanding (VAU) methods
focus on frame-level anomaly prediction, often missing the
interpretability of complex and diverse real-world anomalies. Recent multimodal approaches leverage visual and textual data but lack hierarchical annotations that capture both
short-term and long-term anomalies. To address this challenge, we introduce HIVAU-70k, a large-scale benchmark
for hierarchical video anomaly understanding across any
granularity. We develop a semi-automated annotation engine that efficiently scales high-quality annotations by combining manual video segmentation with recursive free-text

annotation using large language models (LLMs). This results in over 70,000 multi-granular annotations organized
at clip-level, event-level, and video-level segments. For efficient anomaly detection in long videos, we propose the
Anomaly-focused Temporal Sampler (ATS). ATS integrates
an anomaly scorer with a density-aware sampler to adaptively select frames based on anomaly scores, ensuring that
the multimodal LLM concentrates on anomaly-rich regions,
which significantly enhances both efficiency and accuracy.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our hierarchical
instruction data markedly improves anomaly comprehension. The integrated ATS and visual-language model outperform traditional methods in processing long videos. Our
benchmark and model are publicly available at https:
//github.com/pipixin321/HolmesVAU .

* Corresponding author

13843

