This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Not Only Text: Exploring Compositionality of Visual Representations
in Vision-Language Models
Davide Berasi1 Matteo Farina2 Massimiliano Mancini2
Elisa Ricci1, 2 Nicola Strisciuglio3
1

Fondazione Bruno Kessler

2

University of Trento

3

University of Twente

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) learn a shared feature
space for text and images, enabling the comparison of inputs of different modalities. While prior works demonstrated that VLMs organize natural language representations into regular structures encoding composite meanings,
it remains unclear if compositional patterns also emerge
in the visual embedding space. In this work, we investigate compositionality in the image domain, where the analysis of compositional properties is challenged by noise and
sparsity of visual data. We address these problems and
propose a framework, called Geodesically Decomposable
Embeddings (GDE), that approximates image representations with geometry-aware compositional structures in the
latent space. We demonstrate that visual embeddings of pretrained VLMs exhibit a compositional arrangement, and
evaluate the effectiveness of this property in the tasks of
compositional classification and group robustness. GDE
achieves stronger performance in compositional classification compared to its counterpart method that assumes linear geometry of the latent space. Notably, it is particularly
effective for group robustness, where we achieve higher results than task-specific solutions. Our results indicate that
VLMs can automatically develop a human-like form of compositional reasoning in the visual domain, making their underlying processes more interpretable. Code is available
at https://github.com/BerasiDavide/vlm_image_

Figure 1. Compositional structures in visual embedding space.
(left) Pre-trained VLM represents visual inputs of composite
meanings in regular geometric shapes. The modularity of these
structures enables the separation of the primitive components and
the composition of unseen combinations. (right) We evaluate
the usefulness of these properties in compositional classification,
group robustness, and image generation.

compositionality.

capability by developing models that imitate compositional processes, e.g., solving complex tasks via sub-goals
[9, 31, 49, 61], modeling objects as compositions of their
parts [13, 14, 47, 60, 62], encoding concept hierachies
[11, 17, 33, 55], explicitly learning compositional representations [1, 18, 38, 44], or architectures [20, 24, 36, 63, 68].
With the rise of modern Vision-Language Models
(VLMs) [26, 54, 74] jointly trained on large-scale imagetext pairs, there has been growing interest in investigating
whether these models exhibit instrinsic compositional behaviors [45, 52, 71]. In particular, Trager et al. [67] investigated latent compositional structures within the CLIP [54]
text embedding space, demonstrating that composite concepts can be represented as linear combinations of embedding vectors corresponding to various factors. These vectors, called ideal words, can be used to compose new concepts in the embedding space. Their work focuses on finding compositional structures in the text embedding space of

1. Introduction
Compositionality is the principle by which cognitive and
computational systems create meaning of a complex expression by combining the meaning of its (simpler) parts [50,
51]. Humans leverage compositionality instinctively, combining known elements to interpret novel situations. In
machine intelligence, efforts were made to replicate this
Corresponding author: dberasi@fbk.eu.

24917

