This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FloVD: Optical Flow Meets Video Diffusion Model for
Enhanced Camera-Controlled Video Synthesis

1

Single image

Chong Luo2

POSTECH

Camera
parameters

2

Seung-Hwan Baek1

Microsoft Research Asia

Camera-controlled
video synthesis
X-t
slice
(dolly zoom)

…

Ours

CameraCtrl

MotionCtrl

Frame 14

Optical flow maps

Sunghyun Cho1

Frame 1

Qi Dai2

Frame 8

Wonjoon Jin1,2†

Figure 1. (Left) Our method using optical flow enables video synthesis with complex camera movements (dolly zoom). (Right) Synthesized
video frames with ’zoom-out’ camera motion. X-t slice reveals pixel value changes along the red line. Our method shows natural object
motion and accurate camera control, while CameraCtrl [9] produces an object without motions, and MotionCtrl [33] produces artifacts.

Abstract

datasets [3–5, 10, 12, 23, 27, 31, 38]. However, they often
lack the ability to incorporate user-defined controls, particularly in terms of camera movement and perspective. This
limitation restricts the practical applications of video diffusion models, where precise control over camera parameters
is crucial for various tasks such as film production, virtual
reality, and interactive simulations.

We present FloVD, a novel video diffusion model for
camera-controllable video generation. FloVD leverages optical flow to represent the motions of the camera and moving
objects. This approach offers two key benefits. Since optical
flow can be directly estimated from videos, our approach allows for the use of arbitrary training videos without groundtruth camera parameters. Moreover, as background optical flow encodes 3D correlation across different viewpoints,
our method enables detailed camera control by leveraging
the background motion. To synthesize natural object motion while supporting detailed camera control, our framework adopts a two-stage video synthesis pipeline consisting
of optical flow generation and flow-conditioned video synthesis. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of
our method over previous approaches in terms of accurate
camera control and natural object motion synthesis.

Recently, several approaches have introduced camera
controllability to video diffusion models. One line of methods uses either text descriptions or user-drawn strokes that
describe background motion as conditional inputs to represent camera motion [6, 23, 26, 33, 39]. However, these
methods support only limited camera controllability, such
as zoom and pan, during video generation.
More sophisticated camera control has been achieved by
directly using camera parameters as inputs [2, 9, 16, 32–35,
37, 40, 42]. In particular, recent methods embed input camera parameters using the Plücker embedding scheme [28],
which involves embedding ray origins and directions, and
feed them into video diffusion models [2, 9, 35, 42]. While
these approaches offer more detailed control, they require a
training dataset that includes ground-truth camera parameters for every video frame. Acquiring such datasets is challenging, leading to the use of restricted datasets that pri-

1. Introduction
Video diffusion models have made significant strides in
generating high-quality videos by leveraging large-scale
† Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

2040

