This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

End-to-End HOI Reconstruction Transformer with Graph-based Encoding
Zhenrong Wang1 Qi Zheng1† Sihan Ma2 Maosheng Ye3 Yibing Zhan4 Dongjiang Li4
1
Shenzhen University 2 University of Sydney 3 DeepRoute.AI 4 JD Explore Academy
2022280175@email.szu.edu.cn, qiz@szu.edu.cn
https://hoi-tg.github.io/

a. Explicit Contact Constraints

Abstract

Offset = Po — Ph

With the diversification of human-object interaction
(HOI) applications and the success of capturing human
meshes, HOI reconstruction has gained widespread attention. Existing mainstream HOI reconstruction methods often rely on explicitly modeling interactions between humans and objects. However, such a way leads to a natural conflict between 3D mesh reconstruction, which emphasizes global structure, and fine-grained contact reconstruction, which focuses on local details. To address the limitations of explicit modeling, we propose the End-to-End HOI
Reconstruction Transformer with Graph-based Encoding
(HOI-TG). It implicitly learns the interaction between humans and objects by leveraging self-attention mechanisms.
Within the transformer architecture, we devise graph residual blocks to aggregate the topology among vertices of different spatial structures. This dual focus effectively balances global and local representations. Without bells and
whistles, HOI-TG achieves state-of-the-art performance on
BEHAVE and InterCap datasets. Particularly on the challenging InterCap dataset, our method improves the reconstruction results for human and object meshes by 8.9% and
8.6%, respectively.

Ph

Po

(i) Human-Object Offset

(ii) Contact Part

(iii) Contact Vertices

b. Implicit Contact Modeling

Vertex Queries

Init Mesh

Object Queries

End-to-End
HOI Transformer

Joint Queries

Final Mesh

Figure 1. Comparison between existing explicit contact constraints for HOI reconstruction and our implicit contact modeling.

1. Introduction

lated interactions and occlusions.
Recently, several studies [17, 31, 41] have explored
leveraging interaction information for jointly modeling human and object reconstruction. These works generally incorporate interaction representations to impose hard constraints on the models. As shown in Fig. 1a, (i) StackFLOW [17] utilizes the human-object offsets between anchors, densely sampled from the surfaces of the human and
object meshes, to represent their spatial relationships. (ii)
CHORE [41] predicts a part correspondence field to identify which body parts are in contact with object points. (iii)
CONTHO [31] estimates vertex-level human-object contact
maps to prevent the learning of erroneous correlations between humans and objects.
Although leveraging contact constraints on reconstruction models seems suitable for the HOI task, a natural

Significant breakthroughs have recently advanced in reconstructing 3D human meshes from a single image [4, 24, 25,
30]. Such an advancement stimulates the study of joint reconstruction of 3D human and object meshes, which has
numerous applications in areas such as augmented reality
(AR) [5], virtual reality (VR) [1], and robotic manipulation [3]. Unlike reconstructing human meshes from a single image, Human-Object Interaction (HOI) reconstruction
involves capturing the relative posture and interactions between humans and objects. Therefore, it presents considerable challenges, primarily because of the intricate articu† Corresponding author.

27706

