This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

2DMamba: Efficient State Space Model for Image Representation with
Applications on Giga-Pixel Whole Slide Image Classification
Jingwei Zhang1 *, Anh Tien Nguyen2 *, Xi Han1 *, Vincent Quoc-Huy Trinh5 , Hong Qin1 ,
Dimitris Samaras1 , Mahdi S. Hosseini3,4
1
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA 2 Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
3
Concordia University, Montreal, Canada 4 Mila–Quebec AI Institute, Montreal, Canada
5
University of Montreal Hospital Center, Montreal, Canada

Abstract
Efficiently modeling large 2D contexts is essential for various fields including Giga-Pixel Whole Slide Imaging (WSI)
and remote sensing. Transformer-based models offer high
parallelism but face challenges due to their quadratic complexity for handling long sequences. Recently, Mamba introduced a selective State Space Model (SSM) with linear
complexity and high parallelism, enabling effective and efficient modeling of wide context in 1D sequences. However, extending Mamba to vision tasks, which inherently
involve 2D structures, results in spatial discrepancies due
to the limitations of 1D sequence processing. On the
other hand, current 2D SSMs inherently model 2D structures but they suffer from prohibitively slow computation
due to the lack of efficient parallel algorithms. In this
work, we propose 2DMamba, a novel 2D selective SSM
framework that incorporates the 2D spatial structure of
images into Mamba, with a highly optimized hardwareaware operator, adopting both spatial continuity and computational efficiency. We validate the versatility of our
approach on both WSIs and natural images. Extensive
experiments on 10 public datasets for WSI classification
and survival analysis show that 2DMamba improves up
to 2.48% in AUC, 3.11% in F1 score, 2.47% in accuracy and 5.52% in C-index. Additionally, integrating our
method with VMamba for natural imaging yields 0.5 to
0.7 improvements in mIoU on the ADE20k semantic segmentation dataset, and 0.2% accuracy improvement on
ImageNet-1K classification dataset. Our code is available
at https://github.com/AtlasAnalyticsLab/2DMamba.

Conventional MIL

1D Mamba

Our 2D-Mamba

No spatial context

Spatial discrepancy

Spatial continuity

Figure 1. Left: Conventional MIL Bagging of patches adopts
no spatial context. Middle: 1D Mamba-based methods flatten a
WSI into a 1D sequence and lose the 2D structure. The adjacent
blue and orange patches are far away in the sequence. We call this
“spatial discrepancy”. Right: 2DMamba processes a WSI in a
2D manner, preserving 2D structure. The blue and orange patches
maintains adjacent in the sequence. We call it “spatial continuity”.

and remote sensing [7, 8, 18]. While recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [38] can model wide context in long sequences, their sequential nature limits parallelism, making
them unable to fully utilize GPUs. As a remedy, Transformers [12, 43], possessing a high capacity of parallelism, became the mainstream to model long sequences, albeit with
quadratic complexity. As a solution, Mamba [10, 15], benefiting from both linear-time complexity and parallelism, has
emerged as a promising avenue. Mamba is a State Space
Model (SSM), a mathematical framework used in control
theory to capture dynamic interactions between state variables [14, 22, 37]. It introduces a selective mechanism that
enhances the flexibility of SSMs, allowing them to capture
essential information and ignore irrelevant context.
Mamba was proposed for language modeling by only
processing 1D sequences and extended to vision domain
[26, 49]. Due to the 2D nature of vision tasks, Mambabased approaches for natural images have attempted to incorporate 2D image structures by adopting various formulations for flattening 2D images into 1D sequences or
by scanning images in multiple directions simultaneously

1. Introduction
Efficient understanding of large contexts over a 2D visual
domain is crucial across fields such as medical imaging
* These authors contributed equally to this paper.

3583

