This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Latent Space Imaging
Matheus Souza

Yidan Zheng
Kaizhang Kang
Yogeshwar Nath Mishra
Qiang Fu
Wolfgang Heidrich
KAUST

Intermediate
Latent (J)

𝒢

Digital
Encoder (𝒟𝜃 )
Reconstructed
Latent Space
(L)

Optical Encoder (O)

𝒢 – Generative model
𝛲 – Linear Projection
● – Ground-truth
● – Prediction

Spatial
Feat.

𝑃𝑆
𝑃𝐿
𝑃𝐴

Figure 1. We propose an extremely-compressed imaging paradigm called Latent Space Imaging (LSI). The optical encoder (O) projects the
real signal into a compressed set of measurements. A digital encoder (Dθ ) then maps this signal to the latent space (L) of a frozen generative
model (G), enabling image reconstruction. The L can also be linearly projected (P ) to perform downstream tasks directly—such as facial
segmentation (PS ), landmark detection (PL ), and attribute classification (PA )—without requiring image reconstruction or a complex new
model.

Abstract
Digital imaging systems have traditionally relied on bruteforce measurement and processing of pixels arranged on
regular grids. In contrast, the human visual system performs significant data reduction from the large number of
photoreceptors to the optic nerve, effectively encoding visual information into a low-bandwidth latent space representation optimized for brain processing. Inspired by this,
we propose a similar approach to advance artificial vision
systems.
Latent Space Imaging introduces a new paradigm that
combines optics and software to encode image information
directly into the semantically rich latent space of a generative model. This approach substantially reduces bandwidth
and memory demands during image capture and enables a
range of downstream tasks focused on the latent space.
We validate this principle through an initial hardware
prototype based on a single-pixel camera. By implementing
an amplitude modulation scheme that encodes into the gen-

28295

erative model’s latent space, we achieve compression ratios
ranging from 1:100 to 1:1000 during imaging, and up to
1:16384 for downstream applications. This approach leverages the model’s intrinsic linear boundaries, demonstrating the potential of latent space imaging for highly efficient
imaging hardware, adaptable future applications in highspeed imaging, and task-specific cameras with significantly
reduced hardware complexity.

1. Introduction
Conventional imaging systems are based on brute-force
sampling of scene information on regular grids. In contrast, biological vision systems operate very differently: for
example the human visual system has around 120 million
rods and 7 million cones [40], but the information from
these photoreceptors is distilled by retinal processing into
neural signals that are transmitted over the optic nerve with
only 0.7-1.7 million axions [23]. Therefore, our vision employs compression to encode image information into a la-

