This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SoundVista: Novel-View Ambient Sound Synthesis via Visual-Acoustic Binding
∗

Israel D. Gebru2
Ishwarya Ananthabhotla3
Mingfei Chen1,2
Dejan Markovic2
Jake Sandakly2
Steven Krenn2
Eli Shlizerman1
Alexander Richard2
1

University of Washington

2

Codec Avatars Lab, Pittsburgh, Meta

3

Christian Richardt2
Todd Keebler2

Reality Labs Research, Meta

Figure 1. SoundVista: a novel method that synthesizes binaural ambient sound for arbitrary scenes from novel viewpoints. Our method
leverages pre-acquired audio recordings and visual data captured from sparsely distributed reference points and synthesizes binaural audio
consistent with the target 3D position and pose.

Abstract

on both publicly available data and real-world settings. We
demonstrate significant improvements over existing methods.

We introduce SoundVista, a method to generate the ambient
sound of an arbitrary scene at novel viewpoints. Given a preacquired recording of the scene from sparsely distributed
microphones, SoundVista can synthesize the sound of that
scene from an unseen target viewpoint. The method learns
the underlying acoustic transfer function that relates the
signals acquired at the distributed microphones to the signal
at the target viewpoint, using a limited number of known
recordings. Unlike existing works, our method does not require constraints or prior knowledge of sound source details.
Moreover, our method efficiently adapts to diverse room
layouts, reference microphone configurations and unseen
environments. To enable this, we introduce a visual-acoustic
binding module that learns visual embeddings linked with local acoustic properties from panoramic RGB and depth data.
We first leverage these embeddings to optimize the placement of reference microphones in any given scene. During
synthesis, we leverage multiple embeddings extracted from
reference locations to get adaptive weights for their contribution, conditioned on target viewpoint. We benchmark the task

1. Introduction
Recent advances in 3D reconstruction and Novel-View
Synthesis (NVS) have significantly enhanced our ability to create photorealistic visual models of real-world
scenes [17, 34, 48, 49]. These developments have paved the
way for applications in 3D virtual tours, experience recreation, and spatial media. However, the audio counterpart –
Novel-View Acoustic Synthesis (NVAS) [1, 6] – has been
under-explored compared to its visual counterpart and has
not received the rigorous attention required to generate acoustic virtual scenes that match their visual surroundings.
To address this gap, we introduce SoundVista: a novel
method that creates a truly immersive acoustic experience.
SoundVista can generate realistic and spatially accurate binaural audio at novel viewpoints in arbitrary scenes given a
sparse set of sample recordings from different viewpoint.
Unlike novel-view synthesis for visual 3D scenes, which
are mostly static, NVAS faces significant challenges due to
the dynamic nature of real-world acoustic environments. Ambient sound – the overall acoustic state describing all sounds

* Work done during an internship at Meta.

8331

