This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Multimodal LLMs to Generalist Embodied Agents: Methods and Lessons
Andrew Szot*1,2 Bogdan Mazoure→1 Omar Attia1 Aleksei Timofeev1
Harsh Agrawal1 Devon Hjelm1 Zhe Gan1 Zsolt Kira2 Alexander Toshev1
1
Apple, 2 Georgia Tech
a.szot@apple.com, toshev@apple.com
Abstract

MLLM SFT
Success Rate

We examine the capability of Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) to tackle diverse domains that extend beyond the traditional language and vision tasks these models
are typically trained on. Specifically, our focus lies in areas
such as Embodied AI, Games, UI Control, and Planning.
To this end, we introduce a process of adapting an MLLM
to a Generalist Embodied Agent (GEA). GEA is a single
unified model capable of grounding itself across these varied domains through a multi-embodiment action tokenizer.
GEA is trained with supervised learning on a large dataset
of embodied experiences and with online RL in interactive
simulators. We explore the data and algorithmic choices
necessary to develop such a model. Our findings reveal
the importance of training with cross-domain data and online RL for building generalist agents. The final GEA model
achieves strong generalization performance to unseen tasks
across diverse benchmarks compared to other generalist
models and benchmark-specific approaches.

GEA-Base Online RL GEA
83%

57%
0%
Performance on Mobile Manipulation Task

Manipulation

Pick the orange

Move the slider left

Video Games

Collect the gold coin

Destroy space invaders

Planning

Hammer the nail

Put an apple in the drawer

UI Control

Navigation

Set an alarm for 6am

Pickup the gray key

1. Introduction

Figure 1. The Generalist Embodied Agent (GEA) is a multimodal
LLM-based agent that can complete tasks from natural language
instructions across a variety of domains and embodiments spanning manipulation, planning, game playing, and UI control. A
pretrained MLLM is finetuned with supervised finetuning (SFT)
on a large dataset of embodied experiences. The final GEA model
is then finetuned with reinforcement learning (RL). GEA achieves
competitive results in generalization to unseen settings.

Foundation Models have demonstrated broad capabilities
across language and image understanding tasks [5, 16, 30,
33, 42, 43, 45, 46, 51, 58, 66, 95, 103]. In particular, Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) – multimodal foundation models
trained on vast amounts of textual and image data – excel at
tasks that are natural to their text and image training modalities. As an extension of MLLMs, Vision-Language-Action
models have been successfully applied in robotics and embodied AI [3, 11, 18, 80], as well as agents for the web
[27, 37, 75, 102] and user interface (UI) control [28, 68, 89].
These applications have demonstrated that MLLMs can
be successfully applied to diverse domains for the purpose
of controlling various embodiments like robots, playing
games, and controlling devices via UIs. As many of these
domains share similarities, it is natural to ask how a single

agent can be trained to be generally proficient in all of these
domains. This is a challenging problem as many of these
tasks require physics and geometric reasoning, their embodiments are either static or share morphologies via a mobile
manipulator, their applications require long-horizon planning, and many are partially observable and require reasoning over long sequences of observations. In addition, training with combined data across domains with these similarities may yield cross-domain benefits, where a single agent
may outperform agents trained on individual domains.

* Core contributor

In this work, we demonstrate an approach for adapting
an MLLM into a single Generalist Embodied Agent (GEA)
to solve a vast number of tasks across diverse domains spanning manipulation, navigation, video game playing, and UI
control. To enable GEA to control diverse embodiments,
we learn a unified learned tokenization mechanism across

10644

