This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilling Spectral Graph for Object-Context Aware
Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Chanyoung Kim1

Dayun Ju1
1

Woojung Han1

Yonsei University

2

Ming-Hsuan Yang1,2

Seong Jae Hwang1

University of California, Merced

{chanyoung, juda0707, dnwjddl, seongjae}@yonsei.ac.kr, mhyang@ucmerced.edu

(a) Overview

Abstract

Low-rank
Approx.

VFM Visual
Encoder

Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation (OVSS) has advanced with recent vision-language models (VLMs), enabling segmentation beyond predefined categories through
various learning schemes. Notably, training-free methods
offer scalable, easily deployable solutions for handling unseen data, a key goal of OVSS. Yet, a critical issue persists: lack of object-level context consideration when segmenting complex objects in the challenging environment
of OVSS based on arbitrary query prompts. This oversight limits models’ ability to group semantically consistent elements within object and map them precisely to userdefined arbitrary classes. In this work, we introduce a novel
approach that overcomes this limitation by incorporating
object-level contextual knowledge within images. Specifically, our model enhances intra-object consistency by distilling spectral-driven features from vision foundation models into the attention mechanism of the visual encoder, enabling semantically coherent components to form a single
object mask. Additionally, we refine the text embeddings
with zero-shot object presence likelihood to ensure accurate
alignment with the specific objects represented in the images. By leveraging object-level contextual knowledge, our
proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art performance
with strong generalizability across diverse datasets.

𝐴𝐴VFM

Graph Matching

Input Image
{space
needle}

CLIP Visual
Encoder
𝑡𝑡CLIP

CLIP Text
Encoder

𝑣𝑣CLIP

Visual
Embedding

Text Embeddings

(b) Visualization

Input Image

NACLIP

⊙

𝑡𝑡̃CLIP

𝐴𝐴CLIP

𝐴𝐴̈ VFM

⊕

𝐴𝐴𝜓𝜓

𝐹𝐹CLIP

sky

⊙ ⊕

space needle
building

Adjusted Text Embeddings

Truck

ProxyCLIP

Horse

Dynamic
Eigen
scaling

Result

Cow

Ours (CASS)

Sheep

Ground Truth

1. Introduction

Figure 1.
We present CASS, object-level Context-Aware
training-free open-vocabulary Semantic Segmentation model. (a)
Overview: Our method distills the vision foundation model’s
(VFM) object-level contextual spectral graph into CLIP’s attention
and refines query text embeddings towards object-specific semantics. (b) Object-Level Context: This result illustrates how incorporating object-level context improves segmentation accuracy by
unifying object-wise components into a user-defined object class;
for example, (top row) our approach precisely segments the truck’s
body, wheels, and cargo area and (bottom row) accurately groups
elements into a single object, such as the sheep, whereas baselines [16, 29] often fail to achieve this unified segmentation.

Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (OVSS) [9, 32,
54, 55, 58] aims to predict pixel-level labels for arbitrary
prompts defined by user input (e.g., the proper noun Space
Needle in Fig. 1(a)), advancing beyond previous models scoped to predefined static classes [10, 18, 19, 40]. To
achieve this, fully supervised OVSS models [11, 53, 56] enhance generalization to seen classes using labeled training
data. Yet, their reliance on seen classes during training may
Project Page: https://micv-yonsei.github.io/cass/

15033

risk overfitting and limit scalability, as labeled data is required for retraining to adapt to new domains [43].
To better address this, recent studies [16, 28, 29, 48, 58]
propose training-free OVSS methods that leverage pretrained vision-language models (VLMs) (e.g., CLIP [39]) to

