This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GraphI2P: Image-to-Point Cloud Registration with Exploring Pattern of
Correspondence via Graph Learning

Lin Bie

Shouan Pan

Siqi Li

Yining Zhao

Yue Gao*

BNRist, THUIBCS, BLBCI, School of Software, Tsinghua University
{biel20, psa24, zhaoyn22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, lisiqi19971013@gmail.com,
gaoyue@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Although the fusion of images and LiDAR point clouds is
crucial to many applications in computer vision, the relative
poses of cameras and LiDAR scanners are often unknown.
However, due to the modality and domain gap between images and LiDAR point clouds, Image-to-Point Cloud Registration is a significant challenge, especially when the image and point cloud come from non-synchronized frames.
To tackle these issues, we introduce the virtual point cloud
as a bridge to alleviate the cross-modality gap between
images and LiDAR point clouds. In this way, the modality gap is converted to the domain gap of point clouds.
Moreover, we introduce a virtual-spherical representation
achieving orthogonal decoupling between pixel location
and predicted depth. As for the domain gap, we propose
a distribution-based adaptive sample module to generate
a unified distribution of two types of point clouds. Then,
we explore the correct correspondence pattern consistency
and prune the false correspondences through a graph-based
selection process. Experimental results demonstrate that
our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods by
more than 10.77% and 12.53% performance on the KITTI
Odometry and nuScenes datasets, respectively. The results demonstrate that our method can effectively solve nonsynchronized random-frame registration.

Figure 1. Registration recalls on KITTI [8] dataset when compared
with the same-frame and non-synchronized random-frame of the
Image and LiDAR point cloud for registration.

1. Introduction

tween images and point clouds generated by RGBD cameras in indoor environments, outdoor scenarios are more
challenging due to the larger modality gap between the images and point clouds captured by LiDAR. The significant
relative poses of cameras and LiDAR scanners are difficult
to estimate by traditional single modality registration [4, 5]
or regress-based self-calibration methods [6, 7].
Previous methods [9, 10] utilized MLPs [11] on the point
clouds branch and CNNs [12] on the images branch separately and generate 2D-3D correspondences by matching
them in feature space. However, the modality gap between
features may lead to impaired 2D-3D candidate correspondences due to a lack of structure and geometric consistency.
To this end, recent works have started to utilize the virtual
point cloud [13, 14] or voxel [15, 16] as a bridge to alleviate the modality gap, which improves the Image-to-Point
Cloud registration performance effectively. Nevertheless,
these methods still suffer from the domain gap caused by the
distribution difference between the intermediate modality
data and LiDAR point clouds. Moreover, existing methods
require the point cloud and image from the same frame for
registration; when they come from non-synchronized random frames, which is very common in practical scenarios,

Image-to-Point Cloud registration is a fundamental research
topic in 3D computer vision, which is widely applied in
many applications, such as 3D reconstruction [1], robotic
localization [2], and autonomous driving[3]. The objective
of registration is to predict a rigid transformation aligning
images and point clouds. Compared to the registration be* Corresponding author

22161

