This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RCP-Bench: Benchmarking Robustness for Collaborative Perception
Under Diverse Corruptions
Shihang Du1 , Sanqing Qu1 , Tianhang Wang1 , Xudong Zhang1 ,
Yunwei Zhu1 , Jian Mao1 , Fan Lu1 , Qiao Lin2 , Guang Chen1 *
1

Tongji University, 2 EACON Technology Co., ltd.

Baseline

Abstract

Global Interference
-26.64

Ego CAV Clean

Collaborative perception enhances single-vehicle perception by integrating sensory data from multiple connected vehicles. However, existing studies often assume ideal conditions, overlooking resilience to real-world challenges, such
as adverse weather and sensor malfunctions, which is critical for safe deployment. To address this gap, we introduce RCP-Bench, the first comprehensive benchmark designed to evaluate the robustness of collaborative detection models under a wide range of real-world corruptions.
RCP-Bench includes three new datasets (i.e., OPV2V-C,
V2XSet-C, and DAIR-V2X-C) that simulate six collaborative cases and 14 types of camera corruption resulting from
external environmental factors, sensor failures, and temporal misalignments. Extensive experiments on 10 leading collaborative perception models reveal that, while these
models perform well under ideal conditions, they are significantly affected by corruptions. To improve robustness,
we propose two simple yet effective strategies, RCP-Drop
and RCP-Mix, based on training regularization and feature augmentation. Additionally, we identify several critical factors influencing robustness, such as backbone architecture, camera number, feature fusion methods, and the
number of connected vehicles. We hope that RCP-Bench,
along with these strategies and insights, will stimulate future research toward developing more robust collaborative
perception models. Our benchmark toolkit is available at
https://github.com/LuckyDush/RCP-Bench.

Ego Clean

Ego Corruption (Cor)

0

16

32

48

0

a

b

c

d

CAV Interference

16

32

48

Ego Interference

-6.61
+14.90
0

or

16

32

Ego Cor/Clean

48

0

or

16

CAV Cor/Clean

32

48

No CAV

Figure 1. Comparison of collaborative object detection results
(averaged across 10 leading methods) in OPV2V-C across three
interference scenarios: Global, Ego, and CAV Interference. The
results indicate that perception models are particularly vulnerable
to Global Interference, benefit from collaborative compensation
under Ego Interference, and experience performance degradation
under CAV Interference.

1. Introduction

environmental understanding [5]. Collaborative perception,
where perception data are shared among Connected Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs), has shown promise in overcoming these challenges. By leveraging multiple viewpoints,
collaborative perception extends perceptual range, enhances
spatial coverage, and improves resilience to occlusions [16].
Numerous studies have investigated practical challenges
that may impact collaborative performance, such as bandwidth limitations for shared information [15, 32, 33, 44],
transmission issues [26, 38, 47, 60], pose estimation errors [24, 34, 43, 66], and heterogeneity among cooperating vehicles [28, 48, 55]. However, current models and
evaluations generally assume idealized conditions, such
as clear weather and fully functional sensors. In realworld driving scenarios, adverse conditions such as external
weather [9, 10, 18] and sensor failures [2, 12] are unavoidable. Although recent efforts address individual robustness

Perception is a fundamental capability for robots and autonomous vehicles to accurately interpret their surroundings. Despite significant advancements in perception tasks
through deep learning, including object detection [3, 68]
and segmentation [19, 27], single-vehicle perception using
onboard sensors still faces inherent limitations, such as restricted range, limited field of view, and vulnerability to occlusions [17, 30, 50], resulting in blind spots that hinder full
* Corresponding author: guangchen@tongji.edu.cn

11908

