This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Forensics-Bench: A Comprehensive Forgery Detection Benchmark Suite for
Large Vision Language Models
Jin Wang1,⇤ , Chenghui Lv5,4,⇤ , Xian Li6,4 , Shichao Dong7 , Huadong Li8 , Kelu Yao4 , Chao Li4 ,
Wenqi Shao3 , Ping Luo1,2,†
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 HKU Shanghai Intelligent Computing Research Center
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 Zhejiang Laboratory 5 Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study
6
Zhejiang University 7 Alibaba, Beijing, China 8 MEGVII Technology
Abstract

general public. As a result, a large amount of various
synthetic media has flooded the Internet, which poses unprecedented threats to politics, law, and social security,
such as the malicious dissemination of deepfakes [24, 40]
and misinformation [60]. To address such situations, researchers have proposed numerous forgery detection methods [20, 30, 45, 78, 81, 112], aiming to filter out synthetic
media as much as possible. Nevertheless, the synthetic media nowadays can be incredibly diverse, which may encompass different modalities, depict various semantics, and be
created/manipulated with different AI models, etc. Thus,
designing a generalized forgery detector with such comprehensive discerning capabilities becomes a crucial and urgent
task in this new era of AIGC, posing significant challenges
to the research community.

Recently, the rapid development of AIGC has significantly
boosted the diversities of fake media spread in the Internet, posing unprecedented threats to social security, politics, law, and etc. To detect the ever-increasingly diverse malicious fake media in the new era of AIGC, recent studies have proposed to exploit Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) to design robust forgery detectors
due to their impressive performance on a wide range of
multimodal tasks. However, it still lacks a comprehensive
benchmark designed to comprehensively assess LVLMs’
discerning capabilities on forgery media. To fill this gap,
we present Forensics-Bench, a new forgery detection evaluation benchmark suite to assess LVLMs across massive
forgery detection tasks, requiring comprehensive recognition, location and reasoning capabilities on diverse forgeries. Forensics-Bench comprises 63, 292 meticulously curated multi-choice visual questions, covering 112 unique
forgery detection types from 5 perspectives: forgery semantics, forgery modalities, forgery tasks, forgery types and
forgery models. We conduct thorough evaluations on 22
open-sourced LVLMs and 3 proprietary models GPT-4o,
Gemini 1.5 Pro, and Claude 3.5 Sonnet, highlighting the
significant challenges of comprehensive forgery detection
posed by Forensics-Bench. We anticipate that ForensicsBench will motivate the community to advance the frontier
of LVLMs, striving for all-around forgery detectors in the
era of AIGC. The deliverables will be updated here.

In the meantime, Large Vision Language Models
(LVLMs) [2, 8, 53, 69, 84, 107, 108] have achieved remarkable progress in a wide range of multimodal tasks, such
as visual recognition and visual captioning, which reignites
the discussion of artificial general intelligence (AGI) [65].
These promising generalization capabilities make LVLMs
a compelling solution for distinguishing increasingly diverse synthetic media [6, 35, 37, 55, 72, 110]. However,
it still lacks a comprehensive evaluation benchmark to assess LVLMs’ ability to recognize synthetic media, which
hinders the applications of LVLMs on forgery detection and
thus further impedes the continuous progress of LVLMs towards the next level of AGI [65]. To this end, a line of work
[47, 56, 80, 88, 113] attempted to bridge this gap with different evaluation benchmarks, but they only cover a limited
range of synthetic media, such as out-of-context forgeries
[60] and diffusion-based forgeries [74], which restricts their
comprehensiveness in revealing the full extent of LVLMs’
forgery detection capabilities.

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the rapid development of AI-generated
content (AIGC) technology [23, 28, 33], the barrier to creating fake media has been significantly lowered for the

To drive the research in this direction, we introduce
Forensics-Bench, a new forgery detection benchmark suite
for comprehensively evaluating the capabilities of LVLMs

* Equal contribution (primary contact: wj0529@connect.hku.hk)
† Corresponding author

4233

