This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Diffusion for Text-Driven Human Motion Generation: Redundant
Representations, Evaluation, and Masked Autoregression
Zichong Meng, Yiming Xie, Xiaogang Peng, Zeyu Han, Huaizu Jiang
Northeastern University
{meng.zic, xie.yim, peng.xiaog, han.zeyu, h.jiang}@northeastern.edu
https://neu-vi.github.io/MARDM/

Abstract

FID

Since 2023, Vector Quantization (VQ)-based discrete generation methods have rapidly dominated human motion
generation, primarily surpassing diffusion-based continuous generation methods in standard performance metrics. However, VQ-based methods have inherent limitations. Representing continuous motion data as limited discrete tokens leads to inevitable information loss, reduces
the diversity of generated motions, and restricts their ability
to function effectively as motion priors or generation guidance. In contrast, the continuous space generation nature of
diffusion-based methods makes them well-suited to address
these limitations and with even potential for model scalability. In this work, we systematically investigate why current VQ-based methods perform well and explore the limitations of existing diffusion-based methods from the perspective of motion data representation and distribution. Drawing on these insights, we preserve the inherent strengths
of a diffusion-based human motion generation model and
gradually optimize it with inspiration from VQ-based approaches. Our approach introduces a human motion diffusion model enabled to perform masked autoregression, optimized with a reformed data representation and distribution.
Additionally, we propose a more robust evaluation method
to assess different approaches. Extensive experiments on
various datasets demonstrate our method outperforms previous methods and achieves state-of-the-art performances.

ReMoDiffuse

0.8

MotionDiffuse

0.6

MDM
MLD

0.4

Ours-S

0.3

Ours-M
Ours-L
Ours-XL

0.2
0.1
2023

2024

Figure 1. The FID results on HumanML3D dataset. The bubble
size is proportional to the model size. We achieve superior performance and demonstrate model scalability.

1. Introduction

In 2023, the exploration of Vector Quantization (VQ)
techniques for human motion representation becomes increasingly dominant, marked a noticeable shift in attention
away from diffusion models for the human motion generation task [25, 26, 111]. These methods transform continuous motion representations (e.g. processed joint positions) into discrete tokens, which enables the use of already
proven generative architectures [6, 16, 93] and their training
and sampling techniques from the field of natural language
processing with minimal modifications.
Despite the performance improvement, VQ-based methods still exhibit notable limitations. Representing continuous motion data as limited groups of discrete tokens inherently causes a loss of motion information, reduces generation diversity, and limits their ability to serve as motion priors or generation guidance (e.g., in the generation of dualhuman motion and human-object interactions). Moreover,
unlike language models, these discrete tokens often lack
contextual richness, which can hinder model scalability.
In contrast, the continuous space nature of diffusionbased generation methods effectively overcomes these limitations and offers potential for model scalability, as evidenced by numerous image diffusion models [51, 66]. In
light of these, researchers have started to revisit diffusionbased approaches [114, 117]. However, these attempts
struggle to achieve performance comparable to that of VQ-

In this paper, we study the problem of human motion generation from the textual prompt (e.g., a person walks). Due
to the remarkable performance in the image generation domain [32, 80, 82], diffusion models are largely adopted for
human motion generation starting with the pioneer methods [44, 88, 113]. Compared with RNN [81]-based generation methods [1, 3, 24, 57], diffusion-based models offer a
simpler training objective and improved stability.

27859

