This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InstanceCap: Improving Text-to-Video Generation via Instance-aware
Structured Caption
Tiehan Fan1 * Kepan Nan1 * Rui Xie1 Penghao Zhou2
Zhenheng Yang2 Chaoyou Fu1 Xiang Li3 Jian Yang1 Ying Tai1B
1
Nanjing University 2 ByteDance 3 Nankai University
https://github.com/NJU-PCALab/InstanceCap

Abstract
Text-to-video generation has evolved rapidly in recent
years, delivering remarkable results. Training typically
relies on video-caption paired data, which plays a crucial role in enhancing generation performance. However,
current video captions often suffer from insufficient details, hallucinations and imprecise motion depiction, affecting the fidelity and consistency of generated videos.
In this work, we propose a novel instance-aware structured caption framework, termed InstanceCap, to achieve
instance-level and fine-grained video caption for the first
time. Based on this scheme, we design an auxiliary models cluster to convert original video into instances to enhance instance fidelity. Video instances are further used
to refine dense prompts into structured phrases, achieving concise yet precise descriptions. Furthermore, a
22K InstanceVid dataset is curated for training, and an
enhancement pipeline that tailored to InstanceCap structure is proposed for inference. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed InstanceCap significantly outperform previous models, ensuring high fidelity between captions and videos while reducing hallucinations.

1. Introduction
Recently, text-to-video (T2V) generation with advanced
diffusion transformers (DiT) [2, 10, 12–14, 17, 19, 21, 24,
26, 34, 38] have attracted significant attention for the ability to generate realistic, long-duration videos based on text
prompts. Video-caption paired data is typically used in
training and plays a crucial role in enhancing generation
performance [23, 32]. Current video recaption methods often incorporate multimodal large language models to produce detailed captions, which however usually suffer from
hallucinations, leading to inconsistencies between captions
* Equal contributions. Ying Tai is the corresponding author.

and video content. Consequently, creating consistent videocaption pairs with accurate details and precise motion depiction for T2V generation remains a significant challenge.
As shown in Figure 1, current video recaption methods
can be broadly categorized into three types: 1) Short captions, such as Panda-70M [4], lack sufficient coverage of
video content, leading to low fidelity. 2) Dense captions,
like ShareGPT4Video [3], enrich textual content but suffer
from hallucination issues, often generating meaningless or
inaccurate video content. 3) Coarse-level structured captions, exemplified by MiraData [11], improve video quality
but provide coarse-level details. Moreover, the redundancy
introduced by MLLM across structures diminishes its overall effectiveness. To this end, achieving accurate captions
remains two crucial challenges: 1) High fidelity between
caption and video: Retain as much of the original video’s
objects, textures, and motion information as possible. 2) Accurate content in caption: Enable MLLM model to generate
precise content, minimizing hallucinations and repetition.
To address the challenges, we propose a novel instanceaware structured caption framework, termed InstanceCap,
to achieve instance-level and fine-grained video caption for
the first time. Our structure is specifically designed to incorporate instances, background, and camera movement.
For each instance, we specify class, appearance, actions,
motion, and position. To enhance the fidelity and accuracy of video captions, we focus on two key aspects: 1)
From Global Video to Local Instances: For each instance,
we propose an auxiliary models cluster (AMC) to isolate
it from the original video and obtain the corresponding position and category information. This operation minimizes
interference from unrelated regions while retaining as much
of the original video’s information as possible. 2) From
Dense prompt to Structured Phrases: We leverage multimodal large language models (MLLMs) in an improved
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) process to obtain concise yet accurate descriptions of textures, camera movement, actions
and motion for each instance. This reduces the probability
of hallucinations and irrelevant content produced by the lan-

28974

