This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MICAS: Multi-grained In-Context Adaptive Sampling for
3D Point Cloud Processing
Feifei Shao1 *, Ping Liu2 *, Zhao Wang3 , Yawei Luo4†, Hongwei Wang1 , Jun Xiao5
1

Zhejiang University-University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Institute, Zhejiang University, China
2

3

Computer Science and Engineering, University of Nevada, Reno, USA

Ningbo Innovation Center, Zhejiang University, China
5

4

School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, China

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China

{sff, zhao wang, yaweiluo}@zju.edu.cn, pino.pingliu@gmail.com,
hongweiwang@intl.zju.edu.cn, junx@cs.zju.edu.cn

Abstract

registration [72, 82], reconstruction [18, 32, 40, 61], and
denoising [37, 65]. However, achieving high performance
often requires separate models for each task, increasing
complexity and resource demands. Multi-task Learning
(MTL) [34, 54, 81, 84] attempts to reduce this burden
by training models to handle multiple tasks simultaneously, but it struggles with performance trade-offs and complex parameter tuning. In contrast, In-context Learning
(ICL) [11, 22, 70] offers a simpler approach, using only a
few prompts to guide a single model in performing multiple
tasks without changing its parameters [1, 3, 60, 62, 63].

Point cloud processing (PCP) encompasses tasks like reconstruction, denoising, registration, and segmentation, each
often requiring specialized models to address unique task
characteristics. While in-context learning (ICL) has shown
promise across tasks by using a single model with taskspecific demonstration prompts, its application to PCP reveals significant limitations. We identify inter-task and
intra-task sensitivity issues in current ICL methods for
PCP, which we attribute to inflexible sampling strategies
lacking context adaptation at the point and prompt levels. To address these challenges, we propose MICAS, an
advanced ICL framework featuring a multi-grained adaptive sampling mechanism tailored for PCP. MICAS introduces two core components: task-adaptive point sampling,
which leverages inter-task cues for point-level sampling,
and query-specific prompt sampling, which selects optimal
prompts per query to mitigate intra-task sensitivity. To our
knowledge, this is the first approach to introduce adaptive
sampling tailored to the unique requirements of point clouds
within an ICL framework. Extensive experiments show that
MICAS not only efficiently handles various PCP tasks but
also significantly outperforms existing methods. Notably, it
achieves a remarkable 4.1% improvement in the part segmentation task and delivers consistent gains across various
PCP applications.

Despite these advancements, recent efforts to extend ICL
to 3D point cloud processing [11, 35] reveal significant limitations. Specifically, these studies have not fully addressed
critical challenges associated with conventional point cloud
sampling techniques used in the ICL framework. Taking
Figure 1 for example, the ICL framework manages multiple point cloud tasks, each with distinct preferences for
point cloud sampling. More concretely, ICL models (e.g.,
PIC [11]) use Masked Point Modeling for multiple point
cloud tasks, reconstructing masked patches from unmasked
ones (cf. Figure 3), with point patches obtained via KNN
on the sampling center points. However, conventional sampling methods struggle to adapt equally well to these diverse
tasks simultaneously. These gaps, particularly in adapting
sampling techniques to task-specific and prompt-specific
contexts, hinder overall performance and reliability.
To overcome these limitations, our work tackles two critical issues: 1) Inter-task Sensitivity: As illustrated in Figure 1 (b), task-agnostic sampling strategies, e.g., Farthest
Point Sampling (FPS), may perform differently across different tasks, such as reconstruction and denoising. This
difference arises because FPS tends to prioritize outliers,
often leading to the selection of noisy points. This issue
underscores the urgent need for a methodology that effec-

1. Introduction
Deep learning has greatly advanced 3D point cloud processing, tackling tasks like semantic segmentation [24, 55, 80],
* Feifei Shao and Ping Liu are co-first authors with equal contributions.
† Yawei Luo is the corresponding author.

6616

