This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AvatarArtist: Open-Domain 4D Avatarization
Hongyu Liu1,2,∗

Xuan Wang2,§
Yujun Shen2
1

HKUST

2

Ziyu Wan3
Yue Ma1
Jingye Chen1
Yibing Song
Qifeng Chen1,§
3

Ant Group

Yanbo Fan2

City University of Hong Kong

https://kumapowerliu.github.io/AvatarArtist

Figure 1. Gallery of the proposed AvatarArtist. Each row features several triplets, where the first column of each triplet is the source
image. The subsequent two images in each triplet are results that follow the pose and expression of the driving image, as demonstrated in
the bottom right corner of the first three columns. Specifically, our method is applicable to an open domain, encompassing a diverse range
of categories including 3D cartoons, video game characters, sculptures, skulls, etc.

Abstract
This work focuses on open-domain 4D avatarization,
with the purpose of creating a 4D avatar from a portrait
image in an arbitrary style. We select parametric triplanes as the intermediate 4D representation, and propose
a practical training paradigm that takes advantage of
both generative adversarial networks (GANs) and diffusion
models. Our design stems from the observation that
4D GANs excel at bridging images and triplanes without

supervision yet usually face challenges in handling diverse
data distributions. A robust 2D diffusion prior emerges as
the solution, assisting the GAN in transferring its expertise
across various domains. The synergy between these experts
permits the construction of a multi-domain image-triplane
dataset, which drives the development of a general 4D
avatar creator. Extensive experiments suggest that our
model, termed AvatarArtist, is capable of producing
high-quality 4D avatars with strong robustness to various
source image domains. The code, the data, and the models

10758

