This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VidMuse: A Simple Video-to-Music Generation Framework with
Long-Short-Term Modeling
Zeyue Tian*1 , Zhaoyang Liu∗1 , Ruibin Yuan1 , Jiahao Pan1 ,
Qifeng Liu1 , Xu Tan2 , Qifeng Chen† 1 , Wei Xue†1 , Yike Guo1
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2

Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
In this work, we systematically study music generation conditioned solely on the video. First, we present a largescale dataset by collecting 360K video-music pairs, including various genres such as movie trailers, advertisements,
and documentaries. Furthermore, we propose VidMuse, a
simple framework for generating music aligned with video
inputs. VidMuse stands out by producing high-fidelity music that is both acoustically and semantically aligned with
the video. By incorporating local and global visual cues,
VidMuse enables the creation of coherent music tracks that
consistently match the video content through Long-ShortTerm modeling. Through extensive experiments, VidMuse
outperforms existing models in terms of audio quality, diversity, and audio-visual alignment. The code and datasets
are available at https://vidmuse.github.io/

have made significant achievements, especially in text-tomusic generation, but the video-to-music generation still remains to be further studied. Specifically, existing works on
video-conditioned music generation mainly focus on specific scenarios, such as dance videos [37, 87], or on the
symbolic music, i.e., MIDI [13, 33, 73, 89]. However, these
works are unable to generate more diverse musical styles
and are also difficult to generalize to various video genres. Moreover, Hong et al. [29] build a music–video retrieval dataset from YouTube-8M [1], albeit with limited
video genres. Despite that there are also some prominent
works [32, 65] employing multi-modal inputs to generate
music for the video, it is still worth studying that conditioned solely on the visual input, whether it is possible
to generate diverse and harmonious music for various
genres of videos.

1. Introduction
Music, as an essential element of video production, can enhance humans’ feelings and convey the theme of the video
content. Along with the development of social media platforms i.e., YouTube and TikTok, some studies [11, 46, 52]
have shown that a piece of melodious music can vastly attract the audience’s attention and interest in watching the
video. It thus leads to a great demand for studying videoto-music generation [13, 20, 26, 29, 33, 65].
Nevertheless, music creation for a video is a challenging task, which needs to understand both music theory and
video semantics. It would be very time-consuming to produce a piece of suitable music for video in a hand-crafted
manner. Therefore, it is desirable when we can automatically generate high-quality music for different genres of
videos. Currently, most of works [10, 19, 30, 31, 61, 79]
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Authors

18782

Motivated by this, we first construct a large-scale dataset
termed V2M, equipped with a comprehensive benchmark to
evaluate the state-of-the-art works thoroughly. The videomusic pairs are collected from YouTube with various genres, e.g., movie trailers, advertisements, documentaries,
vlogs, etc. In order to ensure the quality of our dataset, we
establish a multi-step pipeline illustrated in Fig. 1 to systematically clean and pre-process data. The videos with low
quality or composed of static images are filtered out. The
proposed dataset contains three subsets: V2M-360K for pretraining, V2M-20K for finetuning, and V2M-bench for evaluation. We believe that V2M is able to facilitate the development of video-to-music generation.
Furthermore, on top of V2M, we propose a simple yet effective method, termed as VidMuse, to generate music only
conditioned on the visual input. Instead of predicting the intermediate musical symbols such as MIDI or retrieving the
music from the database, the proposed VidMuse, integrates
both local and global visual cues to generate background
music consistent with the video in an end-to-end manner.
The core techniques in our method are a Long-Short-Term

