This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transformers without Normalization
Jiachen Zhu1,2 Xinlei Chen1 Kaiming He3 Yann LeCun1,2 Zhuang Liu1,4,†
†

1

FAIR, Meta

2

project lead

New York University

Abstract

3

MIT

4

Princeton University

original block

Normalization layers are ubiquitous in modern neural networks and have long been considered essential. This work
demonstrates that Transformers without normalization can
achieve the same or better performance using a remarkably
simple technique. We introduce Dynamic Tanh (DyT), an
element-wise operation DyT(x) = tanh(ωx), as a dropin replacement for normalization layers in Transformers.
DyT is inspired by the observation that layer normalization in Transformers often produces tanh-like, S-shaped
input-output mappings. By incorporating DyT, Transformers without normalization can match or exceed the performance of their normalized counterparts, mostly without
hyperparameter tuning. We validate the effectiveness of
Transformers with DyT across diverse settings, from recognition to generation, supervised to self-supervised learning,
and computer vision to language models. These findings
challenge the conventional understanding that normalization layers are indispensable in modern neural networks,
and offer new insights into their role in deep networks.

Attention / FFN

Layer Norm

block with DyT

output
scale & shift
normalize

Attention / FFN

DyT

output
scale & shift
tanh(

)

Figure 1. Left: original Transformer block. Right: block with our
proposed Dynamic Tanh (DyT) layer. DyT is a straightforward
replacement for commonly used Layer Norm [5] (in some cases
RMSNorm [89]) layers. Transformers with DyT match or exceed
the performance of their normalized counterparts.

become wider and deeper, this necessity becomes ever more
critical [11, 38]. Consequently, normalization layers are
widely regarded as crucial, if not indispensable, for effective training of deep networks. This belief is subtly evidenced by the fact that, in recent years, novel architectures often seek to replace attention or convolution layers
[22, 29, 75, 78], but almost always retain normalization.

1. Introduction

This paper challenges this belief by introducing a simple alternative to normalization layers in Transformers. Our
exploration starts with the observation that LN layers map
their inputs to outputs with tanh-like, S-shaped curves,
scaling the input activations while squashing the extreme
values. Inspired by this insight, we propose an elementwise operation termed Dynamic Tanh (DyT), defined as:
DyT(x) = tanh(ωx), where ω is a learnable parameter.
This operation aims to emulate the behavior of LN by learning an appropriate scaling factor through ω and squashing
extreme values via the bounded tanh function. Notably, unlike normalization layers, it achieves both effects without
the need to compute activation statistics.

Over the past decade, normalization layers have solidified
their positions as one of the most fundamental components
of modern neural networks. It all traces back to the invention of batch normalization in 2015 [41], which enabled
drastically faster and better convergence in visual recognition models and quickly gained momentum in the following
years. Since then, many variants of normalization layers
have been proposed for different network architectures or
domains [5, 81, 83, 89]. Today, virtually all modern networks use normalization layers, with layer normalization
(Layer Norm, or LN) [5] being one of the most popular, particularly in the dominant Transformer architecture [20, 82].
The widespread adoption of normalization layers is
largely driven by their empirical benefits in optimization
[10, 68]. In addition to achieving better results, they help
accelerate and stabilize convergence. As neural networks

14901

Employing DyT is straightforward, as shown in Figure 1:
we directly replace existing normalization layers with DyT
in architectures such as vision and language Transformers.
We empirically demonstrate that models with DyT can train
stably and achieve high final performance across a wide
range of settings. It often does not require tuning the hy-

