This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging Past and Future: End-to-End Autonomous Driving with Historical
Prediction and Planning
Bozhou Zhang1
1

Nan Song1

Xin Jin2

Li Zhang1 *

School of Data Science, Fudan University
2
Eastern Institute of Technology

https://github.com/fudan-zvg/BridgeAD

Abstract

Motion
Planning

Perception

End-to-end autonomous driving unifies tasks in a differentiable framework, enabling planning-oriented optimization and attracting growing attention. Existing methods aggregate historical information either through dense historical bird’s-eye-view (BEV) features or by querying a sparse
memory bank, following paradigms inherited from detection. We argue that these paradigms either omit historical information in motion planning or fail to align with
its multi-step nature, which requires predicting or planning
multiple future time steps. In line with the philosophy of
“future is a continuation of past”, we propose BridgeAD,
which reformulates motion and planning queries as multistep queries to differentiate the queries for each future time
step. This design enables the effective use of historical
prediction and planning by applying them to the appropriate parts of the end-to-end system based on the time
steps, which improves both perception and motion planning.
Specifically, historical queries for the current frame are
combined with perception, while queries for future frames
are integrated with motion planning. In this way, we bridge
the gap between past and future by aggregating historical
insights at every time step, enhancing the overall coherence and accuracy of the end-to-end autonomous driving
pipeline. Extensive experiments on the nuScenes dataset
in both open-loop and closed-loop settings demonstrate
that BridgeAD achieves state-of-the-art performance.

Multi-view
Images
Historical BEV
Feature

Or

Historical Query
Memory Bank

(a) Previous methods

Perception

Motion
Planning

Multi-view
Images
Historical Prediction
for Current Frame
Historical Prediction and
Planning for Future Frames

Historical Prediction
and Planning

(b) Our BridgeAD

Figure 1. The primary distinction between previous methods and
ours lies in how historical information is aggregated. As depicted
in (a), previous methods either interact with historical BEV features within the perception module or utilize a historical query
memory bank. As shown in (b), our BridgeAD enhances end-toend autonomous driving by incorporating historical prediction
for the current frame into the perception module and historical
prediction and planning for future frames into the motion planning module.

lation. End-to-end methods [18, 22] unify these tasks, enabling planning-oriented optimization and improved system
coherence, and have gained increasing attention.
Current end-to-end methods largely originate from detection approaches [24, 30, 47], adopting similar paradigms
for utilizing temporal information to enhance performance.
These paradigms are generally divided into two categories:
dense methods [18, 22], which aggregate historical bird’seye-view (BEV) features, and sparse methods [43, 54],
which rely on querying a sparse memory bank. However,
we argue that these paradigms are suboptimal. As shown

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving [7] has progressed rapidly in recent
years. Traditional systems use a modular approach, dividing tasks into perception [24, 27, 47], prediction [40, 58],
and planning [9, 12], which simplifies each task but may
interrupt the flow of information and lead to error accumu* Corresponding author (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn).

6854

