This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VILA-M3: Enhancing Vision-Language Models with Medical Expert Knowledge
Vishwesh Nath1
Wenqi Li1
Dong Yang1
Andriy Myronenko1
Mingxin Zheng1
Yao Lu1
Zhijian Liu1
Hongxu Yin1
2
1
1
Yee Man Law
Yucheng Tang
Pengfei Guo
Can Zhao1
Ziyue Xu1
Yufan He1
Stephanie Harmon3
Benjamin Simon3
Greg Heinrich1
1
1
Stephen Aylward
Marc Edgar
Michael Zephyr1
Pavlo Molchanov1
Baris Turkbey3
Holger Roth1∗
Daguang Xu1*
1
2
3
NVIDIA
SingHealth
NIH

Abstract

in creating precise, reliable VLMs for medical applications.

Generalist vision language models (VLMs) have made significant strides in computer vision, but they fall short in specialized
fields like healthcare, where expert knowledge is essential.
Current large multimodal models like Gemini and GPT-4o are
insufficient for medical tasks due to their reliance on memorized
internet knowledge rather than the nuanced expertise required
in healthcare. Meanwhile, existing medical VLMs (e.g. MedGemini) often lack expert consultation as part of their design,
and many rely on outdated, static datasets that were not created
with modern, large deep learning models in mind. VLMs are usually trained in three stages: vision pre-training, vision-language
pre-training, and instruction fine-tuning (IFT). IFT has been
typically applied using a mixture of generic and healthcare data.
In contrast, we propose that for medical VLMs, a fourth stage
of specialized IFT is necessary, which focuses on medical data
and includes information from domain expert models. Domain
expert models developed for medical use are crucial because
they are specifically trained for certain clinical tasks, e.g. to
detect tumors and classify abnormalities through segmentation
and classification, which learn fine-grained features of medical
data−features that are often too intricate for a VLM to capture
effectively. This paper introduces a new framework, VILA-M3,
for medical VLMs that utilizes domain knowledge via expert
models. We argue that generic VLM architectures alone are
not viable for real-world clinical applications and on-demand
usage of domain-specialized expert model knowledge is critical
for advancing AI in healthcare. Through our experiments, we
show an improved state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance with
an average improvement of ∼9% over the prior SOTA model
Med-Gemini and ∼6% over models trained on the specific tasks.
Our approach emphasizes the importance of domain expertise
* Equal Contribution

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are at the forefront of AI.
Recent works [28, 32] have enabled LLMs to support visual
inputs to expand on their use for many vision applications by
transforming them into vision language models (VLM). While
foundational VLMs developed for computer vision applications
have achieved remarkable success in various general-purpose
tasks, they struggle to meet the necessary precision required
for medical tasks [5, 37, 47]. VLMs trained on general tasks
often lack specialized medical domain knowledge to interpret
radiological images correctly [5, 15, 39]. VLMs without
specific medical training also often miss the subtle visual details
that are critical for medical diagnosis. For example, a recent
study on breast imaging [9] shows that generic models like
GPT-4o (OpenAI) are not suitable for medical use cases. At
the same time, there are healthcare-specific large VLMs such
as Med-Gemini (∼1.5 trillion parameters) [58], which are
designed without consideration of expert model information
and are likely to neglect finer visual features. Current VLMs are
well-adapted to connect coarse or dominating visual features
with language. However, they often fail to recognize finer visual
details (Fig. 3). There are multiple reasons for these deficits.
A major reason is the limited availability of comprehensive and
clinically relevant public datasets for medical vision language
tasks. Most public datasets in medical imaging were released to
address specific narrow AI tasks like classification, regression,
and segmentation [29]. At the same time, healthcare datasets
incorporating natural language are limited to specific tasks
such as visual question answering (VQA) and report generation,
which do not cover the breadth of clinically relevant tasks.
Over the years, medical imaging has shown successful

14788

