This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Empowering Vector Graphics with Consistently Arbitrary Viewing and
View-dependent Visibility

1

Yidi Li1 , Jun Xiao1 , Zhengda Lu1* , Yiqun Wang2 , Haiyong Jiang1*
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Chongqing University

{liyidi19@mails,xiaojun,luzhengda,haiyong.jiang}.ucas.ac.cn, yiqun.wang@cqu.edu.cn

“A DSLR photo of a football helmet.”

“A DSLR photo of a time clock, clear pointer.”

“A DSLR photo of a LV handbag.”

“A DSLR photo of a stylish Air Jordan shoes.”

“A space shuttle.”

“A rotary telephone.”

“A lamma.”

“A crab.”

“A flying dragon, highly detailed.”

“A campling.”

“An expensive office chair.”

“An airplane.”

Figure 1. Examples of multiview vector graphics generated by our method conditioned on text prompts, the first two rows are sketch and
the bottom row is iconography. Our method is capable of producing vector graphics with consistent views, well-preserved shape structures,
and accurate occlusion relationships. The non-visible curves are rendered with lower opacity for visualization. Small images on the top
right of the sketch results are the corresponding view rendering from the auxiliary 3DGS [17] branch as a reference for shape structures.
Zoom in for details.

Abstract
This work presents a novel text-to-vector graphics generation approach, Dream3DVG, allowing for arbitrary viewpoint viewing, progressive detail optimization, and viewdependent occlusion awareness. Our approach is a dualbranch optimization framework, consisting of an auxiliary 3D Gaussian Splatting optimization branch and a
3D vector graphics optimization branch. The introduced
3DGS branch can bridge the domain gaps between text
prompts and vector graphics with more consistent guidance. Moreover, 3DGS allows for progressive detail control by scheduling classifier-free guidance, facilitating guiding vector graphics with coarse shapes at the initial stages
and finer details at later stages. We also improve the viewdependent occlusions by devising a visibility-awareness
rendering module. Extensive results on 3D sketches and 3D
iconographies, demonstrate the superiority of the method

on different abstraction levels of details, cross-view consistency, and occlusion-aware stroke culling. Code is available at https://github.com/chenxinl/Dream3DVG.git.

1. Introduction

* Joint Corresponding Authors. Haiyong is the Project Lead.

Vector graphics (VGs) [32] are widely adopted in graphic
designs, art creations, and conceptual illustrations [9, 16].
The advantage of VGs lies in their abstract styles, arbitrary resolutions, and compact sizes. However, VGs are
designed from a specific viewpoint, and cannot support arbitrary viewing. This hinders interesting applications, e.g.,
multiview sketch-based conceptual designs and cartoon animation involving different viewed VGs. Therefore, it is
interesting to create multiview VGs with 3D consistency.
An ideal solution for this task should satisfy the following desiderata: D1) arbitrary viewing of VGs from different perspectives with inherent consistency; D2) visibilityaware strokes across different views for realistic 3D per-

18531

