This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AMR-Transformer: Enabling Efficient Long-range Interaction for Complex
Neural Fluid Simulation

1

Zeyi Xu2 * Jinfan Liu1 * Kuangxu Chen3 Ye Chen1 Zhangli Hu1 Bingbing Ni1†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai University 3 Shenzhen Technology University
xzyblxa@shu.edu.cn

{ljf 2024, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn

https://github.com/JfanLiu/AMR Transformer

Figure 1. AMR tokenizer results in high-resolution simulation. Visualization of the AMR tokenizer applied to 1024 × 1024 shock
wave and explosion simulations. The AMR tokenizer captures fine-scale structures while reducing token count. Right panels compare the
regular 512 × 512 grid with the AMR partitioning, each right panel displays the total cell count and partitioning scheme (bottom-right),
along with the mean squared error (MSE) relative to the 1024 × 1024 ground truth (top-left).

Abstract

global context, incur prohibitive computational costs. To
tackle these challenges, we propose AMR-Transformer, an
efficient and accurate neural CFD-solving pipeline that integrates a novel adaptive mesh refinement scheme with a
Navier-Stokes constraint-aware fast pruning module. This
design encourages long-range interactions between simulation cells and facilitates the modeling of global fluid wave
patterns, such as turbulence and shockwaves. Experiments
show that our approach achieves significant gains in efficiency while preserving critical details, making it suitable
for high-resolution physical simulations with long-range
dependencies. On CFDBench, PDEBench and a new shock-

Accurately and efficiently simulating complex fluid dynamics is a challenging task that has traditionally relied on
computationally intensive methods. Neural network-based
approaches, such as convolutional and graph neural networks, have partially alleviated this burden by enabling
efficient local feature extraction. However, they struggle
to capture long-range dependencies due to limited receptive fields, and Transformer-based models, while providing
* Co-first authors.
† Corresponding author.

5804

