This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Content Prediction with Motion-aware Priors
for Blind Face Video Restoration

1

Lianxin Xie1 , Bingbing Zheng1 , Si Wu1,2* , Hau San Wong3*
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Institute of Super Robotics(Huangpu)
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{cslianxin.xie, 202321044369}@mail.scut.edu.cn
cswusi@scut.edu.cn, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Blind Face Video Restoration (BFVR) focuses on reconstructing high-quality facial image sequences from degraded video inputs. The main challenge is address unknown degradations, while maintaining temporal consistency across frames. Current blind face restoration methods are primarily designed for images, and directly applying these approaches to BFVR will encounter a significant
drop in restoration performance. In this work, we proposed
Dynamic Content Prediction with Motion-aware Priors, referred to as DCP-MP. We develop a motion-aware semantic
dictionary by encoding the semantic information of highquality videos into discrete elements, and capturing the motion information in terms of element relationships, which
are derived from the dynamic temporal changes within
videos. For the purpose of utilizing dictionary to represent the degraded video, we train a temporal-aware element predictor, conditioned on degraded content, to learn
the prediction of discrete elements in dictionary. The predicted elements will be refined, conditioned on motion information captured by the motion-aware semantic dictionary,
to enhance temporal coherence. To alleviate deviation from
the original structure information, we propose a conditional
structure feature correction module that corrects the features flowing from the encoder to the generator. Through
extensive experiments, we validate the effectiveness of our
design components and demonstrate the superior performance of DCP-MP in synthesizing high-quality video.

Figure 1. A example to illustrate the progressive enhancement by
incorporating the designed components into the generic 3D U-Net.

1. Introduction

such as security surveillance and public safety, video quality is often compromised by various factors. BFVR can
significantly enhance the ability to recognize individuals.
This technology meets the growing demand for high-quality
video data in fields that rely on clear facial information for
analysis and interpretation. However, most existing blind
face restoration methods focus on single images, and directly applying them to BFVR may encounter temporal consistency issues. A main challenge in this task lies in effectively managing a range of unknown degradations contained in each frames, while ensuring that the restored con-

Blind face video restoration (BFVR) aims to reconstruct
high-quality face image sequences from degraded video input, where both motion and semantic content are affected
by unknown degradations. In many practical applications,

* Corresponding authors.
17821

