This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Global-Local Tree Search in VLMs for 3D Indoor Scene Generation
Wei Deng
Mengshi Qi*
Huadong Ma
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
{dw-dengwei, qms, mhd}@bupt.edu.cn

Input

Abstract

Output

Reasoning

Large Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as GPT-4,
have achieved remarkable success across various fields.
However, there are few studies on 3D indoor scene generation with VLMs. This paper considers this task as a planning problem subject to spatial and layout common sense
constraints. To solve the problem with a VLM, we propose a new global-local tree search algorithm. Globally,
the method places each object sequentially and explores
multiple placements during each placement process, where
the problem space is represented as a tree. To reduce the
depth of the tree, we decompose the scene structure hierarchically, i.e. room level, region level, floor object level, and
supported object level. The algorithm independently generates the floor objects in different regions and supported
objects placed on different floor objects. Locally, we also
decompose the sub-task, the placement of each object, into
multiple steps. The algorithm searches the tree of problem
space. To leverage the VLM model to produce positions of
objects, we discretize the top-down view space as a dense
grid and fill each cell with diverse emojis to make to cells
distinct. We prompt the VLM with the emoji grid and the
VLM produces a reasonable location for the object by describing the position with the name of emojis. The quantitative and qualitative experimental results illustrate our
approach generates more plausible 3D scenes than stateof-the-art approaches. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/dw-dengwei/TreeSearchGen .

A medium sized cozy bedroom with a reading nook

Not
Realistic

Realistic

Figure 1. Illustration of chain-like (left) and tree-like (right) reasoning in VLMs on 3D scene generation. Each node represents
a token or language sequence. The red dashed nodes indicate the
VLM produces an inappropriate output. The chain-like method
cannot correct the prior errors and the subsequent process reasons
based on the errors, leading to a non-realistic layout, such as exceeding the room. In contrast, the tree-like method can modify the
output if a mistake occurs, resulting in a more realistic layout.

scene generation is crucial in fields such as interior design,
3D gaming, virtual/augmented reality, and embodied AI.
The primary challenge in generating high-quality scenes
is modeling plausible and realistic spatial relationships (i.e.,
3D layouts) between objects. To achieve this, early studies [14, 30] adopt a data-driven fashion. They train generative models on 3D scene datasets to learn the joint distribution of real indoor scenes and their textual descriptions.
However, collecting 3D scene datasets is challenging and
costly, resulting in limited dataset scales and less robust
models. Recently, researchers have focused on using large
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [8, 11, 37, 40] to achieve
this task. VLMs are trained on large-scale datasets, enabling them to understand complex user instructions and in-

1. Introduction
3D indoor scene generation [7, 8, 11, 12, 14, 21, 30, 34,
36, 37, 39] refers to the process of automatically producing
realistic 3D indoor scenes with a computer program. In recent years, some studies [8, 11, 14, 30, 37] have explored on
using natural language for scene generation, as the textual
prompts offer a user-friendly interface. Realistic 3D indoor
* Corresponding author: qms@bupt.edu.cn

8975

