This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PerLA

: Perceptive 3D language assistant

Guofeng Mei1 Wei Lin2 Luigi Riz1
1
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy

Yujiao Wu3 Fabio Poiesi1 Yiming Wang1
2
JKU Linz, Austria 3 CSIRO, Australia

gmei@fbk.eu

What is the object on the right side of a gray chair,
on top of the table?

What is this object? [bbox ] or CLICK
.

CLICK

radiator

black computer monitor

the pillow is on the left side of
the bed. the pillow is black.

this is a black suitcase. it
is on the floor.

SOTA

PerLA

SOTA

PerLA

Figure 1. PerLA is a 3D language assistant that integrates local details with global context to learn informative representations of 3D
scenes, whereas state-of-the-art (SOTA) 3DLAs focus solely on global context information. PerLA can provide more accurate responses,
correctly distinguishing between objects such as a “black computer monitor” and a “black suitcase,” where SOTA models instead fail with
hallucinated responses. Examples in figures show cases where capturing details from the point cloud matters for accurate output captions.

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D language assistants (3DLAs) jointly process natural language and 3D data to achieve 3D scene understanding, such
as recognizing object categories, locations, appearances,
and relationships, without requiring specialized models for
each recognition task [9, 11, 21]. These capabilities are primarily powered by Large Language Models (LLMs) trained
in large text corpora [54]. These approaches can aggregate
multi-view features [21] or process point clouds [9] to generate 3D representations, which are in turn converted to tokens for the LLM [54, 66]. However, extracting multi-view
representations is computationally costly and often fails to
capture essential geometric properties [21]. Directly processing point clouds can yield more accurate results, yet it
is even more computationally costly than handling multiview data, as point clouds typically have rather large cardinalities [60]. To address this, the point cloud cardinality can
be reduced via downsampling [8, 9]. However, as with images [36], downsampling can compromise downstream task
performance due to the reduced model’s ability to perceive
fine details of 3D scenes [47].
Fig. 1 illustrates two cases where our approach can accurately capture details and describe small objects within large

Enabling Large Language Models (LLMs) to understand
the 3D physical world is an emerging yet challenging research direction. Current strategies for processing point
clouds typically downsample the scene or divide it into
smaller parts for separate analysis. However, both approaches risk losing key local details or global contextual
information. In this paper, we introduce PerLA, a 3D language assistant designed to be more perceptive to both details and context, making visual representations more informative for the LLM. PerLA captures high-resolution (local)
details in parallel from different point cloud areas and integrates them with (global) context obtained from a lowerresolution whole point cloud. We present a novel algorithm
that preserves point cloud locality through the Hilbert curve
and effectively aggregates local-to-global information via
cross-attention and a graph neural network. Lastly, we introduce a novel loss for local representation consensus to
promote training stability. PerLA outperforms state-of-theart 3D language assistants, with gains of up to +1.34 CiDEr
on ScanQA for question answering, and +4.22 on ScanRefer and +3.88 on Nr3D for dense captioning. Project page:
https://gfmei.github.io/PerLA

14369

