This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IDEA: Inverted Text with Cooperative Deformable Aggregation for Multi-modal
Object Re-Identification
Yuhao Wang, Yongfeng Lv, Pingping Zhang*, Huchuan Lu
School of Future Technology, School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
{924973292,lvyf}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {zhpp,lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

(a) Multi-modal Caption Generation

Abstract

+

Multi-modal object Re-IDentification (ReID) aims to retrieve specific objects by utilizing complementary information from various modalities. However, existing methods focus on fusing heterogeneous visual features, neglecting the potential benefits of text-based semantic information. To address this issue, we first construct three textenhanced multi-modal object ReID benchmarks. To be specific, we propose a standardized multi-modal caption generation pipeline for structured and concise text annotations
with Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Besides, current methods often directly aggregate multi-modal
information without selecting representative local features,
leading to redundancy and high complexity. To address the
above issues, we introduce IDEA, a novel feature learning framework comprising the Inverted Multi-modal Feature Extractor (IMFE) and Cooperative Deformable Aggregation (CDA). The IMFE utilizes Modal Prefixes and an InverseNet to integrate multi-modal information with semantic guidance from inverted text. The CDA adaptively generates sampling positions, enabling the model to focus on
the interplay between global features and discriminative local features. With the constructed benchmarks and the proposed modules, our framework can generate more robust
multi-modal features under complex scenarios. Extensive
experiments on three multi-modal object ReID benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Template for
R/N/T Image
Structured
R/N/T Image
Description

(b) Limitations of Generated Captions

Caption
Generation

1. Redundant Information
2. Dispersed Key Information
Randomness
of MLLM
3. Poor Generation Consistency
4. Noise Interference in Learning

Attribute
Extraction

MLLM Excels in Keyword Extraction !
Why Not Leverage MLLM Again?

Qwen-VL

(c) Comparison with Previous Methods

🔥
Vision Encoder

Direct Aggregation🔥

R/N/T Text

Text Encoder

InverseNet🔥

R/N/T Image

🔥
Vision Encoder

R/N/T Image

High Complexity...
More Noise...

😭

Richer Semantic Guidance!

More Efficient!
Deformable Aggregation🔥 Less Noise! 🥳

Figure 1. Overall illustration of our motivations and proposed
framework. (a) Our multi-modal caption generation pipeline. (b)
Limitations of existing MLLM-generated captions. (c) Comparison between previous methods and our proposed IDEA.

1. Introduction

as RGB, Near Infrared (NIR) and Thermal Infrared (TIR),
offers a promising solution. By leveraging complementary
information, multi-modal ReID methods [4, 26, 37, 54] improve feature robustness under challenging conditions.
Beyond visual information fusion for different spectra,
integrating language with vision can enhance ReID performance [11, 27, 34]. However, due to the absence of text
annotations for images, most existing methods rely solely
on visual features, overlooking the benefits of text-based semantic information. To address this limitation, some studies
augment RGB datasets with manual text annotations [6, 20].
While this strategy boosts performance, it is both timeconsuming and labor-intensive. With the advent of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), image caption
has made significant progress. Recently, researchers start
to use MLLMs to generate textual descriptions for RGB
images [11, 14]. However, these methods face two main
challenges. (1) As shown in Fig. 1 (b), the randomness in
caption generation often leads to redundancy, resulting in
long and complex sentences. Additionally, the text structure varies across images. In ReID tasks, such captions may
exceed input length limits of a text encoder [29, 55], with redundant content diluting the essential information. (2) Current methods primarily focus on RGB images, where the
generated captions lack sufficient details. However, multimodal imaging can capture crucial information in complex

Object Re-IDentification (ReID) focuses on retrieving the
same object across different camera views. While significant progress has been made with RGB images [9, 13, 23–
25, 30, 35, 39, 40, 45, 47, 53], existing methods are limited
under environmental challenges like dark and glare, reducing their robustness in real-world applications. Multi-modal
imaging, which combines data from multiple spectra such
* Corresponding author

29701

