This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Toward Robust Neural Reconstruction from Sparse Point Sets
Amine Ouasfi, Shubhendu Jena, Eric Marchand, Adnane Boukhayma
Inria, Univ. Rennes, CNRS, IRISA

Abstract
We consider the challenging problem of learning Signed
Distance Functions (SDF) from sparse and noisy 3D point
clouds. In contrast to recent methods that depend on smoothness priors, our method, rooted in a distributionally robust
optimization (DRO) framework, incorporates a regularization term that leverages samples from the uncertainty regions of the model to improve the learned SDFs. Thanks to
tractable dual formulations, we show that this framework
enables a stable and efficient optimization of SDFs in the
absence of ground truth supervision. Using a variety of synthetic and real data evaluations from different modalities, we
show that our DRO based learning framework can improve
SDF learning with respect to baselines and the state-of-theart methods.
Figure 1. We fit a neural SDF to a sparse noisy point cloud solely,
using a distributionally robust loss function. Compared to the
state-of-the-art, our method provides more faithful and robust reconstructions, as can be seen in these detailed and thin structures
of ShapeNet [18] objects.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction from point clouds remains a longstanding problem at the intersection of computer vision, graphics, and machine learning. While traditional optimization
techniques like Poisson Reconstruction [28, 37] and Moving
Least Squares [27] perform well on dense, clean point clouds
with accurate normal estimations, recent deep learning-based
approaches offer improved robustness, especially when handling noisy or sparse inputs. These methods often eliminate
the need for normal data. Many existing approaches rely
on deep priors learned from large, fully labeled 3D datasets
such as ShapeNet [18], but this strategy requires expensive
training, and the resulting models are still susceptible to
generalization issues when exposed to out-of-distribution
data—whether due to changes in input density or domain
shifts, as noted by [20, 64]. Indeed, as demonstrated in
Tab. 2, our unsupervised approach outperforms supervised
generalizable models when tested on data that is sparser and
diverges from the training data. This highlights the importance of developing learning frameworks that can ensure
robust reconstruction under these challenging conditions.
Recent work [62] shows that strategies that can successfully recover SDF representations from dense point clouds,
such as Neural-Pull (NP) [52], often struggle when the point

cloud is sparse and noisy due to overfitting. As a consequence, the extracted shapes have missing parts and hallucinations (cf . Fig. 4, Fig. 1). Instead of relying on smoothness
priors, [62] shifts the focus on how training distributions of
spatial queries affect the performance of the SDF network. It
introduces a special case of distributionally robust optimization (DRO) [71, 80] for SDF learning. Within this framework, the network is trained by considering the worst-case
distribution in terms of the loss function in a neighborhood
around the observed training distribution. To tackle the challenging task of finding worst-case distributions, the training
strategy proposed by [62] that we dub here NAP for Neural
Adversarial Pull, relies on a first-order taylor approximation
of the loss to find query-pointwise adversarial samples that
are used to regularize the training. These are defined as
query points that maximize the loss. In this paper, instead
of relying on pointwise adversaries, we leverage recent advances in DRO literature to explore a tractable formulation

6552

