This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoDepth: From Point-to-Depth to Plane-to-Depth Modeling for
Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation
Haifeng Wu, Shuhang Gu, Lixin Duan, Wen Li*
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{haifengwu205, shuhanggu, lxduan, liwenbnu}@gmail.com

Abstract
Self-supervised monocular depth estimation has long been
treated as a point-wise prediction problem, where the depth
of each pixel is usually estimated independently. However,
artifacts are often observed in the estimated depth map, e.g.,
depth values for points located in the same region may jump
dramatically. To address this issue, we propose a novel selfsupervised monocular depth estimation framework called
GeoDepth, where we explore the intrinsic geometric representation in 3D scenes for producing accurate and continuous depth maps. In particular, we model the complex 3D
scene as a collection of planes with varying sizes, where
each plane is characterized by a unique set of parameters,
namely planar normal (indicating plane orientation) and
planar offset (defining the perpendicular distance from the
camera center to the plane). Under this modeling, points
in the same plane are enforced to share a unique representation and their depth variations related only to pixel coordinates, thus this geometric relationship can be exploited
to regularize the depth variations of these points. To this
end, we design a structured plane generation module that
introduces spatio-temporal geometric cues and the plane
uniqueness principle to recover the correct scene plane representation. In addition, we develop a depth discontinuity
module to identify depth discontinuity regions and subsequently optimize them. Our experiments on the KITTI and
NYUv2 datasets demonstrate that GeoDepth achieves stateof-the-art performance, with additional tests on Make3D
and ScanNet validating its generalization capabilities.

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation is a pivotal task in computer
vision, which aims to predict a pixel-wise depth map for
a given image. Each value in the depth map measures the
distance from the corresponding point in the 3D scene to
the camera plane [44]. Given its ability to provide 3D
* Corresponding author

scene structure information, monocular depth estimation
is broadly applicable in fields such as autonomous driving
[11, 33], robotics [7], and augmented reality [31]. While supervised learning can deliver high-performance depth predictions, acquiring dense depth labels is often costly. As
a result, self-supervised monocular depth estimation methods, which leverage only video or stereo images for training
[9, 13, 46, 60], have emerged as a practical alternative.
Despite its advantages, self-supervised monocular depth
estimation frequently encounters difficulties in achieving
accurate and smooth depth estimation, particularly in regions lacking texture [27, 55, 57]. This mainly because
the mainstream approaches usually adopts a point-to-depth
modeling strategy (refer to Fig. 1(a)), where image pixels
are treated as independent points, and the depth values are
estimated from their discrete representations[28]. As a result, artifacts are often observed in the estimated depth map,
e.g., depth values for points located in the same region may
jump dramatically. We refer to this phenomenon as depth
discontinuity. Some works [27, 36, 54, 55, 57, 59] attempt
to leverage only plane cues from surface normals to facilitate smoother depth estimation by assuming neighboring
pixels form a local plane. Nevertheless, relying solely on
surface normals as plane indicators might be unreliable, as
it contradicts the principle of plane uniqueness in Geometric Algebra [20], which necessitates both a normal vector
and an offset for a definitive plane representation in 3D
space. Therefore, it is appealing to develop a robust modeling strategy to capture the intrinsic geometric representation
for achieving accurate and continuous depth estimation.
In this paper, we propose a new self-supervised monocular depth estimation framework called GeoDepth, where
a novel plane-to-depth modeling strategy is developed to
address the depth discontinuity issues inherent in point-todepth methods. The motivation of GeoDepth is that a 3D
scene can essentially be modeled as a collection of planes
of varying sizes, where all points within the same plane can
be described by a unique set of parameters, namely the planar normal and planar offset [20]. As depicted in Fig. 1(b),
our methodology models coplanar points as a uniform pla-

11525

