This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ZeroGrasp: Zero-Shot Shape Reconstruction Enabled Robotic Grasping
Shun Iwase1,2
Robert Lee3

Muhammad Zubair Irshad2
Takuya Ikeda3

Ayako Amma3

Rares, Ambrus, 2
1

Carnegie Mellon University

Katherine Liu2

2

Vitor Guizilini2

Koichi Nishiwaki3

Kris Kitani1

Sergey Zakharov2

Toyota Research Institute

3

Woven by Toyota

Abstract
Robotic grasping is a cornerstone capability of embodied systems. Many methods directly output grasps from
partial information without modeling the geometry of the
scene, leading to suboptimal motion and even collisions.
To address these issues, we introduce ZeroGrasp, a novel
framework that simultaneously performs 3D reconstruction
and grasp pose prediction in near real-time. A key insight
of our method is that occlusion reasoning and modeling
the spatial relationships between objects is beneficial for
both accurate reconstruction and grasping. We couple our
method with a novel large-scale synthetic dataset, which
comprises 1M photo-realistic images, high-resolution 3D
reconstructions and 11.3B physically-valid grasp pose annotations for 12K objects from the Objaverse-LVIS dataset.
We evaluate ZeroGrasp on the GraspNet-1B benchmark
as well as through real-world robot experiments. ZeroGrasp achieves state-of-the-art performance and generalizes to novel real-world objects by leveraging synthetic
data. https://sh8.io/#/zerograsp

1. Introduction
Safe and robust robotic grasping requires accurate geometric understanding of target objects, as well as their surroundings. However, most previous grasp detection methods [1–6] do not explicitly model the geometry of the target
objects, which can lead to unexpected collisions and unstable contact with target objects. Although several methods [3, 7] leverage multi-view images to reconstruct the target objects in advance, this process introduces additional
computational overhead and requires a more complex setup.
Multi-view reconstruction is also often impractical for objects placed within confined spaces like shelves or boxes.
Furthermore, the lack of large-scale datasets with groundtruth 3D shapes and grasp pose annotations further complicates accurate 3D reconstruction from a single RGB-D im-

(a) RGB Image

(b) Noisy Depth Map

(c) 3D Reconstruction and Predicted Grasp Poses

Figure 1. ZeroGrasp simultaneously reconstructs objects at highresolution and predicts grasp poses from a single RGB-D image in
near real-time (5FPS).

age. Recently, several works [8–10] demonstrate that sparse
voxel representations outperform volumetric and NeRF-like
implicit shape representations in terms of runtime, accuracy,
and resolution, particularly for regression-based zero-shot
3D reconstruction.
To leverage reconstruction methods using sparse voxel
representations for robotic grasping, it is essential to develop new approaches that can reason about both within
a unified framework. To this end, we propose ZeroGrasp,
a novel framework for near real-time 3D reconstruction
and 6D grasp pose prediction. Our key hypothesis is that
improved 3D reconstruction quality enhances grasp pose
prediction, specifically by leveraging physics-based contact
constraints and collision detection, which are essential for
accurate grasping. Since robotic environments often involve

17405

