This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ChainHOI: Joint-based Kinematic Chain Modeling for
Human-Object Interaction Generation
Ling-An Zeng† , Guohong Huang† , Yi-Lin Wei, Shengbo Gu,
Yu-Ming Tang, Jingke Meng*, Wei-Shi Zheng*
Sun Yat-sen University, China
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{zenglan3, huanggh37}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, mengjke@gmail.com, wszheng@ieee.org
Someone is sitting in a chairblack.

A person is toting a backpack.

Someone is shoving the suitcase with a kick.

A person is grasping the boxmedium
from the front.

A person is grasping a trashbin.

Figure 1. Given a text description and target object geometry, our ChainHOI effectively generates high-quality human-object interaction
sequences that are both logical and realistic.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Text-driven human-object interaction (HOI) generation
aims to generate realistic and semantically coherent motions for both humans and objects based on provided textual
descriptions. Unlike previous approaches relying solely on
object motions [28] or past motions [66], text-driven HOI
generation offers greater controllability. This enhanced
control holds significant value for applications in AR/VR,
gaming, and film production [13, 29, 50, 62, 66].
Since the advent of Transformer architectures [55],
which have revolutionized the motion generation domain,
existing HOI methods [13, 28, 29, 50, 62, 66] typically embed full-body poses as tokens within each frame, which are
then processed by Transformers to generate human motion.
While this approach has proven effective, it models human
skeletal joints implicitly, rather than capturing their interactions explicitly. Such implicit modeling increases the difficulty of model learning and lacks a clear understanding of
physics and geometry in the explicit space. We argue that
explicitly modeling joint-level interactions is more natural
and effective for HOI generation, as it directly captures the
geometric and semantic relationships between joints, rather
than modeling interactions in the latent pose space.

We propose ChainHOI, a novel approach for text-driven
human-object interaction (HOI) generation that explicitly
models interactions at both the joint and kinetic chain levels. Unlike existing methods that implicitly model interactions using full-body poses as tokens, we argue that explicitly modeling joint-level interactions is more natural and effective for generating realistic HOIs, as it directly captures
the geometric and semantic relationships between joints,
rather than modeling interactions in the latent pose space.
To this end, ChainHOI introduces a novel joint graph to
capture potential interactions with objects, and a Generative Spatiotemporal Graph Convolution Network to explicitly model interactions at the joint level. Furthermore, we
propose a Kinematics-based Interaction Module that explicitly models interactions at the kinetic chain level, ensuring more realistic and biomechanically coherent motions.
Evaluations on two public datasets demonstrate that ChainHOI significantly outperforms previous methods, generating more realistic, and semantically consistent HOIs. Code
is available here.
† Equal contribution; * Corresponding authors.

12358

