This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniHOPE: A Unified Approach for Hand-Only and Hand-Object Pose Estimation
Yinqiao Wang∗
Hao Xu∗
Pheng-Ann Heng
Chi-Wing Fu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Institute of Medical Intelligence and XR
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{yqwang,xuhao,pheng,cwfu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Backbone

Hand Branch
Missing

object

HOPE

Hand Branch

+

Backbone

Non-existed

object

Object Branch

Hand-Only

Hand-Object

Backbone

Hand Branch

UniHOPE

Estimating the 3D pose of hand and potential hand-held
object from monocular images is a longstanding challenge.
Yet, existing methods are specialized, focusing on either
bare-hand or hand interacting with object. No method
can flexibly handle both scenarios and their performance
degrades when applied to the other scenario. In this paper, we propose UniHOPE, a unified approach for general
3D hand-object pose estimation, flexibly adapting both scenarios. Technically, we design a grasp-aware feature fusion module to integrate hand-object features with an object switcher to dynamically control the hand-object pose
estimation according to grasping status. Further, to uplift the robustness of hand pose estimation regardless of
object presence, we generate realistic de-occluded image
pairs to train the model to learn object-induced hand occlusions, and formulate multi-level feature enhancement
techniques for learning occlusion-invariant features. Extensive experiments on three commonly-used benchmarks
demonstrate UniHOPE’s SOTA performance in addressing
hand-only and hand-object scenarios. Code will be released
on https://github.com/JoyboyWang/UniHOPE_Pytorch.

HPE

Abstract

Flexible Estimation
Object 
 Grasp-aware 

Switcher Feature Fusion

Robustness Learning
De-occluded 

Features
Occluded 

Features

Enhancement

+
If object 

presents

Object Branch

Figure 1. Existing approaches (top) for 3D hand pose estimation
are either Hand Pose Estimation (HPE), which predicts hand pose
only, or Hand-Object Pose Estimation (HOPE), which assumes
hand-held object. Our novel UniHOPE approach (bottom) offers
flexibility and robustness to handle both scenes in a unified manner.

1. Introduction

HOPE methods [18, 31]. We observe an obvious performance degradation when these methods are applied across
different scenes (see “Hand-Only↔Hand-Object Scene”)
due to their task-specific designs. Though training on all
scenes helps, it negatively impacts their original task performance (see “All→Hand-Only/Hand-Object Scene”), revealing their limited generalization capabilities. This observation
motivates the need for a unified approach that can adapt effectively to both hand-only and hand-object scenes.
In this work, we present UniHOPE, the first method to
unify HPE and HOPE by addressing (i) basic criteria: adaptively switch between two scenes; and (ii) advanced criteria:
robustly estimate hand pose regardless of object presence.
First, to meet the basic criteria, we propose that the hand
pose must always be predicted regardless of whether the
hand is grasping an object or not, while the object pose
should be estimated only if the object is present. Though a
straightforward solution is to manually select existing SOTA
HPE and HOPE methods according to the input scene, this
approach is suboptimal, as switching between models leads
to incoherent results and prevents joint optimization for one

Estimating the 3D pose of hand and potential hand-held
objects from monocular images is a long-standing task with
applications in VR/AR, human-computer interactions, etc.
However, existing methods are divided. As Fig. 1 illustrates, hand pose estimation (HPE) methods [5, 9, 25, 36,
39, 49, 64] predict the 3D hand pose without considering the
hand-held object. Conversely, hand-object pose estimation
(HOPE) methods [18, 19, 31, 32, 47] assume the presence of
a hand-held object and perform object pose estimation with
an extra object branch. Yet, they always make predictions
even there is no object. Neither approach offers the flexibility
to consider both hand-only and hand-object scenarios.
Tab. 1 provides a detailed analysis of the performance
of state-of-the-art (SOTA) HPE methods [39, 49, 64] and
∗ Equal contribution.

12231

