This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ImViD: Immersive Volumetric Videos for Enhanced VR Engagement
Zhengxian Yang1 ,* Shi Pan1 ,* Shengqi Wang1 ,* Haoxiang Wang1 ,
Li Lin2 , Guanjun Li3 , Zhengqi Wen1†, Borong Lin1†, Jianhua Tao1†, Tao Yu1†
1
Tsinghua University 2 Migu Beijing Research Institute
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Science
{zx-yang23, ps23, shengqi-21, whx22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
guanjun.li@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

lilin@migu.chinamobile.com

{zqwen, linbr, jhtao, ytrock}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Figure 1. We introduce ImViD, a dataset for immersive volumetric videos. ImViD records dynamic scenes using a multi-view audio-video
capture rig moving in a space-oriented manner, which provides a new benchmark for volumetric video reconstruction and its application.

Abstract
User engagement is greatly enhanced by fully immersive
multi-modal experiences that combine visual and auditory
stimuli. Consequently, the next frontier in VR/AR technologies lies in immersive volumetric videos with complete scene capture, large 6-DoF interaction space, multimodal feedback, and high resolution&frame-rate contents.
To stimulate the reconstruction of immersive volumetric
videos, we introduce ImViD, a multi-view, multi-modal
dataset featuring complete space-oriented data capture and
various indoor/outdoor scenarios. Our capture rig supports
multi-view video-audio capture while on the move, a capability absent in existing datasets, significantly enhancing the
completeness, flexibility, and efficiency of data capture.
The captured multi-view videos (with synchronized audios) are in 5K resolution at 60FPS, lasting from 1-5 minutes, and include rich foreground-background elements,
and complex dynamics. We benchmark existing methods using our dataset and establish a base pipeline for construct-

ing immersive volumetric videos from multi-view audiovisual inputs for 6-DoF multi-modal immersive VR experiences. The benchmark and the reconstruction and interaction results demonstrate the effectiveness of our dataset and
baseline method, which we believe will stimulate future research on immersive volumetric video production. Project
Page: https://yzxqh.github.io/ImViD/

1. Introduction

* Equal contributions. † Corresponding author.

High-quality and high-fidelity digital modeling of the real
world has long been a topic of significant interest. With
breakthroughs in 3D reconstruction algorithms and virtual
reality technology, the generation of such visually compelling content is gradually becoming feasible, whether for
reproducing past events and memories or remotely viewing
current occurrences. Achieving complete user immersion is
a goal pursued by many researchers.
What defines an immersive volumetric video?
Dwelling on previous tests [1, 6] and user feedback [2,
42], we believe that immersive media should have the following four characteristics: i) Full 360° foreground and
background, ii) High-quality 6-DoF interaction, which current volumetric video can achieve, iii) Multimodal experi-

Zhengxian Yang, Shengqi Wang, Haoxiang Wang, Jianhua Tao and
Tao Yu are at BNRist&Department of Automation; Shi Pan and Borong
Lin are at Department of Building Science; Zhengqi Wen is at BNRist.

16554

