This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Synthetic Data is an Elegant GIFT for Continual Vision-Language Models
Bin Wu1 *, Wuxuan Shi1 *, Jinqiao Wang2,3 and Mang Ye1,4†
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Wuhan AI Research, Wuhan, China
4
Taikang Center for Life and Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{wubin2021, wuxuanshi, yemang}@whu.edu.cn, jqwang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
https://github.com/Luo-Jiaming/GIFT_CL

Abstract

Generating Before Task
Approx. downstream task data

Pre-trained Vision-Language Models (VLMs) require Continual Learning (CL) to efficiently update their knowledge
and adapt to various downstream tasks without retraining
from scratch. However, for VLMs, in addition to the loss
of knowledge previously learned from downstream tasks,
pre-training knowledge is also corrupted during continual
fine-tuning. This issue is exacerbated by the unavailability
of original pre-training data, leaving VLM’s generalization
ability degrading. In this paper, we propose GIFT, a novel
continual fine-tuning approach that utilizes synthetic data
to overcome catastrophic forgetting in VLMs. Taking advantage of recent advances in text-to-image synthesis, we
employ a pre-trained diffusion model to recreate both pretraining and learned downstream task data. In this way,
the VLM can revisit previous knowledge through distillation
on matching diffusion-generated images and corresponding
text prompts. Leveraging the broad distribution and high
alignment between synthetic image-text pairs in VLM’s feature space, we propose a contrastive distillation loss along
with an image-text alignment constraint. To further combat
in-distribution overfitting and enhance distillation performance with limited amount of generated data, we incorporate adaptive weight consolidation, utilizing Fisher information from these synthetic image-text pairs and achieving
a better stability-plasticity balance. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms previous state-of-the-art approaches across various settings.

Task
Class Name

Task 2
Class Name

…

Approx. pre-training data

Diverse
Concepts

Task 1
Class Name

Sample
& Template
Add

Stable
Diffusion

A photo of a
A photo of a

photo
{object}
A Aphoto
ofofa.a .
{object}
{object} .
{minibus} .

Match

Task
Class Name

Synthetic Image-Text Pairs

Train

VLM

Distill

VLM

Task Data

Distilling During Task

Figure 1. We use synthetic data generated by Stable Diffusion [46]
to support continual fine-tuning of VLMs. By creating prompts
from learned downstream class names and diverse visual concepts
(i.e., additional class names), the generated data effectively approximates both downstream and VLM’s pre-training data. During training, knowledge distillation [24] enables the VLM to reexperience previous knowledge via its past responses on matching
synthetic images and corresponding text prompts.

various downstream tasks. Despite these advancements,
difficulties remain in updating knowledge of pre-trained
VLMs and applying them to multiple downstream tasks simultaneously. Vanilla approaches involve retraining VLMs
from scratch to update knowledge or storing a fine-tuned
VLM for each specific task, both of which incur substantial
additional costs. While Continual Learning (CL) [6, 31, 34,
47, 48] can reduce this cost by enabling trained models to
only learn new task data incrementally, thereby presenting
itself as an efficient alternative to address these difficulties.

1. Introduction
Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as CLIP [43] and
ALIGN [27], have offered unprecedented advancements in
zero-shot generalization and fine-tuning performance on
* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Author.

2813

