This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GraphMimic: Graph-to-Graphs Generative Modeling from Videos
for Policy Learning
Guangyan Chen1†
Te Cui1†
Meiling Wang1
Chengcai Yang1
Mengxiao Hu1
1
2
1
1
Haoyang Lu
Yao Mu
Zicai Peng
Tianxing Zhou
Xinran Jiang1
Yi Yang1
Yufeng Yue1 *
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 The University of Hong Kong
Current Graph

Abstract

Future Graph Generation

Fold and
locate cloth
into
triangle

Learning from demonstration is a powerful method for
robotic skill acquisition. However, the significant expense of
collecting such action-labeled robot data presents a major
bottleneck. Video data, a rich data source encompassing
diverse behavioral and physical knowledge, emerges as a
promising alternative. In this paper, we present GraphMimic,
a novel paradigm that leverages video data via graph-tographs generative modeling, which pre-trains models to generate future graphs conditioned on the graph within a video
frame. Specifically, GraphMimic abstracts video frames into
object and visual action vertices, and constructs graphs
for state representations. The graph generative modeling
network then effectively models internal structures and spatial relationships within the constructed graphs, aiming to
generate future graphs. The generated graphs serve as conditions for the control policy, mapping to robot actions. Our
concise approach captures important spatial relations and
enhances future graph generation accuracy, enabling the
acquisition of robust policies from limited action-labeled
data. Furthermore, the transferable graph representations
facilitate the effective learning of manipulation skills from
cross-embodiment videos. Our experiments exhibit that
GraphMimic achieves superior performance using merely
20% action-labeled data. Moreover, our method outperforms
the state-of-the-art method by over 17% and 23% in simulation and real-world experiments, and delivers improvements
of over 33% in cross-embodiment transfer experiments.

Put moka
pot on
stove

Open
microwave

(a) Graph-to-Graphs Generative Modeling

Video Pre-training

Cross-embodiment Transfer

(b) Comparisons with Baselines

Figure 1. Illustration of our GraphMimic. (a) GraphMimic constructs the graph within a video frame, and pre-trains models to
generate future graphs, providing effective guidance for policy
learning. (b) GraphMimic achieves superior performance using
merely 20% action-labeled data, and significantly outperforms
strong video pre-training baseline methods.

haviors [1]–[4]. However, demonstration collection often
necessitates substantial human effort, posing a bottleneck
for robot learning. Confronted with this challenge, videos
emerge as a promising alternative, offering a rich data source
encompassing behavioral and physical knowledge.
Prior work has explored various approaches to leverage
video data, including visual pre-training [5]–[11], learning reward functions [12]–[17]. However, these methods overlook
the transition dynamics or encounter a significant sim-to-real
gap. Recent research [18]–[23] attempted to address these
by pre-training models on video data to predict subsequent
images or points from the current ones, then leveraging such
predictions to guide policy learning on action-labeled data.
While these approaches have demonstrated potential, they

1. Introduction
Imitation learning from demonstrations has become an effective paradigm for teaching robots to perform diverse be* Corresponding author. † Equal contributions. This work was supported
by National Key RD Program of China (Grant No.2024YFB4708900). It
was also supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant 624B2025, and 92370203.

1756

