This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UNOPose: Unseen Object Pose Estimation with
an Unposed RGB-D Reference Image
Xingyu Liu1, *, Gu Wang1, *, Ruida Zhang1 ,
Chenyangguang Zhang1 , Federico Tombari2, 3 , and Xiangyang Ji1
1
Tsinghua University, BNRist 2 Technical University of Munich, 3 Google
{liuxy21@mails., wanggu1@, zhangrd23@mails., zcyg22@mails., xyji@}tsinghua.edu.cn,
tombari@in.tum.de

Abstract
Unseen object pose estimation methods often rely on CAD
models or multiple reference views, making the onboarding
stage costly. To simplify reference acquisition, we aim to
estimate the unseen object’s pose through a single unposed
RGB-D reference image. While previous works leverage reference images as pose anchors to limit the range of relative
pose, our scenario presents significant challenges since the
relative transformation could vary across the entire SE(3)
space. Moreover, factors like occlusion, sensor noise, and
extreme geometry could result in low viewpoint overlap. To
address these challenges, we present a novel approach and
benchmark, termed UNOPose1 , for UNseen One-referencebased object Pose estimation. Building upon a coarse-to-fine
paradigm, UNOPose constructs an SE(3)-invariant reference frame to standardize object representation despite pose
and size variations. To alleviate small overlap across viewpoints, we recalibrate the weight of each correspondence
based on its predicted likelihood of being within the overlapping region. Evaluated on our proposed benchmark based on
the BOP Challenge, UNOPose demonstrates superior performance, significantly outperforming traditional and learningbased methods in the one-reference setting and remaining
competitive with CAD-model-based methods. The code and
dataset are available at github.com/shanice-l/UNOPose.

1. Introduction

ing and testing datasets consist of an identical set of known
object instances, and the CAD models of objects are often
required for generating training images and labels [16, 56].
More recently, Wang et al. [87] and its successors [6, 79, 88]
extended this paradigm to the category level, intending to
estimate poses for novel instances within predefined categories without requiring CAD models of target objects.
Both paradigms have limitations in open-world applications,
where annotating and training for new objects beyond known
categories would be very labor-intensive and sometimes prohibitive.
To mitigate this problem, recent research efforts [3, 43, 51,
90] have shifted towards pose estimation of arbitrary novel
objects, where the target object is unseen during training.
This task presents a great challenge due to the inherent uncertainty of the novel object’s canonical frame (defined in the
CAD model of the object). Current approaches [43, 57, 62]
often tackle this by using omnidirectional reference views
to cover the target object, separating pose estimation task to
viewpoint selection and relative pose estimation to known
pose anchors. If CAD models are available during the test
phase, reference views can be easily produced through image
rendering [43, 51, 61, 90]. Alternatively, without CAD models, reference views can be obtained by capturing multiple
images of the object [29, 31, 55, 77]. Both setups have shortcomings, as creating a CAD model of an object or labeling a
substantial number of object poses is limited in scalability.
For example, they can hardly adapt to in-the-wild scenarios
where novel objects are introduced unpredictably.

Localizing an object in Euclidean space by estimating its
6DoF pose, i.e., 3DoF orientation and 3DoF position, plays
a crucial role in augmented/virtual reality [59, 76], scene understanding [37, 63] and robotic manipulation [23, 26, 80].
The vast majority of works [42, 48, 68, 78, 83–86] focuses
on instance-level object pose estimation, where the train* Equal contributions.
1 UNO (/"u:noU/) means one in Spanish and Italian.

To sum up, while existing methods exhibit promising
transfer capability to novel objects, they are notably constrained by their reliance on the CAD model or multiple
reference views (Fig. 1 (a, b)). In this work, we aim to minimize onboarding cost by estimating novel object poses using
a single unposed RGB-D reference image (Fig. 1). This
setup is different from existing methods mainly in two aspects. First, we focus on estimating the relative pose between

22023

