This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real-time Free-view Human Rendering from Sparse-view RGB Videos using
Double Unprojected Textures
Guoxing Sun1 , Rishabh Dabral1,2 , Heming Zhu1 , Pascal Fua3 , Christian Theobalt1,2 , Marc Habermann1,2
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus 2 VIA Research Center
{gsun, rdabral, hezhu, theobalt, mhaberma}@mpi-inf.mpg.de pascal.fua@epfl.ch
https://vcai.mpi-inf.mpg.de/projects/DUT/

3

EPFL

Figure 1. We propose Double Unprojected Textures (DUT), a new method to synthesize photoreal 4K novel-view renderings in realtime. Our method consistently beats baseline approaches [29, 34, 46, 53] in terms of rendering quality and inference speed. Moreover, it
generalizes to, both, in-distribution (IND) motions, i.e. dancing, and out-of-distribution (OOD) motions, i.e. standing long jump.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Sparse free-view human rendering concerns about rendering a virtual twin of a real human observed from (multiple) cameras into arbitrary virtual view points. Here, the
ultimate pursuit is a fast, accurate, and robust algorithm,
which captures human performance and reproduces realistic renderings in real time with minimal sensors. Such an
approach would have great potential in applications like immersive telepresence and it may completely change the way
of how humans remotely communicate in the future. While
researchers have put immense efforts in solving this challenging task, the readily available solutions fall short in one
or multiple ways, e.g., requiring dense sensors, limited photorealism, or slow runtime performance.

Real-time free-view human rendering from sparse-view
RGB inputs is a challenging task due to the sensor scarcity
and the tight time budget. To ensure efficiency, recent methods leverage 2D CNNs operating in texture space to learn
rendering primitives. However, they either jointly learn geometry and appearance, or completely ignore sparse image
information for geometry estimation, significantly harming
visual quality and robustness to unseen body poses. To
address these issues, we present Double Unprojected Textures, which at the core disentangles coarse geometric deformation estimation from appearance synthesis, enabling
robust and photorealistic 4K rendering in real-time. Specifically, we first introduce a novel image-conditioned template
deformation network, which estimates the coarse deformation of the human template from a first unprojected texture.
This updated geometry is then used to apply a second and
more accurate texture unprojection. The resulting texture
map has fewer artifacts and better alignment with input
views, which benefits our learning of finer-level geometry
and appearance represented by Gaussian splats. We validate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method
in quantitative and qualitative experiments, which significantly surpasses other state-of-the-art methods.

Earlier works rely on dense camera setups to reconstruct
high-quality geometry [3, 13, 67] and renderings [41, 70],
which are typically not affordable to non-professional users.
Moreover, these methods generally fail under sparse camera
assumptions, i.e. four or less cameras, due to inherent ambiguities and lack of observation. To solve such ambiguities,
some works [57, 65, 75] learn priors from data, and perform
expensive fine-tuning on novel images, making them inappropriate for live inference. Other works [29, 44, 46, 53]
efficiently predict rendering primitives in 2D texture space
relying on a texture unprojection step [53]. However, they

562

