This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MeGA: Hybrid Mesh-Gaussian Head Avatar for High-Fidelity Rendering and
Head Editing
Cong Wang1 , Di Kang2 , Heyi Sun1 , Shenhan Qian3 , Zixuan Wang4 ,
Linchao Bao2 , ⋆ Song-Hai Zhang1
1

Tsinghua University, 2 Tencent, 3 Technical University of Munich, 4 Carnegie Mellon University
⋆ Corresponding author: shz@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Creating high-fidelity head avatars from multi-view videos
is essential for many AR/VR applications. However, current methods often struggle to achieve high-quality renderings across all head components (e.g., skin vs. hair) due
to the limitations of using one single representation for elements with varying characteristics. In this paper, we introduce a Hybrid Mesh-Gaussian Head Avatar (MeGA) that
models different head components with more suitable representations. Specifically, we employ an enhanced FLAME
mesh for the facial representation and predict a UV displacement map to provide per-vertex offsets for improved
personalized geometric details. To achieve photorealistic
rendering, we use deferred neural rendering to obtain facial
colors and decompose neural textures into three meaningful parts. For hair modeling, we first build a static canonical hair using 3D Gaussian Splatting. A rigid transformation and an MLP-based deformation field are further
applied to handle complex dynamic expressions. Combined with our occlusion-aware blending, MeGA generates higher-fidelity renderings for the whole head and naturally supports diverse downstream tasks. Experiments on
the NeRSemble dataset validate the effectiveness of our designs, outperforming previous state-of-the-art methods and
enabling versatile editing capabilities, including hairstyle
alteration and texture editing. The code is released in
https://github.com/conallwang/MeGA.

1. Introduction
Generating photorealistic rendering of animatable head
avatars has been a long-standing focus in computer vision
and graphics, with applications spanning AR/VR communication [14, 24, 30], gaming [39], and remote collaborations [42].
Existing methods have explored mesh-based representations [1, 13, 24, 28], NeRF-based representations [15, 27,

40, 45], 3D Gaussians-based representations [9, 32, 41, 44]
and achieved remarkable progress in this field. However,
the human head is a complex “object” containing components with drastically different characteristics so there may
not exist one single representation that can model all of
them well simultaneously. For instance, the human hair
contains volumetric thin structures while the human face is
predominantly surface-like regions and can be animated in
a low dimensional space [23]. Thus, using only one representation to model different head components inevitably
sacrifices the rendering quality of one part for another.
Ideally, we expect the head avatar representation can
be rendered in photorealistic quality and can be easily controlled to perform vivid facial animations. For
high-quality facial rendering and animation, Pixel Codec
Avatars (PiCA) [28], which adopts neural texture representation [38], have demonstrated extraordinary rendering
quality and subtle dynamic texture details while being able
to be animated easily due to its mesh-based representation.
However, it contains noticeable artifacts including texturelike hair rendering and mesh-like hair boundaries. In contrast, GaussianAvatars [32], which adopts rigged 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [19] representation, successfully reconstructs high-frequency volumetric human hair but shows
inferior facial texture details (e.g., wrinkles) and interpenetration artifacts (e.g., Fig. 4, first row). Additionally, antialiasing of 3DGS remains an open problem [22, 37, 49], significantly impairing its rendering quality on human faces,
particularly when zooming in/out.
Therefore, we propose to use more suitable representations for different head components (i.e., neural mesh for
the face and 3DGS for the hair), resulting in a Hybrid MeshGaussian Head Avatar (MeGA). Specifically, we adopt the
FLAME mesh [23] as our base mesh to model dynamic human faces. Additionally, we learn a UV displacement map
conditioned on the driving signal (i.e., FLAME parameters)
to account for the geometric details that cannot be represented in the FLAME space. For photorealistic rendering,

26274

