This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalized Few-shot 3D Point Cloud Segmentation
with Vision-Language Model
Guolei Sun2∗ , Yun Liu3 *, Runjia Li4 , Junlin Han4 ,
Ender Konukoglu2 , Serge Belongie1
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen
2
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich
3
College of Computer Science, Nankai University
4
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Zhaochong An1,2 ,

Abstract
Support Feat.

Support

Backbone

Generalized few-shot 3D point cloud segmentation
(GFS-PCS) adapts models to new classes with few support samples while retaining base class segmentation. Existing GFS-PCS methods enhance prototypes via interacting with support or query features but remain limited by
sparse knowledge from few-shot samples. Meanwhile, 3D
vision-language models (3D VLMs), generalizing across
open-world novel classes, contain rich but noisy novel class
knowledge. In this work, we introduce a GFS-PCS framework that synergizes dense but noisy pseudo-labels from 3D
VLMs with precise yet sparse few-shot samples to maximize the strengths of both, named GFS-VL. Specifically, we
present a prototype-guided pseudo-label selection to filter
low-quality regions, followed by an adaptive infilling strategy that combines knowledge from pseudo-label contexts
and few-shot samples to adaptively label the filtered, unlabeled areas. Additionally, we design a novel-base mix
strategy to embed few-shot samples into training scenes,
preserving essential context for improved novel class learning. Moreover, recognizing the limited diversity in current GFS-PCS benchmarks, we introduce two challenging
benchmarks with diverse novel classes for comprehensive
generalization evaluation. Experiments validate the effectiveness of our framework across models and datasets. Our
approach and benchmarks provide a solid foundation for
advancing GFS-PCS in the real world. The code is at here.

Base
Prototypes

Interaction
Module

Query Feat.

Base & Novel
Prototypes

Prediction

Query

3D VLM

Support
Few-shot
Augmentation
Query

Calibration
PseudoLabels

Segmentor

Prediction

Figure 1. Comparison of our framework with previous work.
Top: Prior work [56, 66] primarily enhances prototypes through
interaction modules that integrate support/query features, making
predictions based on refined prototypes. However, they are limited
by the sparse knowledge from few-shot samples. Bottom: Our
framework addresses this limitation by leveraging the extensive
open-world knowledge from 3D VLMs through pseudo-labels. We
mitigate the noise inherent in 3D VLMs by calibrating their raw
pseudo-labels with precise few-shot samples, thereby effectively
expanding novel class knowledge while ensuring reliability.

1. Introduction

as a valuable task [2, 77], enabling models to extend from
base to novel classes with minimal annotations for novel
classes. However, typical few-shot models require additional support samples for each novel class at inference and
only predict novel classes, ignoring base classes. To address
this, generalized few-shot point cloud semantic segmentation (GFS-PCS) [66] was introduced, allowing models to
directly segment both base and novel classes after few-shot
adaptation, making it more practical for real-world use.

Understanding dense 3D semantics is essential for many vision applications [20, 35, 42, 52, 53, 61, 73], and few-shot
point cloud semantic segmentation (FS-PCS) has emerged
* Corresponding authors: Guolei Sun and Yun Liu

16997

