This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stabilizing and Accelerating Autofocus with Expert Trajectory Regularized
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Shouhang Zhu1 , Chenglin Li1 , Yuankun Jiang2 , Li Wei1 , Nuowen Kan1 , Ziyang Zheng1 ,
Wenrui Dai2 , Junni Zou2 , Hongkai Xiong1
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
1

{shzhu2001, lcl1985, wei li, kannw 1230, zhengziyang, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn
2

{yuankunjiang, daiwenrui, zoujunni}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Autofocus is a crucial component of modern digital cameras. While recent learning-based methods achieve stateof-the-art in focus prediction accuracy, they unfortunately
ignore the potential focus hunting phenomenon of backand-forth lens movement in the multi-step focusing procedure. To address this, in this paper, we propose an expert regularized deep reinforcement learning (DRL)-based
approach for autofocus, which can utilize the sequential
information of lens movement trajectory to both enhance
the multi-step in-focus prediction accuracy and reduce the
chance of focus hunting. Our method generally follows an
actor-critic framework. To accelerate the DRL’s training
with a higher sample efficiency, we initialize the policy with
a pre-trained single-step prediction network, where the network is further improved by modifying the output of absolute in-focus position distribution to the relative lens movement distribution to establish a better mapping between input images and lens movement. To further stabilize DRL’s
training with a lower occurrence of focus hunting in the resulting lens movement trajectory, we generate some offline
trajectories based on prior knowledge to avoid focus hunting, which are then leveraged as an offline dataset of expert
trajectories to regularize the actor network’s training. Empirical evaluations show that our method outperforms those
learning-based methods on public benchmarks, with higher
single- and multi-step prediction accuracy, and a significant
reduction of focus hunting rate.

through any post-processing due to the varying effects of
blur influenced by factors such as camera aperture and radial distortion [1]. In addition, the beauty of a moment often
lies in its fleeting nature, which thus imposes an imperative demand for the fast focusing speed of an AF algorithm.
However, due to the instability in focusing systems incurred
by some interference factors, the AF mechanism of the camera lens may fail to accurately lock onto the focal point, resulting in a repeated movement of the lens within a certain
range. This phenomenon, as illustrated in Fig. 1, is referred
to as focus hunting (FH), whereby the camera is unable to
identify the focus plane and thus drives the lens forward and
backward through a set range of focus hunting for it. It then
causes variations in the image sharpness and changes the
lens’s field of view (FoV), ultimately leading to an unstable
focusing experience with longer focusing time, which is a
common issue in the traditional AF-assisted cameras [2]. It
is thus of great importance to develop an AF algorithm that
not only achieves a higher in-focus accuracy but can also
stabilize the trajectory of lens movement with a faster convergence speed to the in-focus position, thus reducing the
probability of occurrence of focus hunting [43, 48].

1. Introduction

There is a large body of work on the traditional autofocus methods, generally falling into two categories: searchbased and phase-based methods. Search-based AF methods
[40, 42] search within a range of focus distances to locate
the lens position of the extreme sharpness value, which is
then determined as the in-focus lens position. Thus, they
need to move the lens back and forth, which leads to a
highly accurate identification of the in-focus position, but
with an annoyingly slow focusing procedure and inevitably
the occurrence of focus hunting. Phase-based approaches,
on the other hand, rely on the dual-pixel (DP) sensors to
obtain the phase data from the left and right sub-images,
which is then leveraged to predict the lens movement and
determine the in-focus position in a single step of lens

Autofocus (AF) is a process through which the camera
can determine automatically a lens position to focus on the
region of interest (RoI). It is a crucial step in image capturing, since once an image is already captured in a defocused
and blurry state, it is then difficult to restore its sharpness

26440

