This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Partonomic 3D Reconstruction from Image Collections
Xiaoqian Ruan1 , Pei Yu2 , Dian Jia1 , Hyeonjeong Park1 , Peixi Xiong3 , Wei Tang1
1
University of Illinois Chicago, 2 Microsoft, 3 Intel
{xruan9, djia7, hpark233, tangw}@uic.edu, pei.yu@microsoft.com, peixi.xiong@intel.com

Abstract
Reconstructing the 3D shape of an object from a single-view
image is a fundamental task in computer vision. Recent advances in differentiable rendering have enabled 3D reconstruction from image collections using only 2D annotations.
However, these methods mainly focus on whole-object reconstruction and overlook object partonomy, which is essential for intelligent agents interacting with physical environments. This paper aims at learning partonomic 3D
reconstruction from collections of images with only 2D annotations. Our goal is not only to reconstruct the shape
of an object from a single-view image but also to decompose the shape into meaningful semantic parts. To handle the expanded solution space and frequent part occlusions in single-view images, we introduce a novel approach
that represents, parses, and learns the structural compositionality of 3D objects. This approach comprises: (1)
a compact and expressive compositional representation of
object geometry, achieved through disentangled modeling
of large shape variations, constituent parts, and detailed
part deformations as multi-granularity neural fields; (2) a
part transformer that recovers precise partonomic geometry and handles occlusions, through effective part-to-pixel
grounding and part-to-part relational modeling; and (3) a
2D-supervised learning method that jointly learns the compositional representation and part transformer, by bridging
object shape and parts, image synthesis, and differentiable
rendering. Extensive experiments on ShapeNetPart, PartNet, and CUB-200-2011 demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach on both overall and partonomic reconstruction. Code, models, and data are avaliable at https:
/ / github . com / XiaoqianRuan1 / Partonomic _
Reconstruction.

Figure 1. This paper aims at learning partonomic 3D reconstruction from an image collection with only 2D annotations. Our goal
is not only to reconstruct the shape of an object from a single-view
image but also to decompose the shape into meaningful semantic
parts. The first and fourth columns are single-view input images.
The other columns are partonomic 3D reconstruction results obtained by our proposed approach.

1. Introduction

ing. Deep neural networks have achieved excellent performance in single-view 3D reconstruction [12, 39, 54], but
their training requires extensive 3D shape and/or pose annotations, which are costly and sometimes impossible to obtain. Thanks to advancement in differentiable rendering, a
significant line of recent research [13, 15, 17, 20, 21, 26, 36]
has shown promise in learning single-view 3D reconstruction from a collection of images with only 2D annotations,
e.g., keypoints [19] and masks [13], following an analysisby-synthesis paradigm. However, these works focus on reconstructing entire objects and ignore their parts.
An object is composed of various parts, which is also
known as partonomy [44]. Understanding the partonomy of
3D objects is crucial for intelligent agents interacting with
the physical world, as it is often the parts that define an
object’s functionality and affordances. For example, considering an assistant robot serving at home or in an office,
it needs to understand that the top of a table can hold other
objects when looking for a suitable place to deliver items.
Similarly, to assist someone sitting down, a robot must understand that the seat of a chair is for sitting, while the backrest provides support for the user’s back. Some 3D recon-

Reconstructing the 3D shape of an object (e.g., a triangle
mesh) from a single-view image is a fundamental task in
computer vision with a wide range of applications, including virtual and augmented reality, robotics, and 3D print-

26734

