This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GaussHDR: High Dynamic Range Gaussian Splatting via Learning Unified
3D and 2D Local Tone Mapping
Jinfeng Liu1
1

Lingtong Kong2

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Bo Li2
2

Dan Xu1

vivo Mobile Communication Co., Ltd

{jliugk,danxu}@cse.ust.hk, {ltkong,libra}@vivo.com

Training with 3D Tone Mapping
Tone
mapping

HDR ray

Render

LDR ray

Weighted HDR/LDR Color Along the Ray

Render

Loss

HDR ray

LDR pixel

LDR RMSE: 0.032

Inaccurate HDR Rendering

Training with 2D Tone Mapping

𝑧 (depth)

Tone
mapping

HDR pixel

Loss

LDR pixel

LDR RMSE: 0.054

𝑧 (depth)

HDR Rendering

Figure 1. 3D tone mapping vs. 2D tone mapping. Training with 3D tone mapping often results in inaccurate HDR rendering, while
training with 2D tone mapping degrades LDR rendering quality, leading to a higher LDR RMSE metric compared to 3D tone mapping.

Abstract

iments demonstrate that GaussHDR significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both synthetic and realworld scenarios. The project page for this paper is available at https://liujf1226.github.io/GaussHDR.

High dynamic range (HDR) novel view synthesis (NVS)
aims to reconstruct HDR scenes by leveraging multi-view
low dynamic range (LDR) images captured at different exposure levels. Current training paradigms with 3D tone
mapping often result in unstable HDR reconstruction, while
training with 2D tone mapping reduces the model’s capacity to fit LDR images. Additionally, the global tone mapper used in existing methods can impede the learning of
both HDR and LDR representations. To address these challenges, we present GaussHDR, which unifies 3D and 2D
local tone mapping through 3D Gaussian splatting. Specifically, we design a residual local tone mapper for both
3D and 2D tone mapping that accepts an additional context feature as input. We then propose combining the dual
LDR rendering results from both 3D and 2D local tone
mapping at the loss level. Finally, recognizing that different scenes may exhibit varying balances between the
dual results, we introduce uncertainty learning and use the
uncertainties for adaptive modulation. Extensive exper-

1. Introduction
Nowadays, novel view synthesis (NVS) has reached an unprecedented level of advancement with the emergence of
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [40] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [25], enabling realistic reconstruction and realtime rendering. This progress significantly benefits high
dynamic range (HDR) NVS, which utilizes multi-view images captured at varying exposure levels to reconstruct HDR
scenes. The objective is to render not only novel HDR views
but also novel low dynamic range (LDR) views with controllable exposure. Currently, the mainstream paradigm for
this task involves extending the color representation from
LDR to HDR, and employing a tone mapper to model the
camera response function (CRF), which maps the exposure
(the product of HDR irradiance and camera exposure time)

5991

