This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LogoSP: Local-global Grouping of Superpoints for Unsupervised Semantic
Segmentation of 3D Point Clouds
Zihui Zhang 1,2† Weisheng Dai 1,2† Hongtao Wen 1,2 Bo Yang 1,2 *
Shenzhen Research Institute, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
vLAR Group, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

1

zihui.zhang@connect.polyu.hk, bo.yang@polyu.edu.hk

Input Point Cloud

GrowSP

PointDC-DINOv2

PointDC

LogoSP (Ours)

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Given an input point cloud with complex structures from ScanNet dataset, our LogoSP automatically discovers accurate semantic
classes such as sofa and table without needing human labels in training, clearly outperforming all existing baselines.

Abstract

per-point 3D semantics, early works focus on developing
fully or weakly supervised techniques including 3D pointbased [22, 25, 54] methods and 2D/3D projection-based approaches [16, 77]. While achieving remarkable accuracy
and efficiency on public datasets, they predominantly depend on large-scale human annotations of raw point clouds
for training neural networks. Unfortunately, the process of
annotating 3D point clouds is particularly costly and labourintensive. To mitigate this issue, an increasing number of recent works leverage supervised pretrained 3D, 2D/language
features such as CLIP [56] and SAM [30], followed by
finetuning techniques to learn per-point semantics. Despite
yielding promising results, these methods still need tedious
human annotations or alignments between modalities.
Very recently, several works tackle 3D semantic segmentation without needing human labels in training, including the seminal GrowSP [91], PointDC [8], and others [37, 45, 61, 72, 92]. By creating and then progressively
growing 3D superpoints within raw point clouds, GrowSP
successfully learns semantically meaningful primitives, ultimately achieving purely unsupervised 3D semantic segmentation. Nevertheless, the segmentation performance
is still unsatisfactory. The primary reasons are two-fold.
First, during its initialization stage, the per-point or persuperpoint features of GrowSP are often not sufficiently discriminative, as its backbone network is randomly initialized
without incorporating semantic priors. Second, the latter
strategy of grouping 3D superpoints is too simplistic, thus
generating inferior pseudo-labels to train the network.
With the advancement of self-supervised pretraining

We study the problem of unsupervised 3D semantic segmentation on raw point clouds without needing human labels in
training. Existing methods usually formulate this problem
into learning per-point local features followed by a simple
grouping strategy, lacking the ability to discover additional
and possibly richer semantic priors beyond local features.
In this paper, we introduce LogoSP to learn 3D semantics
from both local and global point features. The key to our
approach is to discover 3D semantic information by grouping superpoints according to their global patterns in the
frequency domain, thus generating highly accurate semantic pseudo-labels for training a segmentation network. Extensive experiments on two indoor and an outdoor datasets
show that our LogoSP surpasses all existing unsupervised
methods by large margins, achieving the state-of-the-art
performance for unsupervised 3D semantic segmentation.
Notably, our investigation into the learned global patterns
reveals that they truly represent meaningful 3D semantics in
the absence of human labels during training. Our code and
data are available at https://github.com/vLARgroup/LogoSP

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation of 3D point clouds is crucial for
a variety of emerging applications such as robot planing, embodied AI, and autonomous driving. To learn
*

Corresponding author

†

Equal contribution

1374

