This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IncEventGS: Pose-Free Gaussian Splatting from a Single Event Camera
Jian Huang1,2
1

Chengrui Dong1,2

Zhejiang University

2

Xuanhua Chen2,3

Westlake University

3

Peidong Liu2∗

Northeastern University

{huangjian39, dongchengrui, chenxuanhua, liupeidong}@westlake.edu.cn
https://github.com/WU-CVGL/IncEventGS

Abstract
Implicit neural representation and explicit 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) for novel view synthesis have achieved remarkable progress with frame-based camera (e.g. RGB and RGBD cameras) recently. Compared to frame-based camera, a
novel type of bio-inspired visual sensor, i.e. event camera,
has demonstrated advantages in high temporal resolution,
high dynamic range, low power consumption, and low latency, which make it favored for many robotic applications.
In this work, we present IncEventGS, an incremental 3D Gaussian Splatting reconstruction algorithm with a single event
camera, without the assumption of known camera poses. To
recover the 3D scene representation incrementally, we exploit the tracking and mapping paradigm of conventional
SLAM pipelines for IncEventGS. Given the incoming event
stream, the tracker first estimates an initial camera motion
based on prior reconstructed 3D-GS scene representation.
The mapper then jointly refines both the 3D scene representation and camera motion based on the previously estimated
motion trajectory from the tracker. The experimental results
demonstrate that IncEventGS delivers superior performance
compared to prior NeRF-based methods and other related
baselines, even if we do not have the ground-truth camera
poses. Furthermore, our method can also deliver better performance compared to state-of-the-art event visual odometry
methods in terms of camera motion estimation.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing accurate 3D scene representations from 2D
images has been a long-standing challenge in computer vision and robotics, driving substantial efforts over the past few
decades. Among those pioneering works, Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) [19] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) [11],
stand out for their utilization of differentiable rendering techniques, and have garnered significant attention due to their
capability to recover high-quality 3D scene representation
*Corresponding author.

26933

from 2D images. Commonly used sensors for 3D scene reconstruction are usually frame-based cameras, such as the RGB
and RGB-D cameras. They usually capture full-brightness
intensity images within a short exposure time at a regular
frequency. Due to the characteristic of this data-capturing
process, they often suffer from motion blur or fail to capture
accurate and informative intensity information under fast motion and low-light conditions, which would further affect the
performance of downstream applications.
The event camera, a bio-inspired sensor, has gained significant attention in recent years for its potential to address the
limitations of frame-based cameras under challenging conditions. Unlike conventional cameras, event cameras record
brightness changes asynchronously at each pixel, emitting
events when a predefined threshold is surpassed. This unique
operation offers several advantages over conventional cameras, in terms of high temporal resolution, high dynamic range,
low latency, and power consumption. Although event cameras
have attractive characteristics for challenging environments,
they cannot be directly integrated into existing frame-based
3D reconstruction algorithms that rely on processing dense
2D brightness intensity images.
Several pioneering works have been proposed to exploit
event stream [3, 12, 23] to recover the motion trajectory and
scene representation. While existing methods deliver impressive performance, they usually exploit 2.5D semi-dense
depth maps to represent the 3D scene, and bundle adjustment
(BA) is hardly performed, due to the asynchronous and sparse
characteristics of event data stream. Klenk et al. [15] recently proposed to convert event stream into event voxel grids,
and then adapt a previous frame-based deep visual odometry pipeline [30] for accurate camera motion estimation. As
NeRF exhibited impressive scene representation capability
recently, several works [8, 14, 17, 25] explore to recover the
underlying dense 3D scene NeRF representation from event
stream, by assuming ground-truth poses are available.
In contrast to those works, we propose IncEventGS, an
incremental dense 3D scene reconstruction algorithm from a
single event camera, by exploiting Gaussian Splatting as the
underlying scene representation. Different from prior event-

