This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gradient Inversion Attacks on Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning
Hasin Us Sami, Swapneel Sen, Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury, Srikanth V. Krishnamurthy, Başak Güler
University of California, Riverside, CA
hsami003@ucr.edu, ssen010@ucr.edu, amitrc@ece.ucr.edu, krish@cs.ucr.edu, bguler@ece.ucr.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) allows multiple data-owners to
collaboratively train machine learning models by exchanging local gradients, while keeping their private data ondevice. To simultaneously enhance privacy and training efficiency, recently parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) of
large-scale pretrained models has gained substantial attention in FL. While keeping a pretrained (backbone) model
frozen, each user fine-tunes only a few lightweight modules
to be used in conjunction, to fit specific downstream applications. Accordingly, only the gradients with respect to
these lightweight modules are shared with the server. In this
work, we investigate how the privacy of the fine-tuning data
of the users can be compromised via a malicious design of
the pretrained model and trainable adapter modules. We
demonstrate gradient inversion attacks on a popular PEFT
mechanism, the adapter, which allow an attacker to reconstruct local data samples of a target user, using only the accessible adapter gradients. Via extensive experiments, we
demonstrate that a large batch of fine-tuning images can be
retrieved with high fidelity. Our attack highlights the need
for privacy-preserving mechanisms for PEFT, while opening up several future directions. Our code is available at
https://github.com/info-ucr/PEFTLeak.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a collaborative training paradigm
to train a machine learning model across multiple dataowners (users) [41]. Users perform training locally using
their local data and send the local model updates/gradients
to a central server. The server aggregates these to form a
global model. By obviating the need to share raw local samples, FL has emerged as a promising framework in fields
where data privacy is paramount such as healthcare.
Recently, leveraging large-scale pretrained models in
various downstream tasks has gained significant attention,
owing to their remarkable training performance. Considering the potential of pretrained models, recent works have
extended their application to FL [43, 47, 57]. However,

these pretrained models often contain a massive number of
parameters, which can be in the range of millions/billions.
Full fine-tuning (FFT) of such large models and communicating the gradient parameters require often prohibitive
computational infrastructure and bandwidth. This prevents
users with low computation/communication resources from
participating in training and potentially causing bias in the
global model. Thus, recent works have explored parameterefficient fine-tuning (PEFT) [8, 12, 13, 23, 24, 33, 40, 46],
where in lieu of fine-tuning the entire pretrained model,
only a small number of lightweight modules are trained; the
backbone model is kept frozen. Due to marked reduction
in resource consumption and training latency, PEFT has become widely popular in FL [29, 39, 52, 61, 66, 67].
Though FL is popular in privacy-sensitive tasks, an adversarial server can still reverse-engineer the local gradients
received from the users to extract privacy-sensitive information about local data samples [20, 21, 25, 26, 37, 42, 44, 55,
59, 63, 64, 70]. These attacks can be grouped into: 1) gradient inversion attacks [17, 20, 21, 63] and, 2) membership
inference attacks [42, 49, 55, 60]. Gradient inversion attacks reconstruct the raw data samples held by a target user
using the gradient received from the user. In contrast, membership inference attacks seek whether a candidate sample
belongs to the local dataset of a target user. The success of
membership inference attacks under both FFT and PEFT
is shown via a malicious design of the pretrained model
[36, 60]. These works do not consider gradient inversion attacks, which can be more detrimental to privacy, as they can
operate without the knowledge of candidate samples [16].
A gradient inversion attack is proposed in [16], by poisoning the pretrained vision transfomer (ViT) parameters
[14]. However, this attack relies on FFT and assumes that
the attacker has access to the gradients corresponding to the
entire model. Such attacks do not apply to PEFT methods,
where the pretrained model remains frozen and the attacker
loses access to the full (local) gradient. Due to this, PEFT
has been considered to enhance privacy and limit the risk of
exposing sensitive information [67]; it has been shown that
conventional gradient inversion attacks [70] have a reduced
success rate under PEFT. However, these attacks do not con-

10224

