This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning-enabled Polynomial Lyapunov Function Synthesis via High-Accuracy
Counterexample-Guided Framework
Hanrui Zhao1 , Niuniu Qi1 , Mengxin Ren1 , Banglong Liu1 , Shuming Shi1 , Zhengfeng Yang1 *
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Trustworthy Computing of East China Normal University
{hrzhao,jnaite,mxren,blliu,smshi}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn
zfyang@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Polynomial Lyapunov function V(x) provides mathematically rigorous that converts stability analysis into efficiently
solvable optimization problem. Traditional numerical methods rely on user-defined templates, while emerging neural V(x) offer flexibility but exhibit poor generalization
yield from naive Square NNs. In this paper, we propose a
novel learning-enabled polynomial V(x) synthesis approach,
where an automated machine learning process guided by
goal-oriented sampling to fit candidate V(x) which naturally compatible with the sum-of-squares (SOS) soundness
verification. The framework is structured as an iterative
loop between a Learner and a Verifier, where the Learner
trains expressive polynomial V(x) network via polynomial
expansions, while the Verifier encodes learned candidates
with SOS constraints to identify a real V(x) by solving LMI
feasibility test problems. The entire procedure is driven by a
high-accuracy counterexample guidance technique to further
enhance efficiency. Experimental results demonstrate that
our approach outperforms both SMT-based polynomial neural Lyapunov function synthesis and traditional SOS method.

1. Introduction
Stability is a key aspect of control system design, ensuring
this property is a fundamental objective, yet it remains a nontrivial task. Lyapunov theory [23] serves to analyze whether
dynamics converge asymptotically to an equilibrium point
within a region of attraction (ROA [4]) for describing the
stability of dynamic systems. However, finding an effective
Lyapunov function is generally challenging.
Constructing Lyapunov functions is a specialized task,
often relying on user-provided templates. Numerical methods commonly employ sum-of-squares (SOS) by solving
semidefinite programming (SDP) problems for Lyapunov
functions generation [20, 26, 27, 38, 39]. While the SOS* Corresponding author.

based approach is both mathematically rigorous and computationally efficient, the selection of appropriate shape functions remains dependent on expert knowledge. To address
the limitations of manual template selection, neural networks
(NNs) offer a promising alternative for synthesizing Lyapunov functions, leveraging their expressive capacity to automatically learn suitable function forms. Chang et al. are the
first to consider formal synthesis of neural Lyapunov functions [7]. Abate et al. [1, 2, 12] employ a counterexampleguided inductive synthesis (CEGIS [37]) method to further
improve the learning efficiency of the network with formal
posterior guarantees based on satisfiability modulo theories
(SMT [1]). However, the SMT solvers based on interval
arithmetic (e.g., dReal[13]) struggle with high-dimensional
polynomial Lyapunov functions, and although random sampling in the loop reduces time costs, it also risks insufficient
learning and inefficient counterexample guidance. CROWNlike verification[44] improves scalability for neural control
Lyapunov/barrier functions [19, 43], but its reliance on linear
relaxations or omitting complex Lie-derivative conditions
may constrain the solution space, limiting function expressiveness and generality.
This paper presents a novel machine learning algorithm
for automated synthesis of easily verifiable polynomial Lyapunov functions. By fitting general polynomial functions
of arbitrary order through polynomial expansions, thus circumvents the verification challenges associated with deep
network structures. Furthermore, the polynomial V(x) candidates yield from the learning phase are naturally compatible
with the SOS method. Its soundness is formally guaranteed solely through LMI feasibility checking, distinguishing
it from traditional LMI optimization solving by mitigating
the impact of numerical errors from floating-point fluctuations. Moreover, we integrate our method into a worst-case
driven counterexample-guided framework, enabling more
precise counterexamples yielded from a computed minimumvolume ellipsoid counterexample region.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:

10275

