This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Curriculum Direct Preference Optimization for Diffusion and Consistency Models
1

Florinel-Alin Croitoru1 , Vlad Hondru1 , Radu Tudor Ionescu1, *, Nicu Sebe2 , Mubarak Shah3
University of Bucharest, Romania, 2 University of Trento, Italy, 3 University of Central Florida, US
Abstract

Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) has been proposed as
an effective and efficient alternative to reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). In this paper, we propose
a novel and enhanced version of DPO based on curriculum
learning for text-to-image generation. Our method is divided
into two training stages. First, a ranking of the examples
generated for each prompt is obtained by employing a reward model. Then, increasingly difficult pairs of examples
are sampled and provided to a text-to-image generative (diffusion or consistency) model. Generated samples that are far
apart in the ranking are considered to form easy pairs, while
those that are close in the ranking form hard pairs. In other
words, we use the rank difference between samples as a measure of difficulty. The sampled pairs are split into batches
according to their difficulty levels, which are gradually used
to train the generative model. Our approach, Curriculum
DPO, is compared against state-of-the-art fine-tuning approaches on nine benchmarks, outperforming the competing
methods in terms of text alignment, aesthetics and human
preference. Our code is available at https://github.
com/CroitoruAlin/Curriculum-DPO.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [11, 20, 61, 64] represent a family of generative models that gained significant traction in image generation tasks, largely due to their impressive generative capabilities. One of the tasks where these models excel is
text-to-image generation [3, 17, 51, 54], as they are capable of generating images that are both aesthetic and well
aligned with the input text (prompt). However, state-of-theart diffusion models that have been widely adopted by the
community, e.g. Stable Diffusion [51], are typically heavy in
terms of training (and even inference) time. To this end, several studies [7, 15, 37, 72] proposed novel training methods
to efficiently fine-tune pre-trained diffusion models. Some
of these training frameworks [7, 37, 72] were originally introduced for Large Language Models (LLMs) [9, 22, 48],
another family of models that are notoriously hard to train
on a few GPUs [59, 70]. This is also the case of Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [48], a method used to fine-tune
* Corresponding author: raducu.ionescu@gmail.com.

2824

LLMs, which was originally proposed as an effective and
efficient alternative to reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) [9]. DPO bypasses the need to fit a reward
model by harnessing a mapping between reward functions
and optimal policies, which enables the direct optimization
of the LLM to adhere to human preferences. DPO was
later extended to diffusion models [72], showcasing similar
benefits in image generation. Despite the significant benefits brought by Diffusion-DPO [72] and related methods
[7, 15, 37], there are still observable gaps in terms of various
factors, such as text alignment, aesthetics and human preference (see Figures 2, 5 and 6). Therefore, more advanced
adaptation techniques are required to reduce these gaps.
In this work, we propose a novel and enhanced version of
Direct Preference Optimization based on curriculum learning
[6, 69], which is termed Curriculum DPO, to train text-toimage generative (diffusion [51] or consistency [63, 66])
models. Using Diffusion-DPO [72], the model is trained
to learn the preferred example from a pair of generated examples. However, the pairs are randomly sampled during
training, which is suboptimal. We conjecture that organizing
the pairs according to their complexity with respect to the
preference learning task, from easy to hard, can lead to a
more effective training process. Our training process comprises two stages. In the first stage, we employ a reward
model to rank the images generated for each prompt according to their preference score. In the second stage, we create
pairs of samples with different difficulty levels, leveraging
the rank difference between samples as a measure of difficulty. Samples that are far apart in the preference ranking
are considered to form easy pairs, as we naturally assume
that it is more obvious which is the preferred sample. In
contrast, samples that are close in the ranking form hard
pairs, since choosing the preferred sample is less obvious.
The sampled pairs are split into batches according to their
difficulty level, which allows us to organize the batches in a
meaningful order, from easy to hard. This essentially generates an optimization process based on curriculum learning
[6], as illustrated in Figure 1. Our study is motivated by the
success of various curriculum learning methods employed
in different domains [24, 32, 38, 60, 68, 74]. However, to
the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to employ a
curriculum learning strategy to fine-tune (adapt) diffusion
and consistency models for text-to-image generation.

