This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Libra-Merging: Importance-redundancy and Pruning-merging Trade-off for
Acceleration Plug-in in Large Vision-Language Model
Longrong Yang1 *, Dong Shen2 *, Chaoxiang Cai3 , Kaibing Chen2 ,
Fan Yang2 , Tingting Gao2 , Di Zhang2 , Xi Li1†
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Kuaishou Technology
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University

Abstract

Numerous recent LVLMs [2, 8, 58–60] indicate that both
large model size and extensive dataset size are crucial for
enhancing intelligence. Even with sufficiently large model
sizes, these models demonstrate “Emergent Abilities”. As
a result, a range of studies [12, 26, 32] have increased the
model size of LVLMs, resulting in the state-of-the-art performance across a variety of tasks.

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have achieved significant progress in recent years. However, the expensive
inference cost limits the realistic deployment of LVLMs.
Some works find that visual tokens are redundant and compress tokens to reduce the inference cost. These works identify important non-redundant tokens as target tokens, then
prune the remaining tokens (non-target tokens) or merge
them into target tokens. However, target token identification faces the token importance-redundancy dilemma. Besides, token merging and pruning face a dilemma between
disrupting target token information and losing non-target
token information. To solve these problems, we propose
a novel visual token compression scheme, named LibraMerging. In target token identification, Libra-Merging selects the most important tokens from spatially discrete intervals, achieving a more robust token importance-redundancy
trade-off than relying on a hyper-parameter. In token compression, when non-target tokens are dissimilar to target tokens, Libra-Merging does not merge them into the target
tokens, thus avoiding disrupting target token information.
Meanwhile, Libra-Merging condenses these non-target tokens into an information compensation token to prevent losing important non-target token information. Our method
can serve as a plug-in for diverse LVLMs, and extensive experimental results demonstrate its effectiveness. The code
will be publicly available at https://github.com/
longrongyang/Libra-Merging.

Although LVLMs achieve state-of-the-art performance,
they are expensive to employ in realistic applications due
to significant inference costs. To reduce inference costs,
some recent works [9, 23] propose compressing visual tokens, based on the finding that visual tokens are highly redundant in LVLMs. For example, FastV [9] treats tokens as
important when they have high output attention (attention
score of output token on visual tokens), and prunes the bottom R% tokens with the lowest output attention. Turbo [23]
computes the information degree of each token, a weighted
average of attention and redundancy (the highest similarity
between the token and other tokens), and averagely merges
the top R% tokens into their most similar tokens.
In LVLMs, the token compression process can be
modeled as identifying important non-redundant tokens
(named target tokens) and compressing the remaining tokens (named non-target tokens). However, target token
identification and token compression face a dilemma respectively. The dilemma in target token identification lies
in the importance-redundancy trade-off. FastV selects the
most important tokens, but these tokens may be redundant;
Turbo balances importance and redundancy with a hyperparameter, but the fixed hyper-parameter is hard to apply
universally to diverse scenarios. As shown in Figure 1 (a),
they still preserve redundant information, leading to the losing of some important tokens. As shown in Figure 1 (b), the
dilemma in token compression lies in the pruning-merging
trade-off. Pruning non-target tokens loses information in
non-target tokens; averagely merging non-target and target
tokens may disrupt information in target tokens.

1. Introduction
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have recently
shown considerable progress by incorporating visual processing capabilities into Large Language Models (LLMs).
* The authors contributed equally to this paper.
† Corresponding author.

9402

