This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Generative Replay for Class Incremental Object Detection
Shizhou Zhang1 Xueqiang Lv1 Yinghui Xing1 * Qirui Wu1 Di Xu2 Yanning Zhang1
1

Northwestern Polytechnical University

2

Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies Co., Ltd

Abstract

mAP
oAP

80

Generative replay has gained significant attention in
class-incremental learning; however, its application to
Class Incremental Object Detection (CIOD) remains limited due to the challenges in generating complex images
with precise spatial arrangements. In this study, motivated
by the observation that the forgetting of prior knowledge is
predominantly present in the classification sub-task as opposed to the localization sub-task, we revisit the generative
replay method for class incremental object detection. Our
method utilize a standard Stable Diffusion model to generate image-level replay data for all old and new tasks. Accordingly, the old detector and a stage-wise detector are
conducted on the synthetic images respectively to determine the bounding box positions through pseudo-labeling.
Furthermore, we propose to use a Similarity-based Cross
Sampling mechanism to select valuable confusing data between old and new tasks to more effectively mitigate catastrophic forgetting and reduce the false alarm rate for the
new task. Finally, all synthetic and real data are integrated
for current-stage detector training, where the images generated for previous tasks are highly beneficial in minimizing
the forgetting of existing knowledge, while those synthesized
for the new task can help bridge the domain gap between
real and synthetic images. We conducted extensive experiments on PASCAL VOC 2007 and MS COCO benchmark
datasets in multiple settings to showcase the efficacy of
our proposed approach, which achieves state-of-the-art results. The code is available at https://github.com/qiangzailv/RGR-IOD.

75

Average Precision

70
65

Car:91.7

Aeroplane:90.8
Aeroplane:90.8
e:90.8

AP(aeroplane):24.6

60

Car:90.8
ar:90.8

Car:70.5

Ap(areoplane):78.4

55

AP(aeroplane):0.0
Car:97.6Car:32.0

50
45

AP(aeroplane):6.4

1

2

3

4

phase (5-5(4 tasks))

Figure 1. Forgetting curve for Average Precision (AP) on the PASCAL VOC dataset under 5-5 (4 tasks) setting. mAP denotes mean
Average Precision, and oAP denotes objectness Average Precision
(AP calculated in class-agnostic manner) indicating the bounding
box regression accuracy. Green boxes denote correct detections,
whereas red boxes indicate errors in classification. Note that even
when the AP for “aeroplane” decreased to 0, the object can still be
correctly localized.

1. Introduction

methods [17, 18, 24, 32] address the issue of forgetting
by imposing constraints on parameter optimization. Conversely, replay-based approaches [9, 15, 25] propose training the model with a combination of new data and data retained from previous tasks. Notably, replay-based strategies
are particularly straightforward and effective as they either
retain partial data from past tasks or generate image data related to previous tasks utilizing a robust generative model.
With the rapid advancement in generative models, the
Stable Diffusion (SD) method [29] has garnered significant
attention due to its capability to generate high-quality images from contextually informative text prompts after being trained on a large-scale dataset of image-text pairs [33].
Techniques in generative replay continual learning based on
the SD model have achieved substantial progress in image
classification tasks [9, 25], typically characterized by the
depiction of a single object within the image. In real-world
scenarios, Class Incremental Object Detection (CIOD) is

Continual learning, also known as incremental learning, endeavors to establish a unified model with the capacity to
adapt to continuous influxes of data, integrating new information while retaining the knowledge acquired from prior
tasks. In order to address the primary challenge in continual learning, namely catastrophic forgetting, numerous algorithms have been carefully devised. Regularization-based
* Corresponding Author: xyh 7491@nwpu.edu.cn

20340

