This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FruitNinja: 3D Object Interior Texture Generation with Gaussian Splatting
Fangyu Wu
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Canada

Yuhao Chen†
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Canada

f49wu@uwaterloo.ca

yuhao.chen1@uwaterloo.ca

Figure 1. FruitNinja generates high-quality interior textures for 3DGS models, enabling real-time view rendering during arbitrary geometric
transformations. In contrast, direct 2D inpainting requires additional optimization steps (∼30s), often misaligns edited geometry, and yields
inconsistent results per edit.

Abstract
In the real world, objects reveal internal textures when
sliced or cut, yet this behavior is not well-studied in 3D
generation tasks today. For example, slicing a virtual 3D
watermelon should reveal flesh and seeds. Given that no
available dataset captures an object’s full internal structure
and collecting data from all slices is impractical, generative
methods become the obvious approach. However, current
3D generation and inpainting methods often focus on visible appearance and overlook internal textures. To bridge
this gap, we introduce FruitNinja, the first method to generate internal textures for 3D objects undergoing geometric and topological changes. Our approach produces objects via 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) with both surface
and interior textures synthesized, enabling real-time slicing and rendering without additional optimization. FruitNinja leverages a pre-trained diffusion model to progressively inpaint cross-sectional views and applies voxel-gridbased smoothing to achieve cohesive textures throughout
the object. Our OpaqueAtom GS strategy overcomes 3DGS
limitations by employing densely distributed opaque Gaus-

sians, avoiding biases toward larger particles that destabilize training and sharp color transitions for fine-grained
textures. Experimental results show that FruitNinja substantially outperforms existing approaches, showcasing unmatched visual quality in real-time rendered internal views
across arbitrary geometry manipulations. Project page:
https://fanguw.github.io/FruitNinja3D.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author.

Generating high-quality interactive 3D objects has diverse
applications in fields such as augmented and virtual reality
(AR/VR), digital gaming, and advertising. Recent advancements in 3D computer vision, particularly 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) [17], have introduced efficient techniques
for novel view synthesis. Leveraging its explicit pointcloud-based representation and suitability for post-editing
tasks, researchers have further explored user-guided editing
of 3DGS, including stylization [7, 19, 42], deformation[2,
12, 16, 38] , object removal [7, 40], inpainting [7, 22]
and texture editing [24, 39]. In interactive 3D applications, it’s common for users to perform customized or largescale geometric modifications—such as cutting, tearing, or

11051

