This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V I TED : Video Temporal Evidence Distillation
Yujie Lu1,2

Yale Song2

William Wang1 Lorenzo Torresani2
1
UC Santa Barbara 2 FAIR, Meta

Abstract

Tushar Nagarajan2

Question: What does the girl do at the start before she walks the dog?

We investigate complex video question answering via chainof-evidence reasoning — identifying sequences of temporal
spans from multiple relevant parts of the video, together
with visual evidence within them. Existing models struggle with multi-step reasoning as they uniformly sample a
fixed number of frames, which can miss critical evidence
distributed nonuniformly throughout the video. Moreover,
they lack the ability to temporally localize such evidence
in the broader context of the full video, which is required
for answering complex questions. We propose a framework to enhance existing VideoQA datasets with evidence
reasoning chains, automatically constructed by searching
for optimal intervals of interest in the video with supporting evidence, that maximizes the likelihood of answering a
given question. We train our model (V I TED) to generate
these evidence chains directly, enabling it to both localize
evidence windows as well as perform multi-step reasoning
across them in long-form video content. We show the value
of our evidence-distilled models on a suite of long video
QA benchmarks where we outperform state-of-the-art approaches that lack evidence reasoning capabilities.

Video,
Question

ViTED

Evidence chain: The girl walks the dog from 18
to 23.6 seconds. From 4.7 to 6.25 seconds, the
girl waves at the dog. Answer: wave at it

Figure 1. Main idea. We produce multiple, temporally localized
pieces of evidence (the “evidence chain”) to support complex reasoning in VideoQA. Our V I TED model is trained to generate this
evidence chain to enable temporally-grounded chain-of-thought
reasoning in video.

after the baby put their hand in their mouth and observing
how they performed the action (e.g., slowly or quickly) can
offer valuable insights into their intent.
Current models face limitations in effectively processing
the temporal relationships among visual frames, as well as
in bridging the gap between a question and the evidence
needed to answer it. On the one hand, current models do
not temporally ground their responses, and rather sample
a fixed number of video frames at regular intervals, potentially missing important moments from the video (e.g., failing to identify the short window when the girl waves at dog
in Fig. 1, left). Consequently, these models struggle to answer questions requiring complex temporal understanding,
e.g., “what did the girl do right before interacting with the
dog?” in a video where she approaches, picks up a ball, then
engages with the dog; and multi-hop reasoning, e.g., “why
did the baby put his hand in his mouth?” in a video where
the mother feeds him with a spoon, followed by his uncomfortable expression and an attempt to remove the food.
On the other hand, temporal grounding models can indeed localize text queries to specific intervals in a video [13,
22, 33], but they require the text in advance — i.e., they can
localize the evidence needed to answer the question if already provided with the evidence text, but they cannot identify and ground this evidence based on the question alone.
For example, it might identify the moment when the dog
approaches the girl (Fig. 1), but it may not establish how

1. Introduction
Video Question Answering (VideoQA) is a critical task towards general-purpose video understanding, for which large
vision-language models (VLMs) [16, 44, 55] have recently
demonstrated strong performance on a variety of benchmarks [17, 30, 32, 47–49]. Despite their popularity, these
models typically excel at questions for which information
is readily available throughout the video (e.g., high-level
actions, colors/counts of objects, etc.), but struggle on longform videos [9, 26, 30, 32] and on questions that require
gathering and aggregating evidence from the full video [49].
For instance, answering a question like, “Why does the
baby put their hand in their mouth at the beginning of the
video?” requires more than just locating the action — it involves an intricate approach that gathers contextual clues
both before and after the action to infer the underlying reason. For instance, examining what occurred just before or

8501

