This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GenPC: Zero-shot Point Cloud Completion via 3D Generative Priors
An Li† Zhe Zhu† Mingqiang Wei‡
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
{lian, zhuzhe0619, mqwei}@nuaa.edu.cn *

Abstract
Existing point cloud completion methods, which typically
depend on predeﬁned synthetic training datasets, encounter
signiﬁcant challenges when applied to out-of-distribution,
real-world scans. To overcome this limitation, we introduce
a zero-shot completion framework, termed GenPC, designed
to reconstruct high-quality real-world scans by leveraging
explicit 3D generative priors. Our key insight is that recent
feed-forward 3D generative models, trained on extensive
internet-scale data, have demonstrated the ability to perform 3D generation from single-view images in a zero-shot
setting. To harness this for completion, we ﬁrst develop a
Depth Prompting module that links partial point clouds with
image-to-3D generative models by leveraging depth images
as a stepping stone. To retain the original partial structure in
the ﬁnal results, we design the Geometric Preserving Fusion
module that aligns the generated shape with input by adaptively adjusting its pose and scale. Extensive experiments on
widely used benchmarks validate the superiority and generalizability of our approach, bringing us a step closer to
robust real-world scan completion. Our code is available at
https://github.com/liannuaa/GenPC.

1. Introduction
Point clouds, as an essential form of 3D representation, are
widely used in various applications. However, due to factors such as self-occlusion, camera viewpoint limitations,
and sensor resolution, the acquired point clouds are often incomplete. This issue signiﬁcantly hinders downstream tasks.
Therefore, developing effective and robust methods for completing real-world partial point clouds is crucial for achieving
a comprehensive understanding of the real world.
In recent years, numerous deep learning-based point
cloud completion methods [18, 40, 45, 47–49, 55] have
shown remarkable success. These approaches utilize carefully designed neural networks to extract shape patterns from
* This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (No. T2322012, No. 62172218).
† Equal contribution ‡ Corresponding author

(a)
SDF

SDS

Stable
Diffusion

40
Hours

(b)
3D

演 Generative
Model

1
Minute

Figure 1. Difference between our GenPC with previous zero-shot
point cloud completion method [19]. (a) SDS-Complete [19] uses
the SDS loss to directly extract prior knowledge from a 2D diffusion model, featuring time-consuming optimization and suboptimal
completion results. (b) The proposed GenPC leverages explicit
priors provided by a 3D generative model, achieving improved
completion quality with signiﬁcantly reduced inference time.

input point clouds, enabling them to generate detailed geometric structures to complete missing portions of the point
cloud. Although these techniques perform well on trained or
similar categories, they rely on labeled 3D training data and
exhibit limited generalization to categories unseen during
training. Moreover, constrained by domain gaps between
synthetic training data and real-world scans, these models
tend to perform poorly when applied to downstream tasks.
With the impressive zero-shot generation capabilities
of pre-trained 2D diffusion models [31], numerous studies [24, 27, 33] have emerged that utilize these models for
3D generation tasks. Enlightened by these successes, sdscomplete [19] ﬁrst utilized 2D priors for zero-shot shape
completion. This method ﬁts the input partial point cloud surface using Signed Distance Functions (SDF) and leverages
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [27] to extract 2D diffusion priors for completion. Later, Huang et al. [17] proposed
a similar SDS-based framework, but used 3D Gaussian splatting [21] to initialize the partial point cloud as 3D Gaussians.
Although these methods demonstrate improved zero-shot
completion capabilities compared to training-based counterparts, they are time-consuming, as they require training a
radiance ﬁeld from scratch for each incomplete point cloud.

1308

