This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CARE Transformer: Mobile-Friendly Linear Visual Transformer via Decoupled
Dual Interaction
Yuan Zhou1 , Qingshan Xu1 , Jiequan Cui1 , Junbao Zhou1 , Jing Zhang2 , Richang Hong3 , Hanwang Zhang1
1

Nanyang Technological University

2

Beihang University

3

Hefei University of Technology

{yuan.zhou, qingshan.xu, hanwangzhang}@ntu.edu.sg, zhang_jing@buaa.edu.cn
{bowmanchow, jiequancui, hongrc.hfut}@gmail.com

CARE-S2

Abstract

CARE-S1

Recently, large efforts have been made to design efﬁcient
linear-complexity visual Transformers. However, current
linear attention models are generally unsuitable to be deployed in resource-constrained mobile devices, due to suffering from either few efﬁciency gains or signiﬁcant accuracy drops. In this paper, we propose a new deCoupled
duAl-interactive lineaR attEntion (CARE) mechanism, revealing that features’ decoupling and interaction can fully
unleash the power of linear attention. We ﬁrst propose an
asymmetrical feature decoupling strategy that asymmetrically decouples the learning process for local inductive bias
and long-range dependencies, thereby preserving sufﬁcient
local and global information while effectively enhancing the
efﬁciency of models. Then, a dynamic memory unit is employed to maintain critical information along the network
pipeline. Moreover, we design a dual interaction module
to effectively facilitate interaction between local inductive
bias and long-range information as well as among features
at different layers. By adopting a decoupled learning way
and fully exploiting complementarity across features, our
method can achieve both high efﬁciency and accuracy. Extensive experiments on ImageNet-1K, COCO, and ADE20K
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, e.g.,
achieving 78.4/82.1% top-1 accuracy on ImagegNet-1K at
the cost of only 0.7/1.9 GMACs. Codes will be released on
github.

1. Introduction
Transformers [44] were originally designed for natural language processing tasks due to their inherent superiority in
global receptive ﬁeld and parallelizability. In the past few
years, they have been successfully introduced to computer
vision, including image classiﬁcation [12, 13, 29, 46, 48],
image segmentation [4, 25, 39, 53, 54], object detection
[2, 26, 47], to name but a few. Nevertheless, the quadratic

CARE-S0

Figure 1. Visualized comparison of the balance between accuracy,
latency, and GMACs for our CARE Transformers and recent typical mobile-friendly models. In the ﬁgure, the larger the marker,
the more GMACs the model consumes. “SA”, “LA”, and “GNN”
indicate that the methods are based on Self-Attention, Linear Attention, and Graph Neural Networks. For more details, please refer
to Table 1.

complexity of self-attention severely limits the applicability
of Transformers in resource-constrained scenarios, such as
on mobile devices.
Recently, large efforts have been dedicated to designing efﬁcient linear-complexity visual Transformers, which
can be grouped into two main roadmaps: i) limiting the
receptive ﬁeld by using local attention; ii) utilizing linear
attention to lower down complexity. Local attention improves the efﬁciency of visual Transformers at the cost of
sacriﬁcing their capability to capture long-range dependencies [12, 19, 29, 48, 52], which have been proven to play a
critical role in learning high-quality feature representations
[11, 30]. In contrast to local attention, linear attention can
be seen as a more elegant way to solve the quadratic complexity issue [5, 23, 32, 38]. In fact, the quadratic complexity problem in self-attention primarily stems from the use
of an explicit similarity measurement between queries and
keys. Therefore, linear attention utilizes a kernel trick to re-

20135

