This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MagicQuill: An Intelligent Interactive Image Editing System
Zichen Liu♡,1,2 , Yue Yu♡,1,2 , Hao Ouyang2 , Qiuyu Wang2 ,
Ka Leong Cheng1,2 , Wen Wang3,2 , Zhiheng Liu4 , Qifeng Chen†,1 , Yujun Shen†,2
1

HKUST, 2 Ant Group, 3 ZJU, 4 HKU

Figure 1. MagicQuill is an intelligent and interactive image editing system built upon diffusion models. Users seamlessly edit images
using three intuitive brushstrokes: add, subtract, and color (A). A MLLM dynamically predicts user intentions from their brush strokes and
suggests contextual prompts (B1-B4). The examples demonstrate diverse editing operations: to generate a jacket from clothing contour
(B1), add a flower crown from head sketches (B2), remove background (B3), and apply color changes to the hair and flowers (B4).

Abstract
As a highly practical application, image editing encounters a variety of user demands and thus prioritizes excellent
ease of use. In this paper, we unveil MagicQuill, an
integrated image editing system designed to support users in
swiftly actualizing their creativity. Our system starts with a
streamlined yet functionally robust interface, enabling users
to articulate their ideas (e.g., inserting elements, erasing
objects, altering color, etc.) with just a few strokes. These
interactions are then monitored by a multimodal large
language model (MLLM) to anticipate user intentions in
real time, bypassing the need for prompt entry. Finally, we
apply the powerful diffusion prior, enhanced by a carefully
learned two-branch plug-in module, to process the editing
request with precise control. Please visit the project page to
try out our system.
♡ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Performing precise and efficient edits on digital photographs remains a significant challenge, especially when
aiming for nuanced modifications. As shown in Fig. 1,
consider the task of editing a portrait of a lady where
specific alterations are desired: converting a shirt to a
custom-designed jacket, adding a flower crown at an exact
position with a well-designed shape, dyeing portions of her
hair in particular colors, and removing certain parts of the
background to refine her appearance. Despite the rapid
advancements in diffusion models [7, 12, 17, 22, 40, 42–
44, 52, 71, 77] and recent attempts to enhance control [23,
26, 53, 78], achieving such fine-grained and precise edits
continues to pose difficulties, typically due to a lack of
intuitive interfaces and models for fine-grained control.
The challenges highlight the critical need for interactive
editing systems that facilitate precise and efficient modifications. An ideal solution would empower users to specify

13072

