This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detail-Preserving Latent Diffusion for Stable Shadow Removal
Jiamin Xu1 , Yuxin Zheng1 , Zelong Li1 , Chi Wang1 , Renshu Gu1 , Weiwei Xu2 , Gang Xu1 *
1
Hangzhou Dianzi University 2 Zhejiang University
superxjm@yeah.net, yuxin6@hdu.edu.cn, jokerli@hdu.edu.cn, wangchi1995@zju.edu.cn,
renshugu@hdu.edu.cn, xww@cad.zju.edu.cn, gxu@hdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Achieving high-quality shadow removal with strong generalizability is challenging in scenes with complex global illumination. Due to the limited diversity in shadow removal
datasets, current methods are prone to overfitting training data, often leading to reduced performance on unseen
cases. To address this, we leverage the rich visual priors
of a pre-trained Stable Diffusion (SD) model and propose
a two-stage fine-tuning pipeline to adapt the SD model for
stable and efficient shadow removal. In the first stage, we
fix the VAE and fine-tune the denoiser in latent space, which
yields substantial shadow removal but may lose some highfrequency details. To resolve this, we introduce a second
stage, called the detail injection stage. This stage selectively extracts features from the VAE encoder to modulate
the decoder, injecting fine details into the final results. Experimental results show that our method outperforms stateof-the-art shadow removal techniques. The cross-dataset
evaluation further demonstrates that our method generalizes effectively to unseen data, enhancing the applicability
of shadow removal methods.

Input image

OmniSR [Xu et al. 2024]

Ours (Stage I)

Ours (Stage II)

Figure 1. Top: For complex shadows in indoor scenes, current
methods struggle to completely remove shadows, such as those behind the eagle sculpture. Bottom: Our method effectively removes
the shadows, and with our second stage, the details from the original input, such as the wooden texture shown in the cropped image,
are preserved.

1. Introduction

Drawing inspiration from recent advancements in zeroshot dense prediction [12, 42], we leverage the robust and
comprehensive visual priors of the pre-trained Stable Diffusion (SD) model [29], which has been trained on billions of images, to enhance the generalization capability of
shadow removal. However, developing a fine-tuning strategy that effectively removes shadows while preserving clear
details in both shadowed and non-shadowed areas is not
trivial. Unlike low-frequency depth and normal prediction
tasks [12, 42], applying the SD model to shadow removal
can result in detail loss and misalignment between the conditional image and the shadow-free output (Fig. 1). It is
because the SD model, which consists of a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) and a Latent Diffusion Model (LDM),
is designed for text-to-image generation and can lead to
lossy compression during the mapping from pixel space

Shadows are natural phenomena that occur when an obstacle blocks global light transport. They provide crucial cues
for interpreting the three-dimensional structure of objects
and scenes [44]. However, shadows can also hinder computer vision tasks, such as object segmentation [8], tracking [32], and intrinsic decomposition [16, 17, 25, 43]. In
recent years, deep-learning-based methods for shadow removal [4, 5, 24, 40] have shown significant advancements
by learning pixel-wise mappings between shadowed images
and their corresponding ground-truth shadow-free versions
in a fully supervised manner. However, such approaches often risk overfitting the limited training datasets [14, 28, 35],
leading to inadequate generalization.
* Corresponding author.

7592

