This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DirectTriGS: Triplane-based Gaussian Splatting Field Representation for 3D
Generation

1

Xiaoliang Ju, Hongsheng Li1,2
CUHK MMLab 2 CPII under InnoHK
akira@link.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
We present DirectTriGS, a novel framework designed for
3D object generation with Gaussian Splatting (GS). GSbased rendering for 3D content has gained considerable
attention recently. However, there has been limited exploration in directly generating 3D Gaussians compared to traditional generative modeling approaches. The main challenge lies in the complex data structure of GS represented
by discrete point clouds with multiple channels. To overcome this challenge, we propose employing the triplane representation, which allows us to represent Gaussian Splatting as an image-like continuous field. This representation effectively encodes both the geometry and texture information, enabling smooth transformation back to Gaussian
point clouds and rendering into images by a TriRenderer,
with only 2D supervisions. The proposed TriRenderer is
fully differentiable, so that the rendering loss can supervise
both texture and geometry encoding. Furthermore, the triplane representation can be compressed using a Variational
Autoencoder (VAE), which can subsequently be utilized in
latent diffusion to generate 3D objects. The experiments
demonstrate that the proposed generation framework can
produce high-quality 3D object geometry and rendering results in the text-to-3D task.

novel approach called DirectTriGS, which encodes GS as
triplane representation, and introduce its corresponding renderer, TriRenderer. Subsequently, we apply latent diffusion
on the Triplane representation to generate high-quality GS
objects.
Gaussian splatting uses multi-channel point cloud of
“splats” to describe the 3D contents. With a differentiable
splats rasterizer, GS has fast rendering speed. However,
the sparsity, multiple channels, and uneven distributed density of 3D GS bring great difficulty for 3D generation. We
propose to encode GS contents as multi-channel triplane
representations, which have been shown to possess favorable properties for representing 3D geometry or NeRF, as
demonstrated in previous works Shue et al. [40], Wu et al.
[47]. In our work, we leverage the triplane representation
to encode both the geometry information and other GS attributes in two separate groups of channels. By training on
a dataset of 3D objects, we obtain a shared TriRenderer that
is capable of decoding different triplane representations to
GS and then render it to image. TriRenderer is fully differentiable, enabling the use of only 2D rendering loss to supervise both the texture and geometry of 3D GS. The advantage of using Triplane to represent GS are two folds. First, it
leads to high memory efficiency compared with dense voxels and is expressive enough for generating various 3D GS.
Second, Triplane is more compatible with the convolutionbased encoders compared with the original sparse GS point
cloud, which require specifically designed networks on processing sparse point clouds.
We follow stable diffusion [36] to train DirectTriGS on
the proposed triplane representation. Specifically, a VAE is
designed to further convert the Triplanes into latent code.
We use two separate decoders to decouple the decoding of
geometry and GS attributes. Second, we roll out the triplane latent to an expanded multi-channel image, then exploit staged latent diffusion to do generation. Two-stage
diffusion is employed to generate the geometry and the corresponding GS appearance. Finally, score distillation sampling (SDS) [35] is adopted as a optional post-processing to
refine or restyle the generated 3D objects.

1. Introduction
Neural rendering has grown to a focal point in rendering
techniques in recent years, as it achieves more realistic
rendering effects by leveraging the great expressiveness of
neural network. The representatives are neural radience
field (NeRF) [32] and the newly emerged Gaussian Splatting (GS) [21]. However, when applied to the field of 3D
generation, the slow rendering and training speed become a
strong limitation for NeRF. While GS is more flexible with
greater rendering efficiency and editability, few works have
addressed the challenge of direct GS generation in 3D due
to its complex data structure. In this paper, we propose a

16229

