This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain Generalization in CLIP via Learning with Diverse Text Prompts
Changsong Wen, Zelin Peng, Yu Huang, Xiaokang Yang, Wei ShenB
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{changsong, zelin.peng, yellowfish, xkyang, wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
p CLIP pre-training:

Domain generalization (DG) aims to train a model on
source domains that can generalize well to unseen domains.
Recent advances in Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such
as CLIP, exhibit remarkable generalization capabilities
across a wide range of data distributions, benefiting tasks
like DG. However, CLIP is pre-trained by aligning images
with their descriptions, which inevitably captures domainspecific details. Moreover, adapting CLIP to source domains with limited feature diversity introduces bias. These
limitations hinder the model’s ability to generalize across
domains. In this paper, we propose a new DG approach by
learning with diverse text prompts. These text prompts incorporate varied contexts to imitate different domains, enabling DG model to learn domain-invariant features. The
text prompts guide DG model learning in three aspects:
feature suppression, which uses these prompts to identify
domain-sensitive features and suppress them; feature consistency, which ensures the model’s features are robust to
domain variations imitated by the diverse prompts; and feature diversification, which diversifies features based on the
prompts to mitigate bias. Experimental results show that
our approach improves domain generalization performance
on five datasets from the DomainBed benchmark, achieving
state-of-the-art results.

A painting of a
yellow little bird

Text prompt

CLIP Text
Encoder

Align

Source domain features

CLIP Image
Encoder

Capture domain-

p DG classification: specific details
CLIP-based
DG model

a photo of a bird

“dog”

Not
Align

CLIP Text
Encoder

Figure 1. Limitations with existing methods. As shown on the left,
CLIP’s image encoder is pre-trained to align with textual descriptions, which inevitably captures domain-specific visual details, resulting in perturbations in domain generalization. Additionally,
as shown on the right, due to the limited feature diversity in the
source domains, adapting CLIP with source domains will introduce bias.

of data distributions. These VLMs possess remarkable generalization capabilities, and boost many open-world recognition tasks, including out-of-distribution learning [50] and
domain generalization [1, 10, 51].
Existing DG studies [20, 23, 27, 50, 60] leverage CLIP’s
pre-trained weights with techniques like parameter regularization [23] and weight space ensembling [6, 27, 60] to
adapt the model for downstream datasets, while preserving generalization ability. Other recent DG works [1, 26]
propose using knowledge distillation to transfer CLIP’s
knowledge into DG models. However, as shown in Fig. 1,
CLIP [49] aligns images with their descriptions during pretraining, which inevitably contain domain-specific details,
impacting existing DG models. Additionally, since the
training images are limited to a few source domains in DG,
adapting CLIP within these images leads the model to emphasize the features specific to the source domains. This
results in a lack of feature diversity [43, 46, 58], which com-

1. Introduction
In the complex real-world applications, deep learning models are expected to be capable of recognizing data from
a wide range of distributions. Within the past few years,
researchers are dedicated to investigating domain generalization (DG) [6, 7, 9, 24, 25, 27], which empowers the
model to learn robust features from multiple domains and
exhibit good performance across various data distributions.
Recent advances in foundation Vision-Language Models
(VLMs) [34, 35, 52, 61], such as CLIP [49], are trained on
large-scale data sourced from the web with a wide variety
B Corresponding author.

9559

