This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PICD: Versatile Perceptual Image Compression with Diffusion Rendering
Tongda Xu1,2,∗ , Jiahao Li2 , Bin Li2 , Yan Wang1 , Ya-Qin Zhang1 , Yan Lu2
1
AIR, Tsinghua University, 2 Microsoft Research Asia
{xutongda,wangyan,zhangyaqin}@air.tsinghua.edu.cn,{li.jiahao, libin, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Figure 1. For both screen and natural images, PICD demonstrates high text accuracy and superior visual quality simultaneously.

Abstract
Recently, perceptual image compression has achieved
significant advancements, delivering high visual quality at
low bitrates for natural images. However, for screen content, existing methods often produce noticeable artifacts
when compressing text. To tackle this challenge, we propose
versatile perceptual screen image compression with diffusion rendering (PICD), a codec that works well for both
screen and natural images. More specifically, we propose
a compression framework that encodes the text and image
separately, and renders them into one image using diffusion model. For this diffusion rendering, we integrate conditional information into diffusion models at three distinct
levels: 1). Domain level: We fine-tune the base diffusion
model using text content prompts with screen content. 2).

Adaptor level: We develop an efficient adaptor to control
the diffusion model using compressed image and text as input. 3). Instance level: We apply instance-wise guidance
to further enhance the decoding process. Empirically, our
PICD surpasses existing perceptual codecs in terms of both
text accuracy and perceptual quality. Additionally, without
text conditions, our approach serves effectively as a perceptual codec for natural images.

1. Introduction
With recent advancements in generative models, perceptual
image compression has acquired the capability to compress
∗ The work was done when Tongda Xu was a full-time intern with
Microsoft Research Asia.

28436

