This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MTADiffusion: Mask Text Alignment Diffusion Model for Object Inpainting
Jun Huang1,† , Ting Liu1,†, , Yihang Wu2 , Xiaochao Qu1 , Luoqi Liu1 , Xiaolin Hu3,
1

MT Lab, Meitu Inc, Beijing 100083, China
2

3

National University of Singapore

Department of Computer Science and Technology,

BNRist, IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
{hj13, lt, qxc, llq5}@meitu.com
yihang wu@u.nus.edu
xlhu@tsinghua.edu.cn
†

Joint first authors.

Joint corresponding authors.

Abstract
Advancements in generative models have enabled image inpainting models to generate content within specific regions
of an image based on provided prompts and masks. However, existing inpainting methods often suffer from problems
such as semantic misalignment, structural distortion, and
style inconsistency. In this work, we present MTADiffusion,
a Mask-Text Alignment diffusion model designed for object
inpainting. To enhance the semantic capabilities of the inpainting model, we introduce MTAPipeline, an automatic
solution for annotating masks with detailed descriptions.
Based on the MTAPipeline, we construct a new MTADataset
comprising 5 million images and 25 million mask-text pairs.
Furthermore, we propose a multi-task training strategy that
integrates both inpainting and edge prediction tasks to improve structural stability. To promote style consistency, we
present a novel inpainting style-consistency loss using a
pre-trained VGG network and the Gram matrix. Comprehensive evaluations on BrushBench and EditBench demonstrate that MTADiffusion achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to other methods.

Figure 1. Common issues in inpainting tasks. (a) semantic misalignment. (b) structural distortion. (c) style inconsistency.

1. Introduction

tions of the prompt or tends to complete the masked area
with background context rather than generating the intended
new object. (b) Structural distortion [25]: The structural
details of generated objects are distortion, such as disorganized limbs or fuzzy features. (c) Style Inconsistency:
Even when the content of the generated object is reasonable, style inconsistency remains an issue. Specifically, aspects such as hue, texture, and lighting of the generated object are often inconsistent with those of the original image,
resulting in unnatural visual outcomes.
Studies have focused on improving the semantic capabilities of inpainting models. SDI [25] trains the UNet with
random mask and image caption pairs, where the image
caption describes the entire image rather than the content
of the masked region, causing semantic misalignment during the training stage. To address this, SmartBrush [38] and

With the progress of diffusion models, generative models
are now capable of producing a wide variety of content.
The image inpainting task aims to generate content within
local regions of an original image based on the provided
prompt and mask. Current challenges in this task as shown
in Figure 1 include the following: (a) Semantic misalignment [38, 45]: The generated content may not align semantically with the input prompt. For instance, the model
might produce content that does not match the specifica-

18325

