This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feature Selection for Latent Factor Models
Rittwika Kansabanik, Adrian Barbu
Department of Statistics, Florida State University

Abstract
Feature selection is crucial for pinpointing relevant features in high-dimensional datasets, mitigating the ’curse
of dimensionality,’ and enhancing machine learning performance. Traditional feature selection methods for classification use data from all classes to select features for each
class. This paper explores feature selection methods that
select features for each class separately, using class models
based on low-rank generative methods and introducing a
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) feature selection criterion. This
novel approach has theoretical true feature recovery guarantees under certain assumptions and is shown to outperform some existing feature selection methods on standard
classification datasets.

prove the quality of selected features, and embedded methods integrate the feature selection phase into the supervised/unsupervised learning algorithms [11, 20]. Usually,
these methods are performed by considering all data collectively, without distinguishing between different classes.
Therefore, these approaches face scalability issues as the
number of data points or classes increases, leading to computational inefficiencies and potential loss of accuracy.
The usual approach is to optimize a margin-maximizing
loss function, which scales as O(C) with the number of
classes C. Our work emphasizes individual class modeling,
independently leveraging a generative model and feature selection for each class. This class-specific modeling sets our
method apart from existing feature selection techniques for
the following reasons:
• It captures the unique characteristics and distribution by
tailoring the model to each class.
• The model for each class is wrapped tightly around the
observations of that class, which allows the introduction
of new classes without retraining the existing class models and scales as O(1).
• Additionally, preserving learned parameters for each
class mitigates the risk of catastrophic forgetting when
new data is introduced.
We propose using the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) as a
feature selection criterion, where the signal represents relevant information contributing to accurate predictions, and
the noise refers to irrelevant data. SNR quantifies the
strength of the signal relative to noise, with higher SNR features being more effective at distinguishing classes. Eliminating low SNR features enhances computational efficiency
and model interpretability. In summary, this paper makes
the following contributions:
• It introduces an SNR-based feature selection method for
latent factor models such as Latent Factor Analysis and
Probabilistic PCA.
• It provides theoretical true feature recovery guarantees for
the proposed feature selection method under certain assumptions.
• It shows how to apply the proposed feature selection method for multi-class classification, obtaining a
class-incremental feature selection method without catas-

1. Introduction
Features are individual measurable properties of what is being studied. The performance of a classifier depends on the
interrelationship between the number of samples and features used. Although adding more features to the dataset
can improve accuracy, this happens as long as the signal
dominates noise. Beyond that point, the model accuracy
reduces, and this phenomenon is known as peaking [13].
Also, dealing with high-dimensional data poses challenges
such as increased training time, algorithmic complexity,
storage space, and noise in datasets, collectively known as
the ’curse of dimensionality.’
Feature selection is a type of dimensionality reduction
that avoids irrelevant data collection, recovers genuine signals with high probability, and provides good prediction results. Feature selection algorithms face several key challenges, including minimizing accuracy loss when selecting
a smaller feature set. Simplicity in algorithm design is preferred to reduce overfitting and avoid complex, ad-hoc implementations. Additionally, it is beneficial for algorithms
to account for nonlinear feature patterns to capture more
complex relationships beyond linear associations [6, 32].
In a multi-class classification setup, one can perform
feature selection through various approaches: filter methods operate independently of learning algorithms, wrapper
methods depend on learning algorithms to iteratively im-

30742

