This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ShowUI: One Vision-Language-Action Model for GUI Visual Agent
Kevin Qinghong Lin1 , Linjie Li2 , Difei Gao1 , Zhengyuan Yang2 ,
Shiwei Wu1 , Zechen Bai1 , Stan Weixian Lei1 , Lijuan Wang2 , Mike Zheng Shou1B
1

2

Show Lab, National University of Singapore

Microsoft

Abstract

1. Introduction
Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs) are central to how individuals engage with the digital world, serving as virtual embodied interface for a range of daily activities. Meanwhile,
Large Language Models (LLMs) [32], with their ability to
comprehend complex language instructions and seamlessly
B: Corresponding Author.

Task:

Help me create
an CVPR overleaf
template.

ShowUI
{'action':'CLICK', 'value': None, 'position': [0.18,0.50]}

Figure 1. ShowUI is a Vision-Language-Action model for GUI Automation. Given an environment screenshot, ShowUI efficiently processes it
using UI-guided token selection for visual modeling and outputs an interaction action within the loop.
Num of Visual Token

80

2

70 ShowUI-2B

1.4x

1.5

1000

UGround-7B

65

900
1

60

1.0x

500

55

0.5

50

SeeClick-9.6B

45
40

Training Speedup

1344

75

Screenspot (Acc)

Building Graphical User Interface (GUI) assistants
holds significant promise for enhancing human workflow
productivity. While most agents are language-based, relying on closed-source API with text-rich meta-information
(e.g., HTML or accessibility tree), they show limitations in
perceiving UI visuals as humans do, highlighting the need
for GUI visual agents. In this work, we develop a visionlanguage-action model in digital world, namely ShowUI,
which features the following innovations: (i) UI-Guided Visual Token Selection to reduce computational costs by formulating screenshots as an UI connected graph, adaptively
identifying their redundant relationship and serve as the
criteria for token selection during self-attention blocks; (ii)
Interleaved Vision-Language-Action Streaming that flexibly unifies diverse needs within GUI tasks, enabling effective management of visual-action history in navigation
or pairing multi-turn query-action sequences per screenshot to enhance training efficiency; (iii) Small-scale Highquality GUI Instruction-following Datasets by careful data
curation and employing a resampling strategy to address
significant data type imbalances. With above components,
ShowUI, a lightweight 2B model using 256K data, achieves
a strong 75.1% accuracy in zero-shot screenshot grounding.
Its UI-guided token selection further reduces 33% of redundant visual tokens during training and speeds up the performance by 1.4×. Navigation experiments across web [12],
mobile [35], and online [39] environments further underscore the effectiveness and potential of our model in advancing GUI visual agents. The models are available at
https://github.com/showlab/ShowUI.

CogAgent-18B
0

5

10

15

Model Size(B)

20

25

0

Qw

en

2-V

0

Sh

ow
U

L-2

I

B

Qw

en

Sh

2-V

L-2

ow

UI

B

Figure 2. Left: Zero-shot Screenspot grounding comparison between
ShowUI and other GUI visual models in terms of model size and training scale (area); ShowUI reaching state-of-the-art accuracy as well as
the most lightweight model (2B) with a smaller training dataset (256K).
Right: Building upon Qwen2-VL-2B [40], our UI-guided visual token selection reduces visual token redundancy by 33% during training, achieving
a 1.4× speedup.
.

integrate tools, have shown significant potential in performing complex tasks through building agents [1, 13, 16, 55].
This progress inspires the development of intelligent GUI
agents that can significantly streamline human workflows
based on user intentions.
Early efforts in GUI automation have primarily focused
on developing language agents [12, 46, 54] that rely on
closed-source, API-based LLMs like GPT-4 [32]. These
agents leverage text-rich metadata like HTML inputs or
accessibility trees to perform navigation and other tasks.
However, the text-only approach is limited in real-world
applications, where users typically interact with user in-

19498

