This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Variance-Based Membership Inference Attacks Against Large-Scale Image
Captioning Models
Daniel Samira Edan Habler Yuval Elovici Asaf Shabtai
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel
{samirada, habler}@post.bgu.ac.il, {elovici, shabtaia}@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

ical concern is the potential of generative models, particularly those trained on large private datasets, to inadvertently
memorize and expose sensitive information. Such risks can
lead to issues related to intellectual property misuse and privacy breaches involving data from proprietary images or
documents [5, 45]. Among the various threats are membership inference attacks (MIAs), which aim to determine
whether speciﬁc data records were included in a model’s
training dataset [20]. The ability to infer membership can
result in the exposure of personal health information, ﬁnancial details, or undisclosed afﬁliations, thereby posing
a threat to individual privacy and security.
Initially, studies on MIAs focused on classiﬁcation models, revealing heightened privacy risks primarily due to
model overﬁtting [9, 20, 47]. Subsequently, attention turned
to generative models, where research highlighted their tendency to memorize training data, raising concerns about
digital forgery and the loss of originality [10, 11, 39].
In MIAs, as deﬁned by Shokri et al. [37], shadow models are used to mimic the target model’s behavior. However, crafting effective shadow models requires extensive
datasets that mirror the original training data, along with
substantial computational resources. Additionally, in many
MIAs [14, 19, 21, 30, 33, 33, 43, 44, 49], the shadow models
are scaled to hundreds of samples, and must share similar
architectures with the target model and use identical training algorithms. Their dependence on shadow model training limits their applicability for large-scale models [21, 43].
To the best of our knowledge, the study performed by
Hu et al. [21] is the only research exploring MIAs on image captioning models. The authors introduced two attack
methods, which shadow models are employed. Furthermore, they did not directly evaluate the methods on operational image captioning models, such as those from Hugging Face. Instead, they were assessed in a simulated environment, using artiﬁcial models trained on synthetic conﬁgurations, small datasets, and numerous training epochs.
Recent studies have proposed MIAs that do not rely
on shadow models [22, 25]. Speciﬁcally, Ko et al. [22]
introduced the cosine similarity (CS) attack (CSA) and

The proliferation of multi-modal generative models has introduced new privacy and security challenges, especially
due to the risks of memorization and unintentional disclosure of sensitive information. This paper focuses on the vulnerability of multi-modal image captioning models to membership inference attacks (MIAs). These models, which synthesize textual descriptions from visual content, could inadvertently reveal personal or proprietary data embedded in
their training datasets. We explore the feasibility of MIAs
in the context of such models. Speciﬁcally, our approach
leverages a variance-based strategy tailored for image captioning models, utilizing only image data without knowing the corresponding caption. We introduce the meansof-variance threshold attack (MVTA) and conﬁdence-based
weakly supervised attack (C-WSA) based on the metric,
means-of-variance (MV), to assess variability among vector embeddings. Our experiments demonstrate that these
models are susceptible to MIAs, indicating substantial privacy risks. The effectiveness of our methods is validated
through rigorous evaluations on these real-world models,
conﬁrming the practical implications of our ﬁndings.

1. Introduction
The advancement from traditional machine learning (ML)
to advanced generative models has progressed signiﬁcantly
in recent years [7]. An example of this development is seen
in the ﬁeld of multi-modal models, which are able to process information from various modalities [4]. These models
have become increasingly sophisticated and are employed
in challenging tasks involving various types of data (e.g.,
text, images, video). In this paper we focus on image captioning models [2, 3, 23, 24, 26, 34, 50], a multi-modal
model used to generate textual descriptions for images.
While multi-modal models have fostered the development of a variety of new multi-modal applications, they also
present new privacy and security challenges [6, 28]. A crit-

9210

