This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Polarization-Aided Transformer for Image Deblurring via Motion Vector
Decomposition
Duosheng Chen1,3

Shihao Zhou1,3
1

2

Jinshan Pan4

Jinglei Shi3

Lishen Qu1,3

Jufeng Yang1,2,3 *

Nankai International Advanced Research Institute (SHENZHEN· FUTIAN)

Pengcheng Laboratory, 3 VCIP & TMCC & DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
4

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology

duoshengchen@mail.nankai.edu.cn, zhoushihao96@mail.nankai.edu.cn, sdluran@gmail.com
jinglei.shi@nankai.edu.cn, qulishen@mail.nankai.edu.cn, yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract

B

Effectively leveraging motion information is crucial for the
image deblurring task. Existing methods typically build
deep-learning models to restore a clean image by estimating blur patterns over the entire movement. This suggests
that the blur caused by rotational motion components is
processed together with the translational one. Exploring
the movement without separation leads to limited performance for complex motion deblurring, especially rotational
motion. In this paper, we propose Motion Decomposition
Transformer (MDT), a transformer-based architecture augmented with polarized modules for deblurring via motion
vector decomposition. MDT consists of a Motion Decomposition Module (MDM) for extracting hybrid rotation and
translation features and a Radial Stripe Attention Solver
(RSAS) for sharp image reconstruction with enhanced rotational information. Specifically, the MDM uses a deformable Cartesian convolutional branch to capture translational motion, complemented by a polar-system branch to
capture rotational motion. The RSAS employs radial stripe
windows and angular relative positional encoding in the polar system to enhance rotational information. This design
preserves translational details while keeping computational
costs lower than dual-coordinate design. Experimental results on 6 image deblurring datasets show that MDT outperforms state-of-the-art methods, particularly in handling
blur caused by complex motions with significant rotational
components. The code and pre-trained models are available
at https://github.com/Calvin11311/MDT.

1. Introduction
Image deblurring aims to recover a sharp image from its
blurred counterparts. Deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have significantly advanced the research progress
* Corresponding author.

θ

A

Rotation

Motion
Trajectory

Decompose

B

t
A

Translation

(a) Motion Decomposition

(b) Blurry Image

(c) Tokens in Polar Coordinate

Figure 1. (a) The demonstration of the motion trajectory causing
blur. It can be decomposed into translation and rotation components, as the blue curve consists of the red rotational motion and
the orange translational movement. (b) Illustration of the kernel
estimation [4], the red curves describe the motion state that causes
the blur. (c) Exhibiting the relationship of tokens within the polar
coordinates. θ quantifies the relative angle between A and B.

of this problem [16, 34, 50] thanks to their ability to
model complex local blur patterns using diverse strategies
(e.g., the multi-scale [50, 52]/multi-stage network architectures [34, 44], latent space kernel estimation [16], etc.). Unfortunately, they often struggle to capture non-local contextual information due to the spatially invariant and limited
receptive fields of convolutional kernels. Although several
methods [36, 54] focus on using larger kernels or deeper
networks to expand the receptive field, these approaches can
not always generate satisfactory results [23].
As the self-attention in Transformer [47] can capture
the relationships of long-range pixels, the methods [14,
48, 51] achieve impressive performance. The scaled-dotproduct operation in self-attention requires huge computational cost, so several methods utilize the window-based attention mechanism [29, 48] to relieve this issue. Specifically, the rectangular window designs explore motion along
orthogonal directions in the Cartesian coordinate system,

28061

