This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One2Any: One-Reference 6D Pose Estimation for Any Object
Mengya Liu1 Siyuan Li1 Ajad Chhatkuli2 Prune Truong3
Luc Van Gool1,2 Federico Tombari3,4
1

ETH Zurich

2

INSAIT, Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”

3

Google

4

TUM

Abstract
6D object pose estimation remains challenging for many
applications due to dependencies on complete 3D models,
multi-view images, or training limited to specific object categories. These requirements make generalization to novel
objects difficult for which neither 3D models nor multi-view
images may be available. To address this, we propose a
novel method One2Any that estimates the relative 6-degrees
of freedom (DOF) object pose using only a single referencesingle query RGB-D image, without prior knowledge of its
3D model, multi-view data, or category constraints. We treat
object pose estimation as an encoding-decoding process:
first, we obtain a comprehensive Reference Object Pose Embedding (ROPE) that encodes an object’s shape, orientation,
and texture from a single reference view. Using this embedding, a U-Net-based pose decoding module produces Reference Object Coordinate (ROC) for new views, enabling
fast and accurate pose estimation. This simple encodingdecoding framework allows our model to be trained on
any pair-wise pose data, enabling large-scale training and
demonstrating great scalability. Experiments on multiple
benchmark datasets demonstrate that our model generalizes
well to novel objects, achieving state-of-the-art accuracy
and robustness even rivaling methods that require multi-view
or CAD inputs, at a fraction of compute. Code is available
at https://github.com/lmy1001/One2Any.

ROE

Ref. RGBD

•
•
•

ROPE

Q
KV

VQVAE

Query from Any View

Shape
Pose
Texture

Q
KV

Decoder

Pred ROC Pred Pose

Figure 1. Given a single RGB-D image as a reference for an unseen
object, our method estimates the pose of the object in a given
query image, relative to the reference. The method first predicts
a Reference Object Pose Embedding (ROPE) that encodes the
object’s texture, shape, and pose priors. During inference, each
query RGB image is processed through a decoder to predict the
Reference Object Coordinate (ROC) map and estimate the relative
pose to the reference image. This approach effectively handles
large viewpoint changes.

54], while multi-view methods use many (8-200) reference
images that indirectly encode the object’s 3D shape [19, 36,
45, 61]. Although effective, these methods are impractical in
situations where multiple views or high-quality 3D models
are unavailable, as is often the case for novel/unseen objects.
In contrast, direct absolute pose regression methods [27, 60]
bypass extensive reference data through supervised learning
but generally lack the ability to generalize to unseen objects.

1. Introduction
6D object pose estimation is an important task in computer
vision [38, 41, 46], due to its wide applicability in robotics,
mixed reality and general scene understanding. However,
the existing methods are still largely held back by generalizability and speed issues, as well as strict input requirements.
Needless to say, these constraints are difficult to address together while keeping a good performance.
Existing works in 6D object pose estimation can be categorized based on the required inputs. In model-based approaches, a complete 3D model of the reference object is
used at inference to support pose estimations [2, 5, 30, 33, 40,

Our goal is to estimate the pose of any object given only
a single reference RGB-D view, a challenging setting for
current methods. Multi-view approaches typically follow
a “reconstruct-and-compare” pipeline, involving complex
search, refinement, or bundle adjustment steps. The performance of these methods significantly drops when only sparse

6457

