This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Collaborative Tree Search for Enhancing Embodied Multi-Agent Collaboration
Lizheng Zu1, 2 , Lin Lin1 ,* Song Fu1 ,* Na Zhao3 , Pan Zhou4
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, 2 Nanyang Technological University,
3
Singapore University of Technology and Design, 4 Singapore Management University
zuli edu@outlook.com, waiwaiyl@hit.edu.cn, fusong@hit.edu.cn
na zhao@sutd.edu.sg, panzhou@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Embodied agents based on large language models
(LLMs) face significant challenges in collaborative tasks,
requiring effective communication and reasonable division
of labor to ensure efficient and correct task completion.
Previous approaches with simple communication patterns
carry erroneous or incoherent agent actions, which can
lead to additional risks. To address these problems, we
propose Cooperative Tree Search (CoTS), a framework designed to significantly improve collaborative planning and
task execution efficiency among embodied agents. CoTS
guides multi-agents to discuss long-term strategic plans
within a modified Monte Carlo tree, searching along LLMdriven reward functions to provide a more thoughtful and
promising approach to cooperation. Another key feature of
our method is the introduction of a plan evaluation module, which not only prevents agent action confusion caused
by frequent plan updates but also ensures plan updates
when the current plan becomes unsuitable. Experimental
results show that the proposed method performs excellently
in planning, communication, and collaboration on embodied environments (CWAH and TDW-MAT), efficiently completing long-term, complex tasks and significantly outperforming existing methods.

1. Introduction
Embodied agents are increasingly capable of perceiving
and interacting with their environments like humans, autonomously managing planning, decision-making, actions,
and execution tasks [23, 36]. Recent advances have generated substantial interest in these agents, especially for applications requiring complex task execution in dynamic environments, such as robotic operations in warehouses or domestic settings. In particular, collaborative task completion
among multiple agents enhances both efficiency and adapt* Corresponding author.

ability, especially in dynamic scenarios [5, 10]. However,
collaboration among embodied agents introduces significant challenges: agents must not only perceive and understand their environment but also communicate, share information, divide tasks, and coordinate actions responsively.
For example, consider autonomous robots in a home responding to a request: “Bring me the iPad and apple, and
put the milk in the refrigerator.” Achieving this requires
multi-level coordination, including optimal search strategies, task prioritization, and efficient movement planning.
Large language models (LLMs) have recently provided
embodied agents with advanced natural language understanding, dialogue, and reasoning abilities [1, 3, 38, 40].
These capabilities allow LLMs to decompose complex and
long-term tasks into a sequence of manageable sub-goals,
making LLM-driven agents a promising alternative to traditional reinforcement learning models [14, 34] which are
difficult to train and often generalize poorly [7, 21, 39].
However, enabling embodied agents to work together in
decentralized environments remains a significant and underexplored challenge, as it requires long-term planning
and coherent decision-making to coordinate actions efficiently. Early attempts at multi-agent collaboration, such
as CoELA [43] and RoCo [24], demonstrate progress but
also reveal limitations. For instance, as shown in Fig. 1 (b),
CoELA facilitates collaboration by sharing updates through
natural language when sub-tasks are completed, yet each
agent’s decision-making process remains independent, resulting in suboptimal coordination. In contrast, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (c), RoCo develops multi-agent work plans
through agent discussions and environmental interactions.
However, RoCo relies on a single reasoning path, which is
susceptible to the randomness and unpredictability of LLM
outputs. This can lead to inefficient or incorrect planning,
particularly in applications requiring precision, where such
errors can have serious consequences.
Contributions. To address these limitations, we propose
Cooperative Tree Search (CoTS), a framework designed to
significantly improve collaborative planning and task exe-

29513

