This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Flag Decomposition for Hierarchical Datasets
Nathan Mankovich
Universitat de València

Ignacio Santamaria
Universidad de Cantabria

Gustau Camps-Valls
Universitat de València

Tolga Birdal
Imperial College London

Abstract

Denoising

Hierarchical
data

Flag manifolds encode nested sequences of subspaces and
serve as powerful structures for various computer vision
and machine learning applications. Despite their utility in
tasks such as dimensionality reduction, motion averaging,
and subspace clustering, current applications are often restricted to extracting flags using common matrix decomposition methods like the singular value decomposition. Here,
we address the need for a general algorithm to factorize and
work with hierarchical datasets. In particular, we propose
a novel, flag-based method that decomposes arbitrary hierarchical real-valued data into a hierarchy-preserving flag
representation in Stiefel coordinates. Our work harnesses
the potential of flag manifolds in applications including denoising, clustering, and few-shot learning.

Hierarchy-preserving
flag decomposition

Clustering
...
...
...

Few-shot learning

1. Introduction

Figure 1. A flag decomposition (center) is used for a hierarchypreserving flag representation and reconstruction. This decomposition separates a data matrix D with an associated hierarchy of
column indices A1 ⊂ A2 ⊂ A3 into Stiefel coordinates Q for
a flag [[Q]], a block-upper triangular matrix R, and a permutation
matrix P (not pictured). Example applications include denoising
(green), clustering (yellow), and few-shot learning (orange).

Hierarchical structures are fundamental across a variety of
fields: they shape taxonomies and societies [25], allow us
to study 3D objects [26], underpin neural network architectures [59], and form the backbone of language [31]. They
reflect parts-to-whole relationships [55] and how our world
organizes itself compositionally [49]. However, when handling hierarchies in data, we often resort to the temptation
to flatten them for simplicity, losing essential structure and
context in the process. This tendency is evident in standard
dimensionality reduction techniques, like principal component analysis, which ignore any hierarchy the data contains.
In this work, we advocate for an approach rooted in flags
to preserve the richness of hierarchical linear subspaces.
A flag [33, 36] represents a sequence of nested subspaces
with increasing dimensions, denoted by its type or signature (n1 , n2 , . . . , nk ; n), where n1 <n2 <. . . <nk <n. For
instance, a flag of type (1, 2; 3) describes a line within a
plane in R3 . By working in flag manifolds—structured
spaces of such nested subspaces—we leverage the full complexity of hierarchical data. Flag manifolds have already

shown promise in extending traditional methods like Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [36, 47, 53], Independent Component Analysis (ICA) [41–45], generalizing subspace learning [54], and Self-Organizing Maps (SOM) [32].
They enable robust representations for diverse tasks: averaging motions [33], modeling variations in face illumination [11, 33], parameterizing 3D shape spaces [9], and clustering subspaces for video and biological data [33–35, 38].

18738

Our main contribution is a Flag Decomposition (FD)
specifically designed to preserve hierarchical structures
within data (see Fig. 1). First, we formalize the notion of
hierarchies in data and the definition of a flag (§2). Next, we
provide a practical algorithm for deriving FDs (§3) and outline multiple promising applications (§4). Then we demonstrate its robustness in clustering tasks involving noisy and
outlier-contaminated simulated data (§5). Our approach
outperforms standard methods, such as Singular Value Decomposition (SVD), in clustering and denoising hyperspec-

