This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TSAM: Temporal SAM Augmented with Multimodal Prompts for Referring
Audio-Visual Segmentation
Abduljalil Radman & Jorma Laaksonen
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
{abduljalil.saif, jorma.laaksonen}@aalto.fi

Abstract
Referring audio-visual segmentation (Ref-AVS) aims to segment objects within audio-visual scenes using multimodal
cues embedded in text expressions. While the Segment
Anything Model (SAM) has revolutionized visual segmentation, its applicability to Ref-AVS, where multimodal cues
act as novel prompts, remains unexplored. SAM’s limitation to single-frame segmentation also hinders its ability to
capture essential temporal context needed for multi-frame
audio-visual segmentation. To address this gap, we propose TSAM, a novel extension of SAM designed to leverage multimodal cues for precise segmentation in dynamic
audio-visual scenes. TSAM enhances SAM’s image encoder
with a temporal modeling branch, enabling spatio-temporal
learning and deep multimodal fusion across video frames,
while retaining SAM’s pre-trained knowledge. Additionally,
TSAM replaces SAM’s user-interactive prompting mechanism with sparse and dense data-driven prompts, enabling
more effective integration of audio-visual inputs and reference text expressions. Extensive experiments on the RefAVS dataset demonstrate TSAM’s superiority over state-ofthe-art methods. The results illustrate its effectiveness in
segmenting objects in dynamic audio-visual scenes using
text-based multimodal cues and its strong generalization to
unseen objects. Project webpage: https://abdurad.
github.io/TSAM/.

dynamic audio-visual scenes [16, 36]. In the literature, researchers have addressed this need for multimodal integration in object segmentation through three main approaches,
each focused on a specific modality cue.
First, video object segmentation (VOS) [6, 30] relies on
a mask annotation in the initial frame to guide segmentation of objects across subsequent frames. While VOS allows for flexible segmentation, it is heavily dependent on
labor-intensive frame-level annotations, making it challenging to scale. Second, referring video object segmentation
(Ref-VOS) [5, 9, 13] replaces the need for mask annotations with text expressions to identify targeted objects. This
approach introduces a more intuitive, text-based method for
segmentation, but struggles with tracking and segmenting
objects in more dynamic audio-visual environments. Third,
audio-visual segmentation (AVS) [21, 24, 33, 35, 39] leverages audio cues to segment sounding objects in video, effectively handling complex audio-visual scenarios, but remaining limited in scope as it does not generalize to inaudible objects. Each of these approaches, VOS, Ref-VOS, and
AVS, contributes valuable segmentation capabilities within
its modality focus, but remains challenged in more naturalistic audio-visual scenarios [36].
Recently, Wang et al. [36] introduced referring audiovisual segmentation (Ref-AVS), a task that segments objects in video by interpreting text expressions enriched with
both audio and visual cues. They also presented Expression Enhancing with Multimodal Cues (EEMC), a simple method that integrates reference text expressions with
dynamic audio-visual cues to segment targeted objects in
scenes. By unifying these multimodal cues, EEMC enables
robust segmentation in dynamic scenes, overcoming limitations of prior approaches that focused on narrower combinations of modalities.
We propose that enhancing Ref-AVS can be achieved
by leveraging prior knowledge from large-scale visual
foundation models, such as the Segment Anything Model
(SAM) [15], for segmentation. SAM is a flexible segmentation model that utilizes an image encoder to generate high-dimensional image embeddings. It incorpo-

1. Introduction
In real-world scenarios, people often rely on multimodal information, such as audio-visual and visual-text, to gather
spatiotemporal and semantic insights for distinguishing objects of interest [10, 39]. This multimodal approach is
equally valuable for machines, enabling applications like
stage cameras to track a performing musician or movie cameras to focus on a superhero confronting a yelling villain.
Relying on a single sensory input, such as vision, is often
insufficient for accurate object segmentation in complex,

23947

