This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AnimateAnything: Consistent and Controllable Animation for Video Generation
Guojun Lei1 ,* Chi Wang1 ,* Rong Zhang4 , Yikai Wang2 , Hong Li3,5 ,* Weiwei Xu1†
1
Zhejiang University 2 Tsinghua University
3
Beihang University 4 Zhejiang Gongshang University 5 ShengShu
guojunlei@zju.edu.cn, wangchi1995@zju.edu.cn, link0502@buaa.edu.cn
zhangrong@zjgsu.edu.cn, yikaiw@outlook.com, xww@cad.zju.edu.cn

Figure 1. Animate anything. Consistent and controllable animation for different kinds of control signals. Given a reference image and
corresponding user prompts, our approach can animate arbitrary characters, generating clear stable videos while maintaining consistency
with the appearance details of the reference object.

Abstract
We present a unified controllable video generation approach AnimateAnything that facilitates precise and consistent video manipulation across various conditions, including camera trajectories, text prompts, and user motion annotations. Specifically, we carefully design a multiscale control feature fusion network to construct a common
motion representation for different conditions. It explicitly
converts all control information into frame-by-frame optical flows. Then we incorporate the optical flows as motion
priors to guide the final video generation. In addition, to
reduce the flickering issues caused by large-scale motion,
we propose a frequency-based stabilization module. It can

enhance temporal coherence by ensuring the video’s frequency domain consistency. Experiments demonstrate that
our method outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches.
For more details and videos, please refer to the anonymous webpage: https://yu- shaonian.github.
io/Animate_Anything/.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

The emergence of Sora [5] has led to a breakthrough in
large-scale video generation. Recently, controllable video
generation [17, 22, 45, 51], i.e. controlling camera trajectories and object movements, has gained significant attention.
It has expanded applications of video generation, making
them directly applicable to film production and virtual reality. However, due to the high complexity of large-scale

27946

