This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoboBrain: A Unified Brain Model for Robotic Manipulation
from Abstract to Concrete
Yuheng Ji2,3,6,∗ , Huajie Tan1,2,∗ , Jiayu Shi1,2,∗ , Xiaoshuai Hao2,∗,† , Yuan Zhang1,2 , Hengyuan Zhang1,2
Pengwei Wang2,† , Mengdi Zhao2 , Yao Mu5 , Pengju An1,2 , Xinda Xue1,2 , Qinghang Su2,4 , Huaihai Lyu2,3,6
Xiaolong Zheng3,6 , Jiaming Liu1,2 , Zhongyuan Wang2 , Shanghang Zhang1,2,B
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2

Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence 3 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences

4

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 The University of Hong Kong
6

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Place a cup onto a plate
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

OpenEQA Task

Reach for the cup
Grasp the cup
Lift the cup
Move the cup towards the plate
Lower the cup onto the plate
Release the cup

01 Planning

Long-term task planning.

02 Affordance

03 Trajectory
Give the trajectory
waypoints according
to the instruction.

To reach the goal of
<picking up an apple>,
which task should be
prioritized next?

RoboVQA Task
Grasp the cup, and
provide the
affordance.

Give the affordance box
coordinates according to
the instruction.

Lift the apple.

Is now a suitable
time to carry out
<lift the apple>?

Yes, it is !

Figure 1. Overview of RoboBrain. RoboBrain consists of three key robotic capabilities: planning capability, affordance perception, and
trajectory prediction. RoboBrain outperforms previous MLLMs in robotics tasks. The bottom part shows the composition of RoboBrain’s
training data and provides a specific example of visual question answering from our proposed ShareRobot. Best viewed on screen.

Abstract

across various multimodal contexts. However, their application in robotic scenarios, particularly for long-horizon
manipulation tasks, reveals significant limitations. These
limitations arise from the current MLLMs lacking three
essential robotic brain capabilities: Planning Capability, which involves decomposing complex manipulation instructions into manageable sub-tasks; Affordance Per-

Recent advancements in Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities
∗ Equal contribution.
† Project leaders.
B Corresponding author.

1724

