This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Monocular and Generalizable Gaussian Talking Head Animation
Shengjie Gong1 Haojie Li1 Jiapeng Tang2 Dongming Hu1 Shuangping Huang1,3†
Hao Chen1 Tianshui Chen4 Zhuoman Liu5
1
South China University of Technology 2 Technical University of Munich 3 Pazhou Laboratory
4
5
Guangdong University of Technology
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Real-Time Inference on Unseen Identities (>40FPS)

Monucular Training

 30
0
Driving Video

Single Reference

 30
 30

“two hundred thousand”

0
Driving Audio

Monucular Dataset

Single Reference

 30
two
[tuː]

hundred
[ˈhʌndrəd]

thousand
[ˈθaʊznd]

Figure 1. MGGTalk is trained using only monocular datasets and enable generalizing to unseen identities without personalized re-training.
Additionally, it supports real-time generation of talking heads in diverse poses and novel viewpoints.

Abstract

image. These parameters are subsequently utilized to
improve the prediction of Gaussian parameters for the
non-visible regions. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that MGGTalk surpasses previous state-of-the-art methods, achieving superior performance across various metrics. Project page: https://scut-mmpr.github.
io/MGGTalk-Homepage/.

In this work, we introduce Monocular and Generalizable
Gaussian Talking Head Animation (MGGTalk), which requires monocular datasets and generalizes to unseen identities without personalized re-training. Compared with
previous 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) methods that requires elusive multi-view datasets or tedious personalized
learning/inference, MGGtalk enables more practical and
broader applications. However, in the absence of multiview and personalized training data, the incompleteness
of geometric and appearance information poses a significant challenge. To address these challenges, MGGTalk
explores depth information to enhance geometric and facial symmetry characteristics to supplement both geometric and appearance features. Initially, based on the pixelwise geometric information obtained from depth estimation,
we incorporate symmetry operations and point cloud filtering techniques to ensure a complete and precise position parameter for 3DGS. Subsequently, we adopt a twostage strategy with symmetric priors for predicting the remaining 3DGS parameters. We begin by predicting Gaussian parameters for the visible facial regions of the source

1. Introduction
One-shot talking head generation synthesizes realistic talking head videos from a single reference image and driving
sources like audio or motion. This technology is promising
for applications such as video dubbing [1–3], film production [4], and video conferencing [5, 6]. A key challenge
is generating high-quality, motion-rich videos from a single
image, driven by expressive and pose-related information
while ensuring robust identity protection.
Existing methods for talking head animation can be
broadly categorized into 2D generator [2, 7–13] and 3D rendering [14–20] approaches. 2D generator methods typically
use generative network, they often lack 3D modeling of the
face and attribute disentanglement, which affects the overall
generation quality. Some 3D rendering methods [14, 18, 19]
utilize Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) to synthesize more

† Corresponding author.

5523

