This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stable-SCore: A Stable Registration-based Framework
for 3D Shape Correspondence
Haolin Liu1,2,3∗ , Xiaohang Zhan2∗ , Zizheng Yan1,4∗ , Zhongjin Luo1,4 , Yuxin Wen2 , Xiaoguang Han4,1†
1

FNii, CUHKSZ

∗

equal contribution

2

3

Tencent

†

corresponding author

Tencent-Hunyuan3D

4

SSE, CUHKSZ

haolinliu97.github.io/Stable-Score

Figure 1. We propose Stable-SCore: A Stable Registration-based Framework for 3D Shape Correspondence. Given a source and a target
mesh, our approach registers the source mesh to the target and establishes dense correspondence between them, with strong robustness to
large variations in mesh topology, shape, and pose, as shown in (a). Our method enables a range of downstream applications, including
re-topology, texture transfer, rig transfer, and shape interpolation, as shown in (b).

Abstract

challenging scenarios, and brings possibilities for a wide
array of real applications, as demonstrated in our results.

Establishing character shape correspondence is a critical
and fundamental task in computer vision and graphics, with
diverse applications including re-topology, attribute transfer, and shape interpolation. Current dominant functional
map methods, while effective in controlled scenarios, struggle in real situations with more complex challenges such
as non-isometric shape discrepancies. In response, we revisit registration-for-correspondence methods and tap their
potential for more stable shape correspondence estimation. To overcome their common issues including unstable
deformations and the necessity for careful pre-alignment
or high-quality initial 3D correspondences, we introduce
Stable-SCore: A Stable Registration-based Framework for
3D Shape Correspondence. We first re-purpose a foundation model for 2D character correspondence that ensures
reliable and stable 2D mappings. Crucially, we propose
a novel Semantic Flow Guided Registration approach that
leverages 2D correspondence to guide mesh deformations.
Our framework significantly surpasses existing methods in

1. Introduction
Shape correspondence is a fundamental task in computer
vision and graphics, where the goal is to establish accurate
point-to-point mappings between different shapes, ensuring
the preservation of their geometric characteristics. This task
involves the identification and alignment of corresponding
points, features, or regions across multiple shapes, accommodating variations in pose, scale, or intricate local geometric details. Dense correspondences becomes especially
crucial for 3D characters [10, 11, 32, 39, 65] , given its
implications for a range of downstream applications such
as re-topology, shape interpolation [14, 85], texture transfer [28], rig transfer [55, 68], etc.
There are two primary categories to address shape correspondence: registration-for-correspondence methods [2,
8, 19–21, 38, 67] and functional map methods [6, 10, 15,
16, 26, 40, 51, 54, 62]. In recent years, functional map

917

