This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Sparse-View Gaussian Splatting
122

Hanyang Kong Xingyi Yang Xinchao Wang*
National University of Singapore
{hanyang.k, xyang}@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

a) Qualitative comparisons with 3 training views: the vanilla 3D/4DGS v.s. ours.

b) Comparisons with SOTA methods on the LLFF dataset.

Figure 1. Our proposed Generative Sparse-view Gaussian Splatting (GS-GS) achieves high-fidelity quality with only three training
views. 1) GS-GS is a general pipeline for static and dynamic scene reconstruction with sparse camera views (left: vanilla GS model, right:
ours). 2) Quantitative comparisons with other state-of-the-art methods on the LLFF [22] dataset.

impressive results in generating high-quality renderings from
Abstract
dense input views. However, when input views are sparse,
Novel view synthesis from limited observations remains a
this approach struggles to maintain scene fidelity. The lack
significant challenge due to the lack of information in undera) Qualitative comparisons with 3 training views: the vanilla 3D/4DGS v.s.
of ours.
sufficient view constraints leads to severe ambiguities in
sampled
regions, often resulting in noticeable artifacts. We
reconstructing scene geometry and appearance, causing deintroduce Generative Sparse-view Gaussian Splatting (GSgraded performance with visible artifacts, such as incorrect
GS), a general pipeline designed to enhance the rendering
depth estimation, floating structures, and inconsistent colors.
quality of 3D/4D Gaussian Splatting (GS) when training
views are sparse. Our method generates unseen views usThis problem is fundamentally ill-posed due to the undering generative models, specifically leveraging pre-trained
constrained nature of sparse-view scenarios. Without enough
image diffusion models to iteratively refine view consistency
observations, it becomes exceedingly difficult to accurately
and hallucinate additional images at pseudo views. This
infer the 3D structure and appearance of a scene. As a result,
approach improves 3D/4D scene reconstruction by explicexisting methods either rely heavily on the large multi-view
itly enforcing semantic correspondences during the generatraining datasets [5–7, 36, 41, 43, 48] or introduce regulartion of unseen views, thereby enhancing geometric consisization strategies [8, 18, 27, 51] that are often insufficient to
tency—unlike purely generative methods that often fail to
address the inherent limitations posed by sparse views. The
maintain view consistency. Extensive evaluations on various
challenge is exacerbated in textureless or color-inconsistent
3D/4D datasets—including Blender, LLFF, Mip-NeRF360,
areas [15, 23], where traditional reconstruction methods fail
and Neural 3D Video—demonstrate that our GS-GS outperto establish reliable correspondences between views.
forms existing state-of-the-art methods in rendering quality
Our intuition is to leverage generative models to compenwithout sacrificing efficiency.
sate for the missing information in under-sampled regions.
Specifically, we propose GS-GS, a pipeline designed to
enhance the quality of 3D/4D Gaussian splatting reconstruc1. Introduction
tions from sparse inputs.
Gaussian splatting [15], known for its efficiency in repreAt the core of our approach is the integration of presenting 3D scenes using Gaussian primitives, has achieved
trained image diffusion models, which are used to generate
* Corresponding author.
unseen views and iteratively refine the view consistency of

26745

