This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RAEncoder: A Label-Free Reversible Adversarial Examples Encoder for
Dataset Intellectual Property Protection
Fan Xing, Zhuo Tian, Xuefeng Fan, Xiaoyi Zhou*
Hainan University
{xingfan, tianzhuo, xffan, xy.zhou}@hainanu.edu.cn

Abstract
Reversible Adversarial Examples (RAE) are designed to
protect the intellectual property of datasets. Such examples can function as imperceptible adversarial examples to
erode the model performance of unauthorized users while
allowing authorized users to remove the adversarial perturbations and recover the original samples for normal model
training. With the rise of Self-Supervised Learning (SSL),
an increasing number of unlabeled datasets and pre-trained
encoders are available in the community. However, existing RAE methods not only rely on well-labeled datasets
for training Supervised Learning (SL) models but also exhibit poor adversarial transferability when attacking SSL
pre-trained encoders. To address these challenges, we propose RAEncoder, the first framework for RAEs without the
need for labeled samples. RAEncoder aims to generate
universal adversarial perturbations by targeting SSL pretrained encoders. Unlike traditional RAE approaches, the
pre-trained encoder outputs the feature distribution of the
protected dataset rather than classification labels, enhancing both the attack success rate and transferability of RAEs.
Extensive experiments are conducted on six pre-trained encoders and four SL models, covering aspects such as imperceptibility and transferability. Our results demonstrate that
RAEncoder effectively protects unlabeled datasets from malicious infringements. Additional robustness experiments
further confirm the security of RAEncoder in practical application scenarios.

to remove the adversarial perturbations and restore the original dataset [20]. The adversarial attack methods used in
existing RAE schemes focus on targeting specific Supervised Learning (SL) classifiers through optimization-based
or gradient-based attacks, which result in a notable limitation: they lose adversarial strength when attacking different
model architectures, and the adversarial strength diminishes
especially when attacking downstream models trained with
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) pre-trained encoders.
SSL is an emerging paradigm in machine learning. It
typically involves pre-training a generic encoder on vast
amounts of unlabeled data, and it can then serve as a feature extractor for a wide range of downstream tasks. By utilizing a pre-trained encoder, any resource-constrained user
can leverage the advantages of a large model without the
need to undertake expensive training from scratch. Considering SSL for RAEs is highly noteworthy because if RAEs
exhibit poor transferability when attacking SSL pre-trained
encoders, any attacker can leverage them to pre-process
RAEs, thereby mitigating the impact of them on the training
performance of unauthorized downstream models.
Due to the fact that SSL pre-trained encoders learn feature representations of the data directly rather than featurelabel relationships, adversarial attacks against SSL preencoders can exhibit excellent transferability across different downstream model architectures [43, 44]. Although
this attack process demonstrates significant effectiveness,
using it as a method to generate RAEs for protecting
dataset IP introduces an additional challenge. Specifically,
the protection scheme must address the worst-case scenario—adaptive attacks, where the attacker is assumed to
be aware of the detailed steps of the protection scheme [32].
This requires the protection scheme to effectively differentiate between authorized and unauthorized access. To differentiate between authorized and unauthorized users, existing Reversible Data Hidding (RDH)-based RAE methods embed encrypted information in RAEs, ensuring that
only users with the correct key can recover original samples. However, embedding any information within RAEs
could significantly impact both adversarial strength and vi-

1. Introduction
Reversible Adversarial Examples (RAE) [20, 31–34, 37, 38,
41] are highlighted as a fundamental method for protecting
dataset Intellectual Property (IP). Unlike traditional methods for dataset IP protection, such as reversible watermarking [10, 19, 42] and image encryption techniques[11, 35],
RAE transforms the dataset into adversarial examples that
can mislead model training while allowing authorized users

20665

