This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAGiC-SLAM: Multi-Agent Gaussian Globally Consistent SLAM
Vladimir Yugay
Theo Gevers
Martin R. Oswald
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
{vladimir.yugay, th.gevers, m.r.oswald}@uva.nl
vladimiryugay.github.io/magic_slam

Render
Novel Views

Agent 1
.
.
.

Agent N

PSNR:
MAGiC-SLAM: 23dB
SOTA Baseline: 10dB

ATE RMSE
MAGiC-SLAM: 1cm
SOTA Baseline: X

Depth L1:
MAGiC-SLAM: 3cm
SOTA Baseline: 15cm
MAGiC-SLAM

Ground-Truth

Figure 1. MAGiC-SLAM is a multi-agent SLAM method capable of novel view synthesis. Given single-camera RGBD input streams
from multiple simultaneously operating agents MAGiC-SLAM estimates their trajectories and reconstructs a 3D Gaussian map that can
be rendered from previously unseen viewpoints. We showcase the high-fidelity 3D Gaussian map of a real-world environment alongside
multiple agent trajectories (depicted in green, yellow, and blue) within it. Our method effectively utilizes information from multiple agents
to achieve centimeter-level tracking accuracy. Our mapping and map merging strategies allow for realistic rendering of color and depth,
significantly improving the state of the art. Unlike previous methods, MAGiC-SLAM is flexible in the number of agents it can handle.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) systems
with novel view synthesis capabilities are widely used in
computer vision, with applications in augmented reality,
robotics, and autonomous driving. However, existing approaches are limited to single-agent operation. Recent work
has addressed this problem using a distributed neural scene
representation. Unfortunately, existing methods are slow,
cannot accurately render real-world data, are restricted to
two agents, and have limited tracking accuracy. In contrast, we propose a rigidly deformable 3D Gaussian-based
scene representation that dramatically speeds up the system. However, improving tracking accuracy and reconstructing a globally consistent map from multiple agents remains challenging due to trajectory drift and discrepancies
across agents’ observations. Therefore, we propose new
tracking and map-merging mechanisms and integrate loop
closure in the Gaussian-based SLAM pipeline. We evaluate MAGiC-SLAM on synthetic and real-world datasets and
find it more accurate and faster than the state of the art.

Visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM)
enables a machine to build a 3D map of its surroundings
while determining its location relying solely on its camera
input. Imagine an autonomous car navigating a busy city
or a robot exploring a cluttered room. For these systems to
move safely and make decisions, they need a reliable understanding of their surroundings. Over the years, visual
SLAM has advanced [8, 13, 36], learning to handle complex scenes with increasing accuracy. This capability forms
the backbone for various systems from self-driving cars to
virtual reality glasses, where spatial understanding is crucial for navigation, planning, and interactive experiences.
Recently, SLAM systems have been enhanced with
novel view synthesis (NVS) capabilities [14, 22, 35], allowing them to generate realistic, immersive views of scenes.
This allows more detailed scene exploration and supports
the creation of high-quality virtual environments. However,
these NVS-capable SLAM methods are slow, and tracking
accuracy remains limited [14]. These limitations become
even more pronounced in a multi-agent setup, with larger

6741

