This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpecTRe-GS: Modeling Highly Specular Surfaces with Reflected Nearby Objects
by Tracing Rays in 3D Gaussian Splatting
Jiajun Tang1,2 Fan Fei1,2
Youyu Chen4 Binxiao Huang5
1

Zhihao Li3 Xiao Tang3 Shiyong Liu3
Zhenyu Chen3
Xiaofei Wu3 Boxin Shi1,2#

State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 4 Harbin Institute of Technology 5 University of Hong Kong

2

Ground Truth

Ours

PSNR: 23.36

3DGS-DR

GShader

PSNR: 20.90

PSNR: 20.65

3iGS

PSNR: 21.41

GOF

PSNR: 20.87

3DGS

PSNR: 21.13

Figure 1. Our SpecTRe-GS effectively captures the appearance of reflectors with highly specular surfaces, even in the presence of nearby
objects. In the real-world scene shown above, it performs favorably against previous methods [13, 15, 30, 39, 42], both visually (as the
highlighted reflections within the insets) and quantitatively (with PSNR values within the reflective region annotated in the corners).

Abstract

1. Introduction

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), a recently emerged multiview 3D reconstruction technique, has shown significant
advantages in real-time rendering and explicit editing.
However, 3DGS encounters challenges in the accurate modeling of both high-frequency view-dependent appearances
and global illumination effects, including inter-reflection.
This paper introduces SpecTRe-GS, which addresses these
challenges and models highly Specular surfaces that reflect nearby objects through Tracing Rays in 3D Gaussian
Splatting. SpecTRe-GS separately models reflections from
highly specular and rough surfaces to leverage the distinctions between their reflective properties and integrates an
efficient ray tracer within the 3DGS framework for querying
secondary rays, thus achieving fast and accurate rendering.
Also, it incorporates normal prior guidance and joint geometry optimization at various stages of the training process
to enhance geometry reconstruction for undistorted reflections. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world scenes
demonstrate the superiority of SpecTRe-GS compared to existing 3DGS-based methods in capturing highly specular
inter-reflections and also showcase its editing applications.
The work was done during an internship in Huawei.
# Corresponding author. E-mail: shiboxin@pku.edu.cn.

Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [15] has emerged
as an innovative paradigm for multi-view 3D reconstruction. Unlike its predecessor, neural radiance fields
(NeRF) [23], 3DGS adopts an explicit point-based scene
representation with tile-based rasterization rather than relying on ray casting through an implicit neural field for
rendering. This transition endows 3DGS with significant
advantages in terms of real-time rendering speed and allows for convenient post-reconstruction editing. Nevertheless, challenges arise when the scene to be reconstructed
includes highly specular (i.e., mirror-like) surfaces which
exhibit strong and high-frequency view-dependent appearances. The original 3DGS struggles to accurately model
such high-frequency reflections, as it utilizes per-Gaussian
third-order spherical harmonics (SH) to represent viewdependent appearances. This approach is restricted to lowfrequency radiance variations in angular space and is susceptible to overfitting when the training views that observe
the Gaussian are not sufficiently dense [17, 37].
To address this issue, a natural strategy is to adopt
a physically-based shading model and optimize reflective
properties for each Gaussian [2, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 18, 29, 35,
36, 39, 40, 43, 47], rather than merely recording the out-

16133

