This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OODD: Test-time Out-of-Distribution Detection with Dynamic Dictionary
Yifeng Yang1 , Lin Zhu1 , Zewen Sun2 , Hengyu Liu3 , Qinying Gu4 , Nanyang Ye1 *
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Tianjin University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{zxk1212, zhulin sjtu, ynylincoln}@sjtu.edu.cn, 3022244294@tju.edu.cn,
piang.lhy@link.cuhk.edu.hk, guqinying@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection remains challenging
for deep learning models, particularly when test-time OOD
samples differ significantly from training outliers. We propose OODD, a novel test-time OOD detection method
that dynamically maintains and updates an OOD dictionary without fine-tuning. Our approach leverages a priority queue-based dictionary that accumulates representative OOD features during testing, combined with an informative inlier sampling strategy for in-distribution (ID)
samples. To ensure stable performance during early testing, we propose a dual OOD stabilization mechanism that
leverages strategically generated outliers derived from ID
data. To our best knowledge, extensive experiments on the
OpenOOD benchmark demonstrate that OODD significantly
outperforms existing methods, achieving a 26.0% improvement in FPR95 on CIFAR-100 Far OOD detection compared to the state-of-the-art approach. Furthermore, we
present an optimized variant of the KNN-based OOD detection framework that achieves a 3x speedup while maintaining detection performance. Our code is available at
https://github.com/zxk1212/OODD.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has demonstrated impressive capabilities but
often exhibits unpredictable behavior when faced with unknown situations, such as receiving data unrelated to its
training tasks. What’s worse, the model tends to incorrectly
classify unknown out-of-distribution (OOD) data into one of
the in-distribution (ID) classes with high confidence [10, 26].
Existing solutions in OOD detection areas can be broadly
categorized into three main types: (i) post-hoc methods, (ii)
fine-tuning methods, and (iii) test-time calibrated methods.
Post-hoc methods typically design an OOD score function
to analyze model outputs (e.g., logits), features, or layer-wise
* Nanyang Ye is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Before calibration, we dynamically feed the lower tail
of the OOD score distribution into an OOD dictionary through a
priority queue and then use this dictionary to calibrate the OOD
scores.

statistics [7, 13, 21–23, 31]. During inference, these methods discriminate between ID and OOD samples based on the
OOD scores of test samples. In contrast, fine-tuning methods
[4, 14, 37, 41] require fine-tuning the model that has been
pre-trained on ID data, using a combination of an auxiliary
dataset with outliers and ID samples. These methods are
often called outlier exposure (OE) based methods, aiming to
make the classifier outputs more uniformly distributed when
exposed to outliers. However, when the test-time OOD samples differ significantly from the training outliers, the model
may still assign high confidence to test-time OOD samples
[35]. While recent works [1, 8, 36] attempt to calibrate OOD
detection during test time, their batch-wise parameter updates can lead to catastrophic forgetting, unstable detection
performance, and even impact ID classification. We consider
that the key to test-time OOD detection is utilizing the latent OOD features. Particularly in the medical field, when
dealing with unknown diseases during the early stages of an
epidemic, there is an urgent need to specifically collect the
features of these unknown diseases [9].
Given this, we propose a method called OODD (test-time
Out-Of-Distribution detection with dynamic Dictionary),
which does not impose any burden during the training phase,
nor does it require optimization or fine-tuning at test time.
It only requires the addition of a dynamic OOD dictionary

30630

