This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continuous 3D Perception Model with Persistent State
Qianqian Wang1,2∗ , Yifei Zhang1∗ , Aleksander Holynski1,2 , Alexei A. Efros1 , Angjoo Kanazawa1
1

University of California, Berkeley

Static Scene

2

Google DeepMind

Dynamic Scene

Sparse Photo Collection

Figure 1. Continuous 3D Perception. Given a stream of RGB images as input, our approach enables dense 3D reconstruction in an online,
continuous manner, estimating both camera parameters and dense 3D geometry with each incoming frame. Our framework supports various
3D tasks, processes inputs from video sequences and sparse photo collections, and can handle both static and dynamic scenes.

1. Introduction
Abstract
We present a uniﬁed framework capable of solving a broad
range of 3D tasks. Our approach features a stateful recurrent
model that continuously updates its state representation with
each new observation. Given a stream of images, this evolving state can be used to generate metric-scale pointmaps
(per-pixel 3D points) for each new input in an online fashion.
These pointmaps reside within a common coordinate system,
and can be accumulated into a coherent, dense scene reconstruction that updates as new images arrive. Our model,
called CUT3R (Continuous Updating Transformer for 3D
Reconstruction), captures rich priors of real-world scenes:
not only can it predict accurate pointmaps from image observations, but it can also infer unseen regions of the scene
by probing at virtual, unobserved views. Our method is simple yet highly ﬂexible, naturally accepting varying length of
images that may be either video streams or unordered photo
collections, containing both static and dynamic content. We
evaluate our method on various 3D/4D tasks and demonstrate competitive or state-of-the-art performance in each.
Project page: https://cut3r.github.io/.

Humans are online visual learners. We continuously process
streams of visual input, building on what we have learned in
the past while learning in the present. Our prior knowledge
enables us to interpret the world from minimal information;
e.g., upon entering a new restaurant, it only takes a glance
to start inferring its layout and atmosphere. But it doesn’t
stop there—as we accumulate more observations, we continuously reﬁne our mental model of the 3D environment.
This ability to reconcile our prior knowledge of the world
with a continuous stream of new observations is crucial for
functioning effectively in an ever-changing visual world.
Building on these insights, we introduce an online 3D
perception framework that uniﬁes three key capabilities: 1)
reconstructing 3D scenes from few observations, 2) continuously reﬁning the reconstruction with more observations,
and 3) inferring 3D properties of unobserved scene regions.
We achieve these capabilities by integrating data-driven priors with a recurrent update mechanism. The learned prior
enables our method to address challenges encountered by traditional methods (e.g., dynamic objects, sparse observations,
degenerate camera motion), while the ability to continuously
update allows it to process new observations online, and
improve the reconstruction continuously over time.
Speciﬁcally, given an image stream, our recurrent model

10510

