This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CleanDIFT: Diffusion Features without Noise
Nick Stracke*

Stefan Andreas Baumann*
Kolja Bauer*
Frank Fundel
CompVis @ LMU Munich, MCML

Björn Ommer

{nick.stracke,b.ommer}@lmu.de

compvis.github.io/cleandift
Normal Diffusion Features
noisy images

30 min Finetuning

CleanDIFT Features
clean images
clean features

noisy features

timestep tuning required ✗

no timestep tuning required ✓

;

Figure 1. Our proposed CleanDIFT feature extraction method yields noise-free, timestep-independent, general-purpose features that significantly outperform standard diffusion features. CleanDIFT operates on clean images, while extracting diffusion features with existing
approaches requires adding noise to an image before passing it through the model. Adding noise reduces the information present in the
image and requires tuning a timestep per downstream task.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Learning meaningful visual representations that capture a
vast amount of world knowledge remains a key problem
in the field of computer vision. Diffusion models can be
trained at scale in a self-supervised manner and have rapidly
advanced the state of the art in image [12, 41, 51] and video
generation [13, 25, 58], making them a good candidate to
learn visual representations. Many early works have already achieved impressive results using internal features
from large-scale pretrained diffusion models for a wide
variety of tasks, such as semantic correspondence detection [62, 66, 67], semantic segmentation [2, 39, 63], panoptic segmentation [64], object detection [8], and classification [31]. However, the optimal approach to extract this
world knowledge from a diffusion model remains uncertain.
To understand why that is the case, we take a look at how
diffusion models are trained: a varying amount of noise
is added to a clean input image (forward process) and the
model is tasked to remove the noise from the image (backward process). The amount of added noise is dependent on
the diffusion timestep. As a result, the model learns to operate on noisy images and also becomes dependent on the
noise timestep as different noise levels require the model to

Internal features from large-scale pre-trained diffusion
models have recently been established as powerful semantic descriptors for a wide range of downstream tasks. Works
that use these features generally need to add noise to images before passing them through the model to obtain the
semantic features, as the models do not offer the most useful features when given images with little to no noise. We
show that this noise has a critical impact on the usefulness of these features that cannot be remedied by ensembling with different random noises. We address this issue by introducing a lightweight, unsupervised fine-tuning
method that enables diffusion backbones to provide highquality, noise-free semantic features. We show that these
features readily outperform previous diffusion features by
a wide margin in a wide variety of extraction setups and
downstream tasks, offering better performance than even
ensemble-based methods at a fraction of the cost.

* Equal Contribution

117

