This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HumanMM: Global Human Motion Recovery from Multi-shot Videos
Yuhong Zhang1,2,‡ * Guanlin Wu2,3,‡∗ Ling-Hao Chen1,2,‡ Zhuokai Zhao4 Jing Lin1,2
Xiaoke Jiang2 Jiamin Wu2,5 Zhuoheng Li6 Hao Frank Yang3 Haoqian Wang1† Lei Zhang2†
1

Tsinghua University

2

IDEA Research

3

Johns Hopkins University

4

University of Chicago

5

HKUST

6

HKU

{dsyuhong, guanlinwu0930, thu.lhchen}@gmail.com

Project page: https://zhangyuhong01.github.io/HumanMM

Figure 1. Recovering a human motion from multi-shot videos. Top: We take two multi-shot table tennis game videos with shot
transitions as input. We aim to recover two motions of two athletes (Long MA and Zhendong FAN) from two videos, respectively. The
ﬁrst video is recorded by three shots (“x”, “y”, and “z” ), and the second one is recovered by two shots (“{” and “|” ). Bottom: We
recover two motions (Long MA in green and Zhendong FAN in pink), different shots, and camera poses for each multi-shot video. The
recovered motion is aligned with the motion in the videos.

Abstract

methods primarily focus on single-shot videos, where continuity is maintained within a single camera view, or simplify
multi-shot alignment in camera space only. In this work, we
tackle the challenges by integrating an enhanced camera
pose estimation with Human Motion Recovery (HMR) by
incorporating a shot transition detector and a robust alignment module for accurate pose and orientation continuity
across shots. By leveraging a custom motion integrator, we
effectively mitigate the problem of foot sliding and ensure
temporal consistency in human pose. Extensive evaluations
on our created multi-shot dataset from public 3D human
datasets demonstrate the robustness of our method in reconstructing realistic human motion in world coordinates.

In this paper, we present a novel framework designed to
reconstruct long-sequence 3D human motion in the world
coordinates from in-the-wild videos with multiple shot transitions. Such long-sequence in-the-wild motions are highly
valuable to applications such as motion generation and motion understanding, but are of great challenge to be recovered due to abrupt shot transitions, partial occlusions, and
dynamic backgrounds presented in such videos. Existing
* Equal contribution, ‡ Core contributor, † Corresponding author. Work
done by Yuhong Zhang, Guanlin Wu, Ling-Hao Chen, Jing Lin and Jiamin
Wu during the internship at IDEA Research.

1973

