This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Optimus-2

: Multimodal Minecraft Agent with Goal-Observation-Action
Conditioned Policy

Zaijing Li1 2 , Yuquan Xie1 , Rui Shao1 *, Gongwei Chen1 , Dongmei Jiang2 , Liqiang Nie1 *
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{lzj14011,xieyuquan20016}@gmail.com, {shaorui,nieliqiang}@hit.edu.cn
https://cybertronagent.github.io/Optimus-2.github.io/

Abstract
Building an agent that can mimic human behavior patterns to accomplish various open-world tasks is a longterm goal. To enable agents to effectively learn behavioral patterns across diverse tasks, a key challenge lies
in modeling the intricate relationships among observations, actions, and language. To this end, we propose
Optimus-2, a novel Minecraft agent that incorporates a
Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLM) for highlevel planning, alongside a Goal-Observation-Action Conditioned Policy (GOAP) for low-level control. GOAP contains (1) an Action-guided Behavior Encoder that models
causal relationships between observations and actions at
each timestep, then dynamically interacts with the historical observation-action sequence, consolidating it into fixedlength behavior tokens, and (2) an MLLM that aligns behavior tokens with open-ended language instructions to predict actions auto-regressively. Moreover, we introduce a
high-quality Minecraft Goal-Observation-Action (MGOA)
dataset, which contains 25,000 videos across 8 atomic
tasks, providing about 30M goal-observation-action pairs.
The automated construction method, along with the MGOA
dataset, can contribute to the community’s efforts to train
Minecraft agents. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that Optimus-2 exhibits superior performance across
atomic tasks, long-horizon tasks, and open-ended instruction tasks in Minecraft. Please see the project page at
https://cybertronagent.github.io/Optimus-2.github.io/.

MLLM as Planner

Exsiting Goal-conditioned Policy
...
or
sub-goal: chop a tree

1. chop a tree
2. craft four planks
4. craft a wood sword

Goal-conditioned
Policy
Action

⊕
Vision
Encoder

Sub-goals

3. craft two sticks

Goal
Encoder

Transformer
XL

I need a
wooden
sword

Ours
sub-goal: chop a tree
Historical Sequence

History
Aggregator

Vision
Encoder
keyboard: W
mouse: [0.0, 1.0]

LLM

Causal
Perceiver

Action-guided Behavior Encoder

Figure 1. Left: General agent framework. Right: Comparison between existing goal-conditioned policies and ours. Existing
Transformer-XL-based policies [3, 24] exhibit limited natural language understanding capabilities and rely solely on combining implicit goal embeddings with visual embeddings as inputs. In contrast, our GOAP achieves superior action prediction by 1) employing an Action-guided behavior encoder to strengthen causal modeling between observations and actions, as well as to improve historical sequence modeling capabilities, and 2) leveraging MLLM
to enhance open-ended language comprehension.

open-world environment like Minecraft [19, 31], a prominent agent framework [23, 31, 40, 41] integrates a task
planner with a goal-conditioned policy. As illustrated in
Figure 1 (left), this framework first utilizes the task planner’s language comprehension and visual perception abilities to decompose complex task instructions into sequential
sub-goals. These sub-goals are then processed by a goalconditioned policy to generate actions.
Although existing agents [23, 31, 41] have made promising progress by using Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLM) [4, 36, 45] as planners, the current performance
bottleneck for agents lies in the improvement of the goal-

1. Introduction
Enabling agents to learn human behavioral patterns for
completing complex tasks in open-world environments, is
a long-standing goal in the field of artificial intelligence
[5, 22, 33, 44, 47]. To effectively handle diverse tasks in an
* Corresponding authors

9039

