This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DesignDiffusion: High-Quality Text-to-Design Image Generation
with Diffusion Models
Zhendong Wang1 , Jianmin Bao2,⇤,† , Shuyang Gu2 , Dong Chen2 , Wengang Zhou1,⇤ , Houqiang Li1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
⇤

†

corresponding author

project lead

Figure 1. Images generated by our DesignDiffusion model, which only requires a simple text prompt as input and can generate diverse,
high-quality design images with accurate textual and vivid visual content.

Abstract
In this paper, we present DesignDiffusion, a simple yet effective framework for the novel task of synthesizing design
images from textual descriptions. A primary challenge lies
in generating accurate and style-consistent textual and visual content. Existing works in a related task of visual text
generation often focus on generating text within given specific regions, which limits the creativity of generation models,
resulting in style or color inconsistencies between textual
and visual elements if applied to design image generation.
To address this issue, we propose an end-to-end, one-stage
diffusion-based framework that avoids intricate components
like position and layout modeling. Specifically, the proposed
framework directly synthesizes textual and visual design
elements from user prompts. It utilizes a distinctive character embedding derived from the visual text to enhance the
input prompt, along with a character localization loss for
enhanced supervision during text generation. Furthermore,
we employ a self-play Direct Preference Optimization fine-

tuning strategy to improve the quality and accuracy of the
synthesized visual text. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that DesignDiffusion achieves state-of-the-art performance
in design image generation.

1. Introduction
Design images play a pivotal role in various applications
such as graphic design, advertising, and scientific visualization, where the integration of visual and textual elements
must be flawless.
Recently many fascinating and wonderful applications,
such as art image creation or film production, have shown
remarkable progress due to the rapid advance of text-toimage generation techniques [37–40, 47]. Despite these advancements, the precise generation of design images poses a
distinct challenge, largely due to the limited capabilities of
existing image generation models in complex layout planning and visual text generation.
To address the critical issue of visual text generation, re-

20906

