This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FilmComposer: LLM-Driven Music Production for Silent Film Clips
Zhifeng Xie1,2 , Qile He1 , Youjia Zhu1 , Qiwei He1 , Mengtian Li1,2†
1
Shanghai University
2
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Motion Picture Special Effects
{zhifeng xie,shu hql,zyj028,heqiwei,mtli}@shu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we implement music production for silent film
clips using LLM-driven method. Given the strong professional demands of film music production, we propose the
FilmComposer, simulating the actual workflows of professional musicians. FilmComposer is the first to combine
large generative models with a multi-agent approach, leveraging the advantages of both waveform music and symbolic
music generation. Additionally, FilmComposer is the first
to focus on the three core elements of music production
for film—audio quality, musicality, and musical development—and introduces various controls, such as rhythm, semantics, and visuals, to enhance these key aspects. Specifically, FilmComposer consists of the visual processing module, rhythm-controllable MusicGen, and multi-agent assessment, arrangement and mix. In addition, our framework can seamlessly integrate into the actual music production pipeline and allows user intervention in every step,
providing strong interactivity and a high degree of creative
freedom. Furthermore, we propose MusicPro-7k which includes 7,418 film clips, music, description, rhythm spots
and main melody, considering the lack of a professional and
high-quality film music dataset. Finally, both the standard
metrics and the new specialized metrics we propose demonstrate that the music generated by our model achieves
state-of-the-art performance in terms of quality, consistency
with video, diversity, musicality, and musical development.
Project page: https://apple- jun.github.io/
FilmComposer.github.io/

Figure 1. A schematic of our work. The left column illustrates
the actual steps taken by human musicians in music production,
while the middle column represents the corresponding simulated
blocks in the FilmComposer. The inputs and outputs at each stage
are depicted on the right, visually demonstrating how film clips are
gradually transformed into the final music.

1. Introduction

experts in producing music more efficiently, while also enabling non-experts to create high-quality music with ease.
The challenge of AI music production lies in meeting
the high standards of quality, musicality, and development.
Typical music for film demands at least a 48kHz sampling
rate and 24-bit depth, which current models are still far
away from. It requires not only technical excellence but
also heightened musicality, encompassing both expression
and aesthetics. The most overlooked one, Musical development, refers to the evolution of themes and motifs over
time, greatly contributing to audio-visual consistency.
Previous work focused on optimizing audio token compression to improve music quality. However, even the most
advanced token interleaving patterns [7] and stable audio
techniques [11] fail to meet the required standard. Since the
introduction of MusicLM [2], large language models have
gained significant attention, notably improving musicality.
Following the open-sourcing of Meta’s MusicGen [7], large
language models have been widely integrated into various
frameworks [21, 26]. While musicality has improved, control remains limited. Some research has explored adding
conditions, such as rhythm [9, 21, 24, 45], timing [11], and
melody [7, 21]. Yet, these methods tend to either compro-

The music in films can enhance visual content, guide emotions, and support narrative flow. However, manual music
production is time-consuming and requires specialized expertise. Therefore, developing a fast, effective and userfriendly AI approach for film music production would assist
† Corresponding author.

13519

