This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards High-fidelity 3D Talking Avatar with Personalized Dynamic Texture
Xuanchen Li1
1

Jianyu Wang1
Wenhan Zhu2

Yuhao Cheng1
Weiming Zhao3

Yikun Zeng1
Xingyu Ren1
Yichao Yan1†

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Xueshen AI 3 Student Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

{lixc6486, chengyuhao, yi1k-z, rxy sjtu, weiming.zhao, yanyichao}@sjtu.edu.cn
ppjiong11@alumni.sjtu.edu.cn, whzhu@foxmail.com

Figure 1. We present TexTalk4D, a high-precision 4D audio-mesh-texture-aligned dataset consisting of 100 minutes of scan-level meshes
with detailed 8K textures. Based on the dataset, we present TexTalker to generate geometry and aligned dynamic textures from speech
simultaneously, advancing towards highly personalized textured facial animation.

Abstract

generate audio-synced facial motion with dynamic texture,
not only outperforms the prior arts in synthesising facial
motions, but also produces realistic textures that are consistent with the underlying facial movements. Project page:
https://xuanchenli.github.io/TexTalk/.

Significant progress has been made for speech-driven 3D
face animation, but most works focus on learning the motion of mesh/geometry, ignoring the impact of dynamic texture. In this work, we reveal that dynamic texture plays a
key role in rendering high-fidelity talking avatars, and introduce a high-resolution 4D dataset TexTalk4D, consisting
of 100 minutes of audio-synced scan-level meshes with detailed 8K dynamic textures from 100 subjects. Based on the
dataset, we explore the inherent correlation between motion and texture, and propose a diffusion-based framework
TexTalker to simultaneously generate facial motions and
dynamic textures from speech. Furthermore, we propose
a novel pivot-based style injection strategy to capture the
complicity of different texture and motion styles, which allows disentangled control. TexTalker, as the first method to

1. Introduction
Audio-driven 3D facial animation has been widely applied
in entertainment media, such as movies and games, to generate vivid speech-aligned facial animation. The research in
previous decades [10, 18, 31, 48, 52, 53, 65] has focused on
learning the correspondence between phonemes and facial
motions while neglecting the impact of dynamic textures,
greatly reducing the realism of the rendering results. The
industrial pipeline usually customizes compress and stretch
maps manually created by professional artists to achieve dy† Corresponding author

204

