This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Less is More: Efficient Image Vectorization with Adaptive Parameterization
Kaibo Zhao1 ,
1

(a) Raster Image

Liang Bao1 ,

Yufei Li1 ,

Xu Su1 ,

Ke Zhang1 ,

Xiaotian Qiao1,2 *

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, China
2
Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University, China

(b) O&R [12]

(c) SGLIVE [40]

(d) Ours

(e) Image Editing

Figure 1. Given a raster image as input (a), typical image vectorization methods, i.e., O&R [12] (b) and SGLIVE [40] (c), mainly rely
on preset parameters (i.e., a fixed number of paths and control points), and fail to produce pleasant results when the image structure is
complex. In contrast, our method (d) can perform well with an adaptive number of paths and control point parameters based on the input
image complexity, resulting in fast computation speed, high vectorization accuracy, and flexible editing applications (e), e.g., image color
adjustment, object animation, and icon customization.

Abstract
Image vectorization aims to convert raster images to vector ones, allowing for easy scaling and editing. Existing
works mainly rely on preset parameters (i.e., a fixed number of paths and control points), ignoring the complexity
of the image and posing significant challenges to practical
applications. We demonstrate that such an assumption is
often incorrect, as the preset paths or control points may
be neither essential nor enough to achieve accurate and editable vectorization results. Based on this key insight, in this
paper, we propose AdaVec, an efficient image vectorization
method with adaptive parametrization, where the paths and
control points can be adjusted dynamically based on the
complexity of the input raster image. In particular, we first
decompose the input raster image into a set of pure-colored
layers that are aligned with human perception. For each
layer with varying shape complexity, we propose a novel allocation mechanism to adaptively adjust the control point
distribution. We further adopt a differentiable rendering

process to compose and optimize the shape and color parameters of each layer iteratively. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that AdaVec outperforms the baselines qualitatively and quantitatively, in terms of computational efficiency, vectorization accuracy, and editing flexibility.

1. Introduction
Vector graphics [25] belong to a typical image format that
uses primitive parameters like paths and control points, enabling visual content to be scaled and resized without quality loss. Compared to raster images with structured bitmap
format, the efficiency of vector graphics in transmitting and
storing information makes them popular for various applications. However, automatic high-quality vector graphics
creation is still non-trivial, as it requires professional expertise and could be time-consuming.
Image vectorization, the procedure of converting a raster

18166

Xiaotian Qiao is the corresponding author.

