This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scene4U: Hierarchical Layered 3D Scene Reconstruction from
Single Panoramic Image for Your Immerse Exploration
Zilong Huang1

Jun He1
1

Junyan Ye1,2

Lihan Jiang2, 3

Weijia Li1

Yiping Chen1 †

Ting Han1 †

Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
3
University of Science and Technology of China

Figure 1. Overview of Scene4U. Scene4U is an unobstructed 3D scene construction framework based on single-view panoramas. By
inputting a real panoramic image, Scene4U reconstructs a 3D scene free from dynamic objects such as pedestrians and vehicles, supporting
unrestricted navigation.

Abstract
The reconstruction of immersive and realistic 3D scenes
holds significant practical importance in various fields of
computer vision and computer graphics. Typically, immersive and realistic scenes should be free from obstructions by dynamic objects, maintain global texture consistency, and allow for unrestricted exploration. The current
mainstream methods for image-driven scene construction
involves iteratively refining the initial image using a moving
virtual camera to generate the scene. However, previous
methods struggle with visual discontinuities due to global
texture inconsistencies under varying camera poses, and
they frequently exhibit scene voids caused by foregroundbackground occlusions. To this end, we propose a novel layered 3D scene reconstruction framework from panoramic
image, named Scene4U. Specifically, Scene4U integrates
an open-vocabulary segmentation model with a large language model to decompose a real panorama into multiple
layers. Then, we employs a layered repair module based
on diffusion model to restore occluded regions using visual

cues and depth information, generating a hierarchical representation of the scene. The multi-layer panorama is then
initialized as a 3D Gaussian Splatting representation, followed by layered optimization, which ultimately produces
an immersive 3D scene with semantic and structural consistency that supports free exploration. Scene4U outperforms
state-of-the-art method, improving by 24.24% in LPIPS and
24.40% in BRISQUE, while also achieving the fastest training speed. Additionally, to demonstrate the robustness of
Scene4U and allow users to experience immersive scenes
from various landmarks, we build WorldVista3D dataset for
3D scene reconstruction, which contains panoramic images
of globally renowned sites. The implementation code and
dataset will be made publicly available.

1. Introduction

26723

The rapid development of virtual reality technology has
opened up new possibilities to create immersive and realistic experiences. With virtual reality headsets, users can
enjoy the breathtaking landscapes and unique cultures of

