This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MotionPro: A Precise Motion Controller for Image-to-Video Generation*
Zhongwei Zhang1 , Fuchen Long2 , Zhaofan Qiu2 , Yingwei Pan2†, Wu Liu1†, Ting Yao2 , and Tao Mei2
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 HiDream.ai Inc.
zhwzhang@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {longfuchen, qiuzhaofan, pandy}@hidream.ai
liuwu@live.cn, {tiyao, tmei}@hidream.ai

Abstract

Generated Video

Animating images with interactive motion control has garnered popularity for image-to-video (I2V) generation. Modern approaches typically rely on large Gaussian kernels to
extend motion trajectories as condition without explicitly
defining movement region, leading to coarse motion control and failing to disentangle object and camera moving.
To alleviate these, we present MotionPro, a precise motion
controller that novelly leverages region-wise trajectory and
motion mask to regulate fine-grained motion synthesis and
identify target motion category (i.e., object or camera moving), respectively. Technically, MotionPro first estimates
the flow maps on each training video via a tracking model,
and then samples the region-wise trajectories to simulate
inference scenario. Instead of extending flow through large
Gaussian kernels, our region-wise trajectory approach enables more precise control by directly utilizing trajectories
within local regions, thereby effectively characterizing finegrained movements. A motion mask is simultaneously derived from the predicted flow maps to capture the holistic
motion dynamics of the movement regions. To pursue natural motion control, MotionPro further strengthens video denoising by incorporating both region-wise trajectories and
motion mask through feature modulation. More remarkably,
we meticulously construct a benchmark, i.e., MC-Bench,
with 1.1K user-annotated image-trajectory pairs, for the
evaluation of both fine-grained and object-level I2V motion
control. Extensive experiments conducted on WebVid-10M
and MC-Bench demonstrate the effectiveness of MotionPro.
Please refer to our project page for more results: https:
//zhw-zhang.github.io/MotionPro-page/.

MotionPro Typicality

Input Control

MotionPro Typicality

(a) Fine‐grained motion control

(b) Object‐level motion control

Figure 1. An illustration of (a) fine-grained and (b) object-level
motion control by using typical Gaussian filtered trajectory and
our MotionPro. The flow of generated videos are also visualized.

1. Introduction

progress in revolutionizing text-to-video (T2V) generation.
Although promising visual appearance can be attained by
these advances, the controllable motion generation is still a
grand challenge in video diffusion paradigm. There are several attempts [12, 26, 47, 59] to enhance controllable capacity of video synthesis with additional guidance (e.g., depth,
edge or optical flow). Nevertheless, it might be impractical for users to conveniently provide such signals as input
conditions. Hence, the focus of this paper is to capitalize
on the user-friendly conditions (i.e., sparse trajectory and
region mask) for enabling interactively controllable imageto-video (I2V) generation: given the reference image as the
first frame, the motion in the synthesized video should be
natural and well-aligned with the provided trajectory.
Pioneering practices [50, 55] of controllable I2V generation usually guide video denoising with the single condition of Gaussian filtered trajectory. In the training stage,
the input trajectories are first sparsely sampled from the
optical flow maps and then processed by a Gaussian filter
with large kernel to mitigate pixel-level trajectory instability
(e.g., 99 in DragNUWA [55]). The flow extension brought
by Gaussian filtering inevitably results in the inaccuracy

In recent years, diffusion models [8, 11, 15–17, 19–21,
27, 28, 36, 37, 41, 44, 45, 52, 60] have shown significant
* This work was performed at HiDream.ai.
† Co-corresponding author.

27957

