This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffLO: Semantic-Aware LiDAR Odometry with Diffusion-Based Refinement
Yongshu Huang1,2 * Chen Liu1,2 * Minghang Zhu1,2 Sheng Ao1,2† Chenglu Wen1,2 Cheng Wang1,2†
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University, China.
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China.

(b) Ours

(a) Previous

LiDAR odometry is a critical module in autonomous
driving systems, responsible for accurate localization by
estimating the relative pose transformation between consecutive point cloud frames. However, existing studies frequently encounter challenges with unreliable pose estimation, due to the lack of in-depth understanding of scenario
and the presence of noise interference. To address this challenge, we propose DiffLO, a semantic-aware LiDAR odometry network with diffusion-based refinement. To mitigate
the impact of challenging cases such as dynamic, repetitive patterns, and low textures, we introduce a semantic distillation method that integrates semantic information
into the odometry task. This allows the network to gain
a semantic understanding of the scene, enabling it to focus more on the objects that are beneficial for pose estimation. Additionally, to enhance the robustness, we propose a diffusion-based refinement method. This method
uses pose-related features as conditional constraints for
generative diversity, iteratively refining the pose estimation to achieve greater accuracy. Comparative experiments
on the KITTI odometry dataset demonstrate that the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance among
existing learning-based approaches. Furthermore, the proposed DiffLO method outperforms the classic A-LOAM on
most evaluation sequences. The code will be released at
https://github.com/HyTree7/DiffLO.

Encoder

Encoder

Correlation
MLP
MLP

Encoder

Encoder

Correlation

Diffusion Model

Knowledge
Distillation

Abstract

MLP
6-DoF pose

6-DoF pose

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (a) Predicts a coarse initial pose and applies iterative
MLP-based refinement to refine the initial estimate. (b) Predicts
a coarse initial pose and applies iterative Diffusion-based refinement, incorporating knowledge distillation to enable semantic understanding. Here, T̂k represents the noisy pose of the kth denoising step.

LiDAR odometry (LO) is a well-studied problem in computer vision with numerous applications in Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [58], autonomous driving [54], and robotics [45]. The primary objective is to estimate the relative transformation between two frames based
on the source and target point clouds.
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding Author.

17050

Most classic geometry-based methods, such as Iterative
Closest Point (ICP) [4], its variants [31] and others [35],
work by iteratively minimizing the distance between corresponding points in two point clouds to achieve accurate
alignment. However, they often struggle in sparse point
cloud environments, complex dynamic scenes, or when the
quality of the point cloud degrades [13, 27, 42]. This limitation arises due to their reliance on precise geometric correspondences.
Deep learning-based methods have garnered significant
attention in recent years. These methods learn feature representations from large-scale data to infer relative transformation between frames in an end-to-end manner, providing
better scalability and the potential for multi-task learning.
However, the accuracy of deep learning methods still lags
behind traditional odometry techniques.
We identify the following challenges faced by Deep
Learning-based odometry methods: (1) To mitigate the effects of challenging cases such as dynamic objects and oc-

