This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Comprehensive Relighting:
Generalizable and Consistent Monocular Human Relighting and Harmonization
Junying Wang1†
Jingyuan Liu2
Xin Sun2
Krishna Kumar Singh2
Zhixin Shu2
2
3
2
2
He Zhang
Jimei Yang
Nanxuan Zhao
Tuanfeng Y. Wang
Simon S. Chen2
Ulrich Neumann1
Jae Shin Yoon2
1

Input video frames

2

University of Southern California

Relighting

Harmonization

Adobe Research

Relighting + Harmonization Input video frames

Relighting

3

Runway

Harmonization

Relighting + Harmonization

Figure 1. We introduce Comprehensive Relighting, a generalizable and consistent model for relighting and harmonization, which controls
the lighting property from a single image or video of humans with arbitrary body parts. Given target lighting coefficients, e.g., Spherical
harmonics (second), background scenes (third), or their combination (fourth), our model performs consistent and harmonized relighting.

Abstract

serve the high-frequency details from the input image. In
the experiments, Comprehensive Relighting shows a strong
generalizability and lighting temporal coherence, outperforming existing image-based human relighting and harmonization methods.

This paper introduces Comprehensive Relighting, the first
all-in-one approach that can both control and harmonize
the lighting from an image or video of humans with arbitrary body parts from any scene. Building such a generalizable model is extremely challenging due to the lack of
dataset, restricting existing image-based relighting models
to a specific scenario (e.g., face or static human). To address this challenge, we repurpose a pre-trained diffusion
model as a general image prior and jointly model the human
relighting and background harmonization in the coarse-tofine framework. To further enhance the temporal coherence
of the relighting, we introduce an unsupervised temporal
lighting model that learns the lighting cycle consistency
from many real-world videos without any ground truth. In
inference time, our temporal lighting module is combined
with the diffusion models through the spatio-temporal feature blending algorithms without extra training; and we apply a new guided refinement as a post-processing to pre-

1. Introduction
Light is the key component that determines how a person
looks, which is often defined by a specific time and space,
where revisiting such a unique moment gives us the opportunity to experience authentic telepresence sensations.
In this paper, we introduce a generalizable human relighting model that can control the lighting from an image or
video of humans with arbitrary body parts (Fig. 3), which
are well-harmonized with a conditioning space (i.e., background image) as shown in Fig. 1.
As shown in Fig. 2, existing image-based relighting
methods face two main problems, lack of generalizability and controllability. First, they are designed for a specific scenario, e.g., only for face illumination or static humans [33, 61, 68] mainly due to the scarcity of large-scale

1† This work is partially done during an internship at Adobe Research.

380

