This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EnvPoser: Environment-aware Realistic Human Motion Estimation from Sparse
Observations with Uncertainty Modeling
Yu Zhang 1 Zhuo Su2 * Xiaozheng Zheng2 Zheng Lv2 Guidong Wang2
z 3
Yongjie Zhang2 Qi Wu1,2 Lei Chu
Ling Pei1 †
y
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 ByteDance 3 University
of Southern California

Songpengcheng Xia1

x

Abstract
Estimating full-body motion using the tracking signals
of head and hands from VR devices holds great potential
for various applications. However, the sparsity and unique
distribution of observations present a significant challenge,
resulting in an ill-posed problem with multiple feasible solutions (i.e., hypotheses). This amplifies uncertainty and
ambiguity in full-body motion estimation, especially for the
lower-body joints. Therefore, we propose a new method,
EnvPoser, that employs a two-stage framework to perform full-body motion estimation using sparse tracking signals and pre-scanned environment from VR devices. EnvPoser models the multi-hypothesis nature of human motion
through an uncertainty-aware estimation module in the first
stage. In the second stage, we refine these multi-hypothesis
estimates by integrating semantic and geometric environmental constraints, ensuring that the final motion estimation aligns realistically with both the environmental context and physical interactions. Qualitative and quantitative
experiments on two public datasets demonstrate that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance, highlighting significant improvements in human motion estimation
within motion-environment interaction scenarios. Project
page: https://xspc.github.io/EnvPoser/.

1. Introduction
In recent years, motion capture algorithms using sparse
tracking signals have achieved significant progress across
various research fields, establishing themselves as essential
technologies for applications such as motion-sensing games
and immersive VR/AR experiences [13, 18, 42, 49]. With
the rapid development of VR devices, full-body motion estimation algorithms based on head-mounted display (HMD)
have shown great application potential. However, devices
* Project Lead
† Corresponding Author

This work was supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of
China (NSFC) under Grant 62273229.

Environment Pre-Scanned
in VRzDevice Initialization Phase
z
y
x

y
x

Pre-Scanned
Environment Mesh

Motion Estimation with Three Tracking Signals

Figure 1. EnvPoser can estimate the full-body motion using three
tracking signals (HMD and hand controllers) and a pre-scanned
environment mesh.

like PICO and Quest typically provide sparse tracking signals of the head and hands, presenting challenges in estimating the full-body motion from these limited observations.
Current sparse-observation-based human motion estimation methods typically rely on large-scale motion capture datasets, such as AMASS [28], to capture full-body
motion through regression [14, 55] or generative models [2, 6, 8]. Alternatively, physics engines and reinforcement learning have been used [39] to synthesize full-body
motion, bypassing dataset dependency. Utilizing various
advanced architectures or large-scale datasets, these methods [2, 6, 8, 39, 55] attempt to model the mapping from
sparse tracking signals to the most probable full-body motion. However, the lack of direct joint observations results in
the same sparse input often corresponding to multiple plausible motions, making it a challenge for sparse-observation-

1839

