This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Jailbreaking the Non-Transferable Barrier via Test-Time Data Disguising
Yongli Xiang1 , Ziming Hong1† , Lina Yao2,3 , Dadong Wang2 , Tongliang Liu1†
1
Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney
2
3
Data61, CSIRO
The University of New South Wales
Abstract
Non-transferable learning (NTL) has been proposed to protect model intellectual property (IP) by creating a “nontransferable barrier” to restrict generalization from authorized to unauthorized domains. Recently, well-designed attack, which restores the unauthorized-domain performance
by fine-tuning NTL models on few authorized samples, highlights the security risks of NTL-based applications. However, such attack requires modifying model weights, thus
being invalid in the black-box scenario. This raises a critical question: can we trust the security of NTL models
deployed as black-box systems? In this work, we reveal
the first loophole of black-box NTL models by proposing
a novel attack method (dubbed as JailNTL) to jailbreak
the non-transferable barrier through test-time data disguising. The main idea of JailNTL is to disguise unauthorized data so it can be identified as authorized by the NTL
model, thereby bypassing the non-transferable barrier without modifying the NTL model weights. Specifically, JailNTL
encourages unauthorized-domain disguising in two levels,
including: (i) data-intrinsic disguising (DID) for eliminating domain discrepancy and preserving class-related content at the input-level, and (ii) model-guided disguising
(MGD) for mitigating output-level statistics difference of
the NTL model. Empirically, when attacking state-of-theart (SOTA) NTL models in the black-box scenario, JailNTL achieves an accuracy increase of up to 55.7% in the
unauthorized domain by using only 1% authorized samples,
largely exceeding existing SOTA white-box attacks. Code is
released at https://github.com/tmllab/2025_
CVPR_JailNTL.

sources while leading to high business value [11] for model
owners. Therefore, it is crucial to protect these models’ intellectual property (IP) [6, 58, 59].
Recently, Non-Transferable Learning (NTL) [52] has
emerged as a promising approach for IP protection. As
illustrated in Fig. 1(a), NTL aims to establish a “nontransferable barrier” [17, 19, 53] to restrict the model’s
generalization from an authorized domain to an unauthorized domain1 . In this way, NTL can protect model IP
by preventing unauthorized usage, such as applications on
illegal data or in unapproved environments. Intuitively,
existing methods [18, 40, 51–53, 57] create the “nontransferable barrier” by imposing a regularization term on
the vanilla supervised-learning framework to enlarge the
discrepancy between authorized and unauthorized feature
representations. These methods could effectively degrade
the model’s performance on the unauthorized domain while
maintaining its normal utility on the authorized domain.
Despite NTL’s effectiveness in protecting model IP, a recent research TransNTL [17] has uncovered its vulnerabilities to authorized-domain fine-tuning attack on white-box
scenarios. As illustrated in Fig. 1(b), TransNTL demonstrated that the non-transferable barrier could be broken
by fine-tuning the NTL model with few perturbed samples
in the authorized domain. By doing so, any authorized
user who access to both the model and authorized data can
easily crack the NTL model’s restriction on unauthorized
domains. However, the effectiveness of such authorizeddomain fine-tuning attacks heavily depends on having permission to modify the model weights, which is increasingly
rare as many model owners privatize their model structure
and weights and only release online application programming interface (API) [21, 35, 54]. That is, the NTL models
are black-box models to any users, essentially eliminating
the risk against fine-tuning-based attacks. Thus, an intriguing question arises: Can we totally trust the robustness of
NTL models in black-box scenarios?

1. Introduction
Nowadays, Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) [42]
is widely utilized in various scenarios [3, 31, 43, 46]. The
well-trained deep learning models are the core of MLaaS,
which requires vast high-quality data [5], expensive hardware resources [39], and significant time and human re-

1 The two domains are assumed to contain the same content [52] (the

object related to class label), but different environment factors (such as
the collected environments [23, 25, 41, 60] or watermark [58]) cause their
domain distribution discrepancy. Examples are shown in Appendix B.

† Correspondence to Tongliang Liu (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au) and

Ziming Hong (hoongzm@gmail.com).

30671

