This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Track Any Anomalous Object: A Granular Video Anomaly Detection Pipeline
†

Yuzhi Huang1∗ , Chenxin Li2∗ , Haitao Zhang1 , Zixu Lin1 , Yunlong Lin1 ,
†
Hengyu Liu2 , Wuyang Li2 , Xinyu Liu2 , Jiechao Gao3 , Yue Huang1 , Xinghao Ding1 and Yixuan Yuan2
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficien Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 The University of Virginia

VAD Models

Abstract

Frame-level： AnomalyRuler,
VideoPatchCore, MULDE

Video anomaly detection (VAD) is crucial in scenarios such
as surveillance and autonomous driving, where timely detection of unexpected activities is essential. Albeit existing
methods have primarily focused on detecting anomalous
objects in videos—either by identifying anomalous frames
or objects—they often neglect finer-grained analysis, such
as anomalous pixels, which limits their ability to capture
a broader range of anomalies. To address this challenge,
we propose an innovative VAD framework called Track
Any Anomalous Object (TAO), which introduces a Granular
Video Anomaly Detection Framework that, for the first time,
integrates the detection of multiple fine-grained anomalous
objects into a unified framework. Unlike methods that assign anomaly scores to every pixel at each moment, our approach transforms the problem into pixel-level tracking of
anomalous objects. By linking anomaly scores to subsequent tasks such as image segmentation and video tracking,
our method eliminates the need for threshold selection and
achieves more precise anomaly localization, even in long
and challenging video sequences. Experiments on extensive datasets demonstrate that TAO achieves state-of-theart performance, setting a new progress for VAD by providing a practical, granular, and holistic solution. For more information, visit the project page at: https://tao-25.github.io/

Object-level：SSMTL, HF2VAD,
AIVAD, STPT, SS-VAD

Anomaly Detection in a Video by
Different Fine-grained Levels

Abnormal

Frame-level Anomaly

Object-level Anomaly

Pixel-level Anomaly

Figure 1. Analyzing the Limitations of Existing VAD Models.
Video anomaly detection (VAD) models are predominantly framecentric or object-centric. Frame-centric methods detect anomalies
in frames without localizing them, while object-centric methods
identify anomalous objects but lack pixel-level accuracy. Pixelcentric models address these gaps by providing pixel-level localization, delivering fine-grained segmentation and precise delineation of anomalies, particularly for overlapping objects where traditional methods struggle.

are reflected in both methodologies and evaluation benchmarks. Frame-centric methods [1, 2, 11, 32, 34, 39, 44, 57]
and their corresponding frame-level benchmarks [18, 36,
49, 57] focus on analyzing entire frames to detect global
anomalies (e.g., fires or smoke), typically evaluated using frame-level AUC metrics. In contrast, object-centric
methods [3, 8–10, 19, 38, 41, 43, 48] and their objectlevel benchmarks [10, 19, 40] leverage pre-trained feature
extractors to detect object-specific anomalies (e.g., human
falls or vehicle accidents), evaluated using metrics such as
TBDC [40] and RBDC [40], which comprehensively measure temporal consistency and spatial localization precision.
Despite these advances, a critical gap remains in realworld applications of VAD where fine-grained localization
of anomalous objects is essential. As illustrated in Fig. 1,

1. Introduction
Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) involves identifying unusual or unexpected activities in surveillance videos and
has significant applications in areas such as security monitoring (e.g., detecting violent behavior) and autonomous
driving (e.g., recognizing traffic accidents). Current VAD
research has developed along two main directions, which
∗ Equal contribution

Pixel-level：Our Method

† Corresponding author

8689

