This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MM-OR: A Large Multimodal Operating Room Dataset
for Semantic Understanding of High-Intensity Surgical Environments
Ege Özsoy1,2 Chantal Pellegrini1,2 Tobias Czempiel1 Felix Tristram1,2 Kun Yuan1,2
David Bani-Harouni1,2 Ulrich Eck1 Benjamin Busam1,2 Matthias Keicher1,2 Nassir Navab1,2
1

Technical University of Munich

2

Munich Center for Machine Learning

ege.oezsoy@tum.de

Point Cloud

Multiview RGB-D Video (5 cameras)

Robot Screen, Tracker Data and Logs

Detail RGB Videos (3 cameras)

Tracker data:
timestamp: 4405
tools:
base_array:
Translation: [230.7,-155.8,1556.7], Rotation: [65.5,-33.3,71.1]
button_state: 0
Robot Log: “Pedal Press Down”

Low Exposure RGB Video Sound

Panoptic Segmentations

Scene Graphs
holding head surgeon

saw

lating
manipu
sawin
g
lying on

clo
se
to
preparing

nurse

- 1 sec. sawing sound

- “Make sure the hammer
is ready.”

instrument table

mps

robot
patient

operating table

Downstream Tasks

Robot Phase: Robot Preparation Complete

Next Action: Hammering

Sterility Breach: No

Figure 1. Overview of a single timepoint in MM-OR, illustrating the multimodal data provided for each sample: RGB-D video from multiple angles, detailed RGB views, low-exposure video, point cloud data, robot screen and tracker logs, audio and speech transcripts, panoptic
segmentations, semantic scene graphs, and downstream task annotations such as robot phase, next action, and sterility breach status.

Abstract
Operating rooms (ORs) are complex, high-stakes environments requiring precise understanding of interactions
among medical staff, tools, and equipment for enhancing surgical assistance, situational awareness, and patient
safety. Current datasets fall short in scale, realism and
do not capture the multimodal nature of OR scenes, limiting progress in OR modeling. To this end, we introduce
MM-OR, a realistic and large-scale multimodal spatiotemporal OR dataset, and the first dataset to enable multimodal scene graph generation. MM-OR captures comprehensive OR scenes containing RGB-D data, detail views,
audio, speech transcripts, robotic logs, and tracking data
and is annotated with panoptic segmentations, semantic
scene graphs, and downstream task labels. Further, we propose MM2SG, the first multimodal large vision-language

model for scene graph generation, and through extensive
experiments, demonstrate its ability to effectively leverage
multimodal inputs. Together, MM-OR and MM2SG establish a new benchmark for holistic OR understanding, and
open the path towards multimodal scene analysis in complex, high-stakes environments. Our code, and data is available at https://github.com/egeozsoy/MM-OR.

1. Introduction

19378

The operating room (OR) is one of the most complex and
high-stakes environments needing accurate scene understanding [24, 33]. However, the OR domain poses unique
challenges due to the lack of public operating room datasets,
capturing the distinct visual patterns, specialized surgical
tools and equipment, environment, dynamic surgical ac-

