This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AdaMMS: Model Merging for Heterogeneous Multimodal Large Language
Models with Unsupervised Coefficient Optimization
Yiyang Du*,1 , Xiaochen Wang*,3,4 , Chi Chen*,1 , Jiabo Ye5 , Yiru Wang8 ,
Peng Li
, Ming Yan5 , Ji Zhang5 , Fei Huang5 , Zhifang Sui3 , Maosong Sun1 , Yang LiuB,1,2,6,7
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
School of Software Microelectronics, Peking University, Beijing, China
5
Institute of Intelligent Computing, Alibaba Group
6
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
7
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Competence, Jiangsu, China
8
ModelTC Open Source Organization, Beijing, China
B,2,6

Abstract

1. Introduction
Model merging [10] has gained increasing popularity in the
field of large language models (LLMs) [10, 26, 29, 32].
This approach typically involves combining the parameters of two models with the same architecture, creating a
new model without requiring additional training [10]. It
has proven to be an efficient method for developing models that integrate the abilities of multiple existing models [26, 29, 32], avoiding the need for extensive data and
computational resources, and has been widely adopted in
building powerful LLMs [4, 6].
Despite its popularity with LLMs, model merging has
yet to be widely adopted for multimodal large language
models (MLLMs). Some recent studies have explored the
application of model merging to MLLMs [1, 19] but either
prioritize extending multimodal capabilities over enhancing
the performance of existing models [1] or still require additional training after merging [19]. The primary obstacle
in applying model merging to MLLMs lies in the heterogeneous nature of these models [8, 12, 14, 24, 28]. This
heterogeneity arises from modifications to the transformer
architectures [21] within their language models [8, 28], as
well as differences in their choice of modality-specific encoders and tokenizers [8, 24]. Consequently, a significant
challenge in merging MLLMs is that the process cannot be
directly applied to models with different architectures, as
their weights are not isomorphic.
Recent efforts like FuseLLM [22] and FuseChat [23]
have explored fusing the capabilities of heterogeneous
LLMs by merging their generative distributions. Theoretically, these methods could also be applied to MLLMs.

Recently, model merging methods have demonstrated
powerful strengths in combining abilities on various tasks
from multiple Large Language Models (LLMs). While previous model merging methods mainly focus on merging homogeneous models with identical architecture, they meet
challenges when dealing with Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) with inherent heterogeneous property, including differences in model architecture and the asymmetry in the parameter space. In this work, we propose
AdaMMS1 , a novel model merging method tailored for heterogeneous MLLMs. Our method tackles the challenges in
three steps: mapping, merging and searching. Specifically,
we first design mapping function between models to apply
model merging on MLLMs with different architecture. Then
we apply linear interpolation on model weights to actively
adapt the asymmetry in the heterogeneous MLLMs. Finally in the hyper-parameter searching step, we propose an
unsupervised hyper-parameter selection method for model
merging. As the first model merging method capable of
merging heterogeneous MLLMs without labeled data, extensive experiments on various model combinations demonstrated that AdaMMS outperforms previous model merging
methods on various vision-language benchmarks.2

* Equal contribution.
B Corresponding authors:

Peng Li (lipeng@air.tsinghua.edu.cn) and
Yang Liu (liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn).
1 AdaMMS represents Adaptive Mapping, Merging, and Searching.
2 Code at https://github.com/THUNLP-MT/AdaMMS.

9413

