This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A3 : Few-shot Prompt Learning of Unlearnable Examples
with Cross-Modal Adversarial Feature Alignment
Xuan Wang*

Anhui Key Lab of CSSAE,
National University of Defense Technology
wangxuan21d@nudt.edu.cn

Tianrui Qin

OPPO Research Institute
qintianrui123@gmail.com

Xitong Gao* †

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS;
Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology
xt.gao@siat.ac.cn

Yu-liang Lu†

Anhui Key Lab of CSSAE,
National University of Defense Technology
publicLuYL@126.com

Abstract

Dongping Liao

State Key Lab of IoTSC, CIS Dept,
University of Macau
yb97428@um.edu.mo

Cheng-zhong Xu

State Key Lab of IoTSC, CIS Dept,
University of Macau
czxu@um.edu.mo

amples (UEs) [9, 11, 29, 36, 40]. — data modified with
imperceptible perturbations that prevent machine learning
models from effectively learning and generalizing from it,
while preserving its utility for human observers. Unlike traditional data poisoning attacks intended for malicious use,
UEs serve content creators by providing a way to inhibit
unauthorized model training. Beyond this, UEs can also
be used to shed light on vulnerabilities and learning preferences [36] of deep learning models, and prevent unlawful
use of personal features [24]. However, existing UE methods
are primarily designed for models trained from scratch, and
make strong assumptions where all or a large proportion
of training data is used unknowingly by unauthorized trainers. These assumptions may not hold in the wilderness, for
several reasons: (a) Creators may release limited data. (b)
Unauthorized trainers may have limited exposure to the UEs:
they may curate their training data from various sources
and may only use a small fraction of the creator’s data. (c)
Trainers may leverage pretrained models to improve training
efficiency, and to generalize well to new classes and contexts.

In the age of pervasive machine learning applications, protecting digital content from unauthorized use has become
a pressing concern. Unlearnable examples (UEs)—data
modified with imperceptible perturbations to inhibit model
training while preserving human usability—have emerged
as a promising approach. However, existing UE methods assume unauthorized trainers have extensive exposure to UEs
or that models are trained from scratch, which may not hold
in practical scenarios, This paper investigates the effectiveness of UEs under the few-shot learning paradigm, pitching
it against prompt learning (PL) models that leverage pretrained vision-language models (VLMs), like CLIP, capable
of generalizing to new classes with minimal data. To address
this, we introduce an adaptive UE framework to generate
unlearnable examples that specifically target the PL process.
In addition, we propose a novel UE countermeasure, A3 , with
cross-modal adversarial feature alignment, specifically designed to circumvent UEs under few-shot PL. Experimental
evaluations on 7 datasets show that A3 outperforms existing
PL methods, achieving up to 33% higher performance in
learning from UEs. For example, in the scenario involving
ω→ -bounded EM perturbations, A3 has an average harmonic
mean accuracy across 7 datasets of 82.43%, compared to
CoCoOp’s baseline of 65.47%. Our findings highlight the
limitations of existing UEs against PL and lay the foundation
for future data protection mechanisms.

In this paper, we found that recent advances in prompt
learning (PL) with pretrained vision-language models
(VLMs) can indeed challenge the robustness of UEs. VLMs
use contrastive learning to align images and text features,
enabling strong zero-shot and downstream tasks [15, 30, 32,
35]. PL further adapts CLIP by fine-tuning prompts instead
of model weights, making it ideal for data-limited scenarios,
and novel tasks and classes. This paper thus investigates a
central question: Are UEs effective in protecting data against
PL-enabled models? This question has profound implications from both the content creator’s and the unauthorized
trainer’s perspectives.

1. Introduction
In the era of pervasive machine learning applications, protecting digital content from unauthorized use is an escalating
concern. An emerging solution involves unlearnable ex-

For content creators, understanding this question is crucial for several reasons: (a) To effectively prevent unauthorized usage, creators need to know the minimum amount of
modified data required to maintain protection. (b) Content

* Equal contribution.
† Correspondence to Xitong Gao and Yu-liang Lu.

9507

