This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SALAD: Skeleton-aware Latent Diffusion
for Text-driven Motion Generation and Editing
Seokhyeon Hong

Chaelin Kim

Serin Yoon Junghyun Nam
Visual Media Lab, KAIST

Sihun Cha

Junyong Noh

{ghd3079, chaelin.kim, serinyoon, ys4990, chacorp, junyongnoh}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

lationships between poses across frames, while neglecting
spatial interactions between skeletal joints. Furthermore,
these models often compress a sentence into a single vector
for conditioning, which can overlook the important nuances
of word-level variations. This over-simplification of interactions among skeletal, temporal, and textual components
may lead to missing details in the generated results, underscoring the need for models that faithfully capture these
complex dependencies.
On the other hand, learning meaningful representations
is a key factor to enable zero-shot downstream tasks with
pre-trained models. For example, zero-shot text-driven image and video editing methods [3, 7, 13, 15, 25, 35, 43]
leverage attention modulation from pre-trained models for
intuitive manipulation. Unfortunately, motion generation
models typically lack such interpretable and manipulatable
intermediate representations. This limitation stems from the
over-simplification of motion and text features mentioned
above, which restricts rich interactions between them. Although some methods exploit pre-trained models with manual masks, optimization, or fine-tuning [21–23, 42, 45, 47],
these methods require additional effort, time, and cost to
achieve desired results. Therefore, developing interpretable
representations during motion synthesis could improve versatility and flexibility for downstream tasks beyond generation, such as zero-shot motion editing.
In this paper, we propose a skeleton-aware latent
diffusion, which we call SALAD, for text-driven motion
generation within a skeleto-temporally structured latent
space. We first train a variational autoencoder (VAE) [24]
to construct a motion latent space that decouples spatial
and temporal dimensions. To this end, we employ skeletotemporal convolution layers to facilitate information exchange between adjacent joints and frames. We also employ
skeleto-temporal pooling layers to produce a compact representation by reducing the dimensionality, which can reduce
the computational complexity during the sampling process
of the diffusion model. Subsequently, we train a diffusion
model within this latent space to generate motion features
conditioned on text. To train the denoiser, we leverage both

Text-driven motion generation has advanced significantly
with the rise of denoising diffusion models. However, previous methods often oversimplify representations for the
skeletal joints, temporal frames, and textual words, limiting their ability to fully capture the information within each
modality and their interactions. Moreover, when using pretrained models for downstream tasks, such as editing, they
typically require additional efforts, including manual interventions, optimization, or fine-tuning. In this paper, we introduce a skeleton-aware latent diffusion (SALAD), a model
that explicitly captures the intricate inter-relationships between joints, frames, and words. Furthermore, by leveraging cross-attention maps produced during the generation
process, we enable attention-based zero-shot text-driven
motion editing using a pre-trained SALAD model, requiring
no additional user input beyond text prompts. Our approach
significantly outperforms previous methods in terms of textmotion alignment without compromising generation quality,
and demonstrates practical versatility by providing diverse
editing capabilities beyond generation. Code is available at
project page.

1. Introduction
Character animation is a crucial component in various computer graphics and vision applications, including games,
films, and interactive media. Traditional methods, such as
keyframing and motion capture, typically require extensive
manual effort, which are time-consuming and expensive.
Recently, deep generative models have been introduced to
mitigate these challenges. In particular, diffusion models
have shown promising results in text-to-motion generation,
enabling intuitive and efficient animation workflows.
Despite these advancements, fully capturing the intricate relationships among frames, body parts, and textual descriptions remains a complex challenge in text-driven motion generation. Previous approaches typically represent a
pose as a single vector and primarily focus on temporal re-

7158

