This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Chain of Semantics Programming in 3D Gaussian Splatting Representation for
3D Vision Grounding
Jiaxin Shi, Mingyue Xiang, Hao Sun, Yixuan Huang, Zhi Weng*
Inner Mongolia University
{0221121528, 0221122840, 0223121770, 0231122654}@mail.imu.edu.cn, wzhi@imu.edu.cn

Abstract

3D Scene Reconstruction
Utterance Semantics Parsing
Chain of Semantics

3D Vision Grounding (3DVG) is a fundamental research
area that enables agents to perceive and interact with the
3D world. The challenge of the 3DVG task lies in understanding fine-grained semantics and spatial relationships
within both the utterance and 3D scene. To address this
challenge, we propose a zero-shot neuro-symbolic framework that utilizes a large language model (LLM) as neurosymbolic functions to ground the object within the 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) representation. By utilizing 3DGS
representation, we can dynamically render high-quality 2D
images from various viewpoints to enrich the semantic information. Given the complexity of spatial relationships,
we construct a relationship graph and chain of semantics
that decouple spatial relationships and facilitate step-bystep reasoning within 3DGS representation. Additionally,
we employ a grounded-aware self-check mechanism to enable the LLM to reflect on its responses and mitigate the
effects of ambiguity in spatial reasoning. We evaluate our
method using two publicly available datasets, Nr3D and
Sr3D, achieving accuracies of 60.8% and 91.4%, respectively. Notably, our method surpasses current state-of-theart zero-shot methods on the Nr3D dataset. In addition,
it outperforms the recent supervised models on the Sr3D
dataset.

Relationship Graph
3D Point Cloud
& Cameras

Utterance: Choose the smaller
of the two cabinets that are
above the big cabinet. It has a
green note attached to it.

Target ID

3D Gaussian Splatting
Representation

Interact &
Retrieval

Programming

Self-Check

Executor

Chain of Semantics Programming
w. grounded-aware self-check

Figure 1. Our proposed zero-shot framework enables interaction
and retrieval within a 3D Gaussian Splatting representation to obtain fine-grained semantics and supports multi-step spatial reasoning.

1. Introduction

Some prior works have explored the introduction of 2D
information to gain extra semantics [4, 36, 39–41]. While
these methods demonstrate strong performance, they often rely on generating synthetic 2D images from the point
cloud, using real 2D images, or mapping 3D information
onto 2D space. The acquisition of real 2D images is limited, particularly from free-viewpoint perspectives, complicating the alignment with 3D semantics referenced in utterances [13, 14, 39]. Furthermore, the quality of 2D images
derived from point clouds is frequently low or incomplete,
hindering the extraction of clean, fine-grained semantics in
diverse scenes and also limiting the reasoning of spatial relationships. Additionally, recent research aims to use pretrained foundation models, such as large language models
(LLMs) [18] and vision-language models (VLMs) [21, 22],
for understanding utterance, reasoning spatial relationships,
and facilitating zero-shot object grounding [36, 40]. While
these foundational models possess strong capabilities, they
often simplify complex 3D spatial relationships into basic
binary relationships and multiple relationships, such as the
distance between two chairs, the bed being to the left of the
sofa, and the table positioned between the sofa and the bed
[15, 16]. They only focused on object-centered relationships, overlooking the connections between relationships
and the conditionality of those relationships. For example,

3D Vision Grounding (3DVG) has been widely applied in
virtual reality (VR), the metaverse, and autonomous driving [25]. As a fundamental task of understanding spatial
relationships in 3D scenes and aligning them with human
natural language, it has recently received significant attention [24]. Since the representation of the 3D scene is often
based on the point cloud, which is semantically sparse and
subject to noise interference, the 3DVG task faces two main
challenges: acquiring fine-grained semantics and reasoning
about complex spatial relationships.

24560

