This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Adaptive Filtering Network for Text Image
Specular Highlight Removal
Zhi Jiang1 Jingbo Hu1 Ling Zhang2 Gang Fu3 Chunxia Xiao1 *
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, China
3
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
zzz1203685136@whu.edu.cn, zhling@wust.edu.cn, gangfu@polyu.edu.hk, cxxiao@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite significant advances in the field of specular highlight removal in recent years, existing methods predominantly focus on natural images, where highlights typically
appear on raised or edged surfaces of objects. These highlights are often small and sparsely distributed. However, for
text images such as cards and posters, the flat surfaces reflect light uniformly, resulting in large areas of highlights.
Current methods struggle with these large-area highlights
in text images, often producing severe visual artifacts or noticeable discrepancies between filled pixels and the original
image in the central high-intensity highlight areas. To address these challenges, we propose the Hierarchical Adaptive Filtering Network (HAFNet). Our approach performs
filtering at both the downsampled deep feature layer and
the upsampled image reconstruction layer. By designing
and applying the Adaptive Comprehensive Filtering Module
(ACFM) and Adaptive Dilated Filtering Module (ADFM) at
different layers, our method effectively restores semantic information in large-area specular highlight regions and recovers detail loss at various scales. The required filtering
kernels are pre-generated by a prediction network, allowing
them to adaptively adjust according to different images and
their semantic content, enabling robust performance across
diverse scenarios. Additionally, we utilize Unity3D to construct a comprehensive large-area highlight dataset featuring images with rich texts and complex textures. Experimental results on various datasets demonstrate that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art approaches.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Specular highlight removal results on text images. (a)(c)
Specular highlight images. (b)(d) Highlight removal results using
our proposed method.

obscure important information. Additionally, images with
highlights can interfere with various computer vision tasks
such as image segmentation [37], text detection [18], and
object detection [21]. Consequently, specular highlight removal is a critical and challenging task in computer vision.
Traditional methods for highlight removal predominantly analyze the physical and statistical properties of images, employing a variety of techniques such as color space
analysis [32], optimization [20], filtering [43], polarization
information [34, 38], and illumination estimation [13, 22].
However, these methods often perform poorly on text images, leading to issues such as color tone deviation, incomplete highlight removal, and black color block. The primary
limitation of these approaches is their inability to capture
high-level semantic information and leverage useful information from both weak highlight regions and non-highlight
regions.

1. Introduction
Specular highlights are commonly encountered in our
daily lives and often appear in photographs. For instance,
when photographing an ID card, specular highlights may
* Chunxia Xiao is the corresponding author.

2408

