This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fortifying Federated Learning Towards Trustworthiness via Auditable Data
Valuation and Verifiable Client Contribution
∗

K Naveen Kumar1
Ranjeet Ranjan Jha2 C Krishna Mohan1 Ravindra Babu Tallamraju3
1
IIT Hyderabad, India 2 IIT Patna, India 3 Sahaj AI Software Pvt Ltd., India
1

{cs19m20p000001@, ckm@cse.}iith.ac.in, 2 rrjha@iitp.ac.in, 3 ravindrababu.t@gmail.com

Abstract

privacy, security, utility, robustness, fairness, and transparency [8, 48]. Federated Learning (FL) offers a promising alternative to traditional centralized machine learning
where clients exchange only model updates with a central
server, preserving privacy and enabling collaborative learning without direct data exposure [22, 26]. This privacyfocused approach has found applications in areas such as
personalized mobile services [1], healthcare [28], and finance [17]. However, as FL expands to include a broader
range of participants, ensuring auditable data valuation and
verifiable client contribution becomes essential for sustaining trust and accountability within FL systems [31, 46].

Ensuring auditability and verifiability in Federated
Learning (FL) is both challenging and essential to guarantee that local data remains untampered and client updates
are trustworthy. Recent FL frameworks assess client contributions through a trusted central server using various client
selection and aggregation techniques. However, reliance on
a central server can create a single point of failure, making it vulnerable to privacy-centric attacks and limiting its
ability to audit and verify client-side data contributions due
to restricted access. In addition, data quality and fairness
evaluations are often inadequate, failing to distinguish between high-impact contributions and those from low-quality
or poisoned data. To address these challenges, we propose
Federated Auditable and Verifiable Data valuation (FAVD),
a privacy-preserving method that ensures auditability and
verifiability of client contributions through data valuation,
independent of any central authority or predefined training
algorithm. FAVD utilizes shared local data density functions to construct a global density function, aligning data
contributions and facilitating effective valuation prior to
local model training. This proactive approach improves
transparency in data valuation and ensures that only benign updates are generated, even in the presence of malicious data. Further, to mitigate privacy risks associated
with sharing data density functions, we add Gaussian noise
to each client’s local density function before sharing it with
the server. We theoretically demonstrate the convergence,
auditability, and verifiability of FAVD, along with its resilience against data poisoning threats. Our experiments on
five diverse benchmarks, including three medical datasets,
show that FAVD achieves significant performance gains, accurate data valuation, and fair client contributions under
threat, highlighting its reliability as a trustworthy FL approach.

Challenges in auditable data valuation and verifiable
client contribution. Given that the success of an FL model
relies on high-quality private data, accurately assessing and
selecting valuable data for training is essential to prevent
compromised client contributions [13, 34]. A fair and transparent valuation of each client’s data quality is critical in
cross-silo FL, where multiple clients or organizations contribute [20, 57]. Without effective mechanisms to evaluate
data, model contributions may decline due to the inclusion
of low-quality or poisoned data, increasing vulnerability to
adversarial threats [27, 45, 50]. Malicious clients can introduce poisoned data and submit skewed updates that, due to
FL’s decentralized setup, often go undetected, complicating
verifiable data valuation [10, 59]. Therefore, implementing auditable data valuation prior to training and verifying
client contributions before aggregation in FL is essential
to safeguard data integrity, transparency, and accountability
while upholding data privacy standards. Hence, this paper
addresses auditable data valuations under online untargeted
black-box data poisoning threats that are particularly relevant to real-world FL deployments, as highlighted in recent
studies [26, 45].
Limitations of existing FL methods. Table 1 summarizes
the gaps in current FL approaches concerning auditability, verifiability, and other critical parameters for building
trustworthiness. It highlights the significant scope of our
work in addressing these challenges (please refer to the
Supplementary material for a detailed discussion of related
work). Existing methods like Trusted Execution Environ-

1. Introduction
In recent years, the increasing reliance on data-driven intelligence across industries has raised concerns over data

4999

