This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRFPrior: Learning Neural Radiance Field as a Prior for Indoor Scene
Reconstruction
Wenyuan Zhang1 , Emily Yue-ting Jia1 , Junsheng Zhou1 , Baorui Ma1 , Kanle Shi2 ,
Yu-Shen Liu1 * , Zhizhong Han3
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China1
Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China2
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA3
zhangwen21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jiaemily120@gmail.com, zhou-js24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
mabaorui2014@gmail.com, shikanle@kuaishou.com, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn, h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
Recently, it has shown that priors are vital for neural implicit functions to reconstruct high-quality surfaces from
multi-view RGB images. However, current priors require
large-scale pre-training, and merely provide geometric clues
without considering the importance of color. In this paper, we present NeRFPrior, which adopts a neural radiance
field as a prior to learn signed distance fields using volume
rendering for surface reconstruction. Our NeRF prior can
provide both geometric and color clues, and also get trained
fast under the same scene without additional data. Based
on the NeRF prior, we are enabled to learn a signed distance function (SDF) by explicitly imposing a multi-view
consistency constraint on each ray intersection for surface
inference. Specifically, at each ray intersection, we use the
density in the prior as a coarse geometry estimation, while
using the color near the surface as a clue to check its visibility from another view angle. For the textureless areas
where the multi-view consistency constraint does not work
well, we further introduce a depth consistency loss with confidence weights to infer the SDF. Our experimental results
outperform the state-of-the-art methods under the widely
used benchmarks. Project page: https://wen-yuanzhang.github.io/NeRFPrior/.

1. Introduction
3D surface reconstruction from multi-view images is a longstanding challenge in computer vision and graphics. Traditional methods, like multi-view-stereo (MVS) [14, 44, 56],
* The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. This work was partially supported by Deep Earth Probe and Mineral Resources Exploration—National
Science and Technology Major Project (2024ZD1003405), and the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (62272263).

estimate 3D geometry by first extracting a sparse point cloud
and then applying dense reconstruction on it. The latest
reconstruction methods [42, 49, 57] learn implicit functions
from multiple images via volume rendering using neural networks. These methods require learning priors [17, 59, 60]
from an additional large-scale dataset to reveal accurate geometry and structure. However, these data-driven priors
do not generalize well to other kinds of scenes which are
different from the pretrained datasets, which drastically degenerates the performance.
Instead, some methods [3, 9, 12] introduce overfitting
based priors to improve the generalization, since these priors
can be learned by directly overfitting a single scene. Methods
like MVS are widely adopted to extract overfitting priors,
which use the photometric consistency to overfit a scene.
However, these priors can merely provide geometric information and do not provide photometric information which
is important for the network to predict colors in volume
rendering.
To address this issue, we propose NeRFPrior, which introduces a neural radiance field as a prior to learn signed
distance functions (SDF) to reconstruct smooth and highquality surfaces from multi-view images. Thanks for current
advanced training techniques for radiance fields [4, 11, 23,
39, 46], we are able to train a radiance field by overfitting
multi-view images of a scene in minutes. Although more
recent 3DGS methods [23] present a very promising solution
for learning radiance fields with explicit 3D Gaussians, it is
still a challenge to recover continuous SDFs from discrete,
scattered, or even sparse 3D Gaussians. Per this, we adopt
NeRF and leverage the trained NeRF as a prior to provide the
geometry and color information of the scene itself. This enables us to learn a more precise SDF by explicitly imposing
a multi-view consistency constraint on each ray intersection
for its SDF inference.

11317

