This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FRESA: Feedforward Reconstruction of Personalized Skinned Avatars
from Few Images
Rong Wang1,2∗
Junxuan Li2

Fabian Prada2
Ziyan Wang2
Zhongshi Jiang2
Chengxiang Yin2
2
2
2
Shunsuke Saito
Igor Santesteban
Javier Romero
Rohan Joshi2
Hongdong Li1
Jason Saragih2
Yaser Sheikh2
1
2
Australian National University
Meta Reality Labs Research

Figure 1. FRESA. We present a novel method to reconstruct personalized skinned avatars with realistic pose-dependent animation all in
a feed-forward approach, which generalizes to causally taken phone photos without any fine-tuning. We visualize the predicted skinning
weights associated with the most important joints in (b) and colormaps of per-vertex displacement magnitudes1 during animation in (c).

Abstract

arts, and can be directly generalized to inputs from casually
taken phone photos. Project page and code is available at
https://github.com/rongakowang/FRESA.

We present a novel method for reconstructing personalized
3D human avatars with realistic animation from only a few
images. Due to the large variations in body shapes, poses,
and cloth types, existing methods mostly require hours of
per-subject optimization during inference, which limits their
practical applications. In contrast, we learn a universal
prior from over a thousand clothed humans to achieve instant feedforward generation and zero-shot generalization.
Specifically, instead of rigging the avatar with shared skinning weights, we jointly infer personalized avatar shape,
skinning weights, and pose-dependent deformations, which
effectively improves overall geometric fidelity and reduces
deformation artifacts. Moreover, to normalize pose variations and resolve coupled ambiguity between canonical
shapes and skinning weights, we design a 3D canonicalization process to produce pixel-aligned initial conditions,
which helps to reconstruct fine-grained geometric details.
We then propose a multi-frame feature aggregation to robustly reduce artifacts introduced in canonicalization and
fuse a plausible avatar preserving person-specific identities. Finally, we train the model in an end-to-end framework
on a large-scale capture dataset, which contains diverse
human subjects paired with high-quality 3D scans. Extensive experiments show that our method generates more
authentic reconstruction and animation than state-of-the-

1. Introduction
3D digitization for clothed humans is highly demanded in
many vision and graphics applications, such as extended
reality (XR), virtual try-on, and telepresence [23]. Since
humans vary largely in body shapes and cloth types, the reconstructed avatars need to faithfully preserve these personalized details, and can be realistically animated robust to the
underlying topology. To this end, traditional pipelines often
require laborious artist designs [11, 48] or controlled environments [13, 34], which limits their use. In this work, we
aim to automatically reconstruct animatable avatars from
easily accessible sources, e.g. casually taken phone photos,
to better facilitate downstream applications.
Existing works in 3D clothed human reconstructions
[42, 43, 53, 54, 59, 60] have demonstrated impressive quality and generalizability. While they mostly focus on reconstructing a static frame for a given pose, [14, 17, 26] further extend to produce avatars more suitable for animation.
This is achieved by reconstructing the avatar in a canonical
* Work done while Rong Wang was an intern at Reality Labs Research.
1 Scales normalized across all vertices to highlight large deformation.

281

