This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WeGen: A Unified Model for Interactive Multimodal Generation as We Chat
Zhipeng Huang1‡ * Shaobin Zhuang2‡ * Canmiao Fu3 Binxin Yang3 Ying Zhang3 Chong Sun3
Zhizheng Zhang5† Yali Wang4† Chen Li3 Zheng-Jun Zha1
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
WeChat Vision, Tencent Inc. 4 Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Galbot

According to this canny map,
generate the corresponding picture
for me.

Can you give me pictures of them and tell me
which one you think is more suitable on this table?

Ah, I forgot about this globe. Put it on the
table too.

Below are two vases I designed:

A little challenging, but I can still do it.

OK, here is the picture.

I think the first vase is more suitable to be placed
on this table because their colors are more sober,
while the second vase is too gorgeous.

To decorate this empty table, I want to put a
bouquet of flowers on it, but I need a vase first.
Can you help me design a vase?

Forget it, I found a
vase myself. Put this
bouquet in a vase and
put it on the table.

It's a bit monotonous. Let's change the style of
this picture.
Choose the style. Color Field Painting, Adorable
3D Character, Color Pencil Art, Graffiti Art.

It's a piece of cake, bro.
Okay, I have designed two vases for you to
choose from. Their appearance descriptions are
as follows:
1. An elegant porcelain vase with intricate
ornate patterns, featuring detailed floral and
geometric designs in blue and gold, luxurious
and decorative style.
2. A traditional Chinese porcelain vase with
delicate blue and white patterns, featuring
hand-painted dragons and clouds, Ming
dynasty style, glossy ceramic finish.
Just choose the vase you like!

Figure 1. Interactive dialogue examples between users and WeGen, demonstrating unified capabilities across diverse visual generation
tasks through natural conversations.

Abstract
Existing multimodal generative models fall short as qualified design copilots, as they often struggle to generate imaginative outputs once instructions are less detailed or lack
the ability to maintain consistency with the provided ref-

erences. In this work, we introduce WeGen, a model that
unifies multimodal generation and understanding, and promotes their interplay in iterative generation. It can generate diverse results with high creativity for less detailed
instructions. And it can progressively refine prior generation results or integrating specific contents from references
following the instructions in its chat with users. During
this process, it is capable of preserving consistency in the
parts that the user is already satisfied with. To this end,

* Equal contribution ‡ Work done as interns at WeChat
† Corresponding authors (zhangzz@galbot.com, yl.wang@siat.ac.cn)

23679

