This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One is Plenty: A Polymorphic Feature Interpreter for Immutable Heterogeneous
Collaborative Perception
Yuchen Xia1 Quan Yuan1 * Guiyang Luo1 Xiaoyuan Fu1∗
Yang Li1 Xuanhan Zhu1 Tianyou Luo1 Siheng Chen2 Jinglin Li1
1
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
1

{yuchen.xia, yuanquan, luoguiyang, fuxiaoyuan, leeyang866, xuanhan.zhu,
2

lty349, jlli}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

{sihengc}@sjtu.edu.cn

agent’s understanding of driving environment through perceptual data exchanging, which addresses challenges like
occlusion and adverse weather conditions. Collaborative
perception has been widely applied in object detection, obstacle recognition and occupancy prediction [31].

Collaborative perception in autonomous driving significantly enhances the perception capabilities of individual
agents. Immutable heterogeneity, where agents have different and fixed perception networks, presents a major challenge due to the semantic gap in exchanged intermediate
features without modifying the perception networks. Most
existing methods bridge the semantic gap through interpreters. However, they either require training a new interpreter for each new agent type, limiting extensibility, or
rely on a two-stage interpretation via an intermediate standardized semantic space, causing cumulative semantic loss.
To achieve both extensibility in immutable heterogeneous
scenarios and low-loss feature interpretation, we propose
PolyInter, a polymorphic feature interpreter. It provides an
extension point where new agents integrate by overriding
only their specific prompts, which are learnable parameters
that guide interpretation, while reusing PolyInter’s remaining parameters. By leveraging polymorphism, our design
enables a single interpreter to accommodate diverse agents
and interpret their features into the ego agent’s semantic
space. Experiments on the OPV2V dataset demonstrate that
PolyInter improves collaborative perception precision by up
to 11.1% compared to SOTA interpreters, while comparable
results can be achieved by training only 1.4% of PolyInter’s
parameters when adapting to new agents. Code is available
at https://github.com/yuchen-xia/PolyInter.

Homogeneous perception networks are typically exploited by collaborative perception, enabling the exchange
of feature-level perceptual data that are aligned in both semantics and granularity [13, 18, 22]. However, perception networks differ significantly across vehicles of different
models or from different manufacturers, leading to transmitted intermediate features that are too heterogeneous to
be understood by other agents. Furthermore, perception
networks are critical to driving safety and are tightly coupled with downstream tasks, making them difficult to replace or retrain. These limitations give rise to the challenge
of immutable heterogeneous collaborative perception.
Some pioneering works [25, 36] have explored the problem of immutable heterogeneous collaborative perception
by focusing on resolving differences in semantics and feature size while preserving the original perception networks.
In these works, immutable heterogeneity is often addressed
using interpreters, which primarily perform semantic interpretation, along with feature size transformation. However,
addressing the openness in immutable heterogeneous collaboration remains a challenging issue, as it requires an interpreter to efficiently extend to emerging agents without incurring substantial retraining costs or storage overheads
for neural networks. Existing interpreter-based methods
generally follow two strategies: 1) One-stage strategy [36],
as shown in Figure 1(a), requires training and storing a separate interpreter on the ego agent to align neighbor features
in semantics with ego features. However, this strategy fails
to address the openness of immutable heterogeneous collaborative perception, as it requires training a separate in-

1. Introduction
Collaborative perception is essential for driving safety of
autonomous vehicles [1, 21]. It aims to improve each
* Corresponding author.

1592

