This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CraftsMan3D: High-fidelity Mesh Generation with 3D Native Diffusion and
Interactive Geometry Refiner
Weiyu Li1,2∗ , Jiarui Liu1,2∗ , Hongyu Yan1,2∗ , Rui Chen1 , Yixun Liang1
Xuelin Chen3 , Ping Tan1,2 , Xiaoxiao Long1,2†
1

HKUST 2 LightIllusions 3 Adobe Research
∗
Core contributions † Corresponding author

Input Image / Text

2D Diffusion for Mesh Refinement (20s)

3D Native Diffusion for Coarse Generation (5s)
a cute
fluffy cat

Reference
Image

Text

Coarse Mesh

Refined Mesh

Coarse Mesh

Refined Mesh

Figure 1. Our method, given a single reference image or text prompt, can generate intricate 3D shapes with high fidelity in just 25 seconds.
Drawing inspiration from the typical workflow of the craftsman, we start by creating a coarse shape using a 3D native DiT model. We
then enhance the surface details using either an automatic global geometry refiner or, more intriguingly, an interactive geometry refiner that
allows for users to edit. For more visually compelling results, please refer to the supplementary video.

Abstract

ing this data, we employ a 3D-native DiT model that directly models the distribution of 3D data in latent space,
generating coarse geometries in seconds. Subsequently, a
normal-based geometry refiner enhances local surface details, which can be applied automatically or interactively
with user input. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method achieves high efficacy in producing superior quality
3D meshes compared to existing methods.

We present a novel generative 3D modeling system,
coined CraftsMan3D, which can generate high-fidelity 3D
geometries with highly varied shapes, detailed surfaces,
and, notably, allows for refining the geometry in an interactive manner. Despite the significant advancements in 3D
generation, existing methods still struggle with lengthy optimization processes, self-occlusion, irregular mesh topologies, and difficulties in accommodating user editing, consequently impeding their widespread adoption and implementation in 3D modeling softwares. Our work is inspired
by the craftsman, who usually roughs out the holistic figure
of the work first and elaborates the surface details subsequently. Specifically, we first introduce a robust data preprocessing pipeline that utilizes visibility check and winding
mumber to maximize the use of existing 3D data. Leverag-

1. Introduction
The rapid development of industries such as video gaming,
augmented reality, and film production has led to a surge in
demand for automatic 3D asset creation. However, existing
methods still struggle to produce results that are ready to
use.

5307

