This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Apply Hierarchical-Chain-of-Generation to Complex Attributes Text-to-3D
Generation
Yiming Qin Zhu Xu Yang Liu*
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
kevinqym@stu.pku.edu.cn

xuzhu@stu.pku.edu.cn

yangliu@pku.edu.cn

Input Text: A man in black coat, yellow shirt, pink trousers, blue shoes and green hat is waving
MVDream
Progressive3D
LucidDreamer

Cross-attention map

A man in black
coat, yellow shirt,
pink trousers, blue
shoes and green
hat is waving

black

(a) Visualization of cross-attention map. For longer text prompts, 2D Stable Diffusion (SD) [26] fails to accurately associate the word “black” with the
correct spatial location in the generated image. This limitation poses a challenge for methods [15, 27] lifting 2D to 3D using SD effectively.
Input Text: A man in black coat, yellow shirt and pink trousers is waving
Non-automatic
Wrong order:
model:
1. A man in black coat
Progressive3D
is waving
2. A man in black coat,
yellow shirt is waving
3. A man in black coat,
yellow shirt and pink
trousers is waving

(b) Some work such as Progressive3D [5] that targets 3D generation with complex attributes heavily relies on user-defined bounding boxes and generation
order, and imperfect given order results in low-quality results with wrong attributes.

Our automatic pipeline: HCoG
① Hierarchical Blocks (In-n-out Order):

Block 1: Yellow shirt, blue shoes, pink trousers
Block 2: Black coat, green hat

In-To-Out

② Initial Input Texts (Coarse):

1. “A man in a shirt, shoes and trousers is waving."
2. “A man wearing a coat and a hat is waving.“

Coarse
-ToPrecise

③ Input Texts with Attributes (Precise):

black coat, yellow shirt, pink trousers, blue shoes,
green hat

Input Text: A man in black coat, yellow shirt, pink trousers, blue shoes and green hat is waving
(c) Our method (HCoG) leverages LLM to generate hierarchical chain of generation, realizing automatic generation of 3D assets with better complex
attributes binding capability.

Figure 1. The problem of existing work and the example of our method.

Abstract
Recent text-to-3D generation models have demonstrated remarkable abilities in producing high-quality 3D assets. Despite their great advancements, current models struggle to
generate satisfying 3D objects with complex attributes. The
difficulty for such complex attributes 3D generation arises
from two aspects: (1) existing text-to-3D approaches typi-

cally lift text-to-image models to extract semantics via text
encoders, while the text encoder exhibits limited comprehension ability for long descriptions, leading to deviated
cross-attention focus, subsequently wrong attribute binding
in generated results. (2) Objects with complex attributes often exhibit occlusion relationships between different parts,
which demands a reasonable generation order as well as
explicit disentanglement of different parts to enable structural coherent and attribute following results. Though some

∗ Corresponding author.

18521

