This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ROCKET-1: Mastering Open-World Interaction with
Visual-Temporal Context Prompting
Shaofei Cai1,2 , Zihao Wang1,2 Kewei Lian1 , Zhancun Mu1 , Xiaojian Ma4 , Anji Liu3 , Yitao Liang1 *
1
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3
Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles
4
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)
{caishaofei,zhwang,lkwkwl,muzhancun}@stu.pku.edu.cn,xiaojian.ma@ucla.edu
liuanji@cs.ucla.edu,yitaol@pku.edu.cn

Figure 1. Our pipeline solves creative tasks, such as get the obsidian in the original Minecraft version, using the action space identical to
human players (mouse and keyboard). We present a novel instruction interface, visual-temporal context prompting, under which we learn
a spatial-sensitive policy, ROCKET-1. VLMs identify regions of interest within each observation and guide ROCKET-1 interactions.
Different colors in the segmentation represent distinct interaction types, for example, - use, - approach, - switch, - mine block.

Abstract
Vision-language models (VLMs) have excelled in multimodal
tasks, but adapting them to embodied decision-making in
open-world environments presents challenges. One critical
issue is bridging the gap between discrete entities in lowlevel observations and the abstract concepts required for effective planning. A common solution is building hierarchical
agents, where VLMs serve as high-level reasoners that break
down tasks into executable sub-tasks, typically specified using language. However, language suffers from the inability
to communicate detailed spatial information. We propose
visual-temporal context prompting, a novel communication

protocol between VLMs and policy models. This protocol
leverages object segmentation from past observations to
guide policy-environment interactions. Using this approach,
we train ROCKET-1, a low-level policy that predicts actions
based on concatenated visual observations and segmentation
masks, supported by real-time object tracking from SAM-2.
Our method unlocks the potential of VLMs, enabling them to
tackle complex tasks that demand spatial reasoning. Experiments in Minecraft show that our approach enables agents to
achieve previously unattainable tasks, with a 76% absolute
improvement in open-world interaction performance. Codes
are available at https://craftjarvis.github.io/ROCKET-1.

12122

