This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-guided Sparse Voxel Pruning for Efficient 3D Visual Grounding
Wenxuan Guo1∗

Xiuwei Xu1∗ Ziwei Wang2 Jianjiang Feng1† Jie Zhou1
1
2
Tsinghua University
Nanyang Technological University

{gwx22,xxw21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Jiwen Lu1†

ziwei.wang@ntu.edu.sg

{jfeng,jzhou,lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Accuracy (Acc@0.5)

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an efficient multi-level convolution architecture for 3D visual grounding. Conventional
methods are difficult to meet the requirements of real-time
inference due to the two-stage or point-based architecture.
Inspired by the success of multi-level fully sparse convolutional architecture in 3D object detection, we aim to build
a new 3D visual grounding framework following this technical route. However, as in 3D visual grounding task the
3D scene representation should be deeply interacted with
text features, sparse convolution-based architecture is inefficient for this interaction due to the large amount of
voxel features. To this end, we propose text-guided pruning (TGP) and completion-based addition (CBA) to deeply
fuse 3D scene representation and text features in an efficient way by gradual region pruning and target completion.
Specifically, TGP iteratively sparsifies the 3D scene representation and thus efficiently interacts the voxel features
with text features by cross-attention. To mitigate the affect
of pruning on delicate geometric information, CBA adaptively fixes the over-pruned region by voxel completion with
negligible computational overhead. Compared with previous single-stage methods, our method achieves top inference speed and surpasses previous fastest method by 100%
FPS. Our method also achieves state-of-the-art accuracy
even compared with two-stage methods, with +1.13 lead
of Acc@0.5 on ScanRefer, and +2.6 and +3.2 leads on
NR3D and SR3D respectively. The code is available at
https://github.com/GWxuan/TSP3D.

45

40

35

TSP3D
(ours)

MCLN (two-stage)
EDA
(two-stage)

MCLN (single-stage)

3D-VisTA

EDA (single-stage)

BUTD-DETR
(two-stage)
3D-SPS
(two-stage)

BUTD-DETR (single-stage)
3D-SPS (single-stage)

TSP3D-B
(ours)
SAT

30
3

6

9

12

Speed (frames per second)

Figure 1. Comparison of 3DVG methods on ScanRefer dataset [3].
Our TSP3D surpasses existing methods in both accuracy and inference speed, achieving the first efficient 3DVG framework.

to locate an object in the scene with a free-form query description. 3DVG is challenging since it requires understanding of both 3D scene and language description. Recently,
with the development of 3D scene perception and visionlanguage models, 3DVG methods have shown remarkable
progress [16, 22]. However, with 3DVG being widely applied in fields like robotics and AR / VR where inference
speed is the main bottleneck, how to construct efficient realtime 3DVG model remains a challenging problem.
Since the output format of 3DVG is similar with 3D object detection, early 3DVG methods [3, 14, 38, 39] usually
adopt a two-stage framework, which first conducts detection
to locate all objects in the scene, and then selects the target object by incorporating text information. As there are
many similarities between 3D object detection and 3DVG
(e.g. both of them need to extract the representation of the
3D scene), there will be much redundant feature computation during the independent adoption of the two models. As a result, two-stage methods are usually hard to
handle real-time tasks. To solve this problem, single-stage
methods [22, 35] are presented, which generates the bounding box of the target directly from point clouds. This integrated design is more compact and efficient. However,

1. Introduction
Incorporating multi-modal information to guide 3D visual
perception is a promising direction. In these years, 3D visual grounding (3DVG), also known as 3D instance referencing, has been paid increasing attention as a fundamental multi-modal 3D perception task. The aim of 3DVG is
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

3666

