This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WISE: A Framework for Gigapixel Whole-Slide-Image Lossless Compression
Yu Mao1 , Jun Wang2 , Nan Guan2 , Chun Jason Xue1
1
MBZUAI, 2 City University of Hong Kong
{yu.mao, jason.xue}@mbzuai.ac.ae {jwang699-c, nanguan}@cityu.edu.hk

Hospital #1

Abstract

C16 Data

Frequent
Transmission

Whole-Slide Images (WSIs) have revolutionized medical analysis by presenting high-resolution images of the
whole tissue slide. Despite avoiding the physical storage
of the slides, WSIs require considerable data volume, which
makes the storage and maintenance of WSI records costly
and unsustainable. To this end, this work presents the first
investigation of lossless compression of WSI images. Interestingly, we find that most existing compression methods
fail to compress the WSI images effectively. Furthermore,
our analysis reveals that the failure of existing compressors
is mainly due to information irregularity in WSI images. To
resolve this issue, we develop a simple yet effective lossless compressor called WISE, specifically designed for WSI
images. WISE employs a hierarchical encoding strategy to
extract effective bits, reducing the entropy of the image and
then adopting a dictionary-based method to handle the irregular frequency patterns. Through extensive experiments,
we show that WISE can effectively compress the gigapixel
WSI images to 36 times on average and up to 136 times.

1. Introduction
The ever-increasing utilization of advanced medical imaging techniques, such as Whole-Slide Images (WSI) [18, 30],
has led to a surge in the generation of gigapixel medical image data. These detailed volumetric images are indispensable for accurate diagnosis and effective treatment
planning. However, their considerable size presents notable challenges for storage and transmission. For instance,
a single digital pathology WSI scan can produce a fourdimensional (4D) image of a patient’s tissue sample comprising width, height, color channels, and multiple resolution levels, resulting in a total data volume reaching several gigabytes [15]. As shown in Fig.1, two well-known
datasets, C16 [6] and C17 [20], consist primarily of whole
slide images (WSIs) ranging in size from 1 to 5GB. The
large size of these images presents significant challenges
for storage and transmission. Considering a person got a
WSI image as a teenager, the WSI records need to be stored

•
•
•
•

Training
Inference
Diagnosis
…

Hospital #3

Hospital #2

C17 Data

Patients Storage Span
Long Term
Storage and
Huge Data
Volume

10yr
20yr

… 16yr
Figure 1. WSIs are extremely large images (∼3 GB/slide uncompressed) of high resolution (0.25 microns per pixel), presenting a
significant data storage challenge for hospitals wishing to adopt
digital pathology. In practice, hospitals often ship physical drives
via FedEx to transfer WSIs. Therefore, there is a desperate need
for better compression of WSIs.

for decades to keep track. Those cold, huge data can cost a
lot for storage. Also, as the cloud-based medical ecosystem
expands, the frequency of WSI transfers between data centers is increasing due to the growing demands for training,
inference, and diagnosis [20, 21, 31].
Given the aforementioned challenges in using WSI images for digital pathology, there exists a clear need for efficient and lossless WSI compressors. However, most existing WSI compression approaches focus on lossy compression, including those classical methods that leverage lossy
compressors such as JPEG-2000, as well as those modern
compressors that utilize DNN to encode WSI patches into
embeddings [5, 11, 12, 15]. While lossy compression techniques can achieve high compression ratios, they risk introducing distortions that could compromise the diagnostic
integrity of the WSI images and potentially lead to medical issues. On the other hand, lossless compression techniques can avoid distorting the original WSI information.
However, our preliminary experiments with existing lossless compression techniques show that even state-of-the-art
lossless compressors can not yield the desired compression

29342

