This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LSceneLLM: Enhancing Large 3D Scene Understanding
Using Adaptive Visual Preferences
Hongyan Zhi1 6 * † Peihao Chen2 * Junyan Li4 * Shuailei Ma3 Xinyu Sun1
Tianhang Xiang1 Yinjie Lei7 Mingkui Tan1 6‡ Chuang Gan4
1

South China University of Technology, 2 Tencent Robotics X, 3 Northeastern University,
4

UMass Amherst, 6 Pazhou Laboratory, 7 Sichuan University

Abstract
Research on 3D Vision-Language Models (3D-VLMs) is
gaining increasing attention, which is crucial for developing embodied AI within 3D scenes, such as visual navigation and embodied question answering. Due to the high
density of visual features, especially in large 3D scenes,
accurately locating task-relevant visual information is challenging. Existing works attempt to segment all objects
and consider their features as scene representations. However, these task-agnostic object features include much redundant information and missing details for the task-relevant
area. To tackle these problems, we propose LSceneLLM,
an adaptive framework that automatically identifies taskrelevant areas by leveraging LLM’s visual preference for
different tasks, followed by a plug-and-play scene magnifier module to capture fine-grained details in focused areas. Specifically, a dense token selector examines the attention map of LLM to identify visual preferences for the
instruction input. It then magnifies fine-grained details
of the focusing area. An adaptive self-attention module
is leveraged to fuse the coarse-grained and selected finegrained visual information. To comprehensively evaluate
the large scene understanding ability of 3D-VLMs, we further introduce a cross-room understanding benchmark, XRScene, which contains a series of large scene understanding
tasks including XR-QA, XR-EmbodiedPlanning, and XRSceneCaption. Experiments show that our method surpasses
existing methods on both large scene understanding and existing scene understanding benchmarks. Plunging our scene
magnifier module into the existing 3D-VLMs also brings
significant improvement. Code and data are available at
https://github.com/Hoyyyaard/LSceneLLM

* Equal contribution.
† Work done during the internship at Tencent Robotics X
‡ Corresponding author.

(a)
(b)

Down
Sample

coarse scene
understand module
Dense Token
Selector

Ours

LSceneLLM
OccLLaMA
Lidar-LLM

Low Computation

scene
magnifier
module

Visual
Preference
Task–related
Details

Chat3D-v2
Chat-Scene

Leo
LL3DA
3D-LLM

LLM
Black
and
White

(c)

Figure 1. We propose LSceneLLM, a novel framework for
adaptive large 3D scene understanding. (a) Existing methods
struggle to locate task-relevant visual information when facing
large scenes. (b) We are committed to precisely identifying finegrain task-related visual features through adaptive scene modeling.
(c) Our method outperforms existing approaches across various
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding is essential for various tasks, including robotic manipulation [19, 49], navigation [36], and
embodied long-horizon planning [7, 22]. With the rapid
development of large language models (LLMs) [3, 10], researchers are increasingly focusing on leveraging LLMs’
impressive reasoning and summarization capabilities to enhance the understanding of 3D point clouds, building 3D
Vision-Language Models (3D-VLMs) [8, 15, 17, 18, 37, 45].
Most efforts on 3D-VLMs have concentrated on objectlevel point cloud understanding [14, 37, 45], while scenelevel understanding remains underexplored due to the larger
and more intricate nature of 3D environments compared
to individual objects. To introduce the scene-level understanding ability to 3D-VLMs, existing works [8, 16–18, 42]
seek help from object detection [9] and instance segmentation [33, 48] technique to delineate all objects within a
scene. All the object features extracted by an object-level 3D
features extractor are considered to represent the scene-level

3761

