This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VTON 360: High-Fidelity Virtual Try-On from Any Viewing Direction
∗

Zijian He1 Yuwei Ning1 Yipeng Qin2 Guangrun Wang1 Sibei Yang3 Liang Lin1,4,5 Guanbin Li1,4,5
1
2
3
Sun Yat-sen University
Cardiff University
ShanghaiTech University
4
5
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing
Peng Cheng Laboratory
hezj39@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, yuwei ning@hust.edu.cn,{qinyipeng1991,wanggrun}@gmail.com,
yangsb@shanghaitech.edu.cn linliang@ieee.org, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Figure 1. Results of VTON 360. Our VTON 360 enables high-ﬁdelity 3D Virtual Try-On (VTON) by seamlessly adapting E-commerce
garments onto a clothed 3D human model, supporting full 360◦ view rendering. The highlighted bounding boxes (dashed line) demonstrate our method’s ability to preserve intricate clothing details and patterns (e.g., collar accessories, horizontal line patterns, logos, texts,
numbers) across diverse garment types.

Abstract
Virtual Try-On (VTON) is a transformative technology in
e-commerce and fashion design, enabling realistic digital
visualization of clothing on individuals. In this work, we
propose VTON 360, a novel 3D VTON method that addresses the open challenge of achieving high-ﬁdelity VTON
that supports any-view rendering. Speciﬁcally, we leverage
the equivalence between a 3D model and its rendered multiview 2D images, and reformulate 3D VTON as an extension
of 2D VTON that ensures 3D consistent results across multiple views. To achieve this, we extend 2D VTON models to
include multi-view garments and clothing-agnostic human
body images as input, and propose several novel techniques
to enhance them, including: i) a pseudo-3D pose representation using normal maps derived from the SMPL-X 3D
human model, ii) a multi-view spatial attention mechanism
that models the correlations between features from different viewing angles, and iii) a multi-view CLIP embedding
that enhances the garment CLIP features used in 2D VTON
with camera information. Extensive experiments on largescale real datasets and clothing images from e-commerce
* Corresponding author is Guanbin Li.

platforms demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.
Project page: https://scnuhealthy.github.io/
VTON360.

1. Introduction
Virtual Try-On (VTON) enables realistic digital visualization of clothing on individuals and has emerged as a transformative technology in e-commerce and fashion design.
While signiﬁcant research efforts have been made on 2D
VTON solutions [8, 12, 19, 33, 39], these approaches are inherently limited in their representation of view-related features. To overcome this limitation and enable high-ﬁdelity
any-view rendering, 3D VTON methods were introduced.
3D VTON requires accurate garment transfer onto a 3D
human body while ensuring realistic garment ﬁtting, texture
preservation, and 3D consistency. The two primary aims of
3D VTON are i) achieving high-ﬁdelity and ii) supporting
any-view rendering. Leveraging the inherent capability of
3D models for any-view rendering, early 3D VTON methods [13, 15, 28] make clothing simulation on synthetic human bodies. Speciﬁcally, these methods utilized 3D scanners to capture clothing meshes, followed by the development of specialized dressing algorithms. Although effec-

26388

