This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ref-GS: Directional Factorization for 2D Gaussian Splatting
Youjia Zhang1 Anpei Chen2,3,† Yumin Wan1 Zikai Song1
Junqing Yu1 Yawei Luo4 Wei Yang1,†
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center
3
Westlake University 4 Zhejiang University

GaussianShader

3DGS-DR

Ours

PSNR: 27.94, LPIPS: 0.197

PSNR: 29.24, LPIPS: 0.173

PSNR: 30.01, LPIPS: 0.141

Rendering

Mesh

Mesh

Rendering

Mesh

Figure 1. Our Ref-GS method generates photo-realistic renderings with view-dependent effects while also enabling accurate geometry
recovery. The top row shows a comparison of renderings for a scene with specular reflections, along with the recovered normals and mesh.
The bottom row demonstrates our successful reconstruction of the geometries of the ‘reflective table center’ in the ‘Garden’ scene [2] and
the ‘windshield’ in the ‘Truck’ scene [13], which existing methods typically fail to handle.

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce Ref-GS, a novel approach for directional light factorization in 2D Gaussian splatting [8],
which enables photorealistic view-dependent appearance
rendering and precise geometry recovery. Ref-GS builds
upon the deferred rendering of Gaussian splatting and applies directional encoding to the deferred-rendered surface,
effectively reducing the ambiguity between orientation and
viewing angle. Next, we introduce a spherical Mip-grid
to capture varying levels of surface roughness, enabling
roughness-aware Gaussian shading. Additionally, we pro-

pose a simple yet efficient geometry-lighting factorization
that connects geometry and lighting via the vector outer
product, significantly reducing renderer overhead when integrating volumetric attributes. Our method achieves superior photorealistic rendering for a range of open-world
scenes while also accurately recovering geometry. See our
interactive project page.

† denote co-corresponding authors.

26483

1. Introduction
View-dependent effects are a key element in 3D reconstruction and rendering - capturing complex interactions of
light in materials such as reflection and refraction - have

