This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VerbDiff: Text-Only Diffusion Models with Enhanced Interaction Awareness
SeungJu Cha

Kwanyoung Lee Ye-Chan Kim Hyunwoo Oh
Hanyang University, South Korea

Dong-Jin Kim

{sju9020, mobled37, dpcksdl78, komji, djdkim}@hanyang.ac.kr

Real

Stable Diffusion

GLIGEN

InteractDiffusion

VerbDiff (Ours)

“A photo of a man walking a bicycle on the street, carrying an umbrella”

“A basketball player jumping and throwing a basketball and a man blocking the ball”
Figure 1. Generated samples illustrating multiple human-object interactions. Each color represents distinct humans, objects, and
interaction words. GLIGEN [15] and InteractDiffusion [10] use grounding boxes as additional conditions, whereas Stable Diffusion [25]
and VerbDiff rely solely on text.

Abstract

conditions. Our approach enables the model to accurately
understand the intended interaction between humans and
objects, producing high-quality images with accurate interactions aligned with specified verbs. Extensive experiments
on the HICO-DET dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method compared to previous approaches.

Recent large-scale text-to-image diffusion models generate
photorealistic images but often struggle to accurately depict interactions between humans and objects due to their
limited ability to differentiate various interaction words. In
this work, we propose VerbDiff to address the challenge
of capturing nuanced interactions within text-to-image diffusion models. VerbDiff is a novel text-to-image generation model that weakens the bias between interaction words
and objects, enhancing the understanding of interactions.
Specifically, we disentangle various interaction words from
frequency-based anchor words and leverage localized interaction regions from generated images to help the model
better capture semantics in distinctive words without extra

1. Introduction
Recently, text-to-image diffusion models have demonstrated the ability to produce photorealistic images from
natural texts [25]. However, these models sometimes struggle to accurately depict interactions between humans and
objects [10]. For example, they often fail to differentiate

8041

