This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S EM A LIGN 3D: Semantic Correspondence between RGB-Images through
Aligning 3D Object-Class Representations
Krispin Wandel
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Hesheng Wang*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

krispin.wandel@sjtu.edu.cn

wanghesheng@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Semantic correspondence made tremendous progress
through the recent advancements of large vision models
(LVM). While these LVMs have been shown to reliably capture local semantics, the same can currently not be said
for capturing global geometric relationships between semantic object regions. This problem leads to unreliable
performance for semantic correspondence between images
with extreme view variation. In this work, we aim to
leverage monocular depth estimates to capture these geometric relationships for more robust and data-efficient semantic correspondence. First, we introduce a simple but
effective method to build 3D object-class representations
from monocular depth estimates and LVM features using a
sparsely annotated image correspondence dataset. Second,
we formulate an alignment energy that can be minimized using gradient descent to obtain an alignment between the 3D
object-class representation and the object-class instance in
the input RGB-image. Our method achieves state-of-the-art
matching accuracy in multiple categories on the challenging SPair-71k dataset, increasing the PCK@0.1 score by
more than 10 points on three categories and overall by 3.3
points from 85.6% to 88.9%. Additional resources and code
are available at dub.sh/semalign3d.

Figure 1. Our method aligns learned 3D object-class representations, displayed as the colored point cloud, with object instances
to improve robustness of sparse semantic correspondence against
extreme view variation and occlusion, which is still a major issue
for existing methods like GeoAware [32].

1. Introduction

tics of an object. However, as observed by [20, 32], these
features still fall short when dealing with symmetric objects
or extreme view variation. Recent work has proposed solutions such as feature fine-tuning or the introduction of spatial bias (see Sec. 2) but the same issues still persist in many
instances, as depicted in Fig. 1.
To derive a more robust method, we propose to learn
category-level 3D object representations and then align
these representations with the object instance shown in the
image at inference time. Our hypothesis is that this process
is significantly more data-efficient and robust than purely
relying on features built at inference time. Towards this goal
we make two contributions:

Semantic correspondence aims at finding an alignment between two images based on the meaning or function of image regions rather than their exact spatial or visual similarity. This ability is crucial for robotics to learn policies with
category-level generalization capabilities [4–6, 19, 29]. Beyond robotics, this task has also several applications in image editing [8, 23, 24, 31] and style transfer [7, 14].
Large Vision Models (VIT) such as DinoV2 [25] have
pushed this field dramatically through the introduction of
deep features that are able to capture the underlying seman* Corresponding author.

1138

