This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

KMD: Koopman Multi-modality Decomposition for Generalized Brain Tumor
Segmentation under Incomplete Modalities
Tianyi Liu1,2 , Haochuan Jiang* 1 , Kaizhu Huang3
1
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, 2 University of Liverpool, 3 Duke Kunshan University
tianyi.liu2203@student.xjtlu.edu.cn, h.jiang@xjtlu.edu.cn, kaizhu.huang@dukekunshan.edu.cn

Abstract
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), with modalities including T1, T2, T1ce, and Flair, providing complementary information critical for sub-region analysis, is widely used
for brain tumor diagnosis. However, clinical practice often
suffers from varying degrees of incompleteness of necessary
modalities due to reasons such as susceptibility to artifacts.
It signiﬁcantly impairs segmentation model performance.
Given the limited available modalities at hand, existing approaches attempt to project them into a shared latent space.
However, they ignore decomposing the modality-shared and
modality-speciﬁc information and failed to construct the relationship among different modalities. Such deﬁciency limits the effectiveness of the segmentation performance, particularly at the time when the amount of data in each modality is different. In this paper, we propose the plug-and-play
Koopman Multi-modality Decomposition (KMD) module,
leveraging the Koopman Invariant Subspace to disentangle modality-common and modality-speciﬁc information.
It is capable of constructing modality relationships that
minimize bias toward modalities across various modalityincomplete scenarios. More importantly, it can be integrated into several existing backbones feasibility. Through
theoretical deductions and extensive empirical experiences
on the BraTS2018 and BraTS2020 datasets, we have sufﬁciently demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed KMD
to promote generalization performance. Code is available
at: https://github.com/T-Y-Liu/KMD.

Figure 1. Architecture illustration of different kinds of methods.
E is the encoder and D is the decoder. (a) Projecting the available modalities into a shared latent space with balanced missing
rates [5, 11, 20]; (b) disentangle features and fusion again with
balanced missing rates [4, 17]; (c) re-balance the learning rates
with imbalanced missing rates [12]. rectangles here are different
feature maps; (d) ours KMD to disentangle and construct relationships with imbalanced missing rates.

1. Introduction
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with modalities including T1, T2, T1ce, and Flair provides complementary and
key information in clinical imaging diagnosis of brain tumors to support sub-region analysis with deep learning approaches [2, 14]. However, in clinical practice, these mentioned modalities are often incompletely captured due to
* Corresponding author

15663

reasons such as image degradation [6, 8]. The absence of
speciﬁc modalities can markedly impair the segmentation
performance of deep models [9, 20].
In the literature, most of the existing arts address the
aforementioned missing modality problems in a restricted
conﬁguration when the amount of data in each modality is
a ﬁxed number (balanced missing rates). Several attempts
can be found to project the modalities into a shared latent

