This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ShowMak3r: Compositional TV Show Reconstruction
Sangmin Kim
Seunguk Do Jaesik Park*
Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
{sm.kim, seunguk.do, jaesik.park}@snu.ac.kr

#2

ShowMak3r

#1

Input Video Clip

Actor Deletion

Cam #2

Cam #1

Actor Relocation

Actor Insertion

Pose Manipulation

Applications

Reconstructed TV Show

Figure 1. We introduce ShowMak3r, a comprehensive pipeline that reconstructs dynamic radiance fields from TV shows. Given a video
clip that shows limited viewpoints and abrupt shot changes, our pipeline recovers the background stage and dynamic actors that are
trackable across the shot changes. The scene is compositional and editable, so we can render it from novel viewpoints while selectively
editing individual actors. Our method also recovers detailed human appearances, including facial expressions.

Abstract

plications such as synthetic shot-making, actor relocation,
insertion, deletion, and pose manipulation. Project page :
https://nstar1125.github.io/showmak3r

Reconstructing dynamic radiance fields from video clips is
challenging, especially when entertainment videos like TV
shows are given. Many challenges make the reconstruction difficult due to (1) actors occluding with each other
and having diverse facial expressions, (2) cluttered stages,
and (3) small baseline views or sudden shot changes. To address these issues, we present ShowMak3r, a comprehensive
reconstruction pipeline that allows the editing of scenes like
how video clips are made in a production control room. In
ShowMak3r, a 3DLocator module locates recovered actors
on the stage using depth prior and estimates unseen human
poses via interpolation. The proposed ShotMatcher module
then tracks the actors under shot changes. Furthermore,
ShowMak3r introduces a face-fitting network that dynamically recovers the actors’ expressions. Experiments on Sitcoms3D dataset show that our pipeline can reassemble TV
show scenes with new cameras at different timestamps. We
also demonstrate that ShowMak3r enables interesting ap-

1. Introduction
Considerable advances in radiance field reconstruction approaches [22, 36] transform how we reconstruct and visualize the scenes. Recent methods aim to bring video clips into
4D space to enable novel viewpoint rendering or scene editing. However, recovering the radiance field from dynamic
scenes remains a challenging problem. Approaches in this
category have mainly focused on scenarios with multi-view
synchronized cameras or fully observed scenes [20, 43, 65].
The reconstruction gets even harder for entertainment
videos, such as TV shows captured by shot-changing (video
transition by another camera) monocular cameras. Compared to existing benchmark datasets [17], TV show video
clips present additional challenges. First, it contains scenes
that are inherently hard to reconstruct, such as multiple actors interacting and occluding each other on the cluttered

* Corresponding author.

864

