This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EDEN: Enhanced Diffusion for High-quality Large-motion
Video Frame Interpolation
Zihao Zhang1,2 Haoran Chen1,2 Haoyu Zhao1,2 Guansong Lu3
Yanwei Fu1,2 Hang Xu3 Zuxuan Wu1,2,
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei

Abstract
Handling complex or nonlinear motion patterns has long
posed challenges for video frame interpolation. Although
recent advances in diffusion-based methods offer improvements over traditional optical flow-based approaches, they
still struggle to generate sharp, temporally consistent
frames in scenarios with large motion. To address this
limitation, we introduce EDEN, an Enhanced Diffusion
for high-quality large-motion vidEo frame iNterpolation.
Our approach first utilizes a transformer-based tokenizer
to produce refined latent representations of the intermediate frames for diffusion models. We then enhance the diffusion transformer with temporal attention across the process
and incorporate a start-end frame difference embedding to
guide the generation of dynamic motion. Extensive experiments demonstrate that EDEN achieves state-of-the-art results across popular benchmarks, including nearly a 10%
LPIPS reduction on DAVIS and SNU-FILM, and an 8% improvement on DAIN-HD.

LDMVFI
LDMVFI[14]

LBBDM
LBBDM[36]

Ours
Ours

Figure 1. Comparisons between existing diffusion-based methods
and our proposed EDEN on large-motion scenarios.

diffusion-based approaches typically involve compressing
the intermediate frames into latent representations using an
encoder. Diffusion processes are then applied within the
latent space to integrate information from both the starting
and ending frames to predict the latent representation of the
intermediate frame. Finally, a decoder reconstructs the latent representation into the desired intermediate frame. By
directly generating intermediate frames from latent representations, these models eliminate the need for explicit optical flow-based warping, offering a promising alternative to
traditional methods.

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation is a classic computer vision task
that aims to synthesize intermediate frames between given
starting and ending frames. It has wide applications, including animation production [52], generating slow motion
videos [7, 20, 25], novel view synthesis [4, 17, 69] and
videos compression [24, 62].
Most existing video frame interpolation methods [19, 28,
30, 31, 41, 49, 51, 65, 66] rely on estimating optical flow
between the starting and ending frames to synthesize the
intermediate frames. Recently, advances in diffusion models have inspired researchers to explore their application
in video frame interpolation [14, 21, 23, 36, 59]. These

However, despite their advantages, diffusion-based
methods still often fail at accurately capturing large, complex motions. In scenes involving rapid, nonlinear movements, these approaches often face limitations in generating sharp, realistic frames, resulting in motion blur and
temporal inconsistencies. For example, as shown in Figure 1, current diffusion based methods struggle with handling large motions. Furthermore, our analysis of current
diffusion based methods reveals that the effect of diffusion
on the quality of generated intermediate frames is surprisingly minimal. To illustrate, we present in Figure 2 a comparison between intermediate frames generated by directly
decoding random noise versus decoding latent predicted by

: Corresponding author (zxwu@fudan.edu.cn).

2105

