This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Logits DeConfusion with CLIP for Few-Shot Learning
Shuo Li, Fang Liu,* Zehua Hao, Xinyi Wang, Lingling Li, Xu Liu, Puhua Chen, Wenping Ma
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of Ministry of Education,
International Research Center for Intelligent Perception and Computation,
Joint International Research Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Computation,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
lishuo@xidian.edu.cn, f63liu@163.com

Abstract

(a) Inter-class confusion

Confused
Logits
Image / Feature Priors

Modeling
Inter-class
Confusion

+

...

Classifier

Image
Encoder

(b) After Logits DeConfusion

...

With its powerful visual-language alignment capability,
CLIP performs well in zero-shot and few-shot learning
tasks. However, we found in experiments that CLIP’s logits
suffer from serious inter-class confusion problems in downstream tasks, and the ambiguity between categories seriously affects the accuracy. To address this challenge, we
propose a novel method called Logits DeConfusion, which
effectively learns and eliminates inter-class confusion in
logits by combining our Multi-level Adapter Fusion (MAF)
module with our Inter-Class Deconfusion (ICD) module.
Our MAF extracts features from different levels and fuses
them uniformly to enhance feature representation. Our ICD
learnably eliminates inter-class confusion in logits with
a residual structure. Experimental results show that our
method can significantly improve the classification performance and alleviate the inter-class confusion problem. The
code is available at https://github.com/LiShuo1001/LDC.

Clean
Logits

(c) Our Logits DeConfusion

Figure 1. (a) Inter-class confusion of logits in CLIP-based ZSL.
(b) After remove inter-class confusion of logits. (c) Our Logits
DeConfusion models inter-class confusion and removes it.

1. Introduction
CLIP-based FSL has great potential [51, 70], its logits often
show serious inter-class confusion, resulting in a decrease
in classification accuracy, which limits the performance improvement of applying CLIP to FSL [35].
In the original CLIP-based ZSL [48] experiment, as
shown in Figure 1 (a), we found that its logits have significant inter-class confusion, which is manifested as the difficulty in accurately distinguishing the predicted values of
different categories in downstream tasks. The main reason
for this phenomenon is the pre-training strategy of CLIP.
CLIP is pre-trained on large-scale image-text pairs via contrast learning, rather than directly optimizing the classification boundaries [48]. Therefore, the ability to distinguish categories in classification tasks is insufficient, which
leads to obvious inter-class confusion in logits. In addition, the significant domain differences between the down-

Recently, the outstanding performance of Vision-Language
Models (VLMs) [68] in visual understanding has attracted
widespread attention [36]. CLIP (Contrastive LanguageImage Pretraining) [48], as a representative model, successfully maps images and texts to a common embedding
space through large-scale image-text contrastive learning,
and achieves Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) on unseen categories, thereby reducing the dependence on labeled data and
demonstrating excellent transfer learning capabilities [65].
In Few-Shot Learning (FSL), the goal is to quickly adapt to
classification tasks of new categories with very few labeled
training samples [67]. CLIP shows unique advantages in
such tasks, and its pre-trained rich features help improve the
generalization ability of the model [23]. However, although
* Corresponding author

25411

