This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reconstructing Humans with a Biomechanically Accurate Skeleton
Yan Xia1,2

Xiaowei Zhou2
1

Etienne Vouga1

The University of Texas at Austin

Qixing Huang1
2

Georgios Pavlakos1

Zhejiang University

Figure 1. Human Skeleton and Mesh Recovery (HSMR). We propose an approach that recovers the biomechanical skeleton and the
surface mesh of a human from a single image. We adopt a recent biomechanical model, SKEL [24] and train a transformer to estimate the
parameters of the model. We encourage the reader to see the skeleton and surface reconstructions in our project page.

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been remarkable progress in
3D human pose estimation, with proposed methods reaching the potential that computer vision researchers envisioned by finding applications in diverse fields such as
robotics [12, 29, 44, 45], graphics and animation [57, 65],
and AR/VR [51]. However, there are fields where these
techniques would seemingly be a perfect fit, yet the adoption has been notably limited. Biomechanics is one such
example. For biomechanics, the requirements are stricter:
we need methods that estimate parameters compatible with
biomechanical skeletons, respect joint limits, ensure physically plausible motion and return high accuracy estimates.
Unfortunately, most state-of-the-art methods do not satisfy these constraints, and extensive post-processing is required [39, 54]. Our goal is to move towards bridging this
gap by proposing an approach that can generate predictions
aligned with a biomechanically accurate skeleton model.

In this paper, we introduce a method for reconstructing 3D humans from a single image using a biomechanically accurate skeleton model. To achieve this, we train
a transformer that takes an image as input and estimates
the parameters of the model. Due to the lack of training
data for this task, we build a pipeline to produce pseudo
ground truth model parameters for single images and implement a training procedure that iteratively refines these
pseudo labels. Compared to state-of-the-art methods for
3D human mesh recovery, our model achieves competitive
performance on standard benchmarks, while it significantly
outperforms them in settings with extreme 3D poses and
viewpoints. Additionally, we show that previous reconstruction methods frequently violate joint angle limits, leading
to unnatural rotations. In contrast, our approach leverages the biomechanically plausible degrees of freedom making more realistic joint rotation estimates. We validate our
approach across multiple human pose estimation benchmarks. We make the code, models and data available at:
https://isshikihugh.github.io/HSMR/

Currently, the progress in the field of 3D human pose
estimation has largely been driven by the use of parametric body models, like SMPL [33], SMPL-X [42] and
GHUM [60]. These models provide a compact parameter-

5355

