This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D3 -Human: Dynamic Disentangled Digital Human from Monocular Video
Honghu Chen

Bo Peng

Yunfan Tao

Juyong Zhang*

University of Science and Technology of China
{honghuc@mail., ustcpbb@mail., taoyf@mail., juyong@}ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
We introduce D3 -Human, a method for reconstructing
Dynamic Disentangled Digital Human geometry from
monocular videos. Past monocular video human reconstruction primarily focuses on reconstructing undecoupled
clothed human bodies or only reconstructing clothing, making it difficult to apply directly in applications such as animation production. The challenge in reconstructing decoupled clothing and body lies in the occlusion caused by clothing over the body. To this end, the details of the visible area
and the plausibility of the invisible area must be ensured
during the reconstruction process. Our proposed method
combines explicit and implicit representations to model the
decoupled clothed human body, leveraging the robustness of
explicit representations and the flexibility of implicit representations. Specifically, we reconstruct the visible region as
SDF and propose a novel human manifold signed distance
field (hmSDF) to segment the visible clothing and visible
body, and then merge the visible and invisible body. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that, compared with
existing reconstruction schemes, D3 -Human can achieve
high-quality decoupled reconstruction of the human body
wearing different clothing, and can be directly applied to
clothing transfer and animation production. Code is available at https://ustc3dv.github.io/D3Human/.

easily accessible, visually realistic, and easy to edit, including modifications to clothing and posture. Therefore,
how to reconstruct high-fidelity, decoupled representations
of clothed human bodies using monocular video remains a
long-standing research problem. Through decoupled reconstruction, clothing can be separated from the human body,
enabling efficient adjustment and editing of different clothing styles, postures, and body shapes. This decoupling not
only enhances the flexibility and practicality of 3D reconstruction, but also improves the realism of detailed features,
providing greater potential for personalization and dynamic
interaction of virtual characters.

1. Introduction

We aim to develop a method to decouple and reconstruct
the clothed human body from monocular videos. However,
this is a very challenging task because 1) monocular videos
only provide single-view 2D image information and lack
direct 3D depth perception, 2) real captured videos contain
various clothing styles, irregular textures, and complex human poses, 3) body parts occluded by clothes are not visible in the input video, which also poses a great challenge
to reconstruction. Existing methods can be divided into explicit expression methods and implicit expression methods.
Among them, explicit expression methods usually rely on
pre-acquired templates. Some methods [16, 17, 54] use
scanners, while other methods [2, 28, 39] rely on parametric models [20, 32], and the reconstruction quality mainly
depends on the representation ability of the model. Implicit
representation methods [9, 14, 21, 23, 40] use NeRF [35]
or SDF [38] to model the clothed human body, but they usually produce an inseparable whole body or exhibit average
geometric quality.

Clothed human body reconstruction has long been a research focus in the fields of graphics and computer vision,
and has a wide range of applications in many fields such
as virtual reality, augmented reality, holographic communication, film production, and game development. Compared to film-level reconstructions requiring numerous cameras and artists for modeling, reconstructing high-quality
clothed human bodies from monocular videos holds more
practical value for general users. In scenarios such as telepresence and virtual try-ons, the 3D avatars used should be
* Corresponding author

We propose a decoupled human body reconstruction
scheme, named D3 -Human (Dynamically Disentangled
Digital Human), which combines explicit and implicit representations to address the main challenges of template generation and the dynamic deformations. In decoupled human
body reconstruction, generating clothing templates is particularly challenging. Traditional methods, such as those
based on parametric models [28] or feature lines [43], rely
heavily on priors, limiting the types of clothing they can
represent. Although implicit unsigned distance field (UDF)

10836

