This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring CLIP’s Dense Knowledge for Weakly Supervised Semantic
Segmentation
Zhiwei Yang1,2
Yucong Meng2,3
*
*
Kexue Fu4
Feilong Tang1
Shuo Wang2,3
Zhijian Song1,2,3
1
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
2
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention
3
Digital Medical Research Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, China
4
Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan)
(a) Previous methods

Abstract

Global T
CLIP

Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) with
image-level labels aims to achieve pixel-level predictions
using Class Activation Maps (CAMs). Recently, Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) has been introduced in WSSS. However, recent methods primarily focus on image-text alignment for CAM generation, while
CLIP’s potential in patch-text alignment remains unexplored. In this work, we propose ExCEL to explore CLIP’s
dense knowledge via a novel patch-text alignment paradigm
for WSSS. Specifically, we propose Text Semantic Enrichment (TSE) and Visual Calibration (VC) modules to improve the dense alignment across both text and vision
modalities. To make text embeddings semantically informative, our TSE module applies Large Language Models
(LLMs) to build a dataset-wide knowledge base and enriches the text representations with an implicit attributehunting process. To mine fine-grained knowledge from
visual features, our VC module first proposes Static Visual Calibration (SVC) to propagate fine-grained knowledge in a non-parametric manner. Then Learnable Visual
Calibration (LVC) is further proposed to dynamically shift
the frozen features towards distributions with diverse semantics. With these enhancements, ExCEL not only retains CLIP’s training-free advantages but also significantly
outperforms other state-of-the-art methods with much less
training cost on PASCAL VOC and MS COCO. Code is
available at https://github.com/zwyang6/ExCEL.

Global V

a photo of [aero.]

Image-Text
Alignment

(b) The proposed method ExCEL

CLIP

Patch-Text
Alignment

Texts of [aero.]

T

V

Text and vision token

Dense texts and patches

Frozen

Figure 1. Our motivation. (a) Previous methods leverage CLIP to
generate CAMs with global image-text alignment, leaving CLIP’s
dense knowledge unexplored. (b) The proposed ExCEL explores CLIP’s dense knowledge via a novel patch-text alignment
paradigm, which generates better CAMs with less training cost.

1. Introduction

16], or image-level labels [1, 23, 40]. It significantly reduces the annotating cost of fully supervised methods and
has attracted increasing attention in the community. Among
all cheap annotation types, most WSSS approaches leverage
image-level labels to provide dense localization cues, linking visual concepts to specific pixel regions [5, 33]. In this
work, we focus on WSSS with image-level labels as well.
Commonly, the WSSS pipeline involves three stages:
generating Class Activation Maps (CAMs) [46] by training a classification network, refining CAMs into pseudo
labels [28], and using these labels to train a segmentation model [7]. However, due to the minimal semantic information from image-level labels, CAMs intend to highlight the most distinctive object parts, significantly limiting WSSS performance. Recently, Contrastive LanguageImage Pre-training (CLIP) [24] has been introduced in
WSSS. CLIMs [36] applies image-text pairs to regularize
visual relations among different semantics. CLIP-ES [20]

Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) intends to generate pixel-level predictions using weak annotations like points [2], scribbles [18, 32], bounding boxes [8,
* Corresponding authors. Email:{shuowang, zjsong}@fudan.edu.cn.

20223

