This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flow-NeRF: Joint Learning of Geometry, Poses, and Dense Flow within Unified
Neural Representations
Xunzhi Zheng

Dan Xu

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST
{xzhengba, danxu}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Learning accurate scene reconstruction without pose priors in neural radiance fields is challenging due to inherent geometric ambiguity. Recent development either relies
on correspondence priors for regularization or uses offthe-shelf flow estimators to derive analytical poses. However, the potential for jointly learning scene geometry, camera poses, and dense flow within a unified neural representation remains largely unexplored. In this paper, we
present Flow-NeRF, a unified framework that simultaneously optimizes scene geometry, camera poses, and dense
optical flow all on-the-fly. To enable the learning of dense
flow within the neural radiance field, we design and build
a bijective mapping for flow estimation, conditioned on
pose. To make the scene reconstruction benefit from the
flow estimation, we develop an effective feature enhancement mechanism to pass canonical space features to world
space representations, significantly enhancing scene geometry. We validate our model across four important tasks,
i.e., novel view synthesis, depth estimation, camera pose
prediction, and dense optical flow estimation, using several
datasets. Our approach surpasses previous methods in almost all metrics for novel-view view synthesis and depth
estimation and yields both qualitatively sound and quantitatively accurate novel-view flow. Our project page is
https://zhengxunzhi.github.io/flownerf/.

RGB

Depth

t+8

t-8

Figure 1. Our Flow-NeRF model can simultaneously infer novelview image, novel-view depth, and long-range novel-view flow
without requiring pose prior. While we train the model solely on
consecutive forward pseudo flow, it is capable of inferring both
forward and backward long-range novel-view flows that are plausible (as illustrated in the two bottom images). In this figure, t+8
and t-8 denote novel-view forward and backward flow, respectively, with a frame interval of 8.

ever, optimizing all these objectives can be challenging
due to the lack of long-range cross-frame consistency constraints, thus leading to poor reconstruction quality.
Recently, several NeRF methods [25, 32, 33, 54] have
utilized flow supervision to constrain the learning of geometry and cross-view consistency, demonstrating the clear
benefits that optical flow can provide for NeRF optimization. However, these methods treat flow solely as a regularizer for camera pose optimization, leaving its potential to
enhance novel-view synthesis and scene geometry largely
unexplored. We demonstrate for the first time that dense
flow can serve as a simultaneous optimization goal within
an unposed NeRF framework. This joint optimization can
enhance both novel-view synthesis and scene geometry by
leveraging the inherent dense cross-view correspondences
constrained by flow during optimization. This is accomplished through the joint optimization of appearance, geometry, camera poses, and dense flow by enforcing the different objectives to learn unified underlying implicit scene
representations that couple all the optimization objectives.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [2, 3, 26, 27, 49] enable
photo-realistic novel view synthesis and scene reconstruction; however, most methods require camera poses obtained
from traditional Structure-from-Motion (SfM) pipelines,
such as COLMAP [31], as input for training. Nevertheless,
the pose initialization can fail in various cases, e.g., in textureless scenes. Recent studies on pose-free NeRF [4, 24]
and NeRF-based SLAM [23, 53, 54] have shown that poses
can be optimized in conjunction with scene geometry. How-

993

