This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Flow Diffusion for Efficient Frame Interpolation
Yang Hai 1 ,

Guo Wang 1 ,
1

Input overlay

LDMVFI (8.3s)

Tan Su 1 ,

2

Insta360 Research

CBBD (2.1s)

Wenjie Jiang 1 ,

Yinlin Hu 2

MagicLeap

SGM-VFI (0.19s)

Ours (0.20s)

Ground truth

Figure 1. Different methods for video frame interpolation. Most diffusion-based [15, 44] interpolation methods (LDMVFI [7],
CBBD [32]) still have a large gap from non-diffusion-based methods (SGM-VFI [28]), in both accuracy and efficiency. We propose a
diffusion-based model that is 10+ times faster than other diffusion-based methods, and on par with SGM-VFI in efficiency. More importantly, we achieve significantly better accuracy than all baselines. Note how the details and large motions are missed in the baselines, but
recovered with our method. We report the inference seconds on the same RTX-4090 GPU with a typical 1024×1024 image pair.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Most recent diffusion-based methods still show a large gap
compared to non-diffusion methods for video frame interpolation, in both accuracy and efficiency. Most of them formulate the problem as a denoising procedure in latent space
directly, which is less effective caused by the large latent
space. We propose to model bilateral optical flow explicitly
by hierarchical diffusion models, which has much smaller
search space in the denoising procedure. Based on the flow
diffusion model, we then use a flow-guided images synthesizer to produce the final result. We train the flow diffusion
model and the image synthesizer end to end. Our method
achieves state of the art in accuracy, and 10+ times faster
than other diffusion-based methods. The project page is at:
https://hfd-interpolation.github.io.

22943

Video frame interpolation aims to generate intermediate
frames given a pair of consecutive frames from video. It
is a fundamental video understanding task in computer vision [48], and has many real applications such as slowmotion generation [21], video compression [50], and novel
view synthesis [26].
Existing methods have made great progress based on
an encoder-decoder paradigm with bilateral flow as an intermediate supervision signal [19, 25, 27, 28, 30, 40, 51,
54]. However, since predicting bilateral flow between two
frames is an ill-posed problem with many possible solutions in essence, most of them can only produce an oversmoothed mean solution, as shown in Fig. 1 with SGM-VFI.
Some recent methods try to use diffusion techniques [8, 15, 44] for video frame interpolation [7, 20, 32],

