This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FactCheXcker: Mitigating Measurement Hallucinations
in Chest X-ray Report Generation Models
Alice Heiman1→ Xiaoman Zhang, PhD2→ Emma Chen, MS2
Sung Eun Kim, MD2 Pranav Rajpurkar, PhD2†
1
Stanford University, USA 2 Harvard University, USA

Abstract
Medical vision-language models often struggle with generating accurate quantitative measurements in radiology reports, leading to hallucinations that undermine clinical reliability. We introduce FactCheXcker, a modular framework that de-hallucinates radiology report measurements
by leveraging an improved query-code-update paradigm.
Specifically, FactCheXcker employs specialized modules
and the code generation capabilities of large language models to solve measurement queries generated based on the
original report. After extracting measurable findings, the
results are incorporated into an updated report. We evaluate FactCheXcker on endotracheal tube placement, which
accounts for an average of 78% of report measurements,
using the MIMIC-CXR dataset and 11 medical reportgeneration models. Our results show that FactCheXcker
significantly reduces hallucinations, improves measurement
precision, and maintains the quality of the original reports.
Specifically, FactCheXcker improves the performance of all
11 models and achieves an average improvement of 135.0%
in reducing measurement hallucinations measured by mean
absolute error. Code is available at https://github.
com/rajpurkarlab/FactCheXcker.

Figure 1. An illustration of FactCheXcker pipeline, which uses a
query-code-update approach to alleviate measurement hallucinations in chest X-ray report generation models.

1. Introduction

ments, including determining the size of a lung nodule or
measuring the distance from an endotracheal tube (ETT) to
the carina [47]. Incorrect or missing measurements can lead
to adverse clinical outcomes since many reporting guidelines rely on precise thresholds. This phenomenon, usually
referred to as “hallucination” in the context of AI models,
limits their reliability and potential for clinical deployment.
These hallucinations primarily stem from the inherent
complexity of tasks that require precise measurements. Effective measurement requires a model to excel at multiple
subtasks simultaneously: identifying measurable findings,
confirming their presence in images, localizing these findings, pinpointing crucial anatomical landmarks, and performing accurate dimensional calculations. Without explicit instruction or specialized architectures for quantitative

Medical vision-language models have shown significant
potential in assisting with everyday clinical tasks, such
as interpreting chest X-rays for radiology report generation [2, 15, 36, 48]. Recent surveys of radiologists’ expectations regarding AI systems in clinical practice have revealed a preference for medical models on more functional,
tedious tasks such as calculating medical scores and assessing organ sizes, volumes, or density over general-purpose
interpreters [46]. However, current medical report generation models often struggle with such quantitative measure→ Equal contribution.

† Corresponding author.

30787

