This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Light3R-SfM: Towards Feed-forward Structure-from-Motion
Sven Elflein1,2,3
1

NVIDIA

2

Qunjie Zhou1

Vector Institute

3

6

We present Light3R-SfM, a feed-forward, end-to-end
learnable framework for efficient large-scale Structurefrom-Motion (SfM) from unconstrained image collections.
Unlike existing SfM solutions that rely on costly matching and global optimization to achieve accurate 3D reconstructions, Light3R-SfM addresses this limitation through
a novel latent global alignment module. This module replaces traditional global optimization with a learnable attention mechanism, effectively capturing multi-view constraints across images for robust and precise camera pose
estimation. Light3R-SfM constructs a sparse scene graph
via retrieval-score-guided shortest path tree to dramatically reduce memory usage and computational overhead
compared to the naive approach. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that Light3R-SfM achieves competitive accuracy while significantly reducing runtime, making it ideal
for 3D reconstruction tasks in real-world applications with
a runtime constraint.

5

University of Toronto

SfM method
ACE0
GLOMAP
MASt3R-SfM
Spann3r
VGGSfM
Light3R-SfM (ours)
#Images
25
50
100
200

Registered frames per second ↑

Abstract

Laura Leal-Taixé1

4
3
2
1
0
0.2

0.4

0.6
ATE ↓

0.8

1.0
×10−1

Figure 1. Processing speed vs. accuracy for various SfM methods. Our work significantly decreases the runtime across various sizes of image collections compared to traditional pipelines
while obtaining comparable accuracy. Results are measured on the
Tanks&Temples dataset.

1. Introduction

a common reference system for every pixel. Learning from
large-scale annotated data, it shows impressive performance
in handling images with extreme viewpoint changes. To perform SfM from an image collection, DUSt3R works [19,
45] first compute stereo reconstruction exhaustively for all
image pairs and then obtain globally aligned pointmaps
for all cameras through joint optimization of pairwise rigid
transformations and local pointmaps. This baseline has been
significantly improved by the concurrent work MASt3RSfM [10] that leverages image retrieval to drastically reduce the computation overhead, boosts optimization efficiency by optimizing only over the sparse pixel correspondences, and appends a global bundle adjustment stage for
accuracy refinement. While optimization-based alignment
has been proven to be the key to accurate 3D reconstruction by DUSt3R, MASt3R-SfM and classical SfM methods [22, 27, 34], this comes at the cost of slow runtime and
extensive memory footprint even for moderately-sized image collections.
To this end, we propose Light3R-SfM, a fully learnable feed-forward SfM model that directly obtains globally
aligned camera poses from an unordered image collection,

Structure-from-Motion (SfM) is the task of jointly recovering camera poses and reconstructing the 3D scene
structure from a set of unconstrained images. This longstanding problem is essential to many computer vision applications, including novel view synthesis via NeRFs [3,
26] and 3DGS [17], multi-view stereo (MVS) reconstruction [28, 43], and visual localization [31, 33]. Traditional
SfM methods generally follow two main approaches: incremental [34, 37, 48] and global [7, 27, 47] SfM. Both
paradigms rely on key components such as feature detection and matching for correspondence search, 3D triangulation to reconstruct geometry from 2D correspondences,
and joint optimization of camera poses and scene geometry
through bundle adjustment. A major research direction has
been to replace these components with learning-based modules, progressing towards fully end-to-end SfM [6, 36, 44].
Recently, the seminal work DUSt3R [45] proposed to train
an unconstrained stereo 3D reconstruction model through
pointmap regression, i.e., by directly predicting 3D points in

16774

