This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MEET: Towards Memory-Efcient Temporal Sparse Deep Neural Networks
Zeqi Zhu*†

Ibrahim Batuhan Akkaya* Luc Waeijen* Egor Bondarev†
Arash Pourtaherian* Orlando Moreira*
*
Snap Inc. † Eindhoven University of Technology

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are accurate but computeintensive, leading to substantial energy consumption during
inference. Exploiting temporal redundancy through ∆-Σ
convolution [26] in video processing has proven to greatly
enhance computation efciency. However, temporal ∆Σ DNNs typically require substantial memory for storing
neuron states to compute inter-frame differences, hindering
their on-chip deployment. To mitigate this memory cost,
directly compressing the states can disrupt the linearity
of temporal ∆-Σ convolution, causing accumulated errors
in long-term ∆-Σ processing. Thus, we propose MEET,
an optimization framework for MEmory-Efcient Temporal
∆-Σ DNNs. MEET transfers the state compression challenge to a well-established weight compression problem by
trading fewer activations for more weights and introduces a
co-design of network architecture and suppression method
to optimize for mixed spatial-temporal execution. Evaluations on three vision applications demonstrate a reduction of 5.1∼13.3 × in total memory compared to the most
computation-efcient temporal DNNs, while preserving the
computation efciency and model accuracy in long-term ∆Σ processing. MEET facilitates the deployment of temporal ∆-Σ DNNs within on-chip memory of embedded eventdriven platforms, empowering low-power edge processing.

1. Introduction
Recent breakthroughs in deep learning have accelerated advancements across various computer vision tasks, prompting practitioners to increasingly adopt deep neural networks
(DNNs) for performance improvement. However, this rapid
progress is accompanied by signicant trade-offs, as modern DNN inference requires considerable energy, hindering
their deployment in resource-limited environments.
The brain-inspired computing paradigm [4, 34, 39] has garnered considerable attention as a promising solution for
low-power machine intelligence. Unlike conventional von
Neumann computer architectures (e.g., GPU, CPU), eventdriven platforms [1, 5, 13, 20, 59, 65], inspired by the brain’s

Figure 1. MEET inference performance in computation cycles
and energy consumption across three applications. In general,
temporal suppression methods outperform spatial methods in computation reduction (left); however, they may compromise energy
efciency due to memory overow (right). MEET meets the onchip memory constraints of an embedded event-driven platform
GrAI-VIP [59], achieving optimal computation and energy savings. All evaluated models stay within 1.0% accuracy tolerance.

functional principles, bring memory closer to computing
units and use dataow architectures to exploit activation
sparsity. The pivotal optimization for these platforms lies
in deliberate suppression of the non-zero input activations
(events) of computation-intensive layers (e.g., Conv2D),
thereby resulting in diminished event-triggered (dynamic)
computations. Recent research has shown that spatial suppression efciently minimizes event count for single-frame
DNN inference [21, 37, 47, 66, 71, 72], while temporal suppression, utilizing ∆-Σ modulation on linear layers [26],
signicantly improves the suppression performance by ex-

29309

