This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mind the Trojan Horse: Image Prompt Adapter Enabling Scalable and
Deceptive Jailbreaking
Junxi Chen1 Junhao Dong2 Xiaohua Xie1,3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, China
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
chenjx353@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, junhao003@ntu.edu.sg
xiexiaoh6@mail.sysu.edu.cn
1

Abstract

Text Prompt: A person driving a car

Recently, the Image Prompt Adapter (IP-Adapter) has been
increasingly integrated into text-to-image diffusion models
(T2I-DMs) to improve controllability. However, in this paper, we reveal that T2I-DMs equipped with the IP-Adapter
(T2I-IP-DMs) enable a new jailbreak attack named the hijacking attack. We demonstrate that, by uploading imperceptible image-space adversarial examples (AEs), the adversary can hijack massive benign users to jailbreak an
Image Generation Service (IGS) driven by T2I-IP-DMs
and mislead the public to discredit the service provider.
Worse still, the IP-Adapter’s dependency on open-source
image encoders reduces the knowledge required to craft
AEs. Extensive experiments verify the technical feasibility of the hijacking attack. In light of the revealed threat,
we investigate several existing defenses and explore combining the IP-Adapter with adversarially trained models
to overcome existing defenses’ limitations. Our code is
available at https://github.com/fhdnskfbeuv/
attackIPA.
CAUTION: Though we have blacked out and blurred
inappropriate images according to our values, this paper
may still contain offensive or distressing content.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, diffusion models (DMs) [21] have experienced rapid development, demonstrating superior performance in image generation [28, 30, 35]. One of the key
components that leads to the success of DMs is the conditioning mechanism [30], enabling users to control the output through prompts. However, the conditioning mechanism also allows the adversary to generate NSFW (NotSafe-For-Work) images through adversarial prompts, commonly called jailbreaking.

23785

Input

Benign Image
Prompt

Visually
Similar

Input

Adversarial
Example

T2I-IP-DM

Output

Safe Image

Identical

T2I-IP-DM

Output

NSFW Image

Figure 1. An illustration of jailbreaking the T2I-IP-DM. The T2IIP-DM enables the adversary to use the image as an attack vector.

Existing jailbreak attacks [7, 25, 36, 38, 39, 41] mostly
jailbreak text-to-image diffusion models (T2I-DMs) by
crafting adversarial texts1 . Though effective in triggering
NSFW content, these texts often contain typos, non-existent
words, or explicit NSFW concepts, resulting in poor imperceptibility2 . For the red team, the poor imperceptibility is
less concerning, as it focuses on assessing the worst-case security of the IGS. For the real-world adversary, however, the
poor imperceptibility limits adversarial texts’ impact as attack vectors, as the public is unlikely to query the IGS with
these adversarial texts and to accuse an IGS of its faithfully
following explicit NSFW concepts.
Recently, conditioning mechanisms based on the image
modality [24, 27, 37, 40] have been increasingly incorporated into T2I-DMs. Among these image-based conditioning mechanisms, the Image Prompt Adapter [40] (IPAdapter) has attracted much attention for its good perfor1 Yang et al. [38] included image modality to bypass the post-hoc safety
checker and still depended on text modality to trigger NSFW content. We
discuss the only existing image-based jailbreaking [41] in Sec. C.2.
2 A detailed discussion is in Appendix C.1.

