This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Better Alignment: Training Diffusion Models with Reinforcement
Learning Against Sparse Rewards
Zijing Hu1 * Fengda Zhang2 ∗ Long Chen3 Kun Kuang1 † Jiahui Li1
Jun Xiao1 Xin Wang4 Wenwu Zhu4
1

Kaifeng Gao1

Zhejiang University, 2 Nanyang Technological University, 3 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 4 Tsinghua University

{zj.hu,fdzhang}@zju.edu.cn, zjuchenlong@gmail.com, {kunkuang,jiahuil,kite phone}@zju.edu.cn,
junx@cs.zju.edu.cn, {xin wang,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn

SD

DDPO

B2-DiffuRL

SD

DDPO

B2-DiffuRL

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in
text-to-image generation. However, their practical applications are hindered by the misalignment between generated
images and corresponding text prompts. To tackle this issue, reinforcement learning (RL) has been considered for
diffusion model fine-tuning. Yet, RL’s effectiveness is limited by the challenge of sparse reward, where feedback is
only available at the end of the generation process. This
makes it difficult to identify which actions during the denoising process contribute positively to the final generated
image, potentially leading to ineffective or unnecessary denoising policies. To this end, this paper presents a novel RLbased framework that addresses the sparse reward problem
when training diffusion models. Our framework, named
B2 -DiffuRL, employs two strategies: Backward progressive training and Branch-based sampling. For one thing,
backward progressive training focuses initially on the final timesteps of denoising process and gradually extends
the training interval to earlier timesteps, easing the learning difficulty from sparse rewards. For another, we perform
branch-based sampling for each training interval. By comparing the samples within the same branch, we can identify
how much the policies of the current training interval contribute to the final image, which helps to learn effective policies instead of unnecessary ones. B2 -DiffuRL is compatible with existing optimization algorithms. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of B2 -DiffuRL in improving prompt-image alignment and maintaining diversity
in generated images. The code for this work is available1 .

1. Introduction
The text-to-image generation task aims to produce images
from textual descriptions, holding significant potential for
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/hu-zijing/B2-DiffuRL.

“a fox riding a bike”

“a bear washing dishes”

“a pig playing chess”

Figure 1. (Prompt-image Misalignment) Text-to-image diffusion
models (e.g., Stable Diffusion (SD) [52]) may not generate highquality images that accurately align with prompts. Existing reinforcement learning-based diffusion model fine-tuning methods
(e.g., DDPO [8]) have limited effect and loss of image diversity.
For each set of images above, we use the same seed for sampling.

various applications [49, 56]. Recently, diffusion models
have garnered widespread attention due to their success in
this domain [15, 23, 59]. These models employ a sequential denoising process that transforms random noise into
detailed images. However, even the most advanced textto-image diffusion models, such as DALLE3 [6] and Stable Diffusion [52], often encounter issues with misalignment between the generated images and the textual descriptions [28]. This misalignment limits the practicality and effectiveness of these models in real-world applications.
To solve this problem, recent studies have explored incorporating reinforcement learning (RL) techniques to finetune pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models [8, 17, 32,
46, 63, 65]. By formulating the step-by-step denoising process as a sequential decision-making problem, RL enables
diffusion models to optimize for specific long-term objectives, beyond merely fitting to static data as done in standard
supervised learning [29, 52, 64]. In this formulation, noisy
images at different timesteps are viewed as states in RL,
while denoising at each timestep corresponds to an action.

23604

