This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RGBAvatar: Reduced Gaussian Blendshapes for
Online Modeling of Head Avatars
Linzhou Li

Yumeng Li
Yanlin Weng
Youyi Zheng
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Kun Zhou*

Figure 1. Our RGBAvatar reconstructs a high-fidelity head avatar from a 2-minute monocular video in about 80 seconds, using a reduced
set of Gaussian blendshapes. These blendshapes are linearly combined to generate avatar animations in real time at about 400 FPS.

Abstract
We present Reduced Gaussian Blendshapes Avatar (RGBAvatar), a method for reconstructing photorealistic, animatable head avatars at speeds sufficient for on-the-fly reconstruction. Unlike prior approaches that utilize linear bases
from 3D morphable models (3DMM) to model Gaussian
blendshapes, our method maps tracked 3DMM parameters
into reduced blendshape weights with an MLP, leading to a
compact set of blendshape bases. The learned compact base
composition effectively captures essential facial details for
specific individuals, and does not rely on the fixed base composition weights of 3DMM, leading to enhanced reconstruction quality and higher efficiency. To further expedite the reconstruction process, we develop a novel color initialization
estimation method and a batch-parallel Gaussian rasterization process, achieving state-of-the-art quality with training
throughput of about 630 images per second. Moreover, we
propose a local-global sampling strategy that enables direct
on-the-fly reconstruction, immediately reconstructing the
model as video streams in real time while achieving quality
comparable to offline settings. Our source code is available
at https://github.com/gapszju/RGBAvatar.

sians to parametric mesh models [29, 37, 39, 46, 55] or learn
neutral deformation fields [17, 44, 49, 50]. While Gaussian
Blendshapes [33] have recently demonstrated superior reconstruction quality and real-time performance through efficient linear blending, they rely on predefined blendshape
bases from 3D Morphable Models (3DMM) like FLAME
[2] or FaceWarehouse [12]. This reliance on predefined
bases results in a large number of parameters, scaling linearly with the blendshape count, leading to increased computational cost and slower training.
In this paper, we introduce RGBAvatar, a reduced Gaussian Blendshapes representation for animated head avatar
reconstruction. Our key innovation is to implicitly learn a
compact set of Gaussian blendshapes that effectively represent animatable head avatars. We achieve this through a
lightweight MLP that maps tracked FLAME parameters to
reduced blendshape weights, which are then used to linearly
blend a series of learnable bases to generate an animated
head avatar. By optimizing the MLP alongside the blendshapes during training, the model dynamically discovers a
compact, adaptive base composition, leading to enhanced
reconstruction quality and higher efficiency (both in training and runtime).
To further expedite training, we introduce a novel colorinitialization method and a batch-parallel Gaussian rasterization process. Specifically, we observe that initialized
Gaussians can be treated as Gaussian kernels in 2D image
space, allowing direct calculation of Gaussian properties us-

1. Introduction
Recent advances in 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [27]
have significantly improved the reconstruction of animatable head avatars. Prior methods typically bind 3D Gaus-

10747

* Corresponding author (kunzhou@acm.org)

