This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TexGaussian: Generating High-quality PBR Material via
Octree-based 3D Gaussian Splatting
Bojun Xiong1 *†, Jialun Liu2 *, Jiakui Hu3†, Chenming Wu2 , Jinbo Wu2 , Xing Liu2 ,
Chen Zhao2 , Errui Ding2 , Zhouhui Lian1‡
1

Textual
Descriptions

A wooden box
with gold accents

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China
2
Baidu VIS
3
Institute of Medical Technology, Peking University, China
Input Mesh

Albedo

Roughness

Metallic

Rendering 1

Rendering 2 Rendering 3

TexGaussian

Astronomical
telescope

TexGaussian

A green jug with
a handle and rope

TexGaussian

Figure 1. Our proposed TexGaussian is capable of generating high-quality materials for given input 3D meshes based on the corresponding
textual descriptions. The generated results are naturally compatible with modern graphical engines for photo-realistic rendering under
different environment maps.

Abstract

images not only for the albedo map but also for roughness and metallic. Moreover, our model is trained in a
regression manner instead of diffusion denoising, capable
of generating the PBR material for a 3D mesh in a single feed-forward process. Extensive experiments on publicly available benchmarks demonstrate that our method
synthesizes more visually pleasing PBR materials and runs
faster than previous methods in both unconditional and textconditional scenarios, exhibiting better consistency with the
given geometry. Our code and trained models are available
at https://3d-aigc.github.io/TexGaussian.

Physically Based Rendering (PBR) materials play a crucial
role in modern graphics, enabling photorealistic rendering
across diverse environment maps. Developing an effective
and efficient algorithm that is capable of automatically generating high-quality PBR materials rather than RGB texture
for 3D meshes can significantly streamline the 3D content
creation. Most existing methods leverage pre-trained 2D
diffusion models for multi-view image synthesis, which often leads to severe inconsistency between the generated textures and input 3D meshes. This paper presents TexGaussian, a novel method that uses octant-aligned 3D Gaussian
Splatting for rapid PBR material generation. Specifically,
we place each 3D Gaussian on the finest leaf node of the
octree built from the input 3D mesh to render the multi-view

1. Introduction
Traditional 3D asset creation relies heavily on the expertise and extensive effort of professional designers [23], posing a significant barrier for casual users interested in creating 3D models independently. In the 3D design process,
geometry creation typically represents only a small portion of the overall time, while the majority is dedicated to
developing textures and appearances, which are far more
time-consuming. Achieving a delicate appearance for a 3D

* Denotes equal contribution.
† This work was partly done when Bojun and Jiakui interned in Baidu.
‡ Corresponding author. E-mail: lianzhouhui@pku.edu.cn

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (Grant No.: 62372015), Center For Chinese Font Design and Research, and Key Laboratory of Intelligent Press Media Technology.

551

