This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Divot: Diffusion Powers Video Tokenizer for Comprehension and Generation
Yuying Ge

Yizhuo Li
Yixiao Ge
Ying Shan
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
https://github.com/TencentARC/Divot

Abstract

sparse

In recent years, there has been a significant surge of interest in unifying image comprehension and generation within
Large Language Models (LLMs). This growing interest
has prompted us to explore extending this unification to
videos. The core challenge lies in developing a versatile
video tokenizer that captures both the spatial characteristics
and temporal dynamics of videos to obtain representations
for LLMs, and the representations can be further decoded
into realistic video clips to enable video generation. In
this work, we introduce Divot, a Diffusion-Powered Video
Tokenizer, which leverages the diffusion process for selfsupervised video representation learning. We posit that if
a video diffusion model can effectively de-noise video clips
by taking the features of a video tokenizer as the condition, then the tokenizer has successfully captured robust
spatial and temporal information. Additionally, the video
diffusion model inherently functions as a de-tokenizer, decoding videos from their representations. Building upon the
Divot tokenizer, we present Divot-LLM through video-to-text
autoregression and text-to-video generation by modeling
the distributions of continuous-valued Divot features with
a Gaussian Mixture Model. Experimental results demonstrate that our diffusion-based video tokenizer, when integrated with a pre-trained LLM, achieves competitive performance across various video comprehension and generation
benchmarks. The instruction tuned Divot-LLM also excels
in video storytelling, generating interleaved narratives and
corresponding videos. Models and codes are available at
https://github.com/TencentARC/Divot.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the rapid evolution of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [12, 15–17, 55–57, 77, 86, 91, 93]
has demonstrated significant progresses in unified image
understanding and generation, which empowers LLMs [6,
11, 60] with the ability to generate images beyond texts.
While these work primarily focus on image-text data, the
extension of this unification to the video domain remains

Tokenization

Comprehension

Video
Tokenizer

LLM

“Mug moves
down”

condition

same
duration

Denoise for selfsupervised learning
Add Noise

Diffusion Model

“Mug moves
down”

LLM

Generation

dense

Figure 1. We utilize the diffusion procedure to learn a video tokenizer in a self-supervised manner for unified comprehension and
generation, where the spatiotemporal representations serve as the
condition of a diffusion model to de-noise video clips. Additionally,
the proxy diffusion model functions as a de-tokenizer to decode
realistic video clips from the video representations.

relatively under-explored. Achieving unified video comprehension and generation is essential for the development of
more sophisticated artificial intelligence (AI) systems that
are capable of understanding and creating dynamic visual
content in the real world.
The primary challenge of achieving unified video comprehension and generation lies in developing a versatile video
tokenizer that can effectively address the complexities inherent in video data. This tokenizer should be able to obtain
robust video representations that serve as inputs of MLLMs
for video comprehension, and these representations can be
further decoded into realistic video clips to enable video generation. Unlike static images, videos encompass both spatial
characteristics and temporal dynamics, making their representation significantly more complex. Recent pioneering
work [26, 40, 74] adopt a discrete video tokenizer for unifying video comprehension and generation, where a video
is represented as a sequence of discrete frame tokens, or
keyframe tokens followed by discrete motion tokens. This
approach eases video generation with a LLM through an autoregressive next-token prediction mechanism, but sacrifices
the performance of multimodal understanding, as pointed
out by recent work [77]. In this work, we aim to investigate
an alternative approach by utilizing continuous video representations to unify video comprehension and generation.
To this end, we introduce Divot, a Diffusion-Powered

13606

