This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UCM-VeID V2: A Richer Dataset and A Pre-training Method for UAV
Cross-Modality Vehicle Re-Identification
Xingyue Liu Jiahao Qi Chen Chen KangCheng Bin Ping Zhong∗
National University of Defense Technology, China
{liuxingyue18, qijiahao1996, chenchen21c, binkc21, zhongping}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-Modality Re-Identification (VT-ReID) aims to
achieve around-the-clock target matching, benefiting from
the strengths of both RGB and infrared (IR) modalities.
However, the field is hindered by limited datasets, particularly for vehicle VT-ReID, and by challenges such
as modality bias training (MBT), stemming from biased
pre-training on ImageNet. To tackle the above issues,
this paper introduces an dataset benchmark, named
UCM-VeID V2, for vehicle VT-ReID, and proposes a
new self-supervised pre-training method, Cross-Modality
Patch-Mixed Self-supervised Learning (PMSL). UCM-VeID
V2 dataset features a significant increase in data volume,
along with enhancements in multiple aspects. PMSL
addresses MBT by learning modality-invariant features
through Patch-Mixed Image Reconstruction (PMIR) and
Modality Discrimination Adversarial Learning (MDAL),
and enhances discriminability with Modality-Augmented
Contrasting Cluster (MACC). Comprehensive experiments
are carried out to validate the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Cross-modality vehicle re-identification (ReID), also referred to as vehicle visible-infrared (VI) ReID [22], involves
retrieving a matching vehicle image from a gallery set captured in the visible (RGB) or infrared (IR) spectrum, given
a query vehicle image in the alternate modality. This process, where images are obtained from cameras of differing
modalities, has garnered significant attention in applications
such as video surveillance and public security [1, 28], primarily due to its advantages in enabling continuous, intelligent monitoring across day and night conditions.
Despite its importance, research on vehicle VT-ReID remains relatively underdeveloped. A primary challenge lies
in the lack of essential resources, including a comprehensive large-scale dataset and widely accessible benchmark

Figure 1. Increments and samples of UCM-VeID V2. (a)(b)(c)(d)
are varies platforms, time periods, weather conditions and locations for data acquisition, respectively. (e) shows the 4 IDs with
different modalities, view-points and scales samples.

∗ Corresponding author

results. Existing remote sensing vehicle ReID datasets,
such as VRAI [31], UAV-VeID [29], VRU [24], and VeRiUAV [19], primarily focus on the single RGB modality,
lacking the infrared data necessary for cross-modality analysis. For this, [22] has introduced the first UAV RGB-IR vehicle ReID dataset, UCM-VeID, to support cross-modality
vehicle ReID research. However, this dataset is constrained
by its single data acquisition platform and limited number of

22286

