This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Modal Aerial-Ground Cross-View Place Recognition with Neural ODEs

Qiyu Kang3

Sijie Wang*1 Rui She*2
Siqi Li1 Disheng Li1 Tianyu Geng1 Shangshu Yu1 Wee Peng Tay1
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Beihang University
3
University of Science and Technology of China
wang1679@e.ntu.edu.sg

aerial-view map database

Abstract
Place recognition (PR) aims at retrieving the query place
from a database and plays a crucial role in various applications, including navigation, autonomous driving, and augmented reality. While previous multi-modal PR works have
mainly focused on the same-view scenario in which groundview descriptors are matched with a database of ground-view
descriptors during inference, the multi-modal cross-view
scenario, in which ground-view descriptors are matched
with aerial-view descriptors in a database, remains underexplored. We propose AGPlace, a model that effectively integrates information from multi-modal ground sensors (cameras and LiDARs) to achieve accurate aerial-ground PR.
AGPlace achieves effective aerial-ground cross-view PR by
leveraging a manifold-based neural ordinary differential
equation (ODE) framework with a multi-domain alignment
loss. It outperforms existing state-of-the-art cross-view PR
models on large-scale datasets. As most existing PR models
are designed for ground-ground PR, we adapt these baselines into our cross-view pipeline. Experiments demonstrate
that this direct adaptation performs worse than our overall
model architecture AGPlace. AGPlace represents a significant advancement in multi-modal aerial-ground PR, with
promising implications for real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Place recognition (PR) serves as a fundamental solution
to the problem of localization, treating localization as a
retrieval task. It involves maintaining a database of geotagged sensor data (e.g., images and point clouds) collected
at previously visited places. During inference, PR computes
the similarity between the query data and the database data
to retrieve the most similar places. PR plays a crucial role
in various applications, including simultaneous localization
* Sijie Wang and Rui She contribute equally. Corresponding author: Rui

She.

…

aerial-view
database descriptors
2D
VPR model
e.g.
ResNet
multimodal
PR model

we design
ground-view multi-modal query AGPlace

during inference
during training

…

training

query-database
matching
place
recognition

ground-view
query descriptor

for ground
agent localization

Figure 1. An example pipeline of multi-modal aerial-ground PR.
(1) The aerial-view geo-tagged maps (e.g. aerial RGB images, road
maps) act as the database. (2) The ground-view multi-modal data
(images + point clouds) are the place query to be matched with the
database.

and mapping (SLAM) [4] and augmented reality (AR) [49].
PR models are expected to convert the raw sensor data
into highly aggregated scene descriptors with much smaller
sizes. Traditional techniques leverage hand-crafted features
to summarize the query and database data, such as Vector
of Locally Aggregated Descriptors (VLAD) [23]. However,
these solutions heavily rely on prior human knowledge and
may not perform optimally in challenging scenes. Advances
in deep learning have facilitated the widespread adoption
of learning-based PR works. For example, NetVLAD [3]
replaces the manual design of the encoding process used
in traditional VLAD with a neural network that learns the
representation directly from raw image data.
In recent years, PR has attracted increasing attention from
researchers. The initial focus was primarily on developing
single-modal solutions, where both query and database come
from the same modality, such as images [1, 17, 22, 25, 47,
63, 76] or point clouds [9, 10, 26, 27, 39, 40, 62]. However,
with the advancement of multi-sensor processing techniques,
there has been a growing interest in multi-modal PR. In
this direction, query and database data encompass more
than one modality, allowing for richer information fusion.
Multi-modal models [28, 29, 74] have demonstrated superior
performances to their single-modal counterparts.

11717

