This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual Consolidation for Pre-Trained Model-Based Domain-Incremental Learning
Da-Wei Zhou, Zi-Wen Cai, Han-Jia Ye( ) , Lijun Zhang, De-Chuan Zhan
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
{zhoudw,caizw,yehj,zhanglj,zhandc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain-Incremental Learning (DIL) involves the progressive adaptation of a model to new concepts across different domains. While recent advances in pre-trained models provide a solid foundation for DIL, learning new concepts often results in the catastrophic forgetting of pretrained knowledge. Specifically, sequential model updates
can overwrite both the representation and the classifier with
knowledge from the latest domain. Thus, it is crucial to develop a representation and corresponding classifier that accommodate all seen domains throughout the learning process. To this end, we propose DUal ConsolidaTion (D UCT)
to unify and consolidate historical knowledge at both the
representation and classifier levels. By merging the backbone of different stages, we create a representation space
suitable for multiple domains incrementally. The merged
representation serves as a balanced intermediary that captures task-specific features from all seen domains. Additionally, to address the mismatch between consolidated embeddings and the classifier, we introduce an extra classifier
consolidation process. Leveraging class-wise semantic information, we estimate the classifier weights of old domains
within the latest embedding space. By merging historical and estimated classifiers, we align them with the consolidated embedding space, facilitating incremental classification. Extensive experimental results on four benchmark datasets demonstrate D UCT’s state-of-the-art performance. Code is available at https://github.com/
Estrella-fugaz/CVPR25-Duct.

domains [19]. For instance, autonomous vehicles must handle driving tasks across different seasons and weather conditions [10], and face recognition systems are supposed to
recognize users despite the varying lighting conditions [81].
Correspondingly, Domain-Incremental Learning (DIL) [60]
addresses this challenge by absorbing new knowledge from
new data distributions while preserving existing knowledge. However, sequentially updating the model with
new domains often biases the embedding [77] and classifier [73, 80] modules toward the latest domain, leading
to catastrophic forgetting [14, 40] of previous knowledge.
Therefore, developing methods for learning new domains
without forgetting existing knowledge becomes a critical
challenge for the machine learning community.
To combat catastrophic forgetting, recent works leverage
strong pre-trained models (PTMs) [20] as the initialization
for DIL [67–69]. PTMs’ robust feature representation abilities provide a powerful starting point, showing promising
results in DIL benchmarks. These approaches freeze the
pre-trained backbone to preserve existing knowledge and
append lightweight modules [13, 27, 32] to capture new patterns. However, since incoming domains will also overwrite
the appended modules, the representations still suffer from
forgetting, leading to corresponding bias in the classifier.

1. Introduction

In DIL, there are two primary sources of forgetting: the
overwriting of features and classifiers. Continually adjusting the features to capture the latest task biases the representations toward the newest domain. Assuming the previous task involves real-world photos while the subsequent
one consists of quick-draw images, the features will be
overwhelmingly adjusted to highlight non-objective details.
This may hinder the model from distinguishing the previous
domain, resulting in forgetting. In light of this, an ideal feature space in DIL should fit all domains and equally highlight the domain-specific features for all seen tasks. However, as features become less generalizable due to overwriting, the classifier also becomes biased toward the latest domain. Since the classifier plays the pivotal role of mapping
embeddings to classes, using the biased classifier can cause
detrimental effects on decision-making. Consequently, it

Recent years have seen the rise of deep learning, demonstrating its strong potential in real-world applications [15,
17, 21, 42, 43, 76]. However, in a dynamic and everchanging world, data often evolves in a stream format [1,
30], necessitating continuous updates with data from new
† Correspondence to: Han-Jia Ye (yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn)

20547

