This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Solving Instance Detection from an Open-World Perspective
Qianqian Shen1, * Yunhan Zhao2,→
1

Nahyun Kwon3

Jeeeun Kim3

Yanan Li4,†

Shu Kong5,6,†

Zhejiang University, 2 UC Irvine, 3 Texas A&M University, 4 Zhejiang Lab
5

University of Macau, 6 Institute of Collaborative Innovation

website and code: https://shenqq377.github.io/IDOW

Abstract

visual references

Instance detection (InsDet) aims to localize specific object instances within a novel scene imagery based on given
visual references. Technically, it requires proposal detection
to identify all possible object instances, followed by instancelevel matching to pinpoint the ones of interest. Its openworld nature supports its broad applications from robotics
to AR/VR but also presents significant challenges: methods must generalize to unknown testing data distributions
because (1) the testing scene imagery is unseen during training, and (2) there are domain gaps between visual references
and detected proposals. Existing methods tackle these challenges by synthesizing diverse training examples or utilizing off-the-shelf foundation models (FMs). However, they
only partially capitalize the available open-world information. In contrast, we approach InsDet from an Open-World
perspective, introducing our method IDOW. We find that,
while pretrained FMs yield high recall in instance detection, they are not specifically optimized for instance-level
feature matching. Therefore, we adapt pretrained FMs for
improved instance-level matching using open-world data.
Our approach incorporates metric learning along with novel
data augmentations, which sample distractors as negative
examples and synthesize novel-view instances to enrich the
visual references. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our method significantly outperforms prior works, achieving
>10 AP over previous results on two recently released challenging benchmark datasets in both conventional and novel
instance detection settings.

1. Introduction
Instance detection (InsDet) aims to localize object instances of interest in novel scene imagery (Fig. 1), where
these objects are specified by some visual references (as
known as support templates) [3, 26, 34, 48, 53]. Its
open-world nature supports its wide-ranging applications
* Equal contributions; † Corresponding authors.

9901

novel testing scene imagery

Figure 1. Instance Detection (InsDet) aims to localize specific
object instances in novel scene imagery based on given visual
references (aka support templates). It is a challenging problem
due to its open-world nature: the testing scene images are unseen
during training and thus are unknown to InsDet models, and visual
references and detected proposals have domain gaps (e.g., due to
occlusions and arbitrary lighting conditions in the latter).

in robotics and AR/VR. For example, a robot can be commanded to search for a customer’s suitcase at an airport [26],
or my-keys in my cluttered bedroom [62]. Its open-world
nature also presents significant challenges: during training,
one has no knowledge of testing data distribution, which can
be instantiated by the unknown scene imagery [9], novel object instances encountered only in testing [26], and domain
gaps between visual references and detected proposals [48].
Status quo. The literature of InsDet has two settings and
existing InsDet methods attempt to address the open world
in different aspects (Fig. 2). The conventional instance detection (CID) setting provides visual references of object
instances for training. Yet, the testing scene is still unknown
in training time. Therefore, early method Cut Paste Learn
(CPL) collects random background images to model diverse
testing scenes (Fig. 2a), cuts instances from the visual references, and pastes them on these background images to
construct a synthetic training set [9, 11]. It is worth noting
that background image sampling is utilizing open-world information in a way of data collection in the open world. On
the other hand, the novel instance detection (NID) setting,
introduced recently [26], studies detecting novel object instances that are specified only in testing time where a trained
model is not allowed to be tuned further. To approach NID,
VoxDet [26] uses large-scale synthetic data (Fig. 2b) to learn

