This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ControlFace: Harnessing Facial Parametric Control for Face Rigging
Wooseok Jang1† Youngjun Hong2 Geonho Cha2
1
2
Korea University
NAVER Cloud

Rigging Expression (“Smile”)

Seungryong Kim3
3
KAIST

Rigging Pose (“Face Right”)

Rigging Light (“Lit Right”)

Target Control
Rigged Result
Target Control
Rigged Result
Target Control
Rigged Result
Reference
Figure 1. Our ControlFace can edit the input face image using explicit facial parametric controls, generating realistic images without
compromising the identity and other semantic details such as hairstyle.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Manipulating input facial images has long been a fundamental task in computer vision and graphics [2, 26, 43].
Given a face image, the goal of face rigging is to generate an image that corresponds to user controls—lighting or
facial pose—without compromising the identity of the face.
This task is often complicated by the need to preserve fine
details like hairstyle, making it a challenging problem.

Manipulation of facial images to meet specific controls
such as pose, expression, and lighting, also known as face
rigging, is a complex task in computer vision. Existing
methods are limited by their reliance on image datasets,
which necessitates individual-specific fine-tuning and limits their ability to retain fine-grained identity and semantic details, reducing practical usability. To overcome these
limitations, we introduce ControlFace, a novel face rigging
method conditioned on 3DMM renderings that enables flexible, high-fidelity control. We employ a dual-branch UNets: one, referred to as FaceNet, captures identity and
fine details, while the other focuses on generation. To
enhance control precision, the control mixer module encodes the correlated features between the target-aligned
control and reference-aligned control, and a novel guidance
method, reference control guidance, steers the generation
process for better control adherence. By training on a facial video dataset, we fully utilize FaceNet’s rich representations while ensuring control adherence. Extensive experiments demonstrate ControlFace’s superior performance in
identity preservation and control precision, highlighting its
practicality. Please see the project website: https://cvlabkaist.github.io/ControlFace/.

Recent advancements in generative models [8, 26, 33,
34, 41] have significantly impacted the development of face
rigging techniques. Diffusion models, in particular, have
demonstrated remarkable capabilities in producing highquality, realistic facial images through their iterative refinement processes [17, 41]. These models have shown promise
in generating realistic facial images. Leveraging 3D face
reconstruction methods [4, 9, 54], enabling the estimation of 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) parameters—such
as those of FLAME [24]—directly from an image, many
works [7, 10, 19, 25, 28, 42] have utilized 3DMM parameters or renderings as target controls for face rigging. However, existing methods still face several limitations, including difficulties in handling real images [10, 42], the requirement for fine-tuning on images of the same identity [7, 19],
and challenges in maintaining fine-grained details from reference images [25, 28]. Addressing these issues is crucial

† This work was done during an internship at NAVER Cloud.

5614

