This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prior-free 3D Object Tracking
Xiuqiang Song1,3
Li Jin1,3
Zhengxian Zhang1,3
Jiachen Li4
Fan Zhong2,3
Guofeng Zhang5
Xueying Qin1,3 *
1
School of Software, Shandong University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University
3
Engineering Research Center of Digital Media Technology, Ministry of Education, P.R. China
4
Key Laboratory of Computing Power Network and Information Security, Ministry of Education,
Shandong Computer Science Center, Qilu University of Technology
5
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
song xq, jinli, zhangzhengxian@mail.sdu.edu.cn

jcli@qlu.edu.cn

zhongfan@sdu.edu.cn

qxy@sdu.edu.cn

zhangguofeng@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Pose
Optimization
Module

…

…

…

In this paper, we introduce a novel, truly prior-free 3D
object tracking method that operates without given any
model or training priors. Unlike existing methods that
typically require pre-defined 3D models or specific training datasets as priors, which limit their applicability, our
method is free from these constraints. Our method consists
of a geometry generation module and a pose optimization
module. Its core idea is to enable these two modules to automatically and iteratively enhance each other, thereby gradually building all the necessary information for the tracking task. We thus call the method as Bidirectional Iterative Tracking(BIT). The geometry generation module starts
without priors and gradually generates high-precision mesh
models for tracking, while the pose optimization module
generates additional data during object tracking to further
refine the generated models. Moreover, the generated 3D
models can be stored and easily reused, allowing for seamless integration into various other tracking systems, not just
our methods. Experimental results demonstrate that BIT
outperforms many existing methods, even those that extensively utilize prior knowledge, while BIT does not rely on
such information. Additionally, the generated 3D models
deliver results comparable to actual 3D models, highlighting their superior and innovative qualities. The code is
available at https://github.com/songxiuqiang/BIT.git.

Tracking results using
GT models

Geometry
Generation
Module

Input

BIT

Tracking results using
our reusable models
Results

Tracking accuracy on RBOT dataset

Figure 1. We propose a prior-free 3D object tracking method
called BIT, which is both model-free and training-free. The pose
optimization and geometry generation modules iteratively enhance
each other to ultimately realize object tracking. The generated
model can be reused, achieving excellent results.

1. Introduction
The advancement of embodied intelligence technology necessitates a deep understanding of the real world, and a
crucial foundation for this understanding is the accurate
and continuous real-time 6DoF pose estimation of objects
in the real world, also known as 3D object tracking. Existing methods typically rely on predefined 3D model priors [4, 20, 22] or training priors [9, 30], or a combination
of both [27], to achieve accurate tracking results. While the
use of priors simplifies the tracking task, it also incurs high
training costs and the need for precise model reconstruction, which significantly limits the flexibility and scalability
of these methods across diverse environments and object

* Xueying Qin is the corresponding author.

1200

