This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CSC-PA: Cross-image Semantic Correlation via Prototype Attentions for
Single-network Semi-supervised Breast Tumor Segmentation
Zhenhui Ding1 , Guilian Chen1 , Qin Zhang1 , Huisi Wu1 *, Jing Qin2
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Centre for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
1

2300271025@email.szu.edu.cn, hswu@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurate automatic breast ultrasound (BUS) image segmentation is essential for early breast cancer screening and
diagnosis. However, it remains challenging owing to (1)
breast lesions of various scale and shape, (2) ambiguous
boundaries caused by speckle noise and artifacts, and (3)
the scarcity of high-quality annotations. Most existing semisupervised methods employ the mean-teacher architecture,
which merely learns semantic information within a single
image and heavily relies on the performance of the teacher
model. Therefore, we present a novel cross-image semantic correlation semi-supervised framework, named CSCPA, to improve the performance of BUS image segmentation. CSC-PA is trained based on a single network, which
integrates a foreground prototype attention (FPA) and an
edge prototype attention (EPA). Specifically, FPA transfers complementary foreground information for more stable and complete lesion segmentation. On the other hand,
EPA enhances edge features of lesions by using edge prototype, where an adaptive edge container is proposed to store
global edge features and generate the edge prototype. Additionally, we introduce a pixel affinity loss (PAL) to exploit
previously ignored contextual correlation in supervision,
which further improves performance on edges. Extensive
experiments on two benchmark BUS datasets demonstrate
that our model outperforms other state-of-the-art methods
under different partition protocols. Codes are available at
https://github.com/shdkdh/CSC-PA.

Figure 1. Main challenges of BUS image segmentation: (a)-(c)
large variation in the scale and shape of breast tumors; (d)-(e) ambiguous boundaries. Red contours outline ground truth.

1. Introduction

been widely used in clinical practice owing to its radiationfree, non-invasive, cost-effective, and real-time nature [25].
However, conventional disease screening and detection of
BUS images heavily relies on manual delineation, which is
labor-intensive, time-consuming, and sensitive to the experience of radiologists. To overcome above limitations, some
computer-aided diagnostic (CAD) systems equipped with
automatic segmentation models have been developed to enhance the efficiency and accuracy of breast cancer screening. However, automatic BUS image segmentation remains
a challenging task owing to (1) limited annotations, (2) the
large variations of targets in terms of scale and shape (Fig. 1
(a)-(c)), and (3) the ambiguous boundaries between the lesion and the background caused by low contrast, speckle
noise, and artifacts in BUS images (Fig. 1 (d)-(e)).
To tackle these challenges, early studies were devoted to
exploring fully-supervised paradigms [4, 11, 20, 34], which
have achieved remarkable performance. However, these
models are heavily relies on extensive manual annotations.
To alleviate the scarcity of labels, several researchers have
begun to explore semi-supervised paradigms, attempting to
learn the semantic information contained in massive unlabeled data. Mainstream semi-supervised methods can be
divided into two categories: consistency regularization and
pseudo-labeling. Consistency regularization enforces alignment between the original and perturbed outputs, including
images, features, and network perturbations, and thus reduces the reliance on manual labels [5, 15, 17, 36, 41]. On
the other hand, pseudo-labeling improves the model per-

Breast cancer is one of the most common malignant tumors
in women, threatening their health and life [6, 22]. Early
detection and diagnosis play a crucial role in improving patients’ quality of life, extending their lifespan, and reducing the mortality rate [8, 32]. Breast ultrasound (BUS) has
* Corresponding Author

15632

