This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Galaxy Walker: Geometry-aware VLMs For Galaxy-scale Understanding
Tianyu Chen⋆ , Xingcheng Fu⋄ , Yisen Gao† , Haodong Qian⋄ , Yuecen Wei⋆‡ , Kun Yan⋆
Haoyi Zhou⋆‡ , Jianxin Li⋆
SKLCCSE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China⋆
School of Software, Beihang University, China‡
Key Lab of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Guangxi Normal University, China⋄
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China†
{tianyuc, zhouhy, lijx}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Modern vision-language models (VLMs) develop patch embedding and convolution backbone within vector space, especially Euclidean ones, at the very founding. When expanding VLMs to a galaxy scale for understanding astronomical phenomena, the integration of spherical space
for planetary orbits and hyperbolic spaces for black holes
raises two formidable challenges. a) The current pretraining model is confined to Euclidean space rather than a
comprehensive geometric embedding. b) The predominant
architecture lacks suitable backbones for anisotropic physical geometries. In this paper, we introduced Galaxy-Walker,
a geometry-aware VLM, for the universe-level vision understanding tasks. We proposed the geometry prompt that
generates geometry tokens by random walks across diverse
spaces on a multi-scale physical graph, along with a geometry adapter that compresses and reshapes the space
anisotropy in a mixture-of-experts manner. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, with
Galaxy-Walker achieving state-of-the-art performance in
both galaxy property estimation (R2 scores up to 0.91) and
morphology classification tasks (up to +0.17 F1 improvement in challenging features), significantly outperforming
both domain-specific models and general-purpose VLMs.

Figure 1. Geometries of the universe. While traditional VLMs
are confined to flat Euclidean space, the actual universe exhibits
rich geometric diversity including spherical and hyperbolic spaces,
motivating our Galaxy Walker framework to incorporate multigeometric representations.

space [6] in telescope and measure the Gravity Lensing phenomenon, while the LIGO project [1] detects the gravitational waves of astronomical events with hyperbolic space
starting from 2002. One key difference is that the physicists [13, 23] have gradually unveiled the rich geometric diversity at the galaxy scale. As illustrated in Figure 1, if we
aim to walk from the flat universe to the other universes, the
geometric cognition must extend from Euclidean space to
diverse ones for better lare-scale understanding.
To take a concrete investigation on this problem, we apply the predominant Vision-Language Models (VLMs), e.g.

1. Introduction
Geometric cognition has always been an essential problem
in ordinary imaging, like overlap [26], scaling [3], and perspective [32]. It becomes a more challenging one in Astronomy Imagery, where the distance between pixels no longer
stands for its “real” distance, and the measurement scales up
to the galaxy-level. Backing to the Eddington experiment
in 1919, we still view the Solar system as a flat Euclidean
1 The corresponding author is Jianxin Li (lijx@buaa.edu.cn).

4112

