This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Training for De-biasing Text-to-Image Generation:
Unlocking the Potential of Stable Diffusion
Minjun Park2
Rahim Entezari3,†
Sungroh Yoon1,2,4,†
Siwon Kim1, *
Eunji Kim1, *
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
3
4
Stability AI
AIIS, ASRI, INMC, ISRC, Seoul National University
{kce407, tuslkkk, minjunpark}@snu.ac.kr, rahim.entezari@stability.ai, sryoon@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent advancements in text-to-image models, such as Stable
Diffusion, show significant demographic biases. Existing debiasing techniques rely heavily on additional training, which
imposes high computational costs and risks of compromising
core image generation functionality. This hinders them from
being widely adopted to real-world applications. In this
paper, we explore Stable Diffusion’s overlooked potential to
reduce bias without requiring additional training. Through
our analysis, we uncover that initial noises associated with
minority attributes form “minority regions” rather than scattered. We view these “minority regions” as opportunities
in SD to reduce bias. To unlock the potential, we propose a
novel de-biasing method called ‘weak guidance,’ carefully
designed to guide a random noise to the minority regions
without compromising semantic integrity. Through analysis
and experiments on various versions of SD, we demonstrate
that our proposed approach effectively reduces bias without
additional training, achieving both efficiency and preservation of core image generation functionality.

1. Introduction
With their ability to generate high-quality images, diffusionbased text-to-image (T2I) models are gaining widespread
use across various platforms [10, 24, 26, 27, 32]. However,
concerns have emerged about biases in these models, particularly the severe underrepresentation of minority groups
in terms of gender, race, or other demographics, diverging
from real-world distribution. In some cases, this even has
led to some service backlash [3, 5, 7]. Even the recently
open-sourced model Stable Diffusion 3 (SD3) [10] produces
biased outputs, e.g., generating nearly 100% female CEO,
* Co-first authors
† Senior authorship with Rahim Entezari and Sungroh Yoon (correspond-

ing author: Sungroh Yoon)

(a) Conventional observation

(b) Mode test observation

Weak
guidance

(c) Identified minority region
Generated images

Minority region

(d) Proposed de-biasing
Noise

Random noise

Figure 1. Conceptual illustration of our contributions. + and o
denotes observed minority and majority images. + denotes noises
associated with a minor attribute. Mode test (Section 3.1) identifies
the existence of minority regions (b, c) and the proposed method
(Section 4) guides an initial noise to the minority regions (d).

showing that these issues persist.
Several approaches have been explored to mitigate these
biases, primarily through additional training. Previous efforts have involved fine-tuning all or parts of the model parameters or using techniques like prompt tuning for more efficient learning [12, 16, 21, 31]. However, these approaches
have substantial drawbacks, including high computational
costs and the risk of compromising the core image generation capabilities of T2I models. For most companies deploying T2I models, maintaining high-quality image generation
remains the top priority. Consequently, the widespread adoption of existing de-biasing techniques in commercial T2I
services like SD3 has been hindered, as they can impair both
model performance and scalability.
Is training truly essential to de-bias T2I models? Specifically, can any aspects of the pre-trained Stable Diffusion
(SD) model itself be leveraged to mitigate bias? In this
study, we explore the existence of “minority regions” by
using a newly introduced “mode test.” We define a “minor-

13361

