This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SGFormer: Satellite-Ground Fusion for 3D Semantic Scene Completion
Xiyue Guo1 ∗ Jiarui Hu1 ∗ Junjie Hu2 Hujun Bao1 Guofeng Zhang1†
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 2 Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
SGFormer

VoxFormer

Ours

GT

Figure 1. SGFormer, which adopts satellite-ground cooperative fusion, can achieve state-of-the-art performance in scene completion and
semantic prediction. Benefiting from informative satellite images and a well-designed dual-branch pipeline, SGFormer can effectively
improve semantic prediction accuracy and solve the long-standing visual occlusion bottleneck suffered by purely ground-view methods.

Abstract
Recently, camera-based solutions have been extensively explored for scene semantic completion (SSC). Despite their
success in visible areas, existing methods struggle to capture complete scene semantics due to frequent visual occlusions. To address this limitation, this paper presents
the first satellite-ground cooperative SSC framework, i.e.,
SGFormer, exploring the potential of satellite-ground image pairs in the SSC task. Specifically, we propose a
dual-branch architecture that encodes orthogonal satellite
and ground views in parallel, unifying them into a common domain. Additionally, we design a ground-view guidance strategy that corrects satellite image biases during
feature encoding, addressing misalignment between satellite and ground views. Moreover, we develop an adaptive
weighting strategy that balances contributions from satellite and ground views. Experiments demonstrate that SGFormer outperforms the state of the art on SemanticKITTI
and SSCBench-KITTI-360 datasets. Our code is available
on https://github.com/gxytcrc/SGFormer.

ings with a variety of downstream applications such as autonomous driving, robot navigation, and augmented reality (AR). Lidar-based methods have achieved remarkable
progress and decent performance [26, 31, 38], while the underlying point cloud representation inherently suffers from
weak semantic context derived only from geometry shapes.
In contrast, cost-effective camera-based methods can lift
rich 2D cues into the 3D world, demonstrating potential in
scene reconstruction and understanding.
Existing camera-based methods have shown promising
performance on the SSC task [9, 13, 18, 35, 40]. Nevertheless, even with depth information for visible areas, they still
face the challenge of non-unique correspondences between
3D volumes and 2D pixels. Specifically, multiple 3D volumes correspond to significantly overlapping regions within
the 2D image plane, which causes semantic ambiguity and
radial artifacts in the final reconstruction. For occluded areas, these methods generally lack a long-range global perspective, which makes them struggle to restore a complete
scene and serve the following planning and decision steps.

1. Introduction

In this paper, for the first time, we propose to incorporate satellite imagery into the SSC task. Alongside the development of remote sensing technology, satellite imagery
has emerged as a low-cost and widely available reference
information. A satellite image, covering major traffic flows
in a city, typically requires a light-weight storage footprint,
which makes it a compact and memory-efficient representation. Meanwhile, the bird’s-eye view (BEV) observation
is highly suitable for the horizontal layout of urban scenes.
It provides a broad perspective of surrounding obvious ob-

Urban scene semantic completion (SSC) has been an increasingly prominent problem in 3D computer vision over
recent decades, which targets predicting 3D semantic and
geometric occupancy of immediately observed surround† Corresponding author. Email: zhangguofeng@zju.edu.cn
∗ Equal Contribution.

11929

