This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Depth Anything: Consistent Depth Estimation for Super-Long Videos
Sili Chen Hengkai Guo† Shengnan Zhu Feihu Zhang
Zilong Huang Jiashi Feng Bingyi Kang†
ByteDance
videodepthanything.github.io

3s

175s

22s

161s

42s

140s

59s

122s

79s

99s

Figure 1. Left: Our model can generate consistent depth predictions for long videos with rich actions. The demo video shows a 196-second
(4690 frames) long take of pair skating, as sourced from [14]. Right: Comparison to baselines in terms of accuracy (δ1 ), consistency, and
latency on the Nvidia A100 GPU (denoted with circle size). Consistency is defined as the maximum Temporal Alignment Error (TAE)
among all models minus the TAE of each individual model. Our model achieves the best performance in all aspects.

Abstract
Depth Anything has achieved remarkable success in
monocular depth estimation with strong generalization ability. However, it suffers from temporal inconsistency in videos,
hindering its practical applications. Various methods have
been proposed to alleviate this issue by leveraging video generation models or introducing priors from optical flow and
camera poses. Nonetheless, these methods are only applicable to short videos (< 10 seconds) and require a trade-off
between quality and computational efficiency. We propose
Video Depth Anything for high-quality, consistent depth estimation in super-long videos (over several minutes) without
sacrificing efficiency. We base our model on Depth Anything
V2 and replace its head with an efficient spatial-temporal
head. We design a straightforward yet effective temporal
consistency loss by constraining the temporal depth gradient,
† Corresponding author.

eliminating the need for additional geometric priors. The
model is trained on a joint dataset of video depth and unlabeled images, similar to Depth Anything V2. Moreover, a
novel key-frame-based strategy is developed for long video
inference. Experiments show that our model can be applied
to arbitrarily long videos without compromising quality, consistency, or generalization ability. Comprehensive evaluations on multiple video benchmarks demonstrate that our
approach sets a new state-of-the-art in zero-shot video depth
estimation. We offer models of different scales to support
a range of scenarios, with our smallest model capable of
real-time performance at 30 FPS.

1. Introduction
Recently, monocular depth estimation (MDE) has made significant progress, as evidenced by advances in depth foundation models [3, 16, 38, 39]. For example, Depth Any-

22831

