This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ClimbingCap: Multi-Modal Dataset and Method for Rock Climbing
in World Coordinate
Ming Yan1,2,3∗ Xincheng Lin1,3∗ Yuhua Luo1,3 Shuqi Fan1,3 Yudi Dai7 Qixin Zhong4
Lincai Zhong5 Yuexin Ma6 Lan Xu6 Chenglu Wen1,3 Siqi Shen1,3† Cheng Wang1,3
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University
2
National Institute for Data Science in Health and Medicine, Xiamen University
3
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, School of Informatics, Xiamen University
4
China National Climbing Team 5 Ningbo Sports Work Training Team
6
ShanghaiTech University 7 ETH AI Center, ETH Zürich
RGB LiDAR Points

RGB

No Markers

LiDAR Points IMU

With Markers

Dataset: AscendMotion

Method: ClimbingCap

World Coordinate 3D Scene

Figure 1. Overview. To address the challenging problem of global climbing motion recovery, we collect the dataset AscendMotion, using
LiDAR, RGB camera and Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) motion capture system with accurate motion labels and global trajectories (the
blue and orange human bodies in right side of the figure represent labeled motions, and the orange curve represents the motion trajectory in
the world coordinate.). Meanwhile, we propose ClimbingCap, a global climbing motion capturing method in world coordinate. As shown
in the left part of this figure, it uses both image and LiDAR point cloud to recover human motions.

Abstract
Human Motion Recovery (HMR) research mainly focuses on ground-based motions such as running. The study
on capturing climbing motion, an off-ground motion, is
sparse. This is partly due to the limited availability of
climbing motion datasets, especially large-scale and challenging 3D labeled datasets. To address the insufficiency
of climbing motion datasets, we collect AscendMotion, a
large-scale well-annotated, and challenging climbing motion dataset. It consists of 412k RGB, LiDAR frames,
and IMU measurements, including the challenging climbing
motions of 22 skilled climbing coaches across 12 different
rock walls. Capturing the climbing motions is challenging
as it requires precise recovery of not only the complex pose
but also the global position of climbers. Although multi∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

ple global HMR methods have been proposed, they cannot
faithfully capture climbing motions. To address the limitations of HMR methods for climbing, we propose ClimbingCap, a motion recovery method that reconstructs continuous 3D human climbing motion in a global coordinate system. One key insight is to use the RGB and LiDAR modalities to separately reconstruct motions in camera coordinates and global coordinates and to optimize them jointly.
We demonstrate the quality of the AscendMotion dataset
and present promising results from ClimbingCap. The AscendMotion dataset and source code release publicly at
http://www.lidarhumanmotion.net/climbingcap/

1. Introduction
It is challenging for global Human Motion Recovery
(HMR) [1, 9, 40, 42, 80] due to the complexity of human poses and dynamic interaction between humans and
their environments. Moreover, global HMR must main-

12312

