This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BLADE: Single-view Body Mesh Estimation through Accurate Depth Estimation
Shengze Wang1 * Jiefeng Li2 Tianye Li2 Ye Yuan2 Henry Fuchs1
Koki Nagano2† Shalini De Mello2† Michael Stengel2†
1
UNC Chapel Hill 2 NVIDIA † Equal contribution
https://research.nvidia.com/labs/amri/projects/blade/

Figure 1. Our method enables accurate human mesh and camera parameter estimation for single-view in-the-wild images including
close-ups with high levels of perspective distortion (pelvis depth Tz shown in meters).

Abstract
Single-image human mesh recovery is a challenging task
due to the ill-posed nature of simultaneous body shape,
pose, and camera estimation. Existing estimators work well
on images taken from afar, but they break down as the person moves close to the camera. Moreover, current methods fail to achieve both accurate 3D pose and 2D alignment at the same time. Error is mainly introduced by inaccurate perspective projection heuristically derived from orthographic parameters. To resolve this long-standing challenge, we present our method BLADE which accurately recovers perspective parameters from a single image without heuristic assumptions. We start from the inverse relationship between perspective distortion and the person’s
Z-translation Tz , and we show that Tz can be reliably estimated from the image. We then discuss the important role of
Tz for accurate human mesh recovery estimated from closerange images. Finally, we show that, once Tz and the 3D
human mesh are estimated, one can accurately recover the
focal length and full 3D translation. Extensive experiments
on standard benchmarks and real-world close-range images show that our method accurately recovers projection
parameters from a single image, and consequently attains
state-of-the-art accuracy on both 3D pose estimation and
2D alignment for a wide range of images.

tion, allowed computers to understand human gestures for
human-computer interaction and enabled new applications
in healthcare, fitness, and virtual try-on for E-commerce.
Despite the many successes, current methods struggle in
scenarios such as video conferencing and large-scale pose
estimation on diverse images captured in the wild (Fig. 1).
Single-image human mesh recovery is challenging due
to the under-constrained nature of estimating many parameters from a single view. Scale ambiguity and the unknown
shape of the person contribute to the existence of potentially an infinite number of valid yet incorrect solutions [8].
Furthermore, intrinsic and extrinsic camera parameters are
unknown for in-the-wild images and need to be estimated in
addition to human shape and pose. It is thus exceptionally
difficult to jointly estimate all of these variables at once.

1. Introduction

Therefore, most existing methods reduce the number
of unknowns by assuming near-orthographic projection,
where the person is assumed to be far away and focal
length is heuristically determined or calculated [10, 14–
16, 19, 20, 31]. This leads to an unsatisfactory result, especially for close-ups that show a person with strong perspective distortion (Fig. 1). Recent work SPEC [15] targets
this problem by directly estimating the camera focal length
from images. ZOLLY [31] estimates both the depth of the
person and a 2D affine transformation for an orthographic
camera, which are then heuristically converted to a focal
length and 3D translation with perspective projection. Both
methods rely on inaccurate assumptions and fail to accurately recover the perspective parameters.

Recent advances in 3D human mesh recovery (HMR) have
started to democratize motion capture for media produc* Shengze Wang was an intern at NVIDIA during the project.

To simultaneously solve these manyfold challenges, we
propose a new method for Body mesh Learning through
Accurate Depth Estimation from a single image (BLADE).

21991

