This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dinomaly: The Less Is More Philosophy in
Multi-Class Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
Jia Guo1

Shuai Lu2

Weihang Zhang2 †

Fang Chen3

Huiqi Li2 †

Hongen Liao1,3 ✉

1

School of Biomedical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
3
School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
guojia.jeremy@gmail.com lushuaie@163.com zhangweihang@bit.edu.cn
chen-fang@sjtu.edu.cn

huiqili@bit.edu.cn liao@tsinghua.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Abstract
Recent studies highlighted a practical setting of unsupervised anomaly detection (UAD) that builds a unified
model for multi-class images. Despite various advancements addressing this challenging task, the detection performance under the multi-class setting still lags far behind state-of-the-art class-separated models. Our research
aims to bridge this substantial performance gap. In this
paper, we present Dinomaly, a minimalist reconstructionbased anomaly detection framework that harnesses pure
Transformer architectures without relying on complex designs, additional modules, or specialized tricks. Given
this powerful framework consisting of only Attentions and
MLPs, we found four simple components that are essential to multi-class anomaly detection: (1) Scalable foundation Transformers that extracts universal and discriminative features, (2) Noisy Bottleneck where pre-existing
Dropouts do all the noise injection tricks, (3) Linear Attention that naturally cannot focus, and (4) Loose Reconstruction that does not force layer-to-layer and point-bypoint reconstruction. Extensive experiments are conducted
across popular anomaly detection benchmarks including
MVTec-AD, VisA, Real-IAD, etc. Our proposed Dinomaly
achieves impressive image-level AUROC of 99.6%, 98.7%,
and 89.3% on the three datasets respectively, which is not
only superior to state-of-the-art multi-class UAD methods,
but also achieves the most advanced class-separated UAD
records. Code is available at: https://github.com/
guojiajeremy/Dinomaly

Unsupervised anomaly detection (UAD) aims to detect abnormal patterns from normal images and further localize the
anomalous regions. Because of the diversity of potential
anomalies and their scarcity, this task is proposed to model
the accessible training sets containing only normal samples
as an unsupervised paradigm. UAD has a wide range of applications, e.g., industrial defect detection [3], medical disease screening [13], and video surveillance [37], addressing
the difficulty of collecting and labeling all possible anomalies in these scenarios.
Conventional works on UAD build a separate model for
each object category, as shown in Figure 1(a). However,
this one-class-one-model setting entails substantial storage
overhead for saving models [60], especially when the application scenario necessitates a large number of object
classes. For UAD methods, a compact boundary of normal patterns is vital to distinguish anomalies. Once the
intra-normal patterns become exceedingly complicated due
to various classes, the corresponding distribution becomes
challenging to measure, consequently harming the detection
performance. Recently, UniAD [60] and successive studies
have been proposed to train a unified model for multi-class
anomaly detection (MUAD), as shown in Figure 1(b). Under this setting, the ”identity mapping” that directly copies
the input as the output regardless of normal or anomaly
harms the performance of conventional methods [60]. This
phenomenon is caused by the diversity of multi-class normal patterns that drive the network to generalize on unseen
patterns.
Within two years, a number of methods have been proposed to address MUAD, such as neighbor-masked attention [60], synthetic anomalies [68], vector quantization [36], diffusion model [16, 59], and state space model
(Mamba) [17]. However, there is still a non-negligible per-

✉ Corresponding author. † Former advisors when the project initiated.

20405

