This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Online Continual Learning with Plug-and-Play State Space Model
and Class-Conditional Mixture of Discretization
Sihao Liu1
1

Yibo Yang2† Xiaojie Li3

David A. Clifton4

Bernard Ghanem2

2

Harbin Institute of Technology
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
3
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) 4 University of Oxford

Abstract
Online continual learning (OCL) seeks to learn new
tasks from data streams that appear only once, while retaining knowledge of previously learned tasks. Most existing methods rely on replay, focusing on enhancing memory retention through regularization or distillation. However, they often overlook the adaptability of the model, limiting the ability to learn generalizable and discriminative
features incrementally from online training data. To address this, we introduce a plug-and-play module, S6MOD,
which can be integrated into most existing methods and
directly improve adaptability. Specifically, S6MOD introduces an extra branch after the backbone, where a mixture
of discretization selectively adjusts parameters in a selective state space model, enriching selective scan patterns
such that the model can adaptively select the most sensitive discretization method for current dynamics. We further design a class-conditional routing algorithm for dynamic, uncertainty-based adjustment and implement a contrastive discretization loss to optimize it. Extensive experiments combining our module with various models demonstrate that S6MOD significantly enhances model adaptability, leading to substantial performance gains and achieving the state-of-the-art results. The code is available at
https://github.com/MyToumaKazusa/S6MOD.

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL) [10, 29, 31, 43] is a task that requires models to efficiently acquire new abilities from incoming data. It tests the model’s ability to adapt to dynamically changing environments while retaining existing
knowledge. For example, autonomous vehicles are expected to continuously learn new driving environments and
traffic regulations, thereby improving detection accuracy
under complex driving scenes. From the perspective of task
format, CL can be divided into offline and online [10, 43].
† Corresponding author.

Unlike offline CL [7, 33], online CL (OCL) [10, 16] aligns
with real-world implementations as it requires data to arrive
sequentially in mini-batches and allows only one epoch of
training, posing greater challenges for efficient adaptation
with data accessible for learning only once.
To tackle the challenging OCL, existing studies widely
rely on the replay technique [17] that selectively stores
a subset of old-class data to strengthen the memory ability of existing knowledge and mitigate catastrophic forgetting. Building on replay, various methods have been proposed with regularization, buffer allocation, and distillation
strategies [17, 18, 34, 44, 46, 50]. For example, MIR [3]
aims to mitigate mutual interference among tasks through
a retrieval strategy, OCM [17] seeks to reduce forgetting
by maximizing mutual information between different tasks,
and CCLDC [44] adopts collaborative learning and distillation to improve plasticity. However, learning generalizable and discriminative features incrementally from online
training data is still intractable, and imprecise features will
impede and even mislead the replay strategies [45]. Therefore, inducing accurate and efficient adaptation with limited
data access is critically important for OCL and there still
remains significant potential for improvement.
Recently, selective state space models (SSMs), also
known as S6 in Mamba [13], have shown promising results in modeling long-range dependencies with computational efficiency. Selective SSMs introduce a selective scan
mechanism to make the interactions among sequential states
aware of input context, and have been applied to vision tasks
by integrating various scan directions [26, 58]. In addition
to the success in sequence modeling [5, 9, 24, 25, 35, 49],
selective SSMs also exhibit stronger adaptability than static
parameters in few-shot class-incremental learning due to the
dynamic operation weights, as reported in a recent pioneering work [22]. Despite the increased capacity of adaptation,
directly applying selective SSMs to OCL will be infeasible
because it is challenging for selective SSMs to capture a
precise discretization pattern with limited context from online data that appears only once for training. Moreover, a
single discretization mechanism may fail to capture all the

20502

