This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STAA-SNN: Spatial-Temporal Attention Aggregator for Spiking Neural
Networks
Tianqing Zhang1 * Kairong Yu1 * Xian Zhong3 Hongwei Wang1† Qi Xu2† Qiang Zhang2
Zhejiang University 2 Dalian University of Technology 3 Wuhan University of Technology

1

1

{zhangtianqing,22271086}@zju.edu.cn
2

{xuqi,zhangq}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract

1
3

hongweiwang@intl.zju.edu.cn

zhongx@whut.edu.cn

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have gained significant attention due to their biological plausibility and energy efficiency, making them promising alternatives to Artificial
Neural Networks (ANNs). However, the performance gap
between SNNs and ANNs remains a substantial challenge
hindering the widespread adoption of SNNs. In this paper,
we propose a Spatial-Temporal Attention Aggregator SNN
(STAA-SNN) framework, which dynamically focuses on and
captures both spatial and temporal dependencies. First, we
introduce a spike-driven self-attention mechanism specifically designed for SNNs. Additionally, we pioneeringly incorporate position encoding to integrate latent temporal relationships into the incoming features. For spatial-temporal
information aggregation, we employ step attention to selectively amplify relevant features to variant steps. Finally, we
implement a time-step random dropout strategy to avoid local optima. The framework demonstrates exceptional performance across diverse datasets and exhibits strong generalization capabilities. Notably, STAA-SNN achieves stateof-the-art results on neuromorphic datasets CIFAR10-DVS
of 82.10% and with performances of 97.14%, 82.05% and
70.40% on the static datasets CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and
ImageNet, respectively. Furthermore, this model exhibits
improved performance ranging from 0.33% to 2.80% with
fewer time steps.

tion on low-power neuromorphic hardware, offering a distinct advantage over traditional Artificial Neural Networks
(ANNs)[2, 13, 19, 48, 63]. Among various spiking neuron models, the Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) model[1] is
widely used in SNNs for its linear differentiable [37, 38].
Although previous works[17, 34, 73] have developed deep
SNNs to accelerate model convergence, the multi-timestep
computations inherent in SNNs significantly increase both
training and inference times, leading to high latency. This
limitation hinders the potential for efficient algorithm design. Consequently, a performance gap still exists between directly trained large-scale SNNs and ANNs in pattern recognition tasks, underscoring the need for novel approaches that integrate insights from neuroscience with conventional deep learning to improve both the efficiency and
accuracy of SNNs. Inspired by the human visual and cognitive systems, attention mechanisms regulate neural activity
and connectivity, enhancing responses to focal stimuli. This
enhancement is reflected in the increased firing rates and
improved synchronization of neurons in relevant brain regions. Additionally, this mechanism influences the strength
and efficiency of neural connections, thereby facilitating the
flow of information within and between different brain areas. In the field of deep learning, attention mechanisms enable neural networks to selectively focus on relatively important input information, leading to significant advancements in various domains such as natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision (CV). Compared to traditional architectures [5, 6, 44], these mechanisms have consistently demonstrated superior performance.
In this paper, we explore the integration of attention
mechanisms into deep SNNs. Although SNNs are biologically inspired models, their current implementations exhibit
significant limitations due to inadequate biological fidelity.
For instance, the heterogeneity among spiking neurons and
the ability to independently transmit spatial and temporal
information are overlooked, with membrane parameters being uniformly and permanently set across dimensions and
layers in neural networks. Neuroscience research [3, 53] has

1. Introduction
In recent years, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have attracted significant attention due to their low energy consumption and biological interpretability[12, 17, 51, 57–59].
Inspired by the behavior of biological neurons, SNNs represent information using discrete binary spikes over multiple timesteps, making them well-suited for implementa* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

13959

