This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PARC: A Quantitative Framework
Uncovering the Symmetries within Vision Language Models
Jenny Schmalfuss1† Nadine Chang2* Vibashan VS3† Maying Shen2 Andrés Bruhn1 Jose M. Alvarez2
1
University of Stuttgart 2 NVIDIA 3 Johns Hopkins University

Figure 1. PARC prompt sensitivity analysis framework overview. Given a collection of VLMs and datasets, PARC identifies which
prompt variations these VLMs are most sensitive to, and which VLMs are most agnostic to prompt variations [green]. To achieve this,
PARC first applies systematic prompt variations [orange] to the language and vision components of the datasets, then evaluates the VLM
performance on these varied datasets with multiple established scores and a novel reliability score [blue], and finally calibrates [red]
those scores to make them directly comparable across the diverse input datasets as well as PARC’s prompt variations.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Vision language models (VLMs) respond to user-crafted
text prompts and visual inputs, and are applied to numerous real-world problems. VLMs integrate visual modalities
with large language models (LLMs), which are well known
to be prompt-sensitive. Hence, it is crucial to determine
whether VLMs inherit this instability to varying prompts.
We therefore investigate which prompt variations VLMs are
most sensitive to and which VLMs are most agnostic to
prompt variations. To this end, we introduce PARC (Prompt
Analysis via Reliability and Calibration), a VLM prompt
sensitivity analysis framework built on three pillars: (1)
plausible prompt variations in both the language and vision domain, (2) a novel model reliability score with built-in
guarantees, and (3) a calibration step that enables datasetand prompt-spanning prompt variation analysis. Regarding prompt variations, PARC’s evaluation shows that VLMs
mirror LLM language prompt sensitivity in the vision domain, and most destructive variations change the expected
answer. Regarding models, outstandingly robust VLMs
among 22 evaluated models come from the InternVL2 family. We further find indications that prompt sensitivity is
linked to training data. https://github.com/NVlabs/PARC

Vision language models (VLMs) are being adopted in
safety-critical applications such as autonomous navigation [31, 53] or disease screening [45, 48]. They can respond to user inputs, called prompts, that include both text
and images. But to leverage their full practical potential,
VLMs need to be reliable: When presented with two roadside images and asked “Which lane has people?”, VLMs
should respond with the correct image regardless of image
arrangement. However, we find that current VLMs deliver
inconsistent results across such input changes. While this
phenomenon, called prompt sensitivity, receives increasing
attention for Large Language Models (LLMs) [4, 11, 13, 22,
41, 51, 58], it is hardly studied in VLMs [26, 44].
For practical applications we want to select VLMs that
are agnostic to prompt variations, i.e. that perform well independent of the specific way they are prompted. Hence
in this work, we critically examine the VLM sensitivity
to varying user prompts. Our investigation is driven by
two guiding questions: Which prompt variations are VLMs
most sensitive to? and Which VLM class is most agnostic
to prompt variations? To answer these questions, we argue
that three components are currently missing:
(i) Realistic prompt variations for VLMS,

† Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.

(ii) A notion of model reliability, and

* Corresponding author. nadinec@nvidia.com

25081

