This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniSplat: Taming Feed-Forward 3D Gaussian Splatting
for Omnidirectional Images with Editable Capabilities
Suyoung Lee* 1
Jaeyoung Chung* 1
Kihoon Kim 2
Jaeyoo Huh 2
3
3
Gunhee Lee
Minsoo Lee
Kyoung Mu Lee 1,2
1
Dept. of ECE & ASRI, 2 IPAI, Seoul National University, 3 LG AI Research, Seoul, Korea
{esw0116, robot0321, kihoon96}@snu.ac.kr
jaeyoo900@gmail.com
{gunhee.lee, minsoo.lee}@lgresearch.ai
kyoungmu@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Feed-forward 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) models have
gained significant popularity due to their ability to generate
scenes immediately without needing per-scene optimization.
Although omnidirectional images are becoming more popular since they reduce the computation required for image
stitching to composite a holistic scene, existing feed-forward
models are only designed for perspective images. The unique
optical properties of omnidirectional images make it difficult for feature encoders to correctly understand the context
of the image and make the Gaussian non-uniform in space,
which hinders the image quality synthesized from novel views.
We propose OmniSplat, a training-free fast feed-forward
3DGS generation framework for omnidirectional images.
We adopt a Yin-Yang grid and decompose images based on it
to reduce the domain gap between omnidirectional and perspective images. The Yin-Yang grid can use the existing CNN
structure as it is, but its quasi-uniform characteristic allows
the decomposed image to be similar to a perspective image,
so it can exploit the strong prior knowledge of the learned
feed-forward network. OmniSplat demonstrates higher reconstruction accuracy than existing feed-forward networks
trained on perspective images. The code is available on:
https://github.com/esw0116/OmniSplat.

Figure 1. PSNR-runtime trade-off. A chart of reconstruction
PSNR-runtime trade-off in novel view image on OmniBlender [7].
OmniSplat shows the best trade-off compared to the original feedforward networks for perspective images.

1. Introduction

sian splatting (3DGS) representations directly from a few
input images without scene-wise optimization [17]. These
models estimate plausible 3D Gaussian parameters by leveraging priors learned from large-scale datasets and achieve
more than 30 times faster than optimization-based methods.
However, they often encounter challenges in constructing a
holistic scene due to the perspective camera with a limited
field of view. Constructing a holistic scene using multiple
perspective images in a pair-wise manner incurs significant
drawbacks in terms of both computational efficiency and
reconstruction quality. Instead, omnidirectional images have
become increasingly prevalent due to their ability to capture a wide field of view within a single image. They are

The reconstruction of holistic 3D scenes from multiview
images is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision with emerging applications such as virtual reality (VR),
augmented reality (AR), robotics, or autonomous navigation. The goal is to rapidly and accurately create holistic 3D representations of environments. Recent advancements have focused on feed-forward scene generation networks [3, 4, 32], which are capable of generating 3D Gaus* indicates equal contribution.

16356

