This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ARKit LabelMaker: A New Scale for Indoor 3D Scene Understanding
Guangda Ji1

Silvan Weder1
1

ETH Zürich

2

Francis Engelmann1,2
Stanford University

3

Marc Pollefeys1

University of Bonn & Lamarr Institute

Abstract

Datasets Size

ScanNet++ [43]
(100 classes)

Neural network performance scales with both model size
and data volume, as shown in both language and image
processing. This requires scaling-friendly architectures and
large datasets. While transformers have been adapted for
3D vision, a ‘GPT-moment’ remains elusive due to limited training data. We introduce ARKit LabelMaker, a
large-scale real-world 3D dataset with dense semantic annotation that is more than three times larger than prior
largest dataset. Specifically, we extend ARKitScenes [4]
with automatically generated dense 3D labels using an extended LabelMaker pipeline [37], tailored for large-scale
pre-training. Training on our dataset improves accuracy
across architectures, achieving state-of-the-art 3D semantic segmentation scores on ScanNet and ScanNet200, with
notable gains on tail classes. Our code is available at labelmaker.org and our dataset at huggingface.

Hermann Blum1,3

train
val
test

S3DIS [2]
(13 classes)
ScanNet/ScanNet200 [9, 30]
(20/200 classes)

0

1000

2000

3000

40000

ARKit LabelMaker
(186 classes)
num scenes
5000
6000

Figure 1. Our LabelMaker annotation data creates the world’s
largest real-world 3D scene annotation dataset.

questions in 3D scene understanding: Is real-world data
preferable to synthetic data? How can labeling efforts be
minimized? Do current models benefit from increased realworld data?
To address these questions, we leverage ARKitScenes [4], a large-scale 3D indoor dataset consisting of
3D reconstructions and RGB-D frames captured with consumer tablets. Although these scenes are annotated with 3D
object bounding boxes, they lack the per-point annotations
necessary for training competitive 3D segmentation models. To overcome this limitation, we augment the dataset
with per-point semantic labels created through an automated pipeline. This approach enables us to produce the
significantly larger dataset compared to prior 3D semantic
segmentation dataset (see Fig. 1). Our dataset is suitable
for (pre-)training any 3D semantic segmentation model. To
validate the effectiveness of these extensive yet imperfect
annotations, we use them to re-train various models and
conduct comprehensive evaluations on widely-used 3D semantic segmentation benchmarks [9, 30].
More specifically, we build on top of the recent LabelMaker [37] pipeline, which we extend into LabelMakerV2
with more and updated base models, a more general input
data structure, as well as deployment scripts for large clusters through docker or SLURM. Using this pipeline, we process the entire ARKitScenes dataset, which takes 48’000
GPU hours on Nvidia 3090 GPUs. We further scale our
pipeline beyond ARKitScenes to arbitrary scenes by integrating the iOS app Scanner 3D into LabelMakerV2, enabling automatic annotation of scenes recorded with consumer iPhones. In experiments, we use our automatically

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in deep learning on language [5, 26,
27] and 2D vision [1, 28, 29] have made tremendous
progress, primarily driven by the abundance of training data
available on the web for these modalities. Scaling this
type of large-scale training to billions of data points has revealed surprising properties [38] and resulted in unprecedented performance gains, enabling entirely new applications. However, this approach is not directly applicable to
3D scene understanding, where real-world 3D data lacks
web-scale abundance and demands labor-intensive ground
truth annotations.
While recent efforts aim to reduce this dependency
through self-supervision [13, 49], distillation [23, 45], denoising [35], or open-set scene understanding [10, 18, 33,
40, 44], state-of-the-art 3D segmentation methods [21, 31,
40, 46] still rely on some level of direct supervision. Consequently, annotated data remains essential for learning
these tasks, and constructing datasets of comparable scale
to those in language and image generation remains a significant challenge. In this paper, we contribute the largest
3D real-world indoor semantic dataset and investigate key

4398

