This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MERGE: Multi-faceted Hierarchical Graph-based GNN for Gene Expression
Prediction from Whole Slide Histopathology Images
Aniruddha Ganguly1 * Debolina Chatterjee2 Wentao Huang1 Jie Zhang2
Travis Steele Johnson2 Chao Chen1
1
Stony Brook University, NY, USA
2
Indiana University School of Medicine, IN, USA

Alisa Yurovsky1

Abstract
Recent advances in Spatial Transcriptomics (ST) pair histology images with spatially resolved gene expression profiles, enabling predictions of gene expression across different tissue locations based on image patches. This opens
up new possibilities for enhancing whole slide image (WSI)
prediction tasks with localized gene expression. However,
existing methods fail to fully leverage the interactions between different tissue locations, which are crucial for accurate joint prediction. To address this, we introduce MERGE
(Multi-faceted hiErarchical gRaph for Gene Expressions),
which combines a multi-faceted hierarchical graph construction strategy with graph neural networks (GNN) to improve gene expression predictions from WSIs. By clustering
tissue image patches based on both spatial and morphological features, and incorporating intra- and inter-cluster
edges, our approach fosters interactions between distant
tissue locations during GNN learning. As an additional
contribution, we evaluate different data smoothing techniques that are necessary to mitigate artifacts in ST data,
often caused by technical imperfections. We advocate for
adopting gene-aware smoothing methods that are more biologically justified. Experimental results on gene expression
prediction show that our GNN method outperforms stateof-the-art techniques across multiple metrics.

1. Introduction
Spatial Transcriptomics (ST) entails the quantification of
mRNA expression across a set of genes in a tissue sample,
splitting the sample into ‘spots’. Previous techniques like
bulk RNA sequencing quantify gene expressions for an entire tissue sample, thereby sacrificing both the heterogeneity
of the sample and the spatial context. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), however, captures the heterogeneity at the cell-level without preserving the spatial context.
Recent ST methods including Visium [30], MERFISH [5],
* Email: aniganguly@cs.stonybrook.edu

Figure 1. Combining image feature-space clustering with spatial
clustering to build a multi-faceted hierarchical graph leads to spatial gene expression prediction. Left: Patches extracted from a
WSI. Middle: Edges within and across clusters allows us to model
short and long range interactions among patches. Right: This allows our GNN model to make robust predictions.

seqFISH+ [11], STARmap [37], smFISH [8], and Targeted
ExSeq [2] have bridged these gaps. In these methods, a spot
can refer to a tissue segment containing multiple cells [30],
a single cell [11], or a sub-cellular region [35]. Despite the
tremendous scientific premises, ST technology is very expensive due to the necessity of domain expertise, specialized equipment, and expensive reagents.
To circumvent the challenge in acquiring ST data, one
can learn to predict gene expression profiles from histology
images. This provides the opportunity to estimate localized
gene expression on a whole slide image (WSI), which in
turn can potentially benefit many image-based downstream
tasks. Most recent works on this direction [7, 13, 29, 38–40]
train on the Visium ST data [30], in which a tissue sample is
divided into thousands of regularly distributed spots. Each
spot has both the histology image patch and the corresponding gene expression profile. Therefore, we will use ‘spot’ to
refer to image patches and their corresponding gene expressions interchangeably throughout this paper. Past methods
train on these image-gene pairs to learn to predict gene expressions at different locations of a tissue sample based on
purely histology images.
This task is challenging. Given already very powerful
image representations [6, 18, 26, 27, 36], it is difficult to

15611

