This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StageDesigner: Artistic Stage Generation for Scenography via Theater Scripts
Zhaoxing Gan1 , Mengtian Li 2,1†, Ruhua Chen3 , Zhongxia Ji3 ,
Sichen Guo3 , Huanling Hu1 , Guangnan Ye 1†, Zuo Hu3
1 Fudan University, 2 Shanghai University, 3 Shanghai Theatre Academy
zxgan23@m.fudan.edu.cn, mtli@shu.edu.cn, yegn@fudan.edu.cn
{chenruhua, zhongxia.ji, huzuo}@sta.edu.cn

Human Stage Design

Application

StageDesigner
Available
Object area

Chat with LLM

Delete the stairs
and move the
table to corner

LLM Analysis
Change

Entity Retrieve

Input Script

Group Analysis

Generated Foreground

Input Script

Layout controlled
diffusion model

General User
Modifiy in
Blender

Blender

Final Stage

Human Sketching

Real model making

Generated Background

Final Stage

Performance

Professional User

Figure 1. Human Stage Design: Traditional stage design requires manual script analysis, collaborative planning, and model creation,
making it time-consuming and expertise-dependent. StageDesigner: StageDesigner automates stage design by transforming scripts into
3D foreground elements and then placing background elements in unobstructed areas within the audience’s line of sight. Application:
General users can reﬁne stage designs through conversational edits by feeding results back into the LLM, while professionals can import
designs into Blender for detailed adjustments, real model creation, and performance preparation.

Abstract
In this work, we introduce StageDesigner, the ﬁrst comprehensive framework for artistic stage generation using
large language models combined with layout-controlled diffusion models. Given the professional requirements of
stage scenography, StageDesigner simulates the workﬂows
of seasoned artists to generate immersive 3D stage scenes.
Speciﬁcally, our approach is divided into three primary
modules: Script Analysis, which extracts thematic and spatial cues from input scripts; Foreground Generation, which
constructs and arranges essential 3D objects; and Background Generation, which produces a harmonious background aligned with the narrative atmosphere and main-

tains spatial coherence by managing occlusions between
foreground and background elements. Furthermore, we introduce the StagePro-V1 dataset, a dedicated dataset with
276 unique stage scenes spanning different historical styles
and annotated with scripts, images, and detailed 3D layouts, speciﬁcally tailored for this task. Finally, evaluations
using both standard and newly proposed metrics, along
with extensive user studies, demonstrate the effectiveness
of StageDesigner, showcasing its ability to produce visually and thematically cohesive stages that meet both artistic
and spatial coherence standards. Project can be found at:
https://deadsmither5.github.io/2025/01/
03/StageDesigner/

† Corresponding author.

28705

