This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DualPM: Dual Posed-Canonical Point Maps
for 3D Shape and Pose Reconstruction
Tomas Jakab1∗

Ben Kaye1 *
1

University of Oxford

Shangzhe Wu2,3
2

Christian Ruprecht1

Stanford University

3

Andrea Vedaldi1

University of Cambridge

dualpm.github.io

canonical point map 𝑸

input
image 𝑰

𝛷

deformation
field
𝑷 −𝑸

posed point map 𝑷
input image 𝑰

𝑷 – input view

𝑷 – novel views

fitted skeleton

Figure 1. Left: We map an image of an object to its Dual Point Maps (DualPMs), a pair of point maps P , defined in a camera space, and Q,
defined in a canonical space where the object has a neutral pose. The pose is thus given by the flow P − Q. Right: The DualPMs are easy to
predict with a neural network, enabling effective 3D object reconstruction and facilitating geometric tasks like detecting 3D keypoints and
fitting a 3D skeleton. For visualization, we color each point with its coordinate in the canonical point maps.

Abstract

3D locations on the object and the other to a canonical version of the object in its rest pose. We also extend point maps
to amodal reconstruction to recover the complete shape of
the object, even through self-occlusions. We show that 3D
reconstruction and 3D pose estimation can be reduced to the
prediction of DualPMs. Empirically, we demonstrate that
this representation is a suitable target for deep networks
to predict. Specifically, we focus on modeling quadrupeds,
showing that DualPMs can be trained purely on synthetic
3D data, consisting of one or two models per category, while
generalizing effectively to real images. With this approach,
we achieve significant improvements over previous methods
for the 3D analysis and reconstruction of such objects.

The choice of data representation is a key factor in the
success of deep learning in geometric tasks. For instance,
DUSt3R recently introduced the concept of viewpointinvariant point maps, generalizing depth prediction and
showing that all key problems in the 3D reconstruction of
static scenes can be reduced to predicting such point maps.
In this paper, we develop an analogous concept for a very
different problem: the reconstruction of the 3D shape and
pose of deformable objects. To this end, we introduce Dual
Point Maps (DualPM), where a pair of point maps is extracted from the same image—one associating pixels to their
* Equal contribution.

6425

