This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding multi-layered transmission matrices
Anat Levin and Marina Alterman
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion
Haifa, Israel

Abstract
Wavefront shaping systems attempt to correct aberrations
caused by tissue scattering, by placing a spatial light modulator (SLM) in the optical path and using it to reshape
the light wave emitted from a target of interest deep inside
the tissue. However, the field-of-view we can correct with
one SLM pattern is extremely small, because inherently the
aberration is caused by the 3D tissue structure while the
SLM is planar. To overcome this, multi-conjugate correction systems built with multiple layered SLMs have been introduced, which attempt to approximate the 3D tissue structure with multiple planar aberrations.
However, multi-conjugate systems with a large number
of SLMs are not easy to construct. Therefore, it is important to understand how many SLM layers are actually
needed for a good correction, and whether there are practical benefits from correction systems with a relatively small
number of layers. To help in the design of future systems,
this paper analyzes multi-layer corrections. We show that
the well-known missing cone problem which fundamentally
limits the axial resolution of microscopes, turns into an advantage when designing 3D correction systems. Due to this
property less information should be captured by the correction system, facilitating sparser approximations. We also
show that even if the number of available layers is insufficient for a reasonable approximation of the full 3D tissue
volume, it can significantly expand the field-of-view when
compared to single-layer correction systems, and therefore
can largely accelerate their operation.

developed for imaging through scattering tissue. These include computational restoration algorithms which attempt
to fit the observed data with various models for the aberration and the target of interest [4, 5, 15, 17, 21, 23, 25,
32, 37, 39, 40]. Also, optical systems such as a confocal
microscope [14] or an OCT [24], aim to filter out the scattered light and maintain only the ballistic unscattered part.
However, as we attempt to see deeper into a scattering layer,
ballistic light weakens significantly, and the complexity of
aberration models increases. Moreover, biological target
of interest such as fluorescent tissue components are very
weak and as a result the scattered signal is also of a very
low signal to noise ratio (SNR), further limiting digital correction models. A particularly attractive approach for scattering aberration removal is wavefront shaping, where one
places a spatial light modulator (SLM) in the optical path
of the microscope and uses it to correct the wavefront emitted from a point deep inside the tissue, so that light photons
emerging from a single target point are brought into a single
sensor point, despite the tissue aberration. Wavefront shaping is a particularly attractive solution for fluorescent imaging because the correction is done optically rather than digitally. Unlike ballistic filtering approaches, all light photons
are used. Since the correction is done in the optical path, the
limited number of available photons is brought into a single
detector pixel and can be measured with higher SNR. As a
result, wavefront shaping has the potential to revolutionize
tissue imaging and allow us to overcome the fundamental
limitations of scattering, and image very deep inside biological targets at a high SNR.
The main limitation for wavefront shaping approaches is
that the aberrations of neighboring points inside volumetric tissue vary rapidly, and in practice a single correction
mask can only allow imaging of a small local field-of-view.
This is because the scattering process happens throughout
the 3D volume, while the aberration correction only happens on a planar SLM. Earlier demonstrations of wavefront
shaping have considered targets placed at a distance behind
a thin scattering layer, and this far-field arrangement has allowed them to correct larger regions with a single planar
modulation [12, 15, 34, 39]. Similarly in the context of
adaptive-optics, researchers have attempted to correct aber-

1. Introduction
Scattering is a central challenge in multiple imaging tasks
ranging from astronomy to microscopy, and biomedical
imaging. It degrades our ability to resolve stars through
telescopes, image into the bottom of the sea, and drive
through foggy weather. Most importantly in the context
of this paper, scattering severely limits our ability to image
through biological tissue. This happens due to small variations in the refractive index of the tissue volume, which
scatters the propagating light.
Numerous computational optics approaches have been

23164

