This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreeGave: 3D Physics Learning from Dynamic Videos by Gaussian Velocity
Jinxi Li, Ziyang Song, Siyuan Zhou, Bo Yang*
vLAR Group, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{jinxi.li, ziyang.song, siyuan.zhou}@connect.polyu.hk, bo.yang@polyu.edu.hk

Future Time

Observed Time

𝒕 = 𝟎. 𝟎

⋯
𝒕 = 𝟎. 𝟓

Ground Truth

FreeGave (Ours)

DefGS

𝒕 = 𝟏. 𝟎

𝒕 = 𝟏. 𝟎, PSNR: 27.654

𝒕 = 𝟏. 𝟎, PSNR: 20.903

Figure 1. Given video frames of a real-world dynamic scene, our FreeGave can learn the underlying physics and accurately predict the
future motion of a purple pen going through the hole of a tape, while existing baselines cannot.

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to model 3D scene geometry, appearance, and the underlying physics purely from multiview videos. By applying various governing PDEs as PINN
losses or incorporating physics simulation into neural networks, existing works often fail to learn complex physical motions at boundaries or require object priors such as
masks or types. In this paper, we propose FreeGave to learn
physics of complex dynamic 3D scenes without needing any
object priors. The key to our approach is to introduce a
physics code followed by a carefully designed divergencefree module for estimating a per-Gaussian velocity field,
without relying on the inefficient PINN losses. Extensive
experiments on three public datasets and a newly collected
challenging real-world dataset demonstrate the superior
performance of our method for future frame extrapolation
and motion segmentation. Most notably, our investigation
into the learned physics codes reveals that they truly learn
meaningful 3D physical motion patterns in the absence of
any human labels in training. Our code and data are available at https://github.com/vLAR-group/FreeGave

scenes, achieving excellent performance in novel view interpolation and/or 3D shape reconstruction. However, the
majority of these approaches lack the core ability of future
prediction, essentially because they fail to effectively learn
physical properties of 3D space.
To learn physical properties, one line of works introduces various governing PDEs, commonly known as PINN
[53], into the learning process of dynamic 3D scenes. While
achieving encouraging results in modeling 3D physics such
as velocity and viscosity [13, 30, 31, 66], the integration
of PINN losses often compromises the accuracy of learned
physics in boundary regions, leading to blurred predictions for future frames. Another line of works explicitly
incorporates various physics models into neural networks
[6, 24, 67, 83], showing impressive results in learning physical properties and further transferring to simulation. Nevertheless, these methods are usually limited to specific types
of objects or motions, as the encoded physics models are
often less generic than PINN constraints, necessitating additional boundary conditions such as object masks.
In this work, we aim to present a simple and general
method for learning physics of complex dynamic 3D scenes
using only multi-view videos, without needing any PINN
losses or extra priors such as object types or masks, which
are often needed by existing methods. Among various physical properties of a dynamic 3D scene, we follow the recent
work NVFi [30] and focus on learning 3D velocity as it directly governs 3D dynamics and future predictions.
Given video frames containing an unknown number of
objects/parts exhibiting diverse motions, at a single glance,
it is extremely challenging to learn velocities of all (un-

1. Introduction
Obtaining an accurate physical model for complex dynamic 3D environments is a key enabler for many emerging
applications, including robot planning, embodied interaction, and dynamic 3D/4D generation. Represented by NeRF
[47], 3DGS [28] and their variants [5, 29, 33, 51, 68, 75],
recent advancements in 3D learning have demonstrated an
unprecedented level of fidelity in modeling dynamic 3D

12433

