This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ODHSR: Online Dense 3D Reconstruction of Humans and Scenes
from Monocular Videos
Zetong Zhang1
1

Manuel Kaufmann1

ETH Zürich

2

HKUST(GZ)

Lixin Xue1
3

HKUST

Jie Song1,2,3
4

Martin R. Oswald4

University of Amsterdam

Figure 1. ODHSR takes monocular RGB input videos of humans and jointly reconstructs a photorealistic dense Gaussian representation
of the scene and the moving human as well as camera poses, human poses, and human silhouettes within a SLAM setting.

Abstract
Creating a photorealistic scene and human reconstruction from a single monocular in-the-wild video figures
prominently in the perception of a human-centric 3D world.
Recent neural rendering advances have enabled holistic human-scene reconstruction but require pre-calibrated
camera and human poses, and days of training time. In this
work, we introduce a novel unified framework that simultaneously performs camera tracking, human pose estimation and human-scene reconstruction in an online fashion.
3D Gaussian Splatting is utilized to learn Gaussian primitives for humans and scenes efficiently, and reconstructionbased camera tracking and human pose estimation modules
are designed to enable holistic understanding and effective disentanglement of pose and appearance. Specifically,
we design a human deformation module to reconstruct the
details and enhance generalizability to out-of-distribution
poses faithfully. Aiming to learn the spatial correlation between human and scene accurately, we introduce occlusionaware human silhouette rendering and monocular geometric priors, which further improve reconstruction quality.

Experiments on the EMDB and NeuMan datasets demonstrate superior or on-par performance with existing methods in camera tracking, human pose estimation, novel view
synthesis and runtime. Our project page is at https://ethait.github.io/ODHSR.

1. Introduction

21824

Building robotic agents for supporting humans in everyday tasks requires the efficient and holistic understanding
of scenes and dynamic humans in an online manner. Previous works in this domain do not always meet these criteria:
They either focus on the human reconstruction [12, 50] or
the scene reconstruction alone [41, 53, 66, 94], or if combined, they are rather slow to compute (order of days) [78]
or require pre-calibrated cameras [31].
We present the first unified framework that only needs
a monocular RGB video to simultaneously perform camera tracking, human pose estimation and dense photorealistic reconstruction of both the scene and the human. Our
system, called ODHSR, is orders of magnitude (75x) faster

