This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sample- and Parameter-Efficient Auto-Regressive Image Models
Elad Amrani
Apple, Technion

Leonid Karlinsky
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Alex Bronstein
Technion

https://github.com/elad-amrani/xtra

Figure 1. Sample and Parameter Efficiency of XTRA. (Left) XTRA-H/14 (0.6B parameters) outperforms prior state-of-the-art auto-regressive
image model (AIM-0.6B [26]) in top-1 average accuracy across 15 diverse image recognition benchmarks, despite being trained on 152× fewer
samples. (Right) XTRA-B/16 (85M parameters) outperforms prior auto-regressive image models trained on ImageNet-1k in linear and attentive
probing tasks, while using 7–16× fewer parameters.

Abstract
We introduce XTRA, a vision model pre-trained with a novel
auto-regressive objective that significantly enhances both sample and parameter efficiency compared to previous autoregressive image models. Unlike contrastive or masked image
modeling methods, which have not been demonstrated as having consistent scaling behavior on unbalanced internet data,
auto-regressive vision models exhibit scalable and promising
performance as model and dataset size increase. In contrast to
standard auto-regressive models, XTRA employs a Block Causal
Mask, where each Block represents k × k tokens rather than
relying on a standard causal mask. By reconstructing pixel
values block by block, XTRA captures higher-level structural
patterns over larger image regions. Predicting on blocks allows the model to learn relationships across broader areas of
pixels, enabling more abstract and semantically meaningful representations than traditional next-token prediction. This simple
modification yields two key results. First, XTRA is sample-

efficient. Despite being trained on 152× fewer samples (13.1M
vs. 2B), XTRA ViT-H/14 surpasses the top-1 average accuracy
of the previous state-of-the-art auto-regressive model across
15 diverse image recognition benchmarks. Second, XTRA
is parameter-efficient. Compared to auto-regressive models
trained on ImageNet-1k, XTRA ViT-B/16 outperforms in linear
and attentive probing tasks, using 7–16× fewer parameters
(85M vs. 1.36B/0.63B).

1. Introduction
Auto-regressive models have played a foundational role in
recent advancements in Natural Language Processing (NLP).
The simplicity of their objective — predicting the next word
in a sequence based on its preceding context — allows these
models to capture intricate dependencies and complex patterns
over long sequences. This next-token prediction mechanism

30127

Elad Amrani conducted this work while at IBM Research-AI.

