This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CORE4D: A 4D Human-Object-Human Interaction Dataset for Collaborative
Object REarrangement
Yun Liu1,2,3 * Chengwen Zhang4 * Ruofan Xing5 Bingda Tang1 Bowen Yang1 Li Yi1,2,3†
1
Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
4
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 5 Northeastern University
https://core4d.github.io/

Figure 1. CORE4D is a large-scale diverse human-object-human interaction dataset for collaborative object rearrangement, encompassing
real-world and synthetic branches. CORE4D-Real captures 1K human-object-human mesh sequences with allocentric and egocentric visual
signals, while CORE4D-Synthetic retargets real-world data onto 3K virtual object shapes formulating 10K motion sequences.

Abstract

ety of novel objects. Leveraging this approach, CORE4D
comprises a total of 11K collaboration sequences spanning 3K real and virtual object shapes. Benefiting from
extensive motion patterns provided by CORE4D, we benchmark two tasks aiming at generating human-object interaction: human-object motion forecasting and interaction
synthesis. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our collaboration retargeting strategy and indicate
that CORE4D has posed new challenges to existing humanobject interaction generation methodologies.

Understanding how humans cooperatively rearrange
household objects is critical for VR/AR and human-robot
interaction. However, in-depth studies on modeling these
behaviors are under-researched due to the lack of relevant
datasets. We fill this gap by presenting CORE4D, a novel
large-scale 4D human-object-human interaction dataset focusing on collaborative object rearrangement, which encompasses diverse compositions of various object geometries, collaboration modes, and 3D scenes. With 1K humanobject-human motion sequences captured in the real world,
we enrich CORE4D by contributing an iterative collaboration retargeting strategy to augment motions to a vari-

1. Introduction
Humans frequently rearrange household items through
multi-person collaboration , such as moving a table or pick-

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

1769

