This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FFR: Frequency Feature Rectification for Weakly Supervised Semantic
Segmentation
Ziqian Yang1,2,∗

Xinqiao Zhao1,2,∗
1

XJTLU

Xiaolei Wang1,2
2

Quan Zhang1,†

Jimin Xiao1,†

University of Liverpool

Image-level Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
(WSSS) has garnered significant attention due to its low annotation costs. Current single-stage state-of-the-art WSSS
methods mainly rely on Vision Transformer (ViT) to extract features from input images, generating more complete
segmentation results based on comprehensive semantic information. However, these ViT-based methods often suffer
from over-smoothing issues in segmentation results. In this
paper, we identify that attenuated high-frequency features
mislead the decoder of ViT-based WSSS models, resulting
in over-smoothed false segmentation. To address this, we
propose a Frequency Feature Rectification (FFR) framework to rectify the false segmentations caused by attenuated
high-frequency features and enhance the learning of highfrequency features in the decoder. Quantitative and qualitative experimental results demonstrate that our FFR framework can effectively address the attenuated high-frequency
caused over-smoothed segmentation issue and achieve new
state-of-the-art WSSS performances. Codes are available
at https://github.com/yay97/FFR.

Segmentation performance mIoU (%)

Abstract

Low frequency area in frequency domain

(a) Segmentation performance variations

(b) Spectrograms and Segmentation CAMs

1. Introduction
Due to the labor-intensive and costly pixel-wise annotation process required in fully supervised semantic segmentation, image-level Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) has received significant attention in recent
years. WSSS aims to predict pixel-level labels using more
affordable but challenging image-level annotations. Typically, Class Activation Maps (CAMs) are used in WSSS
for pseudo-label generation. Recent WSSS methods leverage Vision Transformers (ViTs) with self-attention mechanism to capture global interactions between features, producing comprehensive CAMs. However, this approach always leads to an over-smoothing issue [37].
In this paper, we attribute the cause of this issue to
the frequency filtering characteristics of ViT. As discussed

Figure 1. How the different frequency features influence the segmentation results. (a) The segmentation performances of different
frequency feature maps from the decoder. The feature map without some high-frequency features lead to the highest segmentation performance. (b) The Spectrograms and their corresponding
segmentation CAMs. We mask the high-frequency components
(boundary) and low-frequency (center) in the spectrograms respectively. The falsely activated regions on segmentation CAM are
marked in ‘red box’, and the correct activated regions are marked
in ‘green box’.

∗:Equal contributions †:Corresponding author

in [32], multi-head self-attention acts as a low-pass filter,
which tends to irreversibly attenuate high-frequency signals—signals that often originate from rapidly changing regions, such as boundaries in images. This attenuation of
high-frequency signals leads to an inaccurate representation

30261

