This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DPU: Dynamic Prototype Updating for Multimodal
Out-of-Distribution Detection
Shawn Li1 , Huixian Gong1 , Hao Dong2 , Tiankai Yang1 , Zhengzhong Tu3 , Yue Zhao1
1
University of Southern California 2 ETH Zürich 3 Texas A&M University
{li.li02, huixian, tiankaiy, yzhao010}@usc.edu, hao.dong@ibk.baug.ethz.ch, tzz@tamu.edu

Abstract

+ 8.1 AUROC

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is crucial for ensuring
the robustness of machine learning models by identifying
samples that deviate from the training distribution. While
traditional OOD detection has predominantly focused on
single-modality inputs, such as images, recent advancements in multimodal models have shown the potential of
utilizing multiple modalities (e.g., video, optical flow, audio) to improve detection performance. However, existing
approaches often neglect intra-class variability within indistribution (ID) data, assuming that samples of the same
class are perfectly cohesive and consistent. This assumption
can lead to performance degradation, especially when prediction discrepancies are indiscriminately amplified across
all samples. To address this issue, we propose Dynamic
Prototype Updating (DPU), a novel plug-and-play framework for multimodal OOD detection that accounts for intraclass variations. Our method dynamically updates class
center representations for each class by measuring the variance of similar samples within each batch, enabling tailored adjustments. This approach allows us to intensify
prediction discrepancies based on the updated class centers, thereby enhancing the model’s robustness and generalization across different modalities. Extensive experiments
on two tasks, five datasets, and nine base OOD algorithms
demonstrate that DPU significantly improves OOD detection performances, setting a new state-of-the-art in multimodal OOD detection, including improvements up to 80%
in Far-OOD detection. To improve accessibility and reproducibility, our code is released at https://github.
com/lili0415/DPU-OOD-Detection.

- 34.3 FPR95

Figure 1. Performance of our DPU applied to four base OOD
methods in the Multimodal Far-OOD Detection task (§4.2), using
HMDB51 as the ID dataset and Kinetics600 as the OOD dataset.
Red symbols denote the OOD methods enhanced by DPU, demonstrating that DPU significantly improves their performances.

robotics [3, 9], and other applications [4, 12, 15, 21, 28, 42,
43, 48, 50]. In recent years, numerous OOD detection algorithms have been developed, spanning classification-based
and distance-based methods [7, 17, 30, 31, 40, 49]. Traditionally, OOD detection has focused on single-modality inputs, such as images or videos. With the emergence of large
Vision-Language Models [37, 52], researchers are exploring OOD detection with the assistance of language modalities [29, 33, 46]. However, their evaluations remain limited
to benchmarks containing only images. Effectively leveraging multimodal features (e.g., video, optical flow, and audio) remains an open challenge, requiring further research.

1. Introduction

Current Work. Dong et al. [11] introduced the first
multimodal OOD benchmark and framework, identifying
the phenomenon of modality prediction discrepancy. This
phenomenon reveals that softmax prediction discrepancies
across different modalities are negligible for ID data but
significant for OOD data. By amplifying this prediction
discrepancy during training, they observed improvements
in OOD detection performance. However, a key assumption in previous multimodal OOD detection studies is that
all samples within a given class are entirely in-distribution
[11, 49], implying perfect cohesion among samples within

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection aims to identify samples that differ from the in-distribution (ID) data in ways
that challenge the model’s ability to generalize [2, 14, 16,
25, 36]. It is crucial for enhancing the safety and robustness of machine learning models across various domains,
such as autonomous driving [8, 26], medical imaging [19],

10193

