This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vid2Sim: Realistic and Interactive Simulation from Video for Urban Navigation
Ziyang Xie1,2 Zhizheng Liu2 Zhenghao Peng2 Wayne Wu2 Bolei Zhou2
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 University of California, Los Angeles
https://metadriverse.github.io/vid2sim/
🤳 Video

🌏 Realistic & Interactive Simulation

🤖 Agent Training

💥

💥

Physical Scene Interac on

📷 Ego View

Diverse Real2Sim Environments

Zero-shot Sim2Real Transfer

Figure 1. Vid2Sim converts monocular video captured by a hand-held camera into realistic and interactive 3D simulation environments.
It facilitates RL training of navigation agents in digital twins of urban scenes and provides realistic observations like RGB and depth to
reduce the sim-to-real gap. The pink mobile robot in the image is a food delivery bot that avoids collisions with pedestrians and obstacles.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Developing intelligent agents navigating and interacting
within complex urban environments is crucial for many
robotic applications like food delivery bots and assistive
electric wheelchairs. Real-world experimentation is often
challenging due to safety risks and efficiency constraints. In
recent years, learning in simulation [34, 46, 54] has become
an essential tool to provide a safe, controlled, and costeffective alternative for training agents on complex tasks
such as robotic manipulation [23, 30, 33] and autonomous
driving [14, 28, 61, 68]. However, transferring the models
trained in a simulated environment into the real world remains challenging due to the significant sim-to-real gap.
Substantial efforts have been made to bridge this gap.
Prior approaches often leverage domain randomization [45,
53, 55] and system identification [9, 43, 52] methods that
enhance the agent’s robustness by simulating real-world
noises and aligning agent dynamic model with the realworld settings. While these methods have achieved some
success, their effectiveness is fundamentally limited by the

Sim-to-real gap has long posed a significant challenge for
robot learning in simulation, preventing the deployment of
learned models in the real world. Previous work has primarily focused on domain randomization and system identification to mitigate this gap. However, these methods are
often limited by the realism of the simulator and graphics
engines renderings. In this work, we propose Vid2Sim, a
novel framework that effectively bridges the sim2real gap
through a scalable and cost-efficient real2sim pipeline with
3D scene reconstruction and simulation. Given a monocular video as input, Vid2Sim can generate photo-realistic and
physically interactable 3D simulation environments to enable the reinforcement learning of visual navigation agents
in complex urban environments. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that Vid2Sim significantly improves the performance of urban navigation in the digital twins and real
world by 31.2% and 68.3% in success rate compared with
agents trained with prior simulation methods.

1581

