This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spk2SRImgNet: Super-Resolve Dynamic Scene from Spike Stream
via Motion Aligned Collaborative Filtering
Yuanlin Wang1,2 , Yiyang Zhang1,2 , Ruiqin Xiong1,2, *, Jing Zhao1,2 ,
Jian Zhang3 , Xiaopeng Fan4 , Tiejun Huang1,2
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
wangyuanlin@stu.pku.edu.cn
{yiyangz, rqxiong, jzhaopku, zhangjian.sz, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Binary Spike Frame (LR)

Spike camera is a kind of neuromorphic camera that records
dynamic scenes by firing a stream of binary spikes with
extremely high temporal resolution. It demonstrates great
potential for vision tasks in high-speed scenarios. One
limitation in its current implementation is the relatively
low spatial resolution. This paper develops a network
called Spk2SRImgNet to super-resolve high resolution images from low resolution spike stream. However, fluctuations in spike stream hinder the performance of spike camera super resolution. To address this issue, we propose
a motion aligned collaborative filtering (MACF) module,
which is motivated by key ideas in classic image restoration
schemes to mitigate fluctuations in spike data. MACF leverages the temporal similarity of spike stream to acquire similar features from neighboring moments via motion alignment. To separate disturbances from features, MACF filters
these similar features jointly in transform domain to exploit
representation sparsity, and generates refinement features
that will be used to update initial fluctuated features. Specifically, MACF designs an inverse motion alignment operation to map these refinement features back to their original positions. The initial features are aggregated with the
repositioned refinement features to enhance reliability. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method
achieves state-of-the-art performance compared with existing methods.

1. Introduction
High-speed imaging attracts increasing attention in emerging computer vision applications such as autonomous driv* Corresponding author.

fxp@hit.edu.cn

Ground Truth (HR)

VidarSR SpikeSR

Ours

Figure 1. Illustration of spike camera super resolution (SCSR) and
visual comparison (×4) with existing SCSR methods: VidarSR
[42] and SpikeSR-Net [50]. Please zoom in for better comparison.

ing [15, 17] and robotics [16, 29]. Conventional camera
employs an exposure-based imaging model, which limits
its ability to capture high-speed scenes. Specifically, conventional camera accumulates photoelectric signals over an
exposure time window to form a snapshot image, which requires the scene to be still during the exposure period. Otherwise, a single point on a moving object may be projected
onto different sensor pixels, resulting in motion blur.
Neuromorphic camera is an emerging camera that abandons the concept of exposure window and mimics the working mechanism of biological retina. It records intensity
information with high temporal resolution, showing great
potential for high speed vision tasks. One kind of neuromorphic camera is event camera [2, 25, 26, 31]. It detects
light intensity changes of each pixel in the logarithmic domain and fires an event when the change exceeds a specified threshold. Another kind of neuromorphic camera is
spike camera [8, 9, 19]. Each pixel of spike camera independently and continuously accumulates photons, and fires
a spike when the accumulation exceeds a predefined threshold. Unlike event camera that only records relative changes
of light intensity, spike camera captures absolute intensity
by firing a stream of binary spikes, providing clearer information for reconstructing image details.
Benefiting from its extremely high temporal resolution

11416

