This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Sparse to Dense: Camera Relocalization with Scene-Specific Detector from
Feature Gaussian Splatting
Zhiwei Huang1,2
1

Hailin Yu2†

Yichun Shentu2

Jin Yuan2

State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University

2

Guofeng Zhang1†

SenseTime Research

teaser

Abstract

Landmarks

This paper presents a novel camera relocalization method,
STDLoc, which leverages Feature Gaussian as scene representation. STDLoc is a full relocalization pipeline that can
achieve accurate relocalization without relying on any pose
prior. Unlike previous coarse-to-fine localization methods
that require image retrieval first and then feature matching,
we propose a novel sparse-to-dense localization paradigm.
Based on this scene representation, we introduce a novel
matching-oriented Gaussian sampling strategy and a scenespecific detector to achieve efficient and robust initial pose
estimation. Furthermore, based on the initial localization
results, we align the query feature map to the Gaussian
feature field by dense feature matching to enable accurate localization. The experiments on indoor and outdoor
datasets show that STDLoc outperforms current state-ofthe-art localization methods in terms of localization accuracy and recall. Our code is available on the project website: https://zju3dv.github.io/STDLoc.

Feature Field

<>

Sparse

Query Image

Dense

Stitched Localization Result

1. Introduction

Figure 1. STDLoc: Sparse-to-Dense Localization. We leverage Feature Gaussian as the scene representation, which supports
direct 2D-3D sparse matching on landmarks and enables the alignment of the query feature map to the feature field through dense
matching.

Camera relocalization is a fundamental task in computer vision. It involves estimating the 6DoF camera pose from a
query image relative to a pre-built scene map. This capability has broad applications in fields such as AR/VR, autonomous driving, and robotics.
An appropriate scene representation is critical for camera relocalization. Traditional methods [25, 30, 43, 44, 46,
54, 55] leverage sparse 3D point clouds pre-reconstructed
by Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [48] as the scene representation, with each point associated with one or more 2D
descriptors [31]. In the localization stage, reliable local
features [14, 31, 40, 41] are first extracted from the query
image, and these features are matched either with reference images [44, 52] or directly with the 3D point cloud
† Corresponding authors.

[43, 46, 62, 65]. Then, the 6DoF pose is estimated using
the Perspective-n-Point (PnP) [24] algorithm based on the
established 2D-3D correspondences. This type of method,
also called feature matching-based localization, can achieve
high localization accuracy in rich-texture scenarios but degrade in weak-texture environments [50] due to insufficient
feature correspondences. Semi-dense [18, 52] or dense
matching [16] can effectively alleviate this problem, but
makes SfM computation unacceptable at the mapping stage.
Mesh can provide dense depth, but the localization accuracy
is seriously affected by artifacts [38, 39].
Many works have explored encoding scene information
into a deep neural network. They train a neural network to
regress absolute poses directly (APR) [9, 20] or scene coordinates (SCR) [8, 50]. The APR method generally has

This work was partially supported by NSF of China (No.62425209).

27059

