This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Differentiable Inverse Rendering with Interpretable Basis BRDFs
Hoon-Gyu Chung

Seokjun Choi
POSTECH

Seung-Hwan Baek

1.0

0.0

(a) Input multi-view
flash images

(b) Image and normals under
novel view and lighting

(c) Our interpretable basis BRDFs
and weight maps

(d) Reflectance editing with
environment relighting

Figure 1. We propose a differentiable inverse rendering method with (a) multi-view flash photography inputs. Our analysis-by-synthesis
method achieves not only (b) novel-view relighting and accurate geometry reconstruction, but also (c) interpretable basis BRDFs and their
spatially-separated weights. This allows for (d) intuitive scene editing.

Abstract
Inverse rendering seeks to reconstruct both geometry
and spatially varying BRDFs (SVBRDFs) from captured
images. To address the inherent ill-posedness of inverse
rendering, basis BRDF representations are commonly used,
modeling SVBRDFs as spatially varying blends of a set of
basis BRDFs. However, existing methods often yield basis BRDFs that lack intuitive separation and have limited
scalability to scenes of varying complexity. In this paper,
we introduce a differentiable inverse rendering method that
produces interpretable basis BRDFs. Our approach models
a scene using 2D Gaussians, where the reflectance of each
Gaussian is defined by a weighted blend of basis BRDFs.
We efficiently render an image from the 2D Gaussians and
basis BRDFs using differentiable rasterization and impose
a specular-weighted rendering loss with the input flash photography images. During this analysis-by-synthesis optimization process of differentiable inverse rendering, we dynamically adjust the number of basis BRDFs to fit the target scene while encouraging sparsity in the basis weights.
This ensures that the reflectance of each Gaussian is represented by only a few basis BRDFs. This approach enables

the reconstruction of accurate geometry and interpretable
basis BRDFs that are spatially separated. Consequently,
the resulting scene representation, comprising basis BRDFs
and 2D Gaussians, supports physically-based novel-view
relighting and intuitive scene editing.

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering aims to reconstruct geometry and reflectance from captured images, a fundamental problem in
computer vision and computer graphics. Recent advances
in differentiable rendering methods [18, 29] have facilitated analysis-by-synthesis differentiable inverse rendering.
These methods enable the optimization of scene parameters by minimizing the discrepancy between captured and
synthesized images [2, 8, 12, 45, 47]. However, achieving
accurate inverse rendering remains challenging, especially
when the available lighting and viewing angles are limited.
A promising approach to mitigate this problem is to exploit
the spatial coherence of SVBRDFs using basis BRDF representations [1, 19, 27, 28, 32]. Representing the BRDF at
each point as a spatially varying blend of basis BRDFs allows gathering multiple points to accurately fit basis BRDFs

475

