This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Taming Video Diffusion Prior with Scene-Grounding Guidance
for 3D Gaussian Splatting from Sparse Inputs
Yingji Zhong1
1

Zhihao Li2

Dave Zhenyu Chen2

Lanqing Hong2

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

2

Dan Xu1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

{yzhongbn,danxu}@cse.ust.hk, {zhihao.li,dave.zhenyuchen,honglanqing}@huawei.com

(c) Enhancement

(b) Occlusion

(a) Extrapolation

Baseline 3DGS

3DGS with Vanilla Generation

3DGS with Scene-Grounding Generation

…
14.29

…
17.89

23.94

…
23.18

…
24.66

25.14

…
28.66

…
22.12

30.12

Figure 1. We tackle the critical issues of (a) extrapolation and (b) occlusion in sparse-input 3DGS by leveraging a video diffusion model.
Vanilla generation often suffers from inconsistencies within the generated sequences (as highlighted by the yellow arrows), leading to black
shadows in the rendered images. In contrast, our scene-grounding generation produces consistent sequences, effectively addressing these
issues and enhancing overall quality (c), as indicated by the blue boxes. The numbers refer to PSNR values. Zoom in for better visualization.

Abstract

holistic scene modeling, we also propose a trajectory initialization method. It effectively identifies regions that are
outside the field of view and occluded. We further design a
scheme tailored for 3DGS optimization with generated sequences. Experiments demonstrate that our method significantly improves upon the baseline and achieves state-ofthe-art performance on challenging benchmarks.

Despite recent successes in novel view synthesis using 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), modeling scenes with sparse
inputs remains a challenge. In this work, we address two
critical yet overlooked issues in real-world sparse-input
modeling: extrapolation and occlusion. To tackle these
issues, we propose to use a reconstruction by generation
pipeline that leverages learned priors from video diffusion
models to provide plausible interpretations for regions outside the field of view or occluded. However, the generated
sequences exhibit inconsistencies that do not fully benefit subsequent 3DGS modeling. To address the challenge
of inconsistencies, we introduce a novel scene-grounding
guidance based on rendered sequences from an optimized
3DGS, which tames the diffusion model to generate consistent sequences. This guidance is training-free and does not
require any fine-tuning of the diffusion model. To facilitate

1. Introduction
Recent advances in 3D scene representation such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [2–4, 29, 31, 43] have greatly
boosted the performance of Novel View Synthesis (NVS).
NeRF represents the scene with a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) and renders high-fidelity images with volumetric rendering. More recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [16, 25, 26, 58] emerges as a powerful explicit

6133

