This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Conformal Prediction for Zero-Shot Models
Julio Silva-Rodrı́guezB

Ismail Ben Ayed
ÉTS Montréal

Jose Dolz

Bjulio-jose.silva-rodriguez@etsmtl.ca
Abstract
Vision-language models pre-trained at large scale have
shown unprecedented adaptability and generalization to
downstream tasks. Although its discriminative potential
has been widely explored, its reliability and uncertainty are
still overlooked. In this work, we investigate the capabilities of CLIP models under the split conformal prediction
paradigm, which provides theoretical guarantees to blackbox models based on a small, labeled calibration set. In
contrast to the main body of literature on conformal predictors in vision classifiers, foundation models exhibit a particular characteristic: they are pre-trained on a one-time
basis on an inaccessible source domain, different from the
transferred task. This domain drift negatively affects the
efficiency of the conformal sets and poses additional challenges. To alleviate this issue, we propose Conf-OT, a transfer learning setting that operates transductive over the combined calibration and query sets. Solving an optimal transport problem, the proposed method bridges the domain gap
between pre-training and adaptation without requiring additional data splits but still maintaining coverage guarantees. We comprehensively explore this conformal prediction strategy on a broad span of 15 datasets and three nonconformity scores. Conf-OT provides consistent relative improvements of up to 20% on set efficiency while being ×15
faster than popular transductive approaches. We make the
code available 1 .

[31, 36] or image synthesis [52], among many others. Inspired by the transferability power of VLMs, many efforts have focused on improving the discriminative performance of CLIP during adaptation to downstream tasks
[18, 20, 26, 34, 56, 72, 74, 75].
Following their remarkable performance on general
computer vision tasks, VLMs, and more particularly CLIP,
are becoming increasingly popular in safety-critical scenarios, such as autonomous driving and medical imaging
[32, 35, 54, 57]. Therefore, ensuring the reliability of model
predictions is paramount for the safe deployment of these
models in real-world applications, particularly considering
their increasing adoption. Nevertheless, this crucial aspect
has often been overlooked in the literature, with only a
handful of recent works exploring the uncertainty of CLIP
predictions from a calibration standpoint [42, 45, 55, 60].
Albeit popular, confidence calibration methods lack theoretical guarantees of the actual model performance. For
example, these cannot estimate the most likely output (or
set of outputs) and provide a verified probability of such
prediction being correct. A principled solution is to quantify the uncertainty via conformal prediction (CP) frameworks [1, 46, 48, 53, 66], which has experienced a growing
interest in more traditional machine learning models. CP
provides confidence guarantees by yielding prediction sets
that contain the correct label with a desired coverage level,
e.g., they can ensure that the true category will be part of
the predictive sets, on average, 95% of the time. Particularly, split conformal prediction [46, 66] provides a practical
scenario to incorporate such marginal guarantees to blackbox models by leveraging a small calibration set, which is
assumed to be, at least, exchangeable with respect to test
data [66]. With the growing interest in the trustworthiness
of machine learning systems, many works have explored CP
on classical image classification benchmarks [2, 13, 25, 59],
including ImageNet [11] or CIFAR [28] datasets. For example, these works have focused on proposing novel criteria
to create the predictive sets (non-conformity scores in conformal prediction literature) with improved efficiency [39],
adaptiveness [2, 51], or conditional coverage [13].
Building on these observations, this work explores how

1. Introduction
Deep learning is currently undergoing a paradigm shift
with the emergence of large-scale vision-language models
(VLMs), such as CLIP [49]. These models, which are
trained on a massive amount of paired language and image data leveraging contrastive learning techniques, have
demonstrated unprecedented zero-shot capabilities on a
wide array of downstream visual tasks, including classification [44, 49], object detection [33, 41], segmentation
1 https://github.com/jusiro/CLIP-Conformal

19931

