This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoWorld: Exploring Knowledge Learning from Unlabeled Videos
Zhongwei Ren1,2 , Yunchao Wei1† , Xun Guo2 ,
Yao Zhao1 , Bingyi Kang2 , Jiashi Feng2 , Xiaojie Jin2 †
1

Beijing Jiaotong University 2 ByteDance Seed
https://VideoWorld.github.io/

Abstract
This work explores whether a deep generative model can
learn complex knowledge solely from visual input, in contrast to the prevalent focus on text-based models like large
language models (LLMs). We develop VideoWorld, an
auto-regressive video generation model trained on unlabeled video data, and test its knowledge acquisition abilities
in video-based Go and robotic control tasks. Our experiments reveal two key findings: (1) video-only training provides sufficient information for learning knowledge, including rules, reasoning and planning capabilities, and (2) the
representation of visual change is crucial for knowledge acquisition. To improve both the efficiency and efficacy of this
process, we introduce the Latent Dynamics Model (LDM) as
a key component of VideoWorld. Remarkably, VideoWorld
reaches a 5-dan professional level in the Video-GoBench
with just a 300-million-parameter model, without relying
on search algorithms or reward mechanisms typical in reinforcement learning. In robotic tasks, VideoWorld effectively
learns diverse control operations and generalizes across environments, approaching the performance of oracle models
in CALVIN and RLBench. This study opens new avenues for
knowledge acquisition from visual data, with all code, data,
and models open-sourced for further research.

Figure 1. VideoWorld explores learning knowledge from unlabeled videos, ranging from task-specific rules to high-level reasoning and planning capabilities. Compared to other learning methods: reinforcement learning (RL), supervised learning (SL) and
text-based learning, it offers three advantages: 1) better generalization with unified visual representation for various tasks and interfaces, 2) lower manual annotation burden, and 3) learning richer
real-world information than text description.

1. Introduction

edge primarily through visual information, rather than relying solely on language. For instance, gorillas and other
primates learn vital skills like foraging and social interactions mainly through visual observation, mimicking adult
behaviors without relying on language [9, 26, 67].
Most existing research has focused on learning knowledge from texts or labels [1, 57], with relatively little attention to learning from pure visual signals. Some studies,
such as [16], have explored using video data to train models
for robot manipulation, but they still rely heavily on language instructions. Moreover, these tasks are often limited
to single commands, without requiring complex reasoning
or planning. This raises an important question: can an AI
model learn knowledge* solely from visual input, akin to
how a gorilla learns from its environment?
In this work, we take an initial step toward exploring
knowledge learning from raw video using the next token

The next token prediction training paradigm has endowed
large language models (LLMs) [2, 3, 7, 13, 19, 20, 30,
31, 58, 63, 70] with remarkable world knowledge and intelligence, enabling them to help address complex tasks
that require reasoning [22, 23, 33, 47–49, 66, 77], planning
ahead [27, 53, 55, 65], and decision-making [10, 11, 17, 37].
However, language alone cannot fully capture all forms of
knowledge or encompass the vast information present in the
real world. In nature, biological organisms acquire knowlWork done when Zhongwei and Xun interned at ByteDance Seed.

* Following prior works in AI and knowledge representation [5, 51]
which view ‘knowledge’ as extending beyond factual information, we use
‘knowledge’ to broadly refer to a model’s learned rules, reasoning, and
planning abilities necessary for task completion. For better readability and
clarity, these terms are used interchangeably in specific contexts.

† Correspondence to Xiaojie Jin <jinxiaojie@bytedance.com>

and Yunchao Wei <yunchao.wei@bjtu.edu.cn>.

Project lead.

29029

