This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ScaleLSD: Scalable Deep Line Segment Detection Streamlined
Bin Tan2
Xianwei Zheng3
Yujun Shen2
Tianfu Wu4
Nan Xue†1,2
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University 2 Ant Group
3
LIESMARS, Wuhan University 4 Department of ECE, NC State University

ScaleLSD

DeepLSD

HAWPv3

LSD

Reference

Zeran Ke1

Figure 1. Our ScaleLSD handles a wide range of images, depicting their geometric structures (including the curves, object contours,
repeated patterns, and structural regularities) by self-supervised learning of line segment detection from 10M unlabeled images.

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of Line Segment Detection (LSD) for the characterization of line geometry in
images, with the aim of learning a domain-agnostic robust
LSD model that works well for any natural images. With
the focus of scalable self-supervised learning of LSD, we
revisit and streamline the fundamental designs of (deep
and non-deep) LSD approaches to have a high-performing
and efficient LSD learner, dubbed as ScaleLSD, for the
curation of line geometry at scale from over 10M unlabeled
real-world images. Our ScaleLSD works very well to

detect much more number of line segments from any natural
images even than the pioneered non-deep LSD approach,
having a more complete and accurate geometric characterization of images using line segments. Experimentally, our
proposed ScaleLSD is comprehensively testified under
zero-shot protocols in detection performance, single-view
3D geometry estimation, two-view line segment matching,
and multiview 3D line mapping, all with excellent performance obtained. Based on the thorough evaluation, our
ScaleLSD is observed to be the first deep approach that
outperforms the pioneered non-deep LSD in all aspects
we have tested, significantly expanding and reinforcing the
versatility of the line geometry of images.

† Corresponding author.

6327

