This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BioX-CPath: Biologically-driven Explainable Diagnostics for Multistain IHC
Computational Pathology
Amaya Gallagher-Syed*†
Michele Bombardieri*

Henry Senior*

Omnia Alwazzan*

Elena Pontarini*

Costantino Pitzalis*

Myles J. Lewis*

Michael R. Barnes*

Luca Rossi‡

Gregory Slabaugh*

Abstract
The development of biologically interpretable and explainable models remains a key challenge in computational
pathology, particularly for multistain immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis. We present BioX-CPath, an explainable graph neural network architecture for whole slide image (WSI) classification that leverages both spatial and semantic features across multiple stains. At its core, BioXCPath introduces a novel Stain-Aware Attention Pooling
(SAAP) module that generates biologically meaningful,
stain-aware patient embeddings. Our approach achieves
state-of-the-art performance on both Rheumatoid Arthritis and Sjogren’s Disease multistain datasets. Beyond performance metrics, BioX-CPath provides interpretable insights through stain attention scores, entropy measures, and
stain interaction scores, that permit measuring model alignment with known pathological mechanisms. This biological grounding, combined with strong classification performance, makes BioX-CPath particularly suitable for clinical applications where interpretability is key. Source code
and documentation can be found at: https://github.
com/AmayaGS/BioX-CPath.

of the tissue samples. Hematoxylin & Eosin (H&E) staining, a traditional and widely used technique, offers a broad
view of tissue architecture and cellular morphology, with
Hematoxylin staining cell nuclei a deep blue-purple, while
Eosin stains cytoplasm and extracellular matrix in shades of
pink. In contrast, Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a more
specialized technique that uses antibodies tagged with visual markers to identify specific proteins or cell types within
tissue samples, allowing for precise localization and visualization of cell populations present in the tissue [41].
In cancer diagnostics, H&E staining remains the foundation for initial assessment and general diagnosis. However, IHC plays a crucial role in tumor classification, prognosis determination, and treatment selection by pinpointing
specific cancer biomarkers, such Human Epidermal Growth
Factor Receptor 2 (HER2), Estrogen Receptor (ER) and
Progesterone Receptor (PR) [64, 65]. For autoimmune diseases, while H&E staining identifies general patterns of inflammation and tissue damage, IHC becomes essential for a
more nuanced understanding of the disease process. It highlights the types of immune cells present in inflammatory infiltrates, detects autoantibody deposits, and visualizes specific autoantigens targeted by the immune system [43]. In
clinical pathology, a tissue sample will be taken and thinly
sliced, and different stains applied to these slices, often with
a reference H&E slide to verify tissue quality [41]. These
multi-stain WSIs stacks are rich in information about cellular types, tissue structures, and spatial patterns which relate
to disease presentation and prognosis. Expert pathologists
examining these stacks perform a semi-quantitative analysis, efficiently integrating information across both scale,
stains, and images.
Most state-of-the-art computational pathology methods
so far have focused on H&E and the single-stain domain.
Works that has tackled IHC have often done so in the context of cell quantification via cell segmentation [15, 26,
51, 52], as well as prediction and scoring of biomarkers
[26, 27, 47], or registration of multistain stacks [55]. Some

1. Introduction
Whole Slide Image (WSI) scanners capture high resolution,
multi-magnification digital images of stained tissue biopsies
presented on glass slides. The digitization of these biopsies
has spurred the development of computational pathology
methods. Analysis of these WSIs currently stands as one
of the gold standard diagnostic and subtyping methods for
many forms of cancers and autoimmune diseases, such as
Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) and Sjogren’s Disease. Different types of staining exist, which highlight different aspects
* Queen Mary University of London
† Corresponding author: a.r.syed@qmul.ac.uk
‡ The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

10372

