This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S3 -Face: SSS-Compliant Facial Reflectance Estimation via Diffusion Priors
Xingyu Ren1
1

Jiankang Deng2 Yuhao Cheng1 Wenhan Zhu3 Yichao Yan1
Xiaokang Yang1 Stefanos Zafeiriou2 Chao Ma1*

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Imperial College London 3 Xueshen AI
{rxy sjtu,chengyuhao,yanyichao,xkyang,chaoma}@sjtu.edu.cn
{j.deng16,s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

zhuwenhan@excitai.com

Figure 1. We introduce S3 -Face, a comprehensive high-quality facial reflectance estimation method. Our approach leverages a pretrained diffusion model as a reflectance prior, robustly generating subsurface scattering (SSS)-compliant facial reflectance, particularly for
hemoglobin and melanin maps. S3 -Face adeptly handles diverse input subjects and formats, delivering photorealistic rendering results.

Abstract
Recent 3D face reconstruction methods have made remarkable advancements, yet achieving high-quality facial reflectance from monocular input remains challenging. Existing methods rely on the light-stage captured data to learn
facial reflectance models. However, limited subject diversity in these datasets poses challenges in achieving good
generalization and broad applicability. This motivates us to
explore whether the extensive priors captured in recent generative diffusion models (e.g., Stable Diffusion) can enable
more generalizable facial reflectance estimation as these
models have been pre-trained on large-scale internet image collections containing rich visual patterns. In this paper, we introduce the use of Stable Diffusion as a prior
for facial reflectance estimation, achieving robust results
with minimal captured data for fine-tuning. We present
S3 -Face, a comprehensive framework capable of produc-

ing SSS-compliant skin reflectance from in-the-wild images.
Our method adopts a two-stage training approach: in the
first stage, DSN-Net is trained to predict diffuse albedo,
specular albedo, and normal maps from in-the-wild images
using a novel joint reflectance attention module. In the second stage, HM-Net is trained to generate hemoglobin and
melanin maps based on the diffuse albedo predicted in the
first stage, yielding SSS-compliant and detailed reflectance
maps. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
achieves strong generalization and produces high-fidelity,
SSS-compliant facial reflectance estimation.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding authors

Long before the digital age, artists meticulously strove to
capture the appearance of real skin in oil paintings, as illustrated in Fig. 1, relying on sharp observational skills and
an intimate understanding of light and texture. In the modern digital era, simulating realistic facial skin reflectance
is still the key challenge in computer vision and computer

16051

