This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Expansion of Pre-trained Models with Mixture of Adapters
for Continual Learning
Huiyi Wang1,2 , Haodong Lu1 , Lina Yao2,1 , Dong Gong1 *
1
University of New South Wales, 2 CSIRO’s Data61
{huiyi.wang, haodong.lu, dong.gong}@unsw.edu.au; lina.yao@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) aims to continually accumulate
knowledge from a non-stationary data stream without catastrophic forgetting of learned knowledge, requiring a balance
between stability and adaptability. Relying on the generalizable representation in pre-trained models (PTMs), PTMbased CL methods perform effective continual adaptation on
downstream tasks by adding learnable adapters or prompts
upon the frozen PTMs. However, many existing PTM-based
CL methods use restricted adaptation on a fixed set of these
modules to avoid forgetting, suffering from limited CL ability.
Periodically adding task-specific modules results in linear
model growth rate and impaired knowledge reuse. We propose Self-Expansion of pre-trained models with Modularized
Adaptation (SEMA), a novel approach to enhance the control of stability-plasticity balance in PTM-based CL. SEMA
automatically decides to reuse or add adapter modules on
demand in CL, depending on whether significant distribution shift that cannot be handled is detected at different
representation levels. We design modular adapter consisting of a functional adapter and a representation descriptor.
The representation descriptors are trained as a distribution
shift indicator and used to trigger self-expansion signals.
For better composing the adapters, an expandable weighting router is learned jointly for mixture of adapter outputs.
SEMA enables better knowledge reuse and sub-linear expansion rate. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed self-expansion method, achieving
state-of-the-art performance compared to PTM-based CL
methods without memory rehearsal. Code is available at
https://github.com/huiyiwang01/SEMA-CL.

1. Introduction
With the development of deep neural networks, deep learning
models have achieved significant success in various fields,
* D. Gong is the corresponding author. This project was partially supported by an ARC DECRA Fellowship (DE230101591) to D. Gong, and
PhD scholarship support from UNSW and CSIRO Data61.

such as computer vision [15, 24]. However, real-world scenarios often present learning tasks in a dynamic data stream
with non-stationary distributions [50]. Considering the need
for efficient model updating and restricted budgets on storage and computation [35], it is not guaranteed to store all
the historical data and repeatedly re-train the model. Continual learning (CL) is investigated to learn incrementally and
accumulate knowledge efficiently from the non-stationary
data stream without catastrophic forgetting [46, 54] of previously learned knowledge [14, 59, 65, 71]. It requires CL
approaches to achieve a balance between knowledge expansion (i.e., plasticity) and knowledge retention (i.e., stability)
[22, 55, 71]. Many CL approaches have been studied to
tackle the challenge relying on different strategies, such as
experience replay (ER) [7, 8, 77], regularization on parameters or representations [6, 39, 77], and architectures with
modularization or isolation [55, 66, 70, 75, 78].
Given the progress in the pre-trained models (PTMs)
with reliable representation, recent works explore the potential of using PTMs, such as Vision Transformer (ViT)
[15], as the starting point of CL, unlike the “training-fromscratch” paradigm. PTM-based CL approaches [73, 74]
usually keep the PTMs frozen to enable stable representation
and alleviate forgetting. The PTMs are continually adapted
to downstream tasks through parameter-efficient fine-tuning
with newly expanded parameters as prompts and/or adapters
[13, 51, 68, 73, 74, 83, 90, 91]. On the other hand, some
methods enable continual fine-tuning of PTMs on real-world
downstream tasks arriving in a streaming manner. Many
PTM-based CL approaches mainly add and learn a fixed
set/pool of prompts [33, 93] or adapters [9] shared by all
downstream tasks in the stream [51, 73, 74, 90]. To alleviate
forgetting caused by the interference on the newly added
parameters, they restrict the parameter updating only on
the first task seen in stream [51, 90] or use various regularization on the shared parameters [73, 74]. Their continual
adaptation potentials are limited by the fixed and static size
of prompt and adapter parameters. Some recent methods
expand the PTMs with task-specific parameters to produce
input-conditioned prompts [68] or ensemble of adapters [92].

10087

