This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detecting Out-of-distribution through the Lens of Neural Collapse
Litian Liu
MIT

Yao Qin
UC Santa Barbara

litianl@mit.edu

yaoqin@ucsb.edu

Abstract
Out-of-Distribution (OOD) detection is critical for safe deployment; however, existing detectors often struggle to generalize across datasets of varying scales and model architectures, and some can incur high computational costs in
real-world applications. Inspired by the phenomenon of
Neural Collapse, we propose a versatile and efficient OOD
detection method. Specifically, we re-characterize prior observations that in-distribution (ID) samples form clusters,
demonstrating that, with appropriate centering, these clusters align closely with model weight vectors. Additionally,
we reveal that ID features tend to expand into a simplex
Equiangular Tight Frame, explaining the common observation that ID features are situated farther from the origin
than OOD features. Incorporating both insights from Neural Collapse, our OOD detector leverages feature proximity
to weight vectors and complements this approach by using
feature norms to effectively filter out OOD samples. Extensive experiments on off-the-shelf models demonstrate the robustness of our OOD detector across diverse scenarios, mitigating generalization discrepancies and enhancing overall
performance, with inference latency comparable to that of
the basic softmax-confidence detector. Code is available at:
https://github.com/litianliu/NCI-OOD.

Figure 1. Centered ID samples tend to cluster near the predicted class weight vectors, which are the last-layer weights of
the corresponding class, as indicated by higher average cosine
similarity (Equation 5) than OOD. This observation, inspired by
the trend of Neural Collapse, emerges early in the training of this
CIFAR-10 ResNet-18 classifier, with OOD set SVHN.

1. Introduction

ples are observed to deviate from clusters of ID samples
[20, 27, 39, 40]. While existing research has made strides
in OOD detection, they still face two major challenges:
1) maintaining detection effectiveness across different scenarios, and 2) ensuring computational efficiency for realworld deployment. For example, both output space and
feature space methods suffer from performance discrepancy
across different classification tasks, as shown in Table 1 (a).
Specifically, strong algorithms on detecting OOD examples
for CIFAR-10 [18] perform suboptimally in detecting OOD
examples for ImageNet [5], and vice versa. No existing algorithm can simultaneously rank in the top three across two
benchmarks, leading to sub-optimal average performance
as shown in Table 1 (b). Furthermore, feature-space methods that rely on similarity measures to characterize ID clustering raise efficiency concerns. For example, [39] records
training features and evaluates OOD-ness based on the kth nearest neighbor distance to these features, while [23]
demonstrates that dependency on such auxiliary models increases computational costs, posing challenges for timesensitive applications. This highlights the need to move beyond feature-wise similarity and establish a more structured
reference to characterize ID clustering efficiently.

Machine learning models deployed in practice will inevitably encounter samples that deviate from the training
distribution. As a classifier cannot make meaningful predictions on test samples that belong to classes unseen during training, it is important to actively detect and handle
Out-of-Distribution (OOD) samples. Considering the diverse and oftentimes time-critical application scenarios, an
OOD detector should be computationally efficient and can
effectively generalize across various scenarios.
In this work, we focus on post-hoc methods, which address OOD detection independently of the training process. One line of prior work designs OOD scores over
model output space [8, 13, 21, 24, 37, 38] and another line
of work focuses on the feature space, where OOD sam-

15424

