This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Project-Probe-Aggregate: Efficient Fine-Tuning for Group Robustness
Beier Zhu1,2 Jiequan Cui1 Hanwang Zhang1 Chi Zhang2†
1
Nanyang Technological University, 2 Westlake University
{beier.zhu, jiequan.cui, hanwangzhang}@ntu.edu.sg, chizhang@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
While image-text foundation models have succeeded across
diverse downstream tasks, they still face challenges in
the presence of spurious correlations between the input
and label. To address this issue, we propose a simple
three-step approach–Project-Probe-Aggregate (PPA)–that
enables parameter-efficient fine-tuning for foundation models without relying on group annotations. Building upon
the failure-based debiasing scheme, our method, PPA, improves its two key components: minority samples identification and the robust training algorithm. Specifically, we first
train biased classifiers by projecting image features onto the
nullspace of class proxies from text encoders. Next, we infer group labels using the biased classifier and probe group
targets with prior correction. Finally, we aggregate group
weights of each class to produce the debiased classifier. Our
theoretical analysis shows that our PPA enhances minority group identification and is Bayes optimal for minimizing
the balanced group error, mitigating spurious correlations.
Extensive experimental results confirm the effectiveness of
our PPA: it outperforms the state-of-the-art by an average
worst-group accuracy while requiring less than 0.01% tunable parameters without training group labels.

Method

Worst-group
Recall (%)

Worst-group
Precision (%)

CA [48]
JTT [21]
PPA (ours)

46.4
78.6
80.4

15.6
24.1
44.3

Table 1. The precision and recall of the worst-group examples (i.e.,
the group with lowest validation accuracy) identified by biased
models on the Waterbird training set [32] using CLIP ResNet-50.
Our PPA is more susceptible to suprious features, achieving higher
worst-group recall and precision compared to previous methods.

1. Introduction

birds” predominantly appear in images with a “water” background. When trained on such a dataset, neural networks
often rely on the background to recognize the objects.
As a result, several fine-tuning methods have emerged to
improve group robustness in foundation models [3, 29, 44,
47, 48]. Unlike conventional robust training frameworks,
which typically re-train the entire model [21, 22, 26, 27]
(which is computationally expensive) and/or require group
labels [1, 32] (which demands additional annotation costs),
these fine-tuning methods prioritize parameter and annotation efficiency. They address spurious correlations by optimizing only a small subset of parameters without relying
on training group labels. For instance, Zhang and Ré [48]
fine-tune a lightweight adapter and You et al. [47] propose
to optimize projection layers to improve distributional robustness. In this paper, we build on these ideas by focusing
on efficient fine-tuning to enhance group robustness, i.e.,
training linear probes.
At a high level, in the absence of group annotations,
a common strategy [5, 19, 21, 22, 26, 48, 49] involves
first identifying minority groups by training a biased model
that easily overfits to spurious features. Subsequently,
a debiased model is trained using the inferred group labels. To improve the identification of minority groups,
prior work proposes various strategies: [22, 26] employ
generalized cross-entropy loss to amplify the model bias,
JTT [21] simply trains a model with empirical risk minimization (ERM) and tunes hyperparameters to exacerbate
bias, CA [48] leverages the correctness of zero-shot pre-

Image-text foundation models [12, 31, 40]—large models
pre-trained on web-scale data—are becoming increasingly
prevalent in real-world deployments. However, adapting
these models to downstream tasks, whether through zeroshot transfer or fine-tuning, remains challenging due to fundamental issues of group robustness: they achieve low average test error but incur high risk on certain groups of examples [3, 44, 47, 48]. This issue becomes particularly pronounced in the presence of spurious correlations [8], where
a classifier relies on non-causal relationships that happen to
align with class labels in training but break down during
deployment. For example, consider the case where “waterThis work was done during Beier Zhu’s visit at AGI Lab, Westlake
University. † denotes corresponding author.

25487

