This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Easy-editable Image Vectorization with Multi-layer Multi-scale Distributed
Visual Feature Embedding
Ye Chen1

Zhangli Hu1
1

Zhongyin Zhao1 Yupeng Zhu1 Yue Shi1 Yuxuan Xiong1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
USC-SJTU Institute of Cultural and Creative Industry

Bingbing Ni1,2∗

{chenye123, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Traditional Methods

Current parameterized image representations embed visual
information along the semantic boundaries and struggle
to express the internal detailed texture structures of image components, leading to a lack of content consistency
after image editing and driving. To address these challenges, this work proposes a novel parameterized representation based on hierarchical image proxy geometry, utilizing multi-layer hierarchically interrelated proxy geometric control points to embed multi-scale long-range structures and fine-grained texture details. The proposed representation enables smoother and more continuous interpolation during image rendering and ensures high-quality
consistency within image components during image editing.
Additionally, under the layer-wise representation strategy
based on semantic-aware image layer decomposition, we
enable decoupled image shape/texture editing of the targets
of interest within the image. Extensive experimental results
on image vectorization and editing tasks demonstrate that
our proposed method achieves high rendering accuracy of
general images, including natural images, with a significantly higher image parameter compression ratio, facilitating user-friendly editing of image semantic components.

SOTA Method

Proposed Method

✓ Intricate Textures
✓ Easy Editing

Shape edit. Texture edit.

Shape Stacking

Simplex Embedding

✘ Texture Embed.
✘ Easy Editing

✘ Local Texture Details
✘ Easy Editing

Hierarchical Embedding

 Layer-wise Rep.
 Multi-scale Emb.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. Traditional methods
heavily rely on stacking a large number of shapes to approximate textures due to the lack of shape-aware texture modeling,
which not only results in low quality texture representation but
also makes image editing extremely challenging. Chen et al. [6]
propose to embed textures at shape contour points for improving
texture representation, but this approach is still limited to simple
artistic images. Additionally, due to the lack of layer-wise modeling and the sparse texture interpolation, it fails to support precise
image editing. This work explores a multi-layer multi-scale texture embedding with the help of hierarchically related proxy geometric nodes, tailored for high quality reconstruction of complex
natural images with lightweight parameters, which also ensures
high-fidelity image shape/texture editing.

The utilization of implicit functions for encoding image
shape and texture information has gained significant attention in recent years [4, 7, 23, 27, 29]. This is primarily
due to the fact that implicit neural network models represent images as functions defined over a continuous domain, independent of grid-based image sampling/rendering,
which allows for highly precise representation of image
content. Additionally, because the implicit parameters are
much sparser than the original pixel-wise RGB values, such
approach also achieves image compression. However, im∗ Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni

23345

plicit image representations inherently function as blackbox mapping models, lacking alignment between the image’s semantic components and corresponding representation parameters. As a result, such representations are not
conducive to image content editing, as users are unable to
manipulate specific local components of the image.
To achieve editable representations, recent works propose vectorized image representation (image vectorization)
frameworks [6, 11, 12, 15, 19, 21, 30, 33]. The principle behind this approach is to use a collection of vectorized geometric primitives like Bézier shapes to represent the image explicitly. Traditional vectorization algorithms [11, 12, 18, 21, 24, 30, 31], due to the lack of
shape-aware texture modeling, require stacking of numerous shapes to approximate image textures, which not only
reduces the representation accuracy but also makes subse-

