This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Compact Clustering Attention (COCA) for Unsupervised
Object-Centric Learning

1

Can Küçüksözen1,2 Yücel Yemez1,2
Department of Computer Engineering, Koç University
2
KUIS AI Center
{ckucuksozen19, yyemez}@ku.edu.tr

Figure 1. Compactness scores obtained for each pixel in the scene, across four different datasets. The transition from bright yellow to
deep purple signifies decreasing compactness. To obtain these scores, a trained COCA-Net encoder is used to generate object masks. Each
object mask is then broadcasted to pixels based on the pixel-object assignments. This operation associates every pixel with a copy of its
object’s mask. Finally, compactness scores for each pixel’s mask are calculated via Eq. 3.

1. Introduction

Abstract
We propose the Compact Clustering Attention (COCA)
layer, an effective building block that introduces a hierarchical strategy for object-centric representation learning,
while solving the unsupervised object discovery task on single images. COCA is an attention-based clustering module
capable of extracting object-centric representations from
multi-object scenes, when cascaded into a bottom-up hierarchical network architecture, referred to as COCA-Net. At
its core, COCA utilizes a novel clustering algorithm that
leverages the physical concept of compactness, to highlight
distinct object centroids in a scene, providing a spatial inductive bias. Thanks to this strategy, COCA-Net generates
high-quality segmentation masks on both the decoder side
and, notably, the encoder side of its pipeline. Additionally, COCA-Net is not bound by a predetermined number
of object masks that it generates and handles the segmentation of background elements better than its competitors.
We demonstrate COCA-Net’s segmentation performance on
six widely adopted datasets, achieving superior or competitive results against the state-of-the-art models across nine
different evaluation metrics.

Object-centric learning (OCL) has emerged as a powerful
paradigm in contemporary computer vision, offering advantages such as improved generalization over supervised
methods, robustness to data distribution shifts, effectiveness
in downstream tasks, and the ability to train without labeled
data [15, 22]. These models allocate a separate representational slot for each object in a scene, enabling the disentanglement of individual object properties in multi-object
scenarios. The benefits of OCL have driven its increasing
adoption across diverse applications. While these models
achieve impressive object discovery accuracy on synthetic
datasets, their performance—and consequently their generalization capabilities—deteriorates significantly when applied to real-world images, which are far more complex and
diverse. Yang et al., [55] argue that these models still lack
the necessary inductive biases to understand ‘objectness’ in
real-world images.

25388

In fact, the challenges of contemporary OCL models
extend beyond real-world images, with critical limitations
also emerging in synthetic datasets. State-of-the-art models [11, 28, 36, 38] derived from Slot-Attention (SA) [38]

