This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-shot 3D Object Canonicalization based on Geometric and
Semantic Consistency
Li Jin1,7
Yujie Wang3,4
Wenzheng Chen5,6
Qiyu Dai3
3
1,7
Qingzhe Gao
Xueying Qin
Baoquan Chen2†
1

School of Software, Shandong University
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
4
5
UNC Chapel Hill
Wangxuan Institue of Computer Technology, Peking University
6
State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China
7
Engineering Research Center of Digital Media Technology, Ministry of Education, P.R. China
2

†: Baoquan Chen is the corresponding author.
The work is done while the first author was visiting Peking University.

Category

Long-tailed Distribution
Canonical
ization
Test Model

Canonical
Model

Category number (k)

3D object canonicalization is a fundamental task, essential for various downstream tasks. Existing methods rely
on either cumbersome manual processes or priors learned
from extensive, per- category training samples. Real- world
datasets, however, often exhibit long- tail distributions, challenging existing learning- based methods, especially in categories with limited samples. We address this by introducing the first one- shot category- level object canonicalization
framework that operates under arbitrary poses, requiring
only a single canonical model as a reference (the ”prior
model”) for each category. To canonicalize any object,
our framework first extracts semantic cues with large language models (LLMs) and vision- language models (VLMs)
to establish correspondences with the prior model. We
introduce a novel joint energy function to enforce geometric and semantic consistency, aligning object orientations precisely despite significant shape variations. Moreover, we adopt a support- plane strategy to reduce search
space for initial poses and utilize a semantic relationship
map to select the canonical pose from multiple hypotheses. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate that our framework achieves state- of- the- art performance and validates key design choices. Using our
framework, we create the Canonical Objaverse Dataset
(COD), canonicalizing 32K samples in the ObjaverseLVIS dataset, underscoring the effectiveness of our framework on handling large- scale datasets. Project page at
https://github.com/JinLi998/CanonObjaverseDataset

Object number

Abstract

ShapeNet
ModelNet

ABO
GSO

AKB-48
Toys4K

3D-Future

CO3D

ScanObjectNN

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

Previous Works:
Vast Priors

Ours: Oneshot Prior

Ours
OmniObject3D

0

10

20
30
40
Object number (k)

50

The Canonical Objaverse Dataset

Figure 1. A one-shot approach for 3D object canonicalization.
The number of objects in different categories follows a long-tail
distribution in the real world, as shown by Objaverse-LVIS [6]
(top). Existing methods rely on many prior conditions, which are
often hard to meet. Our one-shot approach effectively addresses
this issue (bottom left). We also introduce the Canonical Objaverse Dataset (bottom right), which features the largest number of
categories among current canonical 3D datasets.

1. Introduction
3D object canonicalization, which transforms 3D shapes
into a canonical space, ensuring consistent rotation, translation, and scaling across different instances, is crucial for
creating large-scale 3D object datasets. Canonical 3D object datasets serve as the foundation for many downstream

16850

