This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

5%>100%: Breaking Performance Shackles of Full Fine-Tuning
on Visual Recognition Tasks
Dongshuo Yin1,2 * ‡, Leiyi Hu3 *, Bin Li4 , Youqun Zhang4 , Xue Yang1†
1
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
2
BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University,
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 4 Alibaba Group
yinds@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, huleiyi21@mails.ucas.ac.cn
{zhuyi.lb, youqun.zhangyq}@alibaba-inc.com, yangxue-2019-sjtu@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-training & fine-tuning can enhance the transferring efficiency and performance in visual tasks. Recent deltatuning methods provide more options for visual classification tasks. Despite their success, existing visual deltatuning art fails to exceed the upper limit of full finetuning on challenging tasks. To find a competitive alternative to full fine-tuning, we propose the Multi-cognitive Visual Adapter (Mona) tuning, a novel adapter-based tuning
method. First, we introduce multiple vision-friendly filters
into the adapter to enhance its ability for processing visual
signals, while previous methods mainly rely on languagefriendly linear filters. Second, we add the scaled layernorm in the adapter to regulate the distribution of input
features for visual filters. To fully demonstrate the practicality and generality of Mona, we conduct experiments
on representative visual tasks, including instance segmentation on COCO, semantic segmentation on ADE20K, object detection on Pascal VOC, oriented object detection
on DOTA/STAR, and image classification on three common
datasets. Exciting results illustrate that Mona surpasses full
fine-tuning on all these tasks by tuning less than 5% params
of the backbone, and is the only delta-tuning method outperforming full fine-tuning on all tasks. For example, Mona
achieves 1% performance gain on the COCO compared to
full fine-tuning. Comprehensive results suggest that Monatuning is more suitable for retaining and utilizing the capabilities of pre-trained models than full fine-tuning. The code
is publicly available on https://github.com/Leiyi-Hu/mona.

Figure 1. Comparisons of our method with full fine-tuning and
recent delta-tuning art on representative visual tasks. Blue
dashed line is the performance of full fine-tuning on ADE20K and
COCO. The proposed Mona outperforms full fine-tuning on representative visual tasks, which promotes the upper limit of previous
delta-tuning art. The results demonstrate that the adapter-tuning
paradigm can replace full fine-tuning and achieve better performance in common visual tasks. Full fine-tuning is not the only
preferred solution for transfer learning in the future.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Pre-training & fine-tuning paradigm [1] can perform impressive transfer learning between homo-modal tasks, as
has been demonstrated in computer vision (CV) [2, 3] and
natural language processing (NLP) [4–6]. Pre-trained models are often trained by well-resourced and experienced
teams with large amounts of clean data [7]. Exceptional pretrained models can help hardware- and data-limited teams
save plenty of training costs and train well-performing deep
models on new tasks [8–11]. In the era of large models, the efficiency of tuning pre-trained models is an im-

‡ The work was initiated when the author was interning at Shanghai
Jiao Tong University and completed when the author worked at Tsinghua
University.

20071

