This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adapting to Observation Length of Trajectory Prediction via Contrastive
Learning
Ruiqi Qiu

Jun Gong *

Xinyu Zhang

2200891@stu.neu.edu.cn

gongjun@ise.neu.edu.cn

2200981@stu.neu.edu.cn

Siqi Luo

Bowen Zhang

Yi Cen

2300925@stu.neu.edu.cn

2470807@stu.neu.edu.cn

2370875@stu.neu.edu.cn

Northeastern University, China
Abstract

began to be widely applied in this ﬁeld. Although these
works have achieved notable performance, they mainly focus on idealized experimental conditions. In real-world scenarios, obtaining complete observable trajectories is often
impractical under extreme circumstances, considering upstream tracking failures or unexpected events. Many existing datasets lack annotations for instantaneous pedestrians [40], and discard trajectory data with short durations
during preprocessing, resulting in poor performance with
limited observation lengths, potentially leading to signiﬁcant safety risks in practical applications.

The ability to adapt to varying observation lengths is crucial for human trajectory prediction tasks, particularly in
scenarios with limited observation lengths or missing data.
Existing approaches mainly focus on introducing novel architectures or additional structural components, which substantially increase model complexity and present challenges
for integration into existing models. We argue that current
network architectures are sufﬁciently sophisticated to handle the Observation Length Shift problem, with the key challenge lying in improving feature representation for trajectories with limited lengths. To tackle this issue, we introduce a
general and effective contrastive learning approach, called
Contrastive Learning for Length Shift (CLLS). By incorporating contrastive learning during the training phase, our
method encourages the model to extract length-invariant
features, thus mitigating the impact of observation length
variations. Furthermore, to better accommodate length
adaptation tasks, we introduce a lightweight RNN network that, combined with CLLS, achieves state-of-the-art
performance in both general prediction and observation
length shift tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that
our approach outperforms existing methods across multiple
widely-used trajectory prediction datasets.

While training data plays a crucial role in the Observation Length Shift problem, many studies still focus on structural improvements to accommodate more diverse observation lengths [14, 15, 22, 31, 36]. These methods require
additional model structures or specialized networks to handle abnormal observation lengths and do not truly enable
existing models to adapt to varying lengths.
Previous work [4] has indicated that the last two frames
before prediction contribute 80.3% and 8.3% respectively
to prediction results. In most cases, relying solely on the
last two frames of information is sufﬁcient to make accurate
predictions of future trajectories, as demonstrated by models speciﬁcally trained on limited observation length [14,
36]. We think that existing networks suffer from overﬁtting to complete observation trajectories, leading to a
performance decline when face with varying observation
lengths. Therefore, within existing network architecture, it
becomes critical to ensure that the model can effectively extract length invariant information with different observation
lengths.

1. Introduction
Human trajectory prediction tasks involve forecasting potential future trajectories of individuals while considering
various inﬂuential factors, with signiﬁcant applications in
autonomous driving, human-computer interaction, and intelligent security. Early attempts at human trajectory prediction relied on manually designed features based on prior
knowledge [10, 20, 24]. Subsequently, data-driven models

To address the above limitations, we propose a contrastive learning method applicable to different networks:
Contrastive Learning for Length Shift (CLLS). This method
enables models to achieve better performance under any
limited observation length without additional inference

* Corresponding author

1645

