This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D IFFUSION R ENDERER: Neural Inverse and Forward Rendering
with Video Diffusion Models
Ruofan Liang1,2,3 *, Zan Gojcic1 , Huan Ling1,2,3 , Jacob Munkberg1 , Jon Hasselgren1 , Chih-Hao Lin1,4 ,
Jun Gao1,2,3 , Alexander Keller1 , Nandita Vijaykumar2,3 , Sanja Fidler1,2,3 , Zian Wang1,2,3 *
1
NVIDIA 2 University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute 4 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Reference
Forward Rendering
Inverse Rendering
Figure 1. We present D IFFUSION R ENDERER, a general-purpose method for both neural inverse and forward rendering. From input images
or videos, it accurately estimates geometry and material buffers, and generates photorealistic images under specified lighting conditions,
offering fundamental tools for image editing applications.

Abstract
Understanding and modeling lighting effects are fundamental tasks in computer vision and graphics. Classic physicallybased rendering (PBR) accurately simulates the light transport, but relies on precise scene representations–explicit
3D geometry, high-quality material properties, and lighting
conditions–that are often impractical to obtain in real-world
scenarios. Therefore, we introduce D IFFUSION R ENDERER,
a neural approach that addresses the dual problem of inverse
and forward rendering within a holistic framework. Leveraging powerful video diffusion model priors, the inverse rendering model accurately estimates G-buffers from real-world
videos, providing an interface for image editing tasks, and
training data for the rendering model. Conversely, our rendering model generates photorealistic images from G-buffers
without explicit light transport simulation. Specifically, we
first train a video diffusion model for inverse rendering on
synthetic data, which generalizes well to real-world videos
and allows us to auto-label diverse real-world videos. We

then co-train our rendering model using both synthetic and
auto-labeled real-world data. Experiments demonstrate that
D IFFUSION R ENDERER effectively approximates inverse and
forwards rendering, consistently outperforming the state-ofthe-art. Our model enables practical applications from a
single video input—including relighting, material editing,
and realistic object insertion.

1. Introduction

26069

Understanding and modeling light transport forms the basis of Physically Based Rendering (PBR) [59]. Modern
path tracing algorithms, as regularly used in the gaming and
movie industries, simulate light transport to render images
that cannot be distinguished from photographs. The quality
of such PBR-rendered images heavily depends on the accuracy and realism of the scene’s surface geometry, material
properties, and lighting representations. Such a scene description is either designed by artists (synthetic scenes) or reconstructed from data—also known as the inverse rendering
problem [2, 3]. Inverse rendering has been extensively stud-

