This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LT3SD: Latent Trees for 3D Scene Diffusion
Quan Meng

Lei Li

Matthias Nießner

Angela Dai

Technical University of Munich
quan-meng.github.io/projects/lt3sd

Figure 1. We introduce LT3SD, a novel latent 3D scene diffusion approach enabling high-fidelity generation of infinite 3D environments.
We train LT3SD on a latent tree-based 3D scene representation, encoding both lower-frequency geometry and higher-frequency detail, and
synthesize infinite scenes in a patch-by-patch and coarse-to-fine fashion.

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been increasing demand for 3D
digital content, both for content creation purposes such as
films, video games, and mixed reality, as well as for reconstruction to enable machines to perceive real environments
from visual inputs. For instance, video games have driven
efforts to produce realistic virtual 3D environments, requiring significant costs for highly-trained 3D artists to create
a vast array of 3D scene assets. In particular, AAA video
game budgets have risen dramatically in the last five years,
with games planned to be released this year and next having
development budgets of $200 million or more [54].

We present LT3SD, a novel latent diffusion model for
large-scale 3D scene generation. Recent advances in diffusion models have shown impressive results in 3D object
generation, but are limited in spatial extent and quality
when extended to 3D scenes. To generate complex and diverse 3D scene structures, we introduce a latent tree representation to effectively encode both lower-frequency geometry and higher-frequency detail in a coarse-to-fine hierarchy. We can then learn a generative diffusion process
in this latent 3D scene space, modeling the latent components of a scene at each resolution level. To synthesize
large-scale scenes with varying sizes, we train our diffusion
model on scene patches and synthesize arbitrary-sized output 3D scenes through shared diffusion generation across
multiple scene patches. Through extensive experiments, we
demonstrate the efficacy and benefits of LT3SD for largescale, high-quality unconditional 3D scene generation and
for probabilistic completion for partial scene observations.

Recent advances in diffusion models [23, 36, 43, 45, 47,
51] have achieved remarkable success in generating complex, high resolution, realistic images, and videos. In the
3D domain, however, generative modeling remains a significant challenge due to the data and representation complexity and limited training data availability. In addition, signal
in 3D content is highly unevenly distributed, with many re-

650

