This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AudCast: Audio-Driven Human Video Generation
by Cascaded Diffusion Transformers
Jiazhi Guan1,2 Kaisiyuan Wang2 Zhiliang Xu2 Quanwei Yang5 Yasheng Sun6 Shengyi He2
Borong Liang2 Yukang Cao3 Yingying Li2 Haocheng Feng2 Errui Ding2 Jingdong Wang2
Youjian Zhao1,4† Hang Zhou2† Ziwei Liu3†
1
DCST, Tsinghua University 2 Baidu Inc. 3 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
4
Zhongguancun Laboratory 5 University of Science and Technology of China 6 KAUST
guanjz20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhouhang09@baidu.com
Generated Video

Driving Audio

Reference Frame

Figure 1. Zero-Shot Results by AudCast. Our method generates lifelike human videos with a realistic style, conditioned on any reference
subject and driving audio, in various resolutions. The synthesized videos exhibit natural, rhythmic motion and expressive expressions, with
fine details in both face and hands.

Abstract
Despite the recent progress of audio-driven video generation, existing methods mostly focus on driving facial movements, leading to non-coherent head and body dynamics.
Moving forward, it is desirable yet challenging to generate
holistic human videos with both accurate lip-sync and delicate co-speech gestures w.r.t. given audio. In this work,
we propose AudCast, a generalized audio-driven human
video generation framework adopting a cascade DiffusionTransformers (DiTs) paradigm, which synthesizes holistic
human videos based on a reference image and a given au-

dio. 1) Firstly, an audio-conditioned Holistic Human DiT
architecture is proposed to directly drive the movements of
any human body with vivid gesture dynamics. 2) Then to enhance hand and face details that are well-knownly difficult
to handle, a Regional Refinement DiT leverages regional
3D fitting as the bridge to reform the signals, producing
the final results. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our framework generates high-fidelity audio-driven holistic human videos with temporal coherence and fine facial
and hand details. Resources can be found at https:
//guanjz20.github.io/projects/AudCast.

† Corresponding Authors.

10678

