This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boltzmann Attention Sampling for Image Analysis with Small Objects
Theodore Zhao*
Sid Kiblawi*
Naoto Usuyama
Ho Hin Lee
†
Sam Preston
Hoifung Poon
Mu Wei
Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA
https://aka.ms/boltzformer

Abstract
Detecting and segmenting small objects, such as lung
nodules and tumor lesions, remains a critical challenge
in image analysis. These objects often occupy less than
0.1% of an image, making traditional transformer architectures inefficient and prone to performance degradation
due to redundant attention computations on irrelevant regions. Existing sparse attention mechanisms rely on rigid
hierarchical structures, which are poorly suited for detecting small, variable, and uncertain object locations. In this
paper, we propose BoltzFormer, a novel transformer-based
architecture designed to address these challenges through
dynamic sparse attention. BoltzFormer identifies and focuses attention on relevant areas by modeling uncertainty
using a Boltzmann distribution with an annealing schedule. Initially, a higher temperature allows broader area
sampling in early layers, when object location uncertainty
is greatest. As the temperature decreases in later layers,
attention becomes more focused, enhancing efficiency and
accuracy. BoltzFormer seamlessly integrates into existing
transformer architectures via a modular Boltzmann attention sampling mechanism. Comprehensive evaluations on
benchmark datasets demonstrate that BoltzFormer significantly improves segmentation performance for small objects while reducing attention computation by an order of
magnitude compared to previous state-of-the-art methods.

interest in adapting such promptable segmentation models
to key application domains, such as biomedicine (e.g.,
MedSAM [16], BiomedParse [28], and MedSAM-2 [29]).

1. Introduction

While the progress is exciting, challenges abound. A
salient growth area is small objects, which are particularly difficult for conventional segmentation models, especially when there is no user-provided bounding box and
only the object description is available as input [7, 28].
This challenge is especially pronounced in critical application domains such as biomedicine, when important objects like lung nodules, tumor lesions, vessels, and many
other anatomical structures are tiny, sometimes occupying less than 0.1% of the image. By default, many standard segmentation models require the user to conduct the
object detection step and provide object-specific spatial
prompts as input, such as bounding boxes, points, or scribbles [15, 16, 24, 29]. In many applications, there are a large
number of objects and this approach is clearly not scalable.
Ideally, a user can simply specify the object description in
a text prompt, and the model can automatically detect and
segment the given objects, as in BiomedParse [28]. However, in such an end-to-end setting, small objects pose significant challenges because they are particularly hard to locate and identify.
The difficulty in detecting and segmenting small objects
originates from the nature of the attention mechanism in
transformer. For a small object, the relevant information
is confined within a tiny portion of the image (the object
and its neighborhood). This means that the vast majority of
attention computation would be spent on irrelevant pixels
far away from the object. In addition to being wasteful, this
also introduces significant distractions and noises, making
the learning less efficient. Prior work has attempted to
address this issue by focusing decoding on the foreground
regions [7, 27]. However, they used relatively rigid rules,
which are ill-suited for small objects due to their variability
and the uncertainty about their locations.

Transformer [23] has significantly changed the field of
image analysis. Its attention-based architecture introduces
flexibility in handling inputs from various modalities, including images, text, and other forms of prompts. Seminal
works such as SAM [14], SAM 2 [19], and SEEM [32]
unify segmentation tasks for various object types, making
the models flexible and generalizable. There is also rising
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

In this paper, we propose a novel transformer architec-

25950

