This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Birth and Death of a Rose
Chen Geng

Yunzhi Zhang
Shangzhe Wu
Stanford University

Jiajun Wu









         

  

Figure 1. The lifespan of a rose’s object intrinsics generated with our method. We present a pipeline to generate temporally evolving
sequences of 3D objects’ geometry and material properties, including albedo, roughness, and metallic parameters (only albedo is shown
here), as shown in (a), by distilling from 2D foundation models without any 3D data. As shown in (b), the generated assets can be rendered
from any viewpoints and lighting conditions (environment map shown in the last row). See the supplemental website for animations.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We study the problem of generating temporal object
intrinsics—temporally evolving sequences of object geometry, reflectance, and texture, such as a blooming rose—from
pre-trained 2D foundation models. Unlike conventional
3D modeling and animation techniques that require extensive manual effort and expertise, we introduce a method
that generates such assets with signals distilled from pretrained 2D diffusion models. To ensure the temporal consistency of object intrinsics, we propose Neural Templates
for temporal-state-guided distillation, derived automatically from image features from self-supervised learning.
Our method can generate high-quality temporal object intrinsics for several natural phenomena and enable the sampling and controllable rendering of these dynamic objects
from any viewpoint, under any environmental lighting conditions, at any time of their lifespan. Project website:
https://chen-geng.com/rose4d.
Those granted the gift of seeing more deeply can see
beyond form, and concentrate on the wondrous aspect
hiding behind every form, which is called life.
— Hilma af Klint

As illustrated in Figure 1, starting from a bud, a rose gradually expands its petals and blossoms into full glory, only to
wither and conclude its lifespan. This inevitable and unidirectional evolution—a journey shared by all living creatures
on Earth—relentlessly and chronologically transforms their
object intrinsics: geometry, reflectance, and texture. Such
progression of their object intrinsics characterizes our visual conception of the aging of an object, which we collectively refer to as its temporal object intrinsics.
Traditionally, creating graphics assets with realistic
chronologically evolving object intrinsics requires extensive, object-specific manual effort and expertise [9, 18, 42].
Instead, we pursue a learning-based approach to generate
such physically grounded graphics assets with no intervention. The generated temporal object intrinsics can be seen
as a “3D time-lapse volumetric video”, from which we can
sample instances and render them from any viewpoint, under any lighting condition, and at any time of their lifespan.
It is challenging to generate temporal object intrinsics
in a supervised manner due to the lack of annotated data.
Therefore, we explore the potential of generative pipelines
distilled from 2D diffusion models. Existing techniques like
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [41] have shown promis-

26102

