This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LoRA Subtraction for Drift-Resistant Space in Exemplar-Free Continual
Learning
Xuan Liu1 , Xiaobin Chang* 1,2,3
1

2

School of Artificial Intelligence, Sun Yat-sen University, China
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Assessment Technology for Sustainable Tourism, Ministry of Culture
and Tourism, Sun Yat-sen University
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
liux687@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, changxb3@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
In continual learning (CL), catastrophic forgetting often
arises due to feature drift. This challenge is particularly
prominent in the exemplar-free continual learning (EFCL)
setting, where samples from previous tasks cannot be retained, making it difficult to preserve prior knowledge. To
address this issue, some EFCL methods aim to identify feature spaces that minimize the impact on previous tasks while
accommodating new ones. However, they rely on static features or outdated statistics stored from old tasks, which prevents them from capturing the dynamic evolution of the feature space in CL, leading to performance degradation over
time. In this paper, we introduce the Drift-Resistant Space
(DRS), which effectively handles feature drifts without requiring explicit feature modeling or the storage of previous tasks. A novel parameter-efficient fine-tuning approach
called Low-Rank Adaptation Subtraction (LoRA ) is proposed to develop the DRS. This method subtracts the LoRA
weights of old tasks from the initial pre-trained weight before processing new task data to establish the DRS for
model training. Therefore, LoRA enhances stability, improves efficiency, and simplifies implementation. Furthermore, stabilizing feature drifts allows for better plasticity
by learning with a triplet loss. Our method consistently
achieves state-of-the-art results, especially for long task sequences, across multiple datasets.1

Figure 1. Illustrating the old task feature drifts of different EFCL
methods. Imagenet-R dataset under 25 incremental tasks are used.

1. Introduction

as recognizing new object categories, while handling catastrophic forgetting [16, 25] of previously learned information. Rehearsal-based methods [2, 3, 8, 30, 43] alleviate forgetting by storing a small subset of past task exemplars and
replaying them alongside new data during training. However, access to such exemplars is often restricted due to privacy concerns or memory limitations. Therefore, the study
of exemplar-free continual learning (EFCL) becomes necessary. This setting is challenging as no sample of previous
tasks can be retained. Without rehearsal, feature representations of old tasks drift over time, leading to severe catastrophic forgetting, as shown in Fig. 1.
Conventional architecture-based EFCL methods [4, 9,
35, 42] involve freezing certain parameters that were trained
for the initial task while either adjusting other parameters
or expanding the backbone for subsequent tasks. However,

Continual learning (CL) methods [5, 27] aim to enable
deep models to acquire new knowledge continually, such
* indicates corresponding author.
1 Code is available at https://github.com/scarlet0703/

LoRA-Sub-DRS.

15308

