This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Elements to Design: A Layered Approach for Automatic
Graphic Design Composition
Jiawei Lin1 , Shizhao Sun2 , Danqing Huang2 , Ting Liu1 , Ji Li2 , Jiang Bian2
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, 2 Microsoft Research
kylelin@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, tingliu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn,
{shizsu, dahua, jili5, jiang.bian}@microsoft.com

1799 Via Garda Dr 844-1746-9025
PIZZA\nPARTY\nDAY

MAY 17

Background

+ Underlay

(a) Design Composition

+ Logo/Image

+ Text

+ Embellishment

(b) Design Layers

(c) Generated Graphic Designs
Figure 1. (a) Given a set of multimodal elements as input, our approach automatically composes them into a cohesive, balanced, and
aesthetically pleasing graphic design. (b) Since a holistic design can be divided into different layers according to element semantics, we
achieve the design composition task in a layer-by-layer manner. (c) Our approach is able to craft high-quality design pieces.

Abstract

tion process smoother and clearer. The experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of LaDeCo in design composition. Furthermore, we show that LaDeCo enables some
interesting applications in graphic design, such as resolution adjustment, design decoration, design variation, etc.
In addition, it even outperforms the specialized models in
some design subtasks without any task-specific training.

In this work, we investigate automatic design composition from multimodal graphic elements. Although recent studies have developed various generative models for
graphic design, they usually face the following limitations:
they only focus on certain subtasks and are far from achieving the design composition task; they do not consider the
hierarchical information of graphic designs during the generation process. To tackle these issues, we introduce the
layered design principle into Large Multimodal Models
(LMMs) and propose a novel approach, called LaDeCo, to
accomplish this challenging task. Specifically, LaDeCo first
performs layer planning for a given element set, dividing
the input elements into different semantic layers according
to their contents. Based on the planning results, it subsequently predicts element attributes that control the design
composition in a layer-wise manner, and includes the rendered image of previously generated layers into the context.
With this insightful design, LaDeCo decomposes the difficult task into smaller manageable steps, making the genera-

1. Introduction
Graphic design is an artistic discipline dedicated to creating visual content that attracts attention and communicates messages effectively. Creating visually appealing designs today relies on human designers with both artistic creativity and technical expertise to skillfully integrate multimodal graphic elements like images, headlines, decorative
embellishments, and so on. This is a complex and timeconsuming process that requires careful consideration of
many aspects. For example, as shown in Figure 1a, it is
important to ensure that the main object (i.e., pizza) is not
obscured by other elements. For readability, there should be

8128

