This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HOP: Heterogeneous Topology-based Multimodal Entanglement
for Co-Speech Gesture Generation
Hongye Cheng* 1 Tianyu Wang* 2 Guangsi Shi† 3 Zexing Zhao4 Yanwei Fu† 5, 6
1
College of Mechanical and Electronic Engineering, Northwest A&F University
2
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University
3
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Monash University
4
College of Information Engineering, Northwest A&F University 5 School of Data Science, Fudan University
6
Institute of Trustworthy Embodied AI, Fudan University
guangsi.shi@monash.edu

autonomous vehicles will be the key technology...

Text
Action

yanweifu@fudan.edu.cn

roads that interconnect our world are dominated by…

Audio

Model

Figure 1. HOP: We propose a topology-based heterogeneous multimodal model that integrates features from audio, text, and action,
accounting for their inherent heterogeneity through cross-modality adaptation. The model achieves superior performance on both the
TED-Expressive dataset (first row) and the TED dataset (second row), generating gestures that align with the semantics and rhythmic
qualities of the speech, as well as the motion characteristics of the real speaker.

Abstract
Co-speech gestures are crucial non-verbal cues that enhance speech clarity and expressiveness in human communication, which have attracted increasing attention in multimodal research. While the existing methods have made
strides in gesture accuracy, challenges remain in generating diverse and coherent gestures, as most approaches assume independence among multimodal inputs and lack ex* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

plicit modeling of their interactions. In this work, we propose a novel multimodal learning method named HOP for
co-speech gesture generation that captures the heterogeneous entanglement between gesture motion, audio rhythm,
and text semantics, enabling the generation of coordinated
gestures. By leveraging spatiotemporal graph modeling,
we achieve the alignment of audio and action. Moreover, to enhance modality coherence, we build the audiotext semantic representation based on a reprogramming
module, which is beneficial for cross-modality adaptation.
Our approach enables the trimodal system to learn each
other’s features and represent them in the form of topo-

906

