This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoSpace: Benchmarking Continuous Space Perception Ability
for Vision-Language Models
Yiqi Zhu1* , Ziyue Wang1* , Can Zhang3 , Peng Li2,4† , Yang Liu1,2,4,5†
1 Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2 Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3 School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing
4 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
5 Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Competence, Jiangsu, China

Figure 1. Illustration of continuous space perception: The left side depicts the construction of an image sequence representing a continuous
space. The right side presents an example task related to the continuous space, showing how adjacent images are connected. Note that to
answer the question correctly, one must recognize that the cars in images 1 and 2 are the same, as well as those in images 3 and 4.

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have recently witnessed
significant progress in visual comprehension. As the permitting length of image context grows, VLMs can now comprehend a broader range of views and spaces. Current benchmarks provide insightful analysis of VLMs in tasks involving complex visual instructions following, multi-image understanding and spatial reasoning. However, they usually
focus on spatially irrelevant images or discrete images captured from varied viewpoints. The compositional characteristic of images captured from a static viewpoint remains
underestimated. We term this characteristic as Continuous
Space Perception. When observing a scene from a static
viewpoint while shifting orientations, it produces a series
of spatially continuous images, enabling the reconstruction
of the entire space. In this paper, we present CoSpace, a
multi-image visual understanding benchmark designed to
assess the Continuous Space perception ability for VLMs.
CoSpace contains 2,918 images and 1,626 question-answer
pairs, covering seven types of tasks. We conduct evaluation
across 19 proprietary and open-source VLMs. Results reveal that there exist pitfalls on the continuous space perception ability for most of the evaluated models, including pro-

prietary ones. Interestingly, we find that the main discrepancy between open-source and proprietary models lies not
in accuracy but in the consistency of responses. We believe
that enhancing the ability of continuous space perception is
essential for VLMs to perform effectively in real-world tasks
and encourage further research to advance this capability.

1. Introduction
With the advancements in deep learning and Large Language Models (LLMs), Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
have demonstrated exceptional performance across a range
of downstream tasks [4, 17, 22, 30, 47, 60]. Driven by
this, VLMs are now being used in diverse applications,
such as planning [5, 56], navigation [8, 63] and embodied
tasks [28, 42], and are further applied in real-world scenarios [3, 61]. Real-world scenario, featuring the complicated
environment, cast significant challenges on VLMs, especially the ability to capture sophisticated spatial information
from surrounding spaces.
Despite previous attempts to advance spatial understanding in VLMs [4, 38], there remain areas requiring further
exploration. Various strategies have been explored to empower models with the ability to identify and ground objects based on spatial relationship [4, 16]. Shiri et al. [47]

29569

