This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NSD-Imagery: A benchmark dataset for extending fMRI vision decoding methods
to mental imagery
Reese Kneeland1 2

Paul S. Scotti3 4

Ghislain St-Yves1

Kendrick Kay1

Thomas Naselaris1

1

University of Minnesota
2

3
4

Jesse Breedlove1

Alljoined

Princeton Neuroscience Institute

Formerly Stability AI/Medical AI Research Center (MedARC)
Correspondence to: nase0005@umn.edu

Figure 1. Overview of our dataset (NSD-Imagery) against previous imagery reconstruction datasets. 1: NSD [2] and NSD-Imagery (ours),
reconstructions of mental images are produced by Brain Diffuser [39]. 2: DeepRecon [54], reconstructions of mental images produced by
Koide-Majima et al. [28]. 3: Human faces (Lee and Kuhl [31]). 4: English letters (Senden et al. [52]), reconstructions produced by Goebel
et al. [20]. 5: Gabor filters (Thirion et al. [65]).

Abstract
We release NSD-Imagery, a benchmark dataset of human
fMRI activity paired with mental images, to complement the
existing Natural Scenes Dataset (NSD), a large-scale dataset
of fMRI activity paired with seen images that enabled unprecedented improvements in fMRI-to-image reconstruction
efforts. Recent models trained on NSD have been evaluated
only on seen image reconstruction. Using NSD-Imagery,
it is possible to assess how well these models perform on

mental image reconstruction. This is a challenging generalization requirement because mental images are encoded in
human brain activity with relatively lower signal-to-noise
and spatial resolution; however, generalization from seen
to mental imagery is critical for real-world applications
in medical domains and brain-computer interfaces, where
the desired information is always internally generated. We
provide benchmarks for a suite of recent NSD-trained opensource visual decoding models (MindEye1, MindEye2, Brain
Diffuser, iCNN, Takagi et al.) on NSD-Imagery, and show

28852

