This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CroCoDL: Cross-device Collaborative Dataset for Localization
Hermann Blum1,3 , Alessandro Mercurio1 , Joshua O’Reilly1 , Tim Engelbracht1 ,
Mihai Dusmanu2 , Marc Pollefeys1,2 , Zuria Bauer1
1
ETH Zurich 2 Microsoft 3 Lamarr Institute / Uni Bonn
blumh@uni-bonn.de & mihaidusmanu@microsoft.com & {pomarc, zbauer}@ethz.ch

Abstract
Accurate localization plays a pivotal role in the autonomy of systems operating in unfamiliar environments,
particularly when interaction with humans is expected.
High-accuracy visual localization systems encompass
various components, such as image retrievers, feature
extractors, matchers, reconstruction and pose estimation
methods. This complexity translates to the necessity
of robust evaluation settings and pipelines. However,
existing datasets and benchmarks primarily focus on
single-agent scenarios, overlooking the critical issue of
cross-device localization. Different agents with different sensors will show their own specific strengths and
weaknesses, and the data they have available varies
substantially. This work addresses this gap by enhancing an existing augmented reality visual localization
benchmark with data from legged robots, and evaluating human-robot, cross-device mapping and localization.
Our contributions extend beyond device diversity and include high environment variability, spanning ten distinct
locations ranging from disaster sites to art exhibitions.
Each scene in our dataset features recordings from robot
agents, hand-held and head-mounted devices, and highaccuracy ground truth LiDAR scanners, resulting in
a comprehensive multi-agent dataset and benchmark.
This work represents a significant advancement in the
field of visual localization benchmarking, with key insights into the performance of cross-device localization
methods across diverse settings.

1. Introduction
In recent years, a range of mixed-reality (MR) headsets
appeared on the market, bringing them for the first
time into private and public spaces with diverse applications, such as assisting in frontline activities, boosting
the productivity of office workers, augmented / virtual
tours, and games. While for some applications, these
technological leaps allow users standing next to each

Figure 1. CroCoDL: the first dataset to contain sensor
recordings from real-world robots, phones, and MR headsets,
covering a total of 10 challenging locations to benchmark
cross-device and human-robot visual registration.

other to be (virtual) worlds apart as the virtual content
that is rendered into the surrounding environment is
only visible to a single user, many of the foreseen use
cases of these devices involve multiple users observing
and interacting with the same virtual hologram through
different MR interfaces. Mobile phones represent a good
intermediate step, allowing the deployment of a large
variety of MR applications, while dedicated devices continue to gain traction. For the task of human-robot
collaboration, MR unleashes the potential of visualizing the robot sensor readings, as well as planning its
actions ‘at a glance’. The key technological challenge to
interlace virtual or augmented reality experiences into
shared digital spaces is to accurately localize all kinds of
devices from different viewpoints with respect to each
other. Localizing multiple devices with respect to a
shared reference is a necessary condition for rendering
shared content at the same location.
In this work, we investigate the problem of visual

27424

