This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Digital Twin Catalog: A Large-Scale Photorealistic 3D Object Digital Twin Dataset
Zhao Dong1 Ka Chen1,∗ Zhaoyang Lv1,∗ Hong-Xing Yu2,∗ Yunzhi Zhang2,∗ Cheng Zhang1,∗
Yufeng Zhu1,∗ Stephen Tian2 Zhengqin Li1 Geordie Moffatt1 Sean Christofferson1 James Fort1
Xiaqing Pan1 Mingfei Yan1 Jiajun Wu2 Carl Yuheng Ren1 Richard Newcombe1
1

Meta Reality Labs Research

2

Stanford University

Figure 1. The Digital Twin Catalog (DTC) dataset comprises 2,000 digital twins of physical-world objects (a), characterized by millimeterlevel geometric accuracy and photorealistic PBR materials (b). DTC includes evaluation data captured using both DSLR cameras and
egocentric Aria glasses, featuring captured images with precise foreground object masks and environment lighting for relighting evaluation.

Abstract

training or fine-tuning. Moreover, to democratize 3D digital
twin creation, it is essential to integrate creation techniques
with next-generation egocentric computing platforms, such
as AR glasses. Currently, there is no dataset available to
evaluate 3D object reconstruction using egocentric captured
images. To address these gaps, the DTC dataset features
2,000 scanned digital twin-quality 3D objects, along with
image sequences captured under different lighting conditions using DSLR cameras and egocentric AR glasses. This
dataset establishes the first comprehensive real-world evaluation benchmark for 3D digital twin creation tasks, offering
a robust foundation for comparing and improving existing
reconstruction methods. The DTC dataset is already released at https://www.projectaria.com/datasets/dtc/ and we
will also make the baseline evaluations open-source.

We introduce Digital Twin Catalog (DTC), a new large-scale
photorealistic 3D object digital twin dataset. A digital twin
of a 3D object is a highly detailed, virtually indistinguishable
representation of a physical object, accurately capturing its
shape, appearance, physical properties, and other attributes.
Recent advances in neural-based 3D reconstruction and inverse rendering have significantly improved the quality of
3D object reconstruction. Despite these advancements, there
remains a lack of a large-scale, digital twin quality realworld dataset and benchmark that can quantitatively assess
and compare the performance of different reconstruction
methods, as well as improve reconstruction quality through
∗ Authors contributed equally and are listed in alphabetical order.

753

