This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ChatGen: Automatic Text-to-Image Generation From FreeStyle Chatting
Chengyou Jia1 ,* Changliang Xia1 ,* Zhuohang Dang1 , Weijia Wu2 , Hangwei Qian3 , Minnan Luo1†
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, MOEKLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
National University of Singapore 3 CFAR, A*STAR
cp3jia@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, 202066@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, dangzhuohang@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
weijiawu96@gmail.com, qian0045@e.ntu.edu.sg, minnluo@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the significant advancements in text-to-image
(T2I) generative models, users often face a trial-and-error
challenge in practical scenarios. This challenge arises
from the complexity and uncertainty of tedious steps such
as crafting suitable prompts, selecting appropriate models, and configuring specific arguments, making users resort to labor-intensive attempts for desired images. This
paper proposes Automatic T2I generation, which aims to
automate these tedious steps, allowing users to simply describe their needs in a freestyle chatting way. To systematically study this problem, we first introduce ChatGenBench,
a novel benchmark designed for Automatic T2I. It features
high-quality paired data with diverse freestyle inputs, enabling comprehensive evaluation of automatic T2I models
across all steps. Additionally, recognizing Automatic T2I as
a complex multi-step reasoning task, we propose ChatGenEvo, a multi-stage evolution strategy that progressively
equips models with essential automation skills. Through
extensive evaluation across step-wise accuracy and image
quality, ChatGen-Evo significantly enhances performance
over various baselines. Our evaluation also uncovers valuable insights for advancing automatic T2I. Our data, code,
and models will be publicly available.

I wish to create an image of an anime girl
with cool white and black hair. Let's show
her from behind, wearing an Arle suit.

crafting prompts
1girl,solo,white hair,black hair,arle_suit,from behind.

selecting models
The model features a female character
from the game Genshin Impact.

configure arguments
{"sampler":"DPM++ 2M...","steps":30,"cfg_scale":8,...}

SD 1.5

DALL-E 3

Ours

Figure 1. Illustration of tedious steps in T2I. Our method can select an appropriate model with suitable prompts and arguments.
Note: Arle is a character from the game Genshin Impact.

1. Introduction

Face [8]. This variety provides users with a broader range of
options to meet customization needs, facilitating the growing adoption of T2I models in real-world applications.
However, the rapid development of T2I models within
the open-source community has also introduced significant
challenges for users. When non-experts attempt to create
images with specific requirements, they often encounter a
trial-and-error process involving several tedious steps. As
shown in Figure 1, these steps include crafting suitable
prompts, selecting appropriate models, and configuring
specific model arguments. The complexity and uncertainty of each step turn the process into an arduous journey,
resembling “mice in a maze”. In real-world scenarios, this
iterative process consumes substantial time and resources

In recent years, text-to-image (T2I) generative models have
attracted considerable attention [1, 23, 31, 32]. Building on
advancements in large-scale T2I models such as DALL-E
[31] and Stable Diffusion [32], the open-source community
has significantly expanded the capabilities of T2I generation. Researchers fine-tune open-source models on specialized datasets, resulting in a diverse selection of task-specific
models available on platforms like Civitai [6] and Hugging
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding author.

13284

