This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hash3D: Training-free Acceleration for 3D Generation
Xingyi Yang Songhua Liu Xinchao Wang*
National Unversity of Singapore

A marble bust of a fox head

An old car overgrown by vines
and weeds

An orc forging a hammer on an anvil

A porcelain dragon

A gummy bear playing the
saxophone

4. #×
+ Hash3D

Dream-Gaussian

1.5×

+ Hash3D

Gaussian-Dreamer

{xyang,songhua.liu}@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Figure 1. Examples by applying our Hash3D on Gaussian-Dreamer [63] and Dream-Gaussian [53]. We accelerate Gaussian-Dreamer by
1.5→ and Dream-Gaussian by 4→ with comparable visual quality.

Abstract
The quality of 3D generative modeling has been notably
improved by the adoption of 2D diffusion models. Despite
this progress, the cumbersome optimization process per se
presents a critical problem to efficiency. In this paper, we
introduce Hash3D, a universal acceleration for 3D score
distillation sampling (SDS) without model training. Central to Hash3D is the observation that images rendered
from similar camera positions and diffusion time-steps often have redundant feature maps. By hashing and reusing
these feature maps across nearby timesteps and camera angles, Hash3D eliminates unnecessary calculations. We implement this through an adaptive grid-based hashing. As
a result, it largely speeds up the process of 3D generation. Surprisingly, this feature-sharing mechanism not only
makes generation faster but also improves the smoothness
and view consistency of the synthesized 3D objects. Our
experiments covering 5 text-to-3D and 3 image-to-3D mod-

els, demonstrate Hash3D’s versatility to speed up optimization, enhancing efficiency by 1.5 → 4↑. Additionally,
Hash3D’s integration with 3D Gaussian splatting largely
speeds up 3D model creation, reducing text-to-3D conversion to about 10 minutes and image-to-3D conversion to
30 seconds. The project page is https://adamdad.
github.io/hash3D/.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.

In the field of 3D generation, the integration of 2D diffusion
models [36, 55] has led to notable advancements. These
methods leverage off-the-the-shelf image diffusion models
to distill 3D models by predicting 2D score functions at different views, known as score distillation sampling (SDS).
While this approach opens up new opportunities for
creating realistic 3D assets, it also brings significant efficiency challenges. Particularly, SDS requires thousands of
score predictions from different camera angles and denoising steps in the diffusion model. This results in long opti-

21481

