This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Simplification Is All You Need against Out-of-Distribution Overconfidence
Keke Tang1∗ , Chao Hou1∗ , Weilong Peng1† , Xiang Fang2 ,
Zhize Wu3 , Yongwei Nie4 , Wenping Wang5 , Zhihong Tian1
1

Guangzhou University 2 Nanyang Technological University
3
Hefei University 4 South China University of Technology 5 Texas A&M University
tangbohutbh@gmail.com, houchaohk@gmail.com, wlpeng@tju.edu.cn, xfang9508@gmail.com,
wuzz@hfuu.edu.cn, nieyongwei@scut.edu.cn, wenping@tamu.edu, tianzhihong@gzhu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) often exhibit out-ofdistribution (OOD) overconfidence, producing overly confident predictions on OOD samples. We attribute this issue
to the inherent over-complexity of DNNs and investigate two
key aspects: capacity and nonlinearity. First, we demonstrate that reducing model capacity through knowledge distillation can effectively mitigate OOD overconfidence. Second, we show that selectively reducing nonlinearity by removing ReLU operations further alleviates the issue. Building on these findings, we present a practical guide to model
simplification, combining both strategies to significantly reduce OOD overconfidence. Extensive experiments validate
the effectiveness of this approach in mitigating OOD overconfidence and demonstrate its superiority over state-ofthe-art methods. Additionally, our simplification strategies
can be combined with existing OOD detection techniques to
further enhance OOD detection performance.

Figure 1. Histograms (logarithmic scale) of maximum confidence values for the teacher network (ResNet-50), the distilled student network (ResNet-18), and its variant with additional ReLU
removal. All models are trained on CIFAR-100 and evaluated
on OOD datasets: (a) SVHN, (b) LSUN-R, (c) iSUN, and (d)
TinyImageNet-R. The y-axis represents the frequency of samples,
and the x-axis represents confidence scores.

1. Introduction
Extensive research has been dedicated to addressing the
OOD overconfidence issue. One common approach involves calibrating outputs for both in-distribution (ID) and
OOD samples to improve discrimination [20], enabling
OOD detectors to proactively reject OOD inputs. While
these methods can reduce the impact of overconfidence,
they do not fundamentally resolve the issue within DNN
classifiers. Moreover, their effectiveness heavily depends
on the classifiers’ ability to adequately separate predictive
distributions; they fail when the classifiers cannot achieve
this separation [26]. As a more intrinsic solution, another
approach trains DNN classifiers to suppress predictions on
a subset of typical OOD samples, with the expectation that
this behavior will generalize to other OOD data [18, 20].

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have revolutionized image
classification tasks, consistently achieving state-of-the-art
performance [8, 15, 25, 45, 46]. Despite this success, DNN
classifiers are inherently designed for static, closed-world
environments [2], limiting their ability to adapt to novel,
unforeseen concepts encountered in real-world scenarios,
known as out-of-distribution (OOD) samples. Indeed, many
recent studies demonstrate that DNN classifiers suffer from
OOD overconfidence, generating overly confident predictions on OOD samples [13, 34]. This issue significantly impacts the reliability and safety of DNNs in real-world applications, highlighting an urgent need for effective solutions.
∗ Joint first authors. † Corresponding author.

5030

