This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Video Compression with Context Modulation
Chuanbo Tang

Zhuoyuan Li

Yifan Bian

Li Li

Dong Liu

MOE Key Laboratory of Brain-Inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China
{cbtang,zhuoyuanli}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, togelbian@gmail.com, {lil1,dongeliu}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

𝑥𝑡−1

Efficient video coding is highly dependent on exploiting the
temporal redundancy, which is usually achieved by extracting and leveraging the temporal context in the emerging
conditional coding-based neural video codec (NVC). Although the latest NVC has achieved remarkable progress in
improving the compression performance, the inherent temporal context propagation mechanism lacks the ability to
sufficiently leverage the reference information, limiting further improvement. In this paper, we address the limitation
by modulating the temporal context with the reference frame
in two steps. Specifically, we first propose the flow orientation to mine the inter-correlation between the reference
frame and prediction frame for generating the additional
oriented temporal context. Moreover, we introduce the context compensation to leverage the oriented context to modulate the propagated temporal context generated from the
propagated reference feature. Through the synergy mechanism and decoupling loss supervision, the irrelevant propagated information can be effectively eliminated to ensure
better context modeling. Experimental results demonstrate
that our codec achieves on average 22.7% bitrate reduction
over the advanced traditional video codec H.266/VVC, and
offers an average 10.1% bitrate saving over the previous
state-of-the-art NVC DCVC-FM. The code is available at
https://github.com/Austin4USTC/DCMVC.

1. Introduction
Temporal prediction [31, 32, 34] plays an essential role
in removing temporal redundancy for video compression.
Since DCVC [25] shifted the paradigm from traditional
residual coding to conditional coding, temporal prediction
has been represented efficiently by the temporal context for
the emerging conditional coding-based neural video comThis work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grants 62036005 and 62021001. We acknowledge the support of
GPU cluster built by MCC Lab of Information Science and Technology
Institution, USTC. Corresponding author: Dong Liu.

𝐶𝑡−1

Frame
Coding

𝐹𝑡−1

Symbol Statement
𝑥𝑡 : Input Frame
𝑥ො𝑡 : Reconstruction Frame
𝑣ො𝑡 : Reconstruction Motion
𝐹𝑡 : Reference Feature
𝐶𝑡 : Temporal Context
𝐶𝑡ҧ : Compensated Context

𝑥𝑡

𝑣ො𝑡
Context
Generation

𝐶𝑡

Frame
Coding

𝑥ො𝑡−1

𝐹𝑡

𝑥ො𝑡
(a) DCVC-DC

𝑥𝑡−1
ҧ
𝐶𝑡−1

Frame
Coding

𝑥𝑡

𝑣ො𝑡
𝐹𝑡−1

Context
Generation

𝐶𝑡

Context
Modulation

𝑥ො𝑡−1

𝐶𝑡ҧ

Frame
Coding

𝐹𝑡

𝑥ො𝑡
(b) Our DCMVC

Figure 1. Comparison of context generation for our DCMVC
(Deep Context Modulation for Video Compression) with previous
state-of-the-art compression scheme, DCVC-DC.

pression framework [17, 25–28, 45, 47, 53]. The temporal
context is regarded as the condition to encode and decode
the current frame, so generating high-quality temporal context is the key to achieve a better compression performance.
Recent conditional coding-based neural video codecs
(NVCs) have invested significant efforts in better leveraging the temporal context to realize effective inter-frame prediction. Based on DCVC [25], DCVC-TCM [47] further
mines temporal context from the propagated reference feature and motion vector (MV), and the reference propagation structure mechanism is widely adopted in the following works [26–28, 45, 48]. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), taking
our baseline DCVC-DC [27] as an example, the context of
current frame Ct is generated through the context generation mechanism with the input of propagated adjacent reference feature Ft−1 and reconstructed MV v̂t . Based on the
DCVC-DC, considering temporal error accumulation problem in long prediction chain, DCVC-FM [28] has proposed
a periodically refreshing mechanism in the process of context generation, which manually switches the input of context generation from the propagated reference feature Ft−1
to reference frame x̂t−1 . Through the modulation on the
temporal feature under a fixed temporal period, DCVC-FM
mitigates the error propagation and maintains a good inter-

12553

