This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HRAvatar: High-Quality and Relightable Gaussian Head Avatar
Dongbin Zhang1,2∗ Yunfei Liu2 Lijian Lin2 Ye Zhu2 Kangjie Chen2
Minghan Qin1 Yu Li2† Haoqian Wang1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)

Input monocular video
Source actor

Animation

Novel views synthesis

Relighting

Material editing

…
Figure 1. With monocular video input, HRAvatar reconstructs a high-quality, animatable 3D head avatar that enables realistic relighting
effects and simple material editing.

Abstract
Reconstructing animatable and high-quality 3D head
avatars from monocular videos, especially with realistic
relighting, is a valuable task. However, the limited information from single-view input, combined with the complex head poses and facial movements, makes this challenging. Previous methods achieve real-time performance by
combining 3D Gaussian Splatting with a parametric head
model, but the resulting head quality suffers from inaccurate face tracking and limited expressiveness of the deformation model. These methods also fail to produce realistic
effects under novel lighting conditions. To address these issues, we propose HRAvatar, a 3DGS-based method that reconstructs high-fidelity, relightable 3D head avatars. HRAvatar reduces tracking errors through end-to-end optimization and better captures individual facial deformations using learnable blendshapes and learnable linear blend skinning. Additionally, it decomposes head appearance into
several physical properties and incorporates physicallybased shading to account for environmental lighting. Extensive experiments demonstrate that HRAvatar not only re-

constructs superior-quality heads but also achieves realistic
visual effects under varying lighting conditions. Video results and code are available at the project page.

1. Introduction

∗ Intern at IDEA. † Corresponding authors.

Creating a 3D head avatar is essential for film, gaming,
immersive meetings, AR/VR, etc. In these applications,
the avatar must meet several requirements: animatable,
real-time, high-quality, and visually realistic. However,
achieving a highly realistic and animatable head avatar from
widely-used monocular video remains challenging.
Research in this area spans many years. Early efforts
[7, 35, 48] develop parametric head models based on 3D
Morphable Models (3DMM) theory [3]. These methods allow registering 3D head scans to parametric models for 3D
facial mesh reconstruction. With the rise of deep learning,
methods [10, 17, 41, 79] use parametric model priors to simplify head mesh reconstruction from videos, either through
estimation or frame-wise optimization, i.e., 3D face tracking. While these methods generalize well for expressions
and pose variations, their fixed topology limits complex hair
modeling and fine-grained appearance reconstruction. To

26285

