This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Luminance-GS: Adapting 3D Gaussian Splatting to Challenging Lighting
Conditions with View-Adaptive Curve Adjustment
Ziteng Cui1 , Xuangeng Chu1 , Tatsuya Harada1,2
1 The University of Tokyo 2 RIKEN AIP
(cui, xuangeng.chu, harada)@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Capturing high-quality photographs under diverse realworld lighting conditions is challenging, as both natural
lighting (e.g., low-light) and camera exposure settings (e.g.,
exposure time) significantly impact image quality. This
challenge becomes more pronounced in multi-view scenarios, where variations in lighting and image signal processor (ISP) settings across viewpoints introduce photometric inconsistencies. Such lighting degradations and viewdependent variations pose substantial challenges to novel
view synthesis (NVS) frameworks based on Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS).
To address this, we introduce Luminance-GS, a novel
approach to achieving high-quality novel view synthesis results under diverse challenging lighting conditions using
3DGS. By adopting per-view color matrix mapping and
view adaptive curve adjustments, Luminance-GS achieves
state-of-the-art (SOTA) results across various lighting conditions—including low-light, overexposure, and varying exposure—while not altering the original 3DGS explicit representation. Compared to previous NeRF- and 3DGSbased baselines, Luminance-GS provides real-time rendering speed with improved reconstruction quality. The source
code is available at 1 .

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Up: The core idea of Luminance-GS is to perform viewadaptive adjustments for images from each viewpoint, including
color matrix mapping and curve adjustment. Down: Compare with
previous SOTA solutions [15, 60], our approach achieves superior
performance and efficiency across different lighting conditions.

In recent years, Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) and Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) based methods [3, 4, 10, 18, 29, 34,
35, 38, 41, 44, 62] have made significant strides in reconstructing realistic 3D scenes and generating coherent novel
views. The impressive performance of NeRF and 3DGS
has found applications across various fields, including augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR), computational photography, medical imaging, and autonomous driving, etc. Both
NeRF- and 3DGS-based methods aim to synthesize novel
views by learning from existing multi-view images, captur1 https://github.com/cuiziteng/Luminance-GS

26472

ing consistent geometric information and simulating nonLambertian effects. Despite their success under normal,
uniform lighting, these methods often struggle with realworld challenging lighting conditions (e.g., low-light, varying camera exposure), which is primarily due to the lightness distortion caused by the environment or camera sensor
limitations [42, 52], and the inherent lack of illumination
modeling in both NeRF and 3DGS methods [37, 47]. To
make matters worse, de facto results [15, 24, 67] also show
that using 2D image restoration methods [1, 14, 23, 39] to

