This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SeriesBench: A Benchmark for Narrative-Driven Drama Series Understanding
Chenkai Zhang1,3→

Yiming Lei1,3→ Zeming Liu2† Haitao Leng4 ShaoGuo Liu4
Tingting Gao4 Qingjie Liu1,3† Yunhong Wang1
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou China
4
Kuaishou Technology
→
†

Co-first authors: {zhangchenkai, ymlei}@buaa.edu.cn

Corresponding authors: {zmliu, qingjie.liu}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

0:20 The director agrees to install air conditioning for Yingyan.

With the rapid development of Multi-modal Large Language
Models (MLLMs), an increasing number of benchmarks
have been established to evaluate the video understanding
capabilities of these models. However, these benchmarks
focus on standalone videos and only assess “visual elements” like human actions and object states. In reality, contemporary videos often encompass complex and continuous
narratives, typically presented as a series. To address this
challenge, we propose SeriesBench, a benchmark consisting of 105 carefully curated narrative-driven series, covering 28 specialized tasks that require deep narrative understanding to solve. Specifically, we first select a diverse set
of drama series spanning various genres. Then, we introduce a novel long-span narrative annotation method, combined with a full-information transformation approach to
convert manual annotations into diverse task formats. To
further enhance the model’s capacity for detailed analysis of plot structures and character relationships within series, we propose a novel narrative reasoning framework,
PC-DCoT. Extensive results on SeriesBench indicate that
existing MLLMs still face significant challenges in understanding narrative-driven series, while PC-DCoT enables
these MLLMs to achieve performance improvements. Overall, our SeriesBench and PC-DCoT highlight the critical
necessity of advancing model capabilities for understanding narrative-driven series, guiding future MLLMs development. SeriesBench is publicly available at https://
github.com/zackhxn/SeriesBench-CVPR2025.

director forbids Tuojiangkai
director allows Meiyang to
1:12 The
2:24 The
from using the air conditioning.
turn on the air conditioning.

Why does the director repeatedly enter the classroom?
A. Announces the removal of Meiyang's air conditioning rights.
B. Announces defeat due to the plan executed by Simayi.
C. Announces that Yingyan's air conditioning is not working.

Figure 1. An example from SeriesBench. The task involves multiple events and characters spanning a long time period in a video.

1. Introduction

upon these advancements, a range of benchmarks [7, 20,
23, 35, 42, 44] have been established to evaluate the visuallanguage capabilities of these models, primarily through
question-answering (QA) tasks based on static images. Although these benchmarks effectively assess static visual
comprehension, real-world visual understanding must account for complex and dynamic changes over time. As a
result, an increasing emphasis has emerged on evaluating
MLLMs’ ability to comprehend dynamic video content and
perform temporal reasoning. Several studies [5, 8, 18, 21,
25, 26] have introduced video-based benchmarks to assess
MLLMs’ temporal analysis capabilities through questions
like “Is the man walking towards the right-side exit?”.
However, despite the growing attention to temporal issues in video analysis, current evaluations primarily focus
on standalone videos, often neglect the narrative structure
and character development across multi-video series. Furthermore, these evaluations often focus solely on visual ele-

In recent years, multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) have made remarkable strides in the field of visual understanding [4, 9, 16, 31, 32, 37, 38, 47]. Building

28995

