This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SDBF: Steep-Decision-Boundary Fingerprinting for Hard-Label Tampering
Detection of DNN Models
Xiaofan Bai1 , Shixin Li1 , Xiaojing Ma1 , Bin Benjamin Zhu2 , Dongmei Zhang2 , Linchen Yu1 *
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Microsoft Corporation
{xiaofanbai, shixinli, linda, linchenyu}@hust.edu.cn, {binzhu, dongmeiz}@microsoft.com
Machine Learning as a Service

Abstract
Cloud-based AI systems offer significant benefits but
also introduce vulnerabilities, making deep neural network
(DNN) models susceptible to malicious tampering. This
tampering may involve harmful behavior injection or resource reduction, compromising model integrity and performance. To detect model tampering, hard-label fingerprinting techniques generate sensitive samples to probe and reveal tampering. Existing fingerprinting methods are mainly
based on gradient-defined sensitivity or decision boundary, with the latter showing a manifest superior detection
performance. However, all existing fingerprinting methods
either suffer from insufficient sensitivity or incur high computational costs.
In this paper, we theoretically analyze the black-box
co-optimal tampering detection sensitivity of fingerprint
samples in the context of decision boundary and gradientdefined sensitivity. Based on this, we further propose
Steep-Decision-Boundary Fingerprinting (SDBF), a novel
lightweight approach for hard-label tampering detection
that inherently and efficiently combines the strengths of existing fingerprinting techniques. SDBF places fingerprint
samples near the steep decision boundary, where the outputs
of samples are inherently highly sensitive to tampering. We
also design a Max Boundary Coverage Strategy (MBCS),
which enhances samples’ diversity over the decision boundary. Theoretical analysis and extensive experimental results
show that SDBF outperforms existing SOTA hard-label fingerprinting methods in both sensitivity and efficiency.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated excellent capabilities across various domains, such as computer
vision [12, 18, 24]. An increasing number of applications
have incorporated DNN models. Machine Learning as a
Service (MLaaS) platforms, such as Google AutoML [9],
Microsoft Azure ML [21], and Amazon SageMaker [1],
* Corresponding Author

Model training

Malicious tampering

Upload
Model 𝑭

Model owner
Model 𝑭

Malicious user
Open access API

Model 𝑭′

Users
Owner Side

Cloud Service provider

Model 𝑭

User Side

Model 𝑭′

Public Tampering Detection

Figure 1. Overview of potential model tampering and public tampering detection for models deployed in MLaaS.

leverage powerful pre-trained DNN models, allowing users
with limited computational resources to access cutting-edge
technology.
However, models deployed in the cloud often operate beyond the direct control of their owners, leaving them vulnerable to unauthorized/illegal model tampering as shown in Fig.
1. For instance, unscrupulous service providers might compress a model—reducing its memory and computational footprint—as a cost-saving measure without the owner’s consent,
as demonstrated in prior work [3, 22]. Alternatively, adversaries could inject malicious behaviors into the model’s parameters to manipulate the model’s outputs [10,14,15,27,29].
Such tampering not only compromises the model’s integrity,
security, and overall performance but also erodes users’ trust
and the reliability of the system.
Many works [2, 6, 13, 17, 31, 33–35] have focused on
detecting model tampering. Due to the black-box nature of
the models deployed in the cloud, hard-label fingerprinting
techniques are the most practical but also most challenging
among existing tampering detection methods as their non-

29278

