This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Convex Combination Star Shape Prior for Data-driven Image Semantic
Segmentation
Xinyu Zhao
Beijing Normal University
Beijing, China

Jun Xie
Beijing Normal University
Beijing, China

Shengzhe Chen
Arizona State University
Phoenix, USA

202321130115@mail.bnu.edu.cn

xiej@mail.bnu.edu.cn

schen415@asu.edu

Jun Liu *
Beijing Normal University
Beijing, China
jliu@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-center star shape is a prevalent object shape feature,
which has proven effective in model-based image segmentation methods. However, the shape field function induced
by the multi-center star shape is non-smooth, and directly
applying it to the data-driven image segmentation network
architecture design may lead to instability in backpropagation. This paper proposes a convex combination star (CCS)
shape, possessing multi-center star shape properties, and
has the advantage of effectively controlling the shape of the
region through a smooth field function. The sufficient condition of the proposed CCS shape can be combined into the
image segmentation neural network structure design through
the bridge between the variational segmentation model and
the activation function of the data-driven method. Taking
Segment Anything Model (SAM) and its improved version as
backbone networks, we have shown that the segmentation
network architecture with CCS shape properties can greatly
improve the accuracy of segmentation results.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation is essential in medical and remote sensing fields. Unlike natural images, objects in medical and
remote sensing images exhibit distinct geometric shape, so a
satisfactory segmentation result should maintain these characteristics. Some task-specific traditional methods, such
as graph cuts and active contours [1, 3, 20, 27], improve
segmentation accuracy by incorporating shape and other
priors [2, 13, 30, 31, 33, 35]. The star-shaped prior, in particular, has shown effective in various studies [14, 24, 36].

Vicente [36] introduced a single-center star-shaped constraint within an interactive graph-cut framework, and later
extended by Gulshan et al. [14] and Isack et al. [18] to multicenter and hedgehog shape models, respectively. However,
the interactive graph-cut framework restricts parallel processing, posing efficiency challenges. Additionally, traditional
methods typically rely on manually selected low-level features, such as edges, textures, and colors, making it difficult
to capture high-level semantic information in complex images. In contrast, deep learning methods [29, 32, 34, 39] can
learn more complex and abstract features from large-scale
annotated data in an end-to-end manner.
Currently, many studies have integrated shape, boundary, and other priors into neural networks [5, 6, 11, 15, 23],
generally falling into two categories: one is adding regularization terms to the loss function [9, 15, 17, 23], while the
other is integrating prior information directly into the network architecture via specialized sub-networks [5, 37, 38].
However, regularized-loss-function methods only enforce
shape priors during training, with no theoretical guarantee
that the network’s output retains desired shape properties
during prediction. Thus, methods integrating prior information directly into the architecture deserve more attention. For
instance, Chen et al. [5] refined segmentation predictions
by learning directional maps, while works [6, 37] used predicted vertices or contour points to improve segmentation.
Other approaches [11, 38] combine boundary information
to enhance model performance. However, such methods
are often directly implemented by adding network layers
based on engineering experience, lacking mathematical interpretability.
Unlike traditional variational models, data-driven methods require backpropagation of gradients during training. It

* Corresponding author

14068

