This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flexible Group Count Enables Hassle-Free Structured Pruning
* ∫ê

*∫

Jiamu Zhang

Shaochen Zhong
π

†

Kaixiong Zhou

Andrew Ye
π

Li Li

∑ê

Zirui Liu
π

Soo-Hyun Choi

Rui Chen

ô

µ

Sebastian Zhao
∫

Xia Hu

ê

Shuai Xu

ê

Vipin Chaudhary

∫
∑

Rice University, USA, Case Western Reserve University, USA, Samsung Electronics America, USA
ê

Stanford University, USA,

ô

π

University of Minnesota–Twin Cities, USA, UC Berkeley, USA, North Carolina State University, USA
µ

Abstract

†

pacities. To address this issue of over-parameterization, network pruning — a field studying how to insightfully remove components from the original model without significant degradation to its properties and performance — has
undergone constant development for being an intuitive way
of potentially reducing the computation and memory footprint required to practically utilize a model [2].

Densely structured pruning methods — which generate
pruned models in a fully dense format, allowing immediate compression benefits without additional demands — are
evolving due to their practical significance. Traditional
techniques in this domain mainly revolve around coarser
granularities, such as filter pruning, thereby limiting performance due to restricted pruning freedom. Recent advancements in Grouped Kernel Pruning (GKP) have enabled the utilization of finer granularities while maintaining
a densely structured format. We observe that existing GKP
methods often introduce dynamic operations to different aspects of their procedures at the cost of adding complications
and/or imposing limitations (e.g., requiring an expensive
mixture of clustering schemes), or contain dynamic pruning
rates and sizes among groups that result in a reliance on
custom architecture support for its pruned models. In this
work, we argue that the best practice to introduce these dynamic operations to GKP is to make Conv2d(groups)
(a.k.a. group count) flexible under an integral optimization, leveraging its ideal alignment with the infrastructure
support of Grouped Convolution. Pursuing such a direction, we present a one-shot, post-train, data-agnostic GKP
method that is more performant, adaptive, and efficient than
its predecessors while simultaneously being user-friendly,
with little-to-no hyper-parameter tuning or handcrafting of
criteria required.

In this work, we advance the progress on Grouped Kernel Pruning (GKP) [60], a recently developed structured
pruning granularity with many deployment-friendly properties, by investigating a common design choice among existing GKP methods: dynamic operations, which denotes the
act of applying different operations to the same task (e.g.,
clustering CNN filters with various combinations of dimensionality reduction and clustering techniques, as in TMIGKP [60]). We find that current GKP designs tend to include such operations in a sub-optimal manner, resulting in
various complications and limitations. As a solution, we
propose that the best approach to implementing dynamic
operations to GKP is to make Conv2d(groups) (a.k.a.
group count) flexible under an integral optimization, leveraging its ideal alignment with the existing and future infrastructure support of Grouped Convolution [26]. Our empirical evaluation shows that by making these group counts
flexible, we can afford to “lean down” on the rest of the typical GKP procedures, and therefore obtain a new one-shot,
1
post-train, data-agnostic GKP method that is more performant, adaptive, and efficient than its predecessors while
simultaneously being user-friendly with little-to-no hyperparameter tuning or handcrafted criteria required. We concisely summarize our contribution as enabling “hassle-free
structured pruning,” as suggested in the title.

1. Introduction
Despite having a proven track record revolving around computer vision tasks, modern convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) face deployment challenges for growing model ca* Equal contribution. The work corresponds to Jiamu Zhang
<mz81@rice.edu>. Jiamu Zhang and Andrew Ye conducted the majority of their contribution while studying at the Case Western Reserve
University.

1

As of the pruning operation is not influenced, nor is making any assumption, of the task-consisting data.

4807

