This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Million-Scale Adversarial Robustness Evaluation With Stronger
Individual Attacks
Yong Xie1 , Weijie Zheng1 , Hanxun Huang2 , Guangnan Ye1∗ , Xingjun Ma1 *
Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University, China
2
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia
1

Abstract
As deep learning models are increasingly deployed in safetycritical applications, evaluating their vulnerabilities to adversarial perturbations is essential for ensuring their reliability and trustworthiness. Over the past decade, a large
number of white-box adversarial robustness evaluation methods (i.e., attacks) have been proposed, ranging from singlestep to multi-step methods and from individual to ensemble methods. Despite these advances, challenges remain in
conducting meaningful and comprehensive robustness evaluations, particularly when it comes to large-scale testing
and ensuring evaluations reflect real-world adversarial risks.
In this work, we focus on image classification models and
propose a novel individual attack method, Probability Margin Attack (PMA), which defines the adversarial margin
in the probability space rather than the logits space. We
analyze the relationship between PMA and existing crossentropy or logits-margin-based attacks, and show that PMA
can outperform the current state-of-the-art individual methods. Building on PMA, we propose two types of ensemble
attacks that balance effectiveness and efficiency. Furthermore, we create a million-scale dataset, CC1M, derived
from the existing CC3M dataset, and use it to conduct the
first million-scale white-box adversarial robustness evaluation of adversarially-trained ImageNet models. Our findings
provide valuable insights into the robustness gaps between
individual versus ensemble attacks and small-scale versus
million-scale evaluations.

1. Introduction
Despite their success in various applications, deep neural networks (DNNs) exhibit significant sensitivity to imperceptible
perturbations specifically designed to maximize prediction
error, a phenomenon known as "adversarial vulnerability"
[1]. This vulnerability presents a critical safety risk, as ad* Corresponding

authors:

xingjunma@fudan.edu.cn

yegn@fudan.edu.cn,

versaries can exploit it to launch stealthy attacks that evade
human detection, potentially undermining the reliability of
real-world systems. Consequently, evaluating the adversarial
robustness of DNNs has become essential.
White-box adversarial attack methods evaluate the worstcase performance of a DNN model by crafting attacks directly using adversarial gradients. These attacks, commonly
tested in image classification tasks, aim to maximize the
model’s prediction error while constraining perturbations
to be "small" through an Lp norm [2, 3]. The Projected
Gradient Descent (PGD) [4] and AutoAttack (AA) [5] are
two commonly used for such evaluations. PGD is a strong
first-order attack, while AA is an ensemble attack with four
different methods. However, PGD struggles with obfuscated
gradients [6], and AA is computationally expensive [7], highlighting the trade-off between effectiveness and efficiency in
white-box robustness evaluation.
As large-scale DNNs are increasingly deployed across
various applications, large-scale adversarial robustness evaluations have become essential. To conduct such evaluations,
highly efficient attack methods are necessary. Although AA
can be accelerated through adaptive initialization and discarding strategies [8], individual attacks hold a significant
efficiency advantage in large-scale evaluation. Improving the
standard PGD attack is a promising direction for obtaining
stronger individual attacks. Existing improvements to PGD
include better initialization [9], multiple adversarial targets
[10], intermediate feature layers [11], or loss alternation [12],
as well as more robust loss functions, such as margin loss [7],
the difference of logits ratio (DLR) [5], and Minimize the
Impact of Floating-Point Errors (MIFPE) loss [13]. A recent
work proposed a Margin Decomposition (MD) attack to circumvent obfuscated/imbalanced gradients using a two-stage
margin decomposition strategy.
In this work, we build on the attack pipeline of the Margin
Decomposition (MD) attack but introduce a novel loss function, probability margin loss, to develop a stronger individual
attack. Specifically, the probability margin loss defeines the
margin in the probability space, rather than the logits space.
We refer to the attack using this adversarial loss function

30702

