This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perceptual Inductive Bias Is What You Need Before Contrastive Learning
Junru Zhao

Tianqin Li

Dunhan Jiang

Shenghao Wu

Alan Ramirez

Tai Sing Lee

Carnegie Mellon University
{junruz, tianqinl, dunhanj, shenghaw, alanrami, taislee}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
David Marr’s seminal theory of human perception stipulates that visual processing is a multi-stage process, prioritizing the derivation of boundary and surface properties
before forming semantic object representations. In contrast, contrastive representation learning frameworks typically bypass this explicit multi-stage approach, defining
their objective as the direct learning of a semantic representation space for objects. While effective in general contexts, this approach sacrifices the inductive biases of vision,
leading to slower convergence speed and learning shortcut resulting in texture bias. In this work, we demonstrate
that leveraging Marr’s multi-stage theory—by first constructing boundary and surface-level representations using
perceptual constructs from early visual processing stages
and subsequently training for object semantics—leads to
2x faster convergence on ResNet18, improved final representations on semantic segmentation, depth estimation, and
object recognition, and enhanced robustness and out-ofdistribution capability. Together, we propose a pretraining stage before the general contrastive representation pretraining to further enhance the final representation quality
and reduce the overall convergence time via inductive bias
from human vision systems.

Figure 1. We propose to leverage perceptual constructs from
early vision processing stages to improve the contrastive learning
pipeline. By introducing a pre-pretraining stage before general
contrastive learning (CL), we inject inductive bias into the contrastive representation learning. We demonstrate that such inductive bias is benefitical to the representation quality and provides
significiantly convergence speed-up the contrastive learning.

cess rich semantic information without building intermediate representations sensitive to surfaces and boundaries first.
In this work, we evaluate whether perceptual constructs
from early visual processing, such as figure-ground segmentation and intrinsic image decomposition, can serve as
additional inductive biases for contrastive learning. Evidence of figure-ground organization has been found in the
primary visual cortex and secondary visual cortex in primate visual systems [19, 22, 34, 35]. This early perceptual
construct distinguishes figures against the ground, assigns
border ownership to surfaces, and enables the construction
of a neural representation of local shapes and global shapes
along the ventral visual hierarchy. The perception of shapes
could be innate or at least develop very fast [8, 29]. Furthermore, categorization and identification of unseen objects are considered to rely on the similarity of the overall
shape, conceptualized through shape prototypes [6]. The
recognition of shapes was found to be parallel to the development of vocabularies in language in infancy. Infants can
learn new nouns faster when nonce objects are organized
in shape, implicating a linked development between labeling objects linguistically and shape prototypes in the visual

1. Introduction
Human visual information processing is organized in
stages, progressing from contrast and edge detection to perceptual organization and figure-ground segmentation, then
to computing surfaces and shapes, and ultimately to object recognition. End-to-end supervised learning in neural
networks for object classification in images often relies on
the simplest features or shortcuts, bypassing essential intermediate representations, resulting in texture bias. Selfsupervised contrastive learning, on the other hand, leverages
the inductive bias of semantic segregation by grouping semantically similar scenes and separating dissimilar scenes
in latent space. This also leads to representations that ac-

9621

