This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InterDyn: Controllable Interactive Dynamics with Video Diffusion Models
Rick Akkerman1,2→
1

Haiwen Feng1→†

Michael J. Black1

Dimitrios Tzionas2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

2

Victoria Fernández Abrevaya1

University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands

{rick.akkerman, haiwen.feng, black, victoria.abrevaya}@tuebingen.mpg.de
Input image

Video generation by InterDyn using only the hand mask sequence as control signal

Counterfactual dynamics

Force propagation
t=0

d.tzionas@uva.nl

t=3

t=0

t=13

Denotes a driving object motion |

Future #1

Future #2

Tracks indicate an object with generated uncontrolled dynamics

Figure 1. We present InterDyn, a framework for synthesizing realistic interactive dynamics without 3D reconstruction and physics simulation. Our core principle is to rely on the implicit physics knowledge embedded in large-scale video generative models. Given an image
and a “driving motion”, our model generates the consequential scene dynamics. We investigate the generated interactive dynamics in a
simple object collision scenario (bottom) and complex in-the-wild human-object interaction (top).

Abstract
Predicting the dynamics of interacting objects is essential
for both humans and intelligent systems. However, existing
approaches are limited to simplified, toy settings and
lack generalizability to complex, real-world environments.
Recent advances in generative models have enabled the
prediction of state transitions based on interventions, but
focus on generating a single future state which neglects
the continuous dynamics resulting from the interaction. To
address this gap, we propose InterDyn, a novel framework
that generates videos of interactive dynamics given an
initial frame and a control signal encoding the motion of a
driving object or actor. Our key insight is that large video

generation models can act as both neural renderers and
implicit physics “simulators”, having learned interactive
dynamics from large-scale video data. To effectively
harness this capability, we introduce an interactive control
mechanism that conditions the video generation process
on the motion of the driving entity. Qualitative results
demonstrate that InterDyn generates plausible, temporally consistent videos of complex object interactions
while generalizing to unseen objects. Quantitative evaluations show that InterDyn outperforms baselines that
focus on static state transitions. This work highlights
the potential of leveraging video generative models as
implicit physics engines. Code and trained models will be
released at: https://interdyn.is.tue.mpg.de/.

* Equal contribution
† Project lead

12467

