This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Change Monitoring: A Hyperbolic Representative Learning Framework
and a Dataset for Long-term Fine-grained Tree Change Detection
Yante Li1 , Hanwen Qi2 , Haoyu Chen1 , Xinlian Liang2 *, Guoying Zhao1*
1
University of Oulu, 2 Wuhan University
{yante.li, haoyu.chen, guoying.zhao}@oulu.fi, {hanwenqi, xinlian.liang}@whu.edu.cn
Autumn

Winter

Summer

Spring

Campsis White
grandiflora pine

Summer

(a) Tree samples across the entire timeline in the dataset
Intrinsic changes
Color

Flower

Leaf

Extrinsic changes
Deconstruction

Illumination

Position

Weather

(c) Examples of changes caused by environmental factors

(b) Examples of tree changes caused by physiological factors

Figure 1. The proposed UAVTC is a dataset for long-term, precise tree monitoring aimed at supporting environmental protection. (a)
UAVTC includes a large volume of high-resolution tree images captured by UAVs with cameras over one year. Tree changes encompass
intrinsic (b) and extrinsic (c) patterns, which share hierarchical relationships. Traditional linear operators in Euclidean space are ineffective
at representing these complex relationships. In contrast, hyperbolic spaces are naturally suited to embedding hierarchies with low distortion
[35, 36].

Abstract
In environmental protection, tree monitoring plays an essential role in maintaining and improving ecosystem health.
However, precise monitoring is challenging because existing datasets fail to capture continuous fine-grained changes
in trees due to low-resolution images and high acquisition costs. In this paper, we introduce UAVTC, a
large-scale, long-term, high-resolution dataset collected
using UAVs equipped with cameras, specifically designed
to detect individual Tree Changes (TCs). UAVTC includes rich annotations and statistics based on biological knowledge, offering a fine-grained view for tree monitoring. To address environmental influences and effectively model the hierarchical diversity of physiological
TCs, we propose a novel Hyperbolic Siamese Network

(HSN) for TC detection, enabling compact and hierarchical representations of dynamic tree changes. Extensive
experiments show that HSN can effectively capture complex hierarchical changes and provide a robust solution
for fine-grained TC detection. In addition, HSN generalizes well to cross-domain face anti-spoofing task, highlighting its broader significance in AI. We believe our
work, combining ecological insights and interdisciplinary
expertise, will benefit the community by offering a new
benchmark and innovative AI technologies. Source code
is available on https://github.com/liyantett/Tree-ChangesDetection-with-Siamese-Hyperbolic-network.

1. Introduction

* Co-corresponding author

Forests, essential for climate stability and ecological health,
act as crucial biological reserves [47]. Effective forestry
and management hinge on diligent tree monitoring, which
includes growth measurement, health assessment, and envi-

27346

