This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-Agnostic Guided Feature Expansion for Class-Incremental Learning
Bowen Zheng Da-Wei Zhou† Han-Jia Ye De-Chuan Zhan
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{zhengbw,zhoudw,yehj,zhandc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
0.12

The ability to learn new concepts while preserve the learned
knowledge is desirable for learning systems in ClassIncremental Learning (CIL). Recently, feature expansion of
the model become a prevalent solution for CIL, where the
old features are ﬁxed during the training of the new task
while new features are expanded for the new tasks. However, such task-speciﬁc features learned from the new task
may collide with the old features, leading to misclassiﬁcation between tasks. Therefore, the expanded model is often
encouraged to capture diverse features from the new task,
aiming to avoid such collision. However, the existing solution is largely restricted to the samples from the current
task, because of the poor accessibility to previous samples.
To promote the learning and transferring of diverse features across tasks, we propose a framework called TaskAgnostic Guided Feature Expansion (TagFex). Firstly, it
captures task-agnostic features continually with a separate
model, providing extra task-agnostic features for subsequent tasks. Secondly, to obtain useful features from the
task-agnostic model for the current task, it aggregates the
task-agnostic features with the task-speciﬁc feature using a
merge attention. Then the aggregated feature is transferred
back into the task-speciﬁc feature for inference, helping the
task-speciﬁc model capture diverse features. Extensive experiments show the effectiveness and superiority of TagFex
on various CIL settings. Code is available at https:
//github.com/bwnzheng/TagFex_CVPR2025.

1. Introduction
For real-world applications of learning systems, new concepts and knowledge increase over time. Therefore, the
ability to learn new concepts while preserve the learned
knowledge is desirable for the learning system. This motivates the research in Continual Learning (or Incremental
Learning). Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) [29, 46, 60]
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Average CKA feature similarities between different expanded models of DER and TagFex by task. It shows the expanded
features learned by TagFex are less correlated.
1.0
0.8

DER

0.6
0.4

TagFex
(Ours)
Model id

0.2

0

2

4

6

0.0

Figure 2. GradCAM visualization comparison between different
expanded models by DER and TagFex. It shows that the expanded
models learned by the proposed framework focus on more diverse
features.

is one of the scenarios where new concepts incrementally
emerge as new classes. The main challenge for Continual
Learning is catastrophic forgetting [30], where the learning
system usually forgets previously learned knowledge fast
and catastrophically. Solving catastrophic forgetting alone
is not enough for the model to learn new knowledge. Therefore, researchers seek for balance between stability (ability
to resist changes) and plasticity (ability to adapt) [15].
One of the promising strategies is to train a new feature extractor for each new task while keep the previously
learned model intact during the training of the new task.
Such methods are often referred to as expansion-based approaches [10, 20, 43, 51, 59]. Although expansion-based
CIL achieve impressive performance on various scenarios

10099

