This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FRAMES-VQA: Benchmarking Fine-Tuning Robustness across Multi-Modal
Shifts in Visual Question Answering
Chengyue Huang*

Brisa Maneechotesuwan* Shivang Chopra
Georgia Institute of Technology

Zsolt Kira

{chuang475,bmaneech3,shivangchopra11,zkira}@gatech.edu

Abstract

and clipart, challenging models to generalize across different styles and representations. Similarly, various ImageNet
variants [10, 22, 39, 50] introduce shifts through image
variations, adversarial examples, rendering transformations,
and changes in texture or background. Collectively, these
datasets provide a comprehensive framework for assessing
how well models withstand visual distribution changes.
While robust fine-tuning algorithms are widely examined under distribution shifts in a single modality (images),
few studies have explored robust fine-tuning for VQA tasks,
where distribution shifts are multi-modal and models must
adapt to variations across both visual and textual inputs.
Apart from visual shift [1], there are question shifts [15, 41]
involving variations in phrasing, structure, or vocabulary, as
well as answer shifts [2] with changes in answer distributions such as frequency and formatting. Beyond uni-modal
shift, these variations may occur simultaneously across visual, question, and answer inputs [9, 31, 42, 44, 49], posing
an even greater challenge as models must generalize across
complex, combined shifts.
Therefore, we build upon our preliminary exploration [25] and propose a benchmark FRAMESVQA (Fine-Tuning Robustness Across Multi-Modal
Shifts in VQA) to systematically evaluate the robustness of
fine-tuning in VQA task. We leverage ten existing VQA
datasets and categorize distribution shifts into uni-modal
and multi-modal types, quantified by Mahalanobis distance
across various backbones to capture both near and far
OOD scenarios. We conduct a comprehensive comparison
of the existing robust fine-tuning baselines on ID and
OOD performance using the benchmark. Furthermore,
we analyze shift scores and modality importance across
fine-tuning methods. To summarize, our contributions are:
• We propose FRAMES-VQA for evaluating robust finetuning in VQA, including ten VQA datasets categorized
by uni-modal (e.g., image, question) and multi-modal
shifts. We quantify dataset shifts under different modalities using Mahalanobis distance and embeddings from
different backbones.
• We perform an in-depth comparison of robust fine-tuning

Visual question answering (VQA) systems face significant
challenges when adapting to real-world data shifts, especially in multi-modal contexts. While robust fine-tuning
strategies are essential for maintaining performance across
in-distribution (ID) and out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios, current evaluation settings are primarily unimodal or
particular to some types of OOD, offering limited insight
into the complexities of multi-modal contexts. In this work,
we propose a new benchmark FRAMES-VQA (Fine-Tuning
Robustness Across Multi-Modal Shifts in VQA) for evaluating robust fine-tuning for VQA tasks. We utilize ten existing VQA benchmarks, including VQAv2, IV-VQA, VQACP, OK-VQA and others, and categorize them into ID, near
and far OOD datasets covering uni-modal, multi-modal and
adversarial distribution shifts. We first conduct a comprehensive comparison of existing robust fine-tuning methods. We then quantify the distribution shifts by calculating the Mahalanobis distance using uni-modal and multimodal embeddings extracted from various models. Further, we perform an extensive analysis to explore the interactions between uni- and multi-modal shifts as well as
modality importance for ID and OOD samples. These
analyses offer valuable guidance on developing more robust fine-tuning methods to handle multi-modal distribution
shifts. The code is available at https://github.com/
chengyuehuang511/FRAMES-VQA.

1. Introduction
Robust fine-tuning methods aim to adapt pre-trained models
to downstream tasks while retaining resilience to distribution shifts [38, 52]. Distribution shifts in the image modality are widely explored, with various datasets designed to
evaluate a model’s generalization across diverse visual conditions. For example, DomainNet [37] spans multiple visual domains including real images, sketches, paintings,
* Equal contribution.

3909

