This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamRelation: Bridging Customization and Relation Generation
Qingyu Shi1

Lu Qi3∗ Jianzong Wu1 Jinbin Bai5 Jingbo Wang4 Yunhai Tong1 Xiangtai Li2,4∗
1
PKU 2 NTU 3 Insta360 Research 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory 5 NUS
Project page: https://shi-qingyu.github.io/DreamRelation.github.io

Figure 1. In our Relation-Aware Image Customization task, the generated images must accurately preserve the relationships between
objects and maintain their identity. We highlight the limitations of previous approaches using three color codes: red indicates failure to
capture relationships, blue marks missing objects, and orange represents object confusion. Each image is annotated to reflect its specific
issue. Our results, highlighted by green boxes, demonstrate the advantages of our proposed method.

Abstract
Customized image generation is essential for creating personalized content based on user prompts, allowing largescale text-to-image diffusion models to more effectively
meet individual needs. However, existing models often neglect the relationships between customized objects in generated images. In contrast, this work addresses this gap by
focusing on relation-aware customized image generation,
which seeks to preserve the identities from image prompts
while maintaining the relationship specified in text prompts.
Specifically, we introduce DreamRelation, a framework that
disentangles identity and relation learning using a carefully curated dataset. Our training data consists of relationspecific images, independent object images containing identity information, and text prompts to guide relation genera-

tion. Then, we propose two key modules to tackle the two
main challenges—generating accurate and natural relationships, especially when significant pose adjustments are
required, and avoiding object confusion in cases of overlap. First, we introduce a keypoint matching loss that effectively guides the model in adjusting object poses closely
tied to their relationships. Second, we incorporate local
features of the image prompts to better distinguish between
objects, preventing confusion in overlapping cases. Extensive results on our proposed benchmarks demonstrate the
superiority of DreamRelation in generating precise relations while preserving object identities across a diverse set
of objects and relationships.

15723

1 * Corresponding authors: Lu Qi, Xiangtai Li.

