This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VidBot: Learning Generalizable 3D Actions from In-the-Wild 2D Human
Videos for Zero-Shot Robotic Manipulation
Hanzhi Chen1

Boyang Sun2

Anran Zhang1

Marc Pollefeys2,3

1 Technical University of Munich
“Close the fridge”

“Open the cupboard”

“Push the drawer”

2 ETH Zürich

Stefan Leutenegger1,2

3 Microsoft

“Take the milk”

Extracting 3D Affordance from Everyday Human Videos
“Open the cabinet”

“Open the cabinet”

“Pull the drawer”

“Place the driller”

“Take the tissue”

“Open the microwave”

“Drop the box”

“Push the drawer”

“Pull the drawer”

Learning Language-Conditioned 3D Affordance

“Place the cup”

“Close the cabinet”

“Pick up the watering pot”

Zero-Shot Deployment across Robots for Household Manipulation Tasks

Figure 1. We present VidBot, a framework to learn interactions from in-the-wild RGB-only human videos. Our affordance model can be
deployed across robots for daily manipulation tasks. Project cite: https://hanzhic.github.io/vidbot-project/

Abstract
Future robots are envisioned as versatile systems capable
of performing a variety of household tasks. The big question
remains, how can we bridge the embodiment gap while minimizing physical robot learning, which fundamentally does
not scale well. We argue that learning from in-the-wild
human videos offers a promising solution for robotic manipulation tasks, as vast amounts of relevant data already
exist on the internet. In this work, we present VidBot, a
framework enabling zero-shot robotic manipulation using
learned 3D affordance from in-the-wild monocular RGBonly human videos. VidBot leverages a pipeline to extract
explicit representations from them, namely 3D hand trajectories from videos, combining a depth foundation model
with structure-from-motion techniques to reconstruct temporally consistent, metric-scale 3D affordance representations agnostic to embodiments. We introduce a coarse-tofine affordance learning model that first identifies coarse
actions from the pixel space and then generates fine-grained
interaction trajectories with a diffusion model, conditioned
on coarse actions and guided by test-time constraints for
context-aware interaction planning, enabling substantial
generalization to novel scenes and embodiments. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the efficacy of VidBot, which sig-

27661

nificantly outperforms counterparts across 13 manipulation
tasks in zero-shot settings and can be seamlessly deployed
across robot systems in real-world environments. VidBot
paves the way for leveraging everyday human videos to
make robot learning more scalable.

1. Introduction
Advancements in AI are accelerating the development of
personalized devices, such as smart glasses that offer virtual
guidance to users [13, 22, 28, 62]. In the near future, robots
will also become personalized systems, akin to smartphones
or smart glasses, designed to provide physical assistance to
humans. However, the diverse and novel forms of robotic
embodiment pose a significant challenge for deploying AI
to perform open-ended tasks in open-ended environments.
State-of-the-art approaches attempting to learn robot manipulation skills still rely heavily on human experts’ teleoperated demonstrations, which are used to train robot policies
under the Imitation Learning (IL) paradigm [35, 37, 64, 95].
However, this process remains costly, time-consuming, and
labor-intensive. While recent efforts have gathered largescale robotic demonstrations for everyday manipulation
tasks–such as Open X-Embodiment [59] and DROID [39]–

