This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neuro-3D: Towards 3D Visual Decoding from EEG Signals
Zhanqiang Guo1,2∗ , Jiamin Wu1,3∗ , Yonghao Song2 , Jiahui Bu5 , Weijian Mai1,6 ,
Qihao Zheng1 , Wanli Ouyang1,3† , Chunfeng Song1,4†
1

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 2 Tsinghua University,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 4 Shanghai Innovation Institute,
5
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 6 South China University of Technology
3

Abstract

3D Objects

1. Introduction
“The brain is wider than the sky.” — Emily Dickinson
The endeavor to comprehend how the human brain perceives the visual world has long been a central focus of cognitive neuroscience [17, 22]. As we navigate through the
environment, our perception of the three-dimensional world
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors: {songchunfeng,
ouyangwanli}@pjlab.org.cn

shape

Shape-wise
Category

Reconstructed 3D Objects

Stimulus

EEG
acquisition

Rotating 3D Objects

Decoding

Color
Category

color

Human’s perception of the visual world is shaped by the
stereo processing of 3D information. Understanding how
the brain perceives and processes 3D visual stimuli in the
real world has been a longstanding endeavor in neuroscience. Towards this goal, we introduce a new neuroscience task: decoding 3D visual perception from EEG signals, a neuroimaging technique that enables real-time monitoring of neural dynamics enriched with complex visual
cues. To provide the essential benchmark, we first present
EEG-3D, a pioneering dataset featuring multimodal analysis data and extensive EEG recordings from 12 subjects
viewing 72 categories of 3D objects rendered in both videos
and images. Furthermore, we propose Neuro-3D, a 3D
visual decoding framework based on EEG signals. This
framework adaptively integrates EEG features derived from
static and dynamic stimuli to learn complementary and robust neural representations, which are subsequently utilized
to recover both the shape and color of 3D objects through
the proposed diffusion-based colored point cloud decoder.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to explore
EEG-based 3D visual decoding. Experiments indicate that
Neuro-3D not only reconstructs colored 3D objects with
high fidelity, but also learns effective neural representations that enable insightful brain region analysis. The code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
gzq17/neuro-3D.

…

Figure 1. Illustration of brain activity acquisition and colored 3D
objects reconstruction from EEG signal.

is shaped by both fine details and the diverse perspectives
from which we observe them. This stereo experience of
color, depth, and spatial relationships forms complex neural activity in the brain’s cortex. Unraveling how the brain
processes 3D perception remains an appealing challenge in
neuroscience. Recently, electroencephalography (EEG), a
non-invasive neuroimaging technique favored for its safety
and ethical suitability, has been widely adopted in 2D visual decoding [7, 8, 26, 31, 39, 72] to generate static visual
stimuli. With the aid of EEG and generative techniques, an
intriguing question arises: can we directly reconstruct the
original 3D visual stimuli from dynamic brain activity?
To address this question, in this paper, we explore a
new task, 3D visual decoding from EEG signals, shedding light on the brain mechanisms for perceiving natural
3D objects in the real world. To be specific, this task aims to
reconstruct 3D objects from the EEG signals in the form of
colored point clouds, as shown in Fig. 1. The task involves
not only extracting semantic features but also capturing intricate visual cues, e.g., color, shape, and structural information, underlying in dynamic neural signals, all of which are
essential for a thorough understanding of 3D visuals. In observing the surrounding world, humans form 3D perception
through shifting views of objects in continuous movement
overtime. EEG provides an effective means of tracking neural dynamics in this evolving perceptual process for the 3D

23870

