This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing the Abstract:
Translating the Abstract Language for Vision Language Models
Davide Talon*1

Federico Girella*2

Ziyue Liu2, 3

Marco Cristani2

Yiming Wang1

Fondazione Bruno Kessler
2
University of Verona
3
Polytechnic Institute of Turin
1

https://github.com/davidetalon/fashionact
Abstract
VLM
Image Encoder

VLM latent space

Text embedding

if
sh
t

Natural language goes beyond dryly describing visual content. It contains rich abstract concepts to express feeling,
creativity and properties that cannot be directly perceived.
Yet, current research in Vision Language Models (VLMs)
has not shed light on abstract-oriented language. Our research breaks new ground by uncovering its wide presence
and under-estimated value, with extensive analysis. Particularly, we focus our investigation on the fashion domain, a
highly-representative field with abstract expressions. By analyzing recent large-scale multimodal fashion datasets, we
find that abstract terms have a dominant presence, rivaling
the concrete ones, providing novel information, and being
useful in the retrieval task. However, a critical challenge
emerges: current general-purpose or fashion-specific VLMs
are pre-trained with databases that lack sufficient abstract
words in their text corpora, thus hindering their ability to
effectively represent abstract-oriented language. We propose a training-free and model-agnostic method, Abstractto-Concrete Translator (ACT), to shift abstract representations towards well-represented concrete ones in the VLM
latent space, using pre-trained models and existing multimodal databases. On the text-to-image retrieval task, despite being training-free, ACT outperforms the fine-tuned
VLMs in both same- and cross-dataset settings, exhibiting its effectiveness with a strong generalization capability.
Moreover, the improvement introduced by ACT is consistent
with various VLMs, making it a plug-and-play solution.

Image embedding
ACT embedding (Ours)

VLM
Text Encoder

Concrete-oriented
“A sleeveless top with crochet
bodice and loose waist”

Abstract-oriented
“Opt for something a little different,
such as this sexy top! This sleeveless
number features a stunning crochet
bodice, followed by loose, airy fabric”

Figure 1. Human language can exhibit both abstract and
concrete words to express feelings, desires, and properties together with perceivable elements, e.g., when describing a fashion item. However, Vision Language Models (VLMs) are mostly
pre-trained with concrete -oriented web-image texts, thus underrepresenting the abstract-oriented ones. When encoding the
abstract-oriented description with pre-trained VLMs, there exists a
noticeable representation shift from the concrete-oriented description, hindering the performance in downstream tasks, e.g., textto-image retrieval in fashion. Our proposal Abstract-to-Concrete
Translator (ACT) can effectively compensate for such representation shift in a training-free manner, bringing the representation of
the abstract-oriented language towards the concrete-oriented one
in the latent space of existing VLMs, thereby improving the downstream task performance.

pressing complex feelings, spiritual qualities and stimulating inspirations through a nuanced interplay of abstract and
concrete concepts. In the lexicon literature, concrete and
abstract words are often distinguished based on whether
they can be perceived and acted upon [5, 34]. Such language is extensively applied in fields where creativity and
aesthetics are most valued. As one of the most representative domains, fashion language, spoken by experts, critics, and general consumers, utilizes terms like “different”,

1. Introduction
Human language extends beyond the straightforward depiction of visual elements and physical attributes presented in
images. Evolving over millennia, humans are skilled in ex* Equal Contribution

9253

