This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adapter Merging with Centroid Prototype Mapping for Scalable
Class-Incremental Learning
Takuma Fukuda
Chiba University
takuma.fukuda@chiba-u.jp

Hiroshi Kera
Chiba University
Zuse Institute Berlin

Kazuhiko Kawamoto
Chiba University
kawa@faculty.chiba-u.jp

kera@chiba-u.jp

Abstract
Ours

We propose Adapter Merging with Centroid Prototype Mapping (ACMap), an exemplar-free framework for classincremental learning (CIL) that addresses both catastrophic
forgetting and scalability. While existing methods involve a
trade-off between inference time and accuracy, ACMap consolidates task-specific adapters into a single adapter, thus
achieving constant inference time across tasks without sacrificing accuracy. The framework employs adapter merging
to build a shared subspace that aligns task representations
and mitigates forgetting, while centroid prototype mapping
maintains high accuracy by consistently adapting representations within the shared subspace. To further improve scalability, an early stopping strategy limits adapter merging
as tasks increase. Extensive experiments on five benchmark datasets demonstrate that ACMap matches state-ofthe-art accuracy while maintaining inference time comparable to the fastest existing methods. The code is available
at https://github.com/tf63/ACMap.

Adapter-based
EASE

APER

L2P

Prompt-based
DualPrompt
SimpleCIL

CODA-Prompt

Figure 1. Comparison of the final top-1 accuracy and inference
time for task 40 of ImageNet-R in class-incremental learning.
The comparison includes L2P [50], DualPrompt [49], CODAPrompt [41], SimpleCIL [61], APER [61], EASE [59], and our
method. All methods use the same backbone (ViT-B/16). Our
method performs well in terms of both inference time and accuracy by consolidating task-specific adapters into a single adapter.

ods [58] using pre-trained models have attracted attention.
These methods leverage the strong generalization of pretrained models to mitigate catastrophic forgetting. Typically, these methods incorporate parameter-efficient modules for task-specific training on each CIL task, such as
prompts [21] or adapters [33]. Although effective for domain adaptation, task-specific classifiers often hinder scalability at inference. Figure 1 compares the final top-1 accuracy and inference time on task 40 of ImageNet-R for
these methods. The results demonstrate a trade-off between
accuracy and inference time. This trade-off highlights the
challenge of achieving both high accuracy and scalability.

1. Introduction
In real-world applications, data often arrives sequentially,
which requires continual learning [44] to adapt to evolving
data distributions. Class-incremental learning (CIL) [36]
is a branch of continual learning designed for scenarios
where tasks with new classes appear sequentially. A primary challenge in CIL is catastrophic forgetting [10]—the
difficulty of learning new tasks while preserving knowledge from previous ones. Traditional CIL methods mitigate catastrophic forgetting by retaining representative data
(exemplars) from previous tasks [3, 29, 38] or by dynamically adjusting network structures [48, 54, 57]. However,
privacy concerns [39] often limit the use of exemplars. This
limitation highlights the need for exemplar-free methods in
practical applications.
In contrast to traditional approaches, recent CIL meth-

To address the dual challenges of catastrophic forgetting and scalability in CIL, we propose Adapter Merging with Centroid Prototype Mapping (ACMap), a framework that consolidates task-specific adapters into a single
adapter. ACMap enables scalability by maintaining con-

4884

