This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multirate Neural Image Compression with Adaptive Lattice Vector Quantization
Hao Xu
McMaster University

Xiaolin Wu*
Southwest Jiaotong University

Xi Zhang
Nanyang Technological University

xu338@mcmaster.ca

xlw@swjtu.edu.cn

xi.zhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

among latent elements [5, 19–21, 28, 35, 36, 39]. Meanwhile, some researchers have investigated in replacing SQ
by vector quantization (VQ) to reduce the quantization distortion [1, 18, 33, 48].

Recent research has explored integrating lattice vector
quantization (LVQ) into learned image compression models. Due to its more efficient Voronoi covering of vector
space than scalar quantization (SQ), LVQ achieves better rate-distortion (R-D) performance than SQ, while still
retaining the low complexity advantage of SQ. However,
existing LVQ-based methods have two shortcomings: 1)
lack of a multirate coding mode, hence incapable to operate at different rates; 2) the use of a fixed lattice basis,
hence nonadaptive to changing source distributions. To
overcome these shortcomings, we propose a novel adaptive
LVQ method, which is the first among LVQ-based methods
to achieve both rate and domain adaptations. By scaling
the lattice basis vector, our method can adjust the density
of lattice points to achieve various bit rate targets, achieving superior R-D performance to current SQ-based variable
rate models. Additionally, by using a learned invertible linear transformation between two different input domains, we
can reshape the predefined lattice cell to better represent
the target domain, further improving the R-D performance.
To our knowledge, this paper represents the first attempt to
propose a unified solution for rate adaptation and domain
adaptation through quantizer design.

The conventional VQ involves nearest neighbor search
and is a non-differentiable encoding process. Although
the soft-to-hard VQ [1] addresses the issue of nondifferentiability, it suffers from unstable training. The training highly depends on fine-tuning hyperparameters and a
carefully initialized codebook. As a cost-effect trade-off
between VQ and SQ, lattice vector quantization (LVQ) has
gained popularity [11, 27, 29, 47] because it enjoys lower
complexity and higher training stability compared to the
free-form VQ. Moreover, it maintains a comparable complexity while offering improved coding efficiency relative
to SQ. However, all current LVQ-based methods use a fixed,
predefined basis, which limits their flexibility in two ways.
First, these methods require training and storing separate
models for different rate-distortion (R-D) trade-offs, leading to an increased memory footprint. Second, using a pretrained LVQ-based codec to compress images from a different domain can lead to a mismatch between the generated
latent features and the predefined lattice quantizer, resulting
in suboptimal performance.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel adaptive LVQ method. The proposed LVQ can be seamlessly
integrated into any existing neural compression models to
replace SQ and boost the R-D performance. To our knowledge, the proposed method is the first to achieve both
rate adaptation and domain adaptation among neural image
compression models and unify the two by the quantization
module. This method achieves these goals without modifying the original network architecture nor adding any extra
network components. As the bit rate is proportional to the
lattice point density in LVQ, one can simply scale the lattice basis vectors to adjust this density. This allows a single network to achieve multiple target rates. For domain
adaptation, we fix the original network, which is optimized
for the source domain and a given LVQ, and only learn an
invertible linear transform of the original LVQ basis using
data from the target domain. The learned invertible trans-

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed rapid progress in neural image/video compression; the DNN-based image compression
methods have surpassed the hand-crafted counterparts in
just five years [14, 36]. The key to this success is to replace
the linear transform module used in traditional compression systems by a learned highly complex nonlinear transform realized by DNN. In the neural image compression
system, quantization and entropy coding of latent features
are still needed. Most existing methods use scalar quantization (SQ) for simplicity and pay more attention to designing
powerful entropy models that can eliminate dependencies
* Corresponding author.

7633

