This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shape My Moves: Text-Driven Shape-Aware Synthesis of Human Motions
Yi Zhou2
Yu Shen2
Chun-Hao Paul Huang2
Saayan Mitra2
Uttaran Bhattacharya2
Jia-Bin Huang1
2
1
Adobe Research
University of Maryland, College Park, USA

Ting-Hsuan Liao1, 2 *

Abstract

Shape description:
Male
Height: 175 cm
Leg Length: 70 cm
Arm Length: 51 cm
Chest cir.: 111 cm
Waist cir.: 102 cm
Hips cir.: 104 cm

We explore how body shapes influence human motion synthesis, an aspect often overlooked in existing text-to-motion
generation methods due to the ease of learning a homogenized, canonical body shape. However, this homogenization
can distort the natural correlations between different body
shapes and their motion dynamics. Our method addresses
this gap by generating body-shape-aware human motions
from natural language prompts. We utilize a finite scalar
quantization-based variational autoencoder (FSQ-VAE) to
quantize motion into discrete tokens and then leverage continuous body shape information to de-quantize these tokens
back into continuous, detailed motion. Additionally, we
harness the capabilities of a pretrained language model to
predict both continuous shape parameters and motion tokens, facilitating the synthesis of text-aligned motions and
decoding them into shape-aware motions. We evaluate our
method quantitatively and qualitatively, and also conduct
a comprehensive perceptual study to demonstrate its efficacy in generating shape-aware motions. Project URL:
https://shape-move.github.io/.

Shape description:
Female
Height: 163 cm
Leg Length: 66 cm
Arm Length: 49 cm
Chest cir.: 140 cm
Waist cir.: 128 cm
Hips cir.: 117 cm

Motion description:
“A person is running
forward and stop.”

Shape description:
Male
Height: 182 cm
Leg Length: 77 cm
Arm Length: 55 cm
Chest cir.: 100 cm
Waist cir.: 89 cm
Hips cir.: 96 cm

Input: Shape description and Motion description

Output: Inferred body shape and Shape-aware motion

Figure 1. Text-Driven Shape-Aware Motion Synthesis. The
same motion performed by different body shapes can vary
significantly, a realism aspect often overlooked in text-to-motion
tasks. We propose a novel framework to integrate both shape and
motion descriptions as input. Our framework synthesizes the
shape parameters to reflect the described physical attributes, and
injects them into motion synthesis to generate plausible
shape-aware motions. The figure demonstrates the same running
motion synthesized across different body shapes.

difficulties of learning continuous motion features, quantizing motions into discrete tokens has emerged as an area of
significant interest, which can then be predicted using transformers [105] or fine-tuning large language models [50].
These advancements have led to improved realism and creative control over motion synthesis.
However, existing methods typically standardize motions by mapping to a canonical human body model. This
results in homogenized motions across diverse body types
and leaves out the unique attributes of individual body
shapes. In reality, persons with different body shapes perform the same action with distinct physiological differences, as illustrated in Figure 1. Treating these distinct motions identically during motion synthesis leads to artifacts
in subsequent motion transfer efforts [6], often resulting in
unrealistic motions and limitations on the body shapes on
which the motions can be reliably retargeted.
Incorporating body shapes in motion synthesis is challenging due to the difficulties in both obtaining closed-form
parameterization of motions by body shapes and learning

1. Introduction
Human motion synthesis is an expansive field with wide applications in avatar creation, robotics, and the gaming industry [27, 63, 75, 83]. Advances in both motion synthesis
methods and language modeling techniques have, in recent
times, led to the development of text-to-motion synthesis,
with the aim of generating dynamic motions that are contextually aligned with textual descriptions.
Previous efforts in text-to-motion synthesis have explored techniques to integrate motion and language. Some
approaches map motion and language into a shared latent
space, and then sample motions from it based on text inputs [5]. Others utilize diffusion models conditioned on
learned features, such as CLIP, to enhance the quality and
relevance of the generated motions [85]. To overcome the
* Work done while an intern at Adobe Research

1917

