This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CarPlanner: Consistent Auto-regressive Trajectory Planning for Large-scale
Reinforcement Learning in Autonomous Driving
Dongkun Zhang1,2 Jiaming Liang2 Ke Guo2 Sha Lu1 Qi Wang2
Rong Xiong1,! Zhenwei Miao2,† Yue Wang1
1
Zhejiang University 2 Cainiao Network
1

2

{zhangdongkun, lusha, rxiong, ywang24}@zju.edu.cn

{liangjiaming.ljm, muguo.gk, ruifeng.wq, zhenwei.mzw}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Trajectory planning is vital for autonomous driving, ensuring safe and efficient navigation in complex environments.
While recent learning-based methods, particularly reinforcement learning (RL), have shown promise in specific
scenarios, RL planners struggle with training inefficiencies
and managing large-scale, real-world driving scenarios. In
this paper, we introduce CarPlanner, a Consistent autoregressive Planner that uses RL to generate multi-modal
trajectories. The auto-regressive structure enables efficient
large-scale RL training, while the incorporation of consistency ensures stable policy learning by maintaining coherent temporal consistency across time steps. Moreover, CarPlanner employs a generation-selection framework with an
expert-guided reward function and an invariant-view module, simplifying RL training and enhancing policy performance. Extensive analysis demonstrates that our proposed
RL framework effectively addresses the challenges of training efficiency and performance enhancement, positioning
CarPlanner as a promising solution for trajectory planning
in autonomous driving. To the best of our knowledge, we are
the first to demonstrate that the RL-based planner can surpass both IL- and rule-based state-of-the-arts (SOTAs) on
the challenging large-scale real-world dataset nuPlan. Our
proposed CarPlanner surpasses RL-, IL-, and rule-based
SOTA approaches within this demanding dataset.

1. Introduction
Trajectory planning [36] is essential in autonomous driving, utilizing outputs from perception and trajectory prediction modules to generate future poses for the ego vehicle.
A controller tracks this planned trajectory, producing control commands for closed-loop driving. Recently, learningbased trajectory planning has garnered attention due to its
† Project lead. ! Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Frameworks for multi-step trajectory generation.
(a) Initialization-refinement that generates an initial trajectory and
refines it iteratively. (b) Vanilla auto-regressive models that decode
subsequent poses sequentially. (c) Our consistent auto-regressive
model that integrates time-consistent mode information.

potential to automate algorithm iteration, eliminate tedious
rule design, and ensure safety and comfort in diverse realworld scenarios [36].
Most existing researches [11, 16, 29] employ imitation
learning (IL) to align planned trajectories with those of
human experts. However, this approach suffers from distribution shift [28] and causal confusion [8]. Reinforcement learning (RL) offers a potential solution, addressing
these challenges and providing richer supervision through
reward functions. Although RL shows effectiveness in domains such as games [34], robotics [19], and language models [25], it still struggles with training inefficiencies and performance issues in the large-scale driving task. To the ex-

17239

