This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Identity-Clothing Similarity Modeling for Unsupervised Clothing Change Person
Re-Identiﬁcation
Zhiqi Pang1
1

Junjie Wang2
Lingling Zhao1
Chunyu Wang1 *
Harbin Institute of Technology, China
2
Nanjing Medical University, China

zqpang98@gmail.com, junjiehit@163.com, zhaoll@hit.edu.cn, chunyu@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Clothing change person re-identiﬁcation (CC-ReID) aims
to match different images of the same person, even when
the clothing varies across images. To reduce manual labeling costs, existing unsupervised CC-ReID methods employ
clustering algorithms to generate pseudo-labels. However,
they often fail to assign the same pseudo-label to two images
with the same identity but different clothing—referred to as
a clothing change positive pair—thus hindering clothinginvariant feature learning. To address this issue, we propose
the identity-clothing similarity modeling (ICSM) framework. To effectively connect clothing change positive pairs,
ICSM ﬁrst performs clothing-aware learning to leverage
all discriminative information, including clothing, to obtain compact clusters. It then extracts cluster-level identity and clothing features and performs inter-cluster similarity estimation to identify clothing change positive clusters, reliable negative clusters, and hard negative clusters
for each compact cluster. During optimization, we design
an adaptive version of existing optimization methods to enhance similarities of clothing change positive pairs, while
also introducing text semantics as a supervisory signal to
further promote clothing invariance. Extensive experimental results across multiple datasets validate the effectiveness
of the proposed framework, demonstrating its superiority
over existing unsupervised methods and its competitiveness
with some supervised approaches.

1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (ReID) [32, 41, 43, 47, 48] aims
to match images of the same individual captured in multicamera scenarios. Compared to traditional ReID, clothing
change ReID (CC-ReID) [7, 23, 24, 26, 27] assumes that
individuals may change clothing and focuses on matching
images of the same person with different outﬁts. Although
* Corresponding author: Chunyu Wang

(a) Original images

(b) Clothing-occluded images

Figure 1. Visualization of features extracted from original images
and clothing-occluded images. Different colors represent features
with different identities, while the same color but different shapes
indicate features with the same identity but different clothing. Image pairs that are correctly (incorrectly) clustered by clustering
algorithms are connected with green (red) arrows.

existing CC-ReID methods have achieved promising performance, they largely depend on large-scale manual annotations. However, manual labeling for retrieval tasks is an
extremely labor-intensive process [1, 3]. Consequently, researchers have begun to focus on unsupervised CC-ReID
(UCC-ReID) [20, 29]. In UCC-ReID, two images of the
same person with different clothing—referred to as a clothing change positive pair—often exhibit signiﬁcant appearance differences. This makes it challenging for clustering
algorithms [4] to group their features into the same cluster,
thus preventing them from obtaining the same pseudo-label.
This phenomenon severely hinders the performance improvement of UCC-ReID methods. We refer to each clothing change positive pair that receives the same pseudo-label
as a connected positive pair, while those that receive different pseudo-labels are termed unconnected positive pairs.
To obtain robust pseudo-labels for clothing changes, existing UCC-ReID methods [20, 29] leverage body shapes
extracted by human parsing models [21], which are typically clothing-invariant and identity-related. For example,
CICL [29] clusters the fused features of original and body
shape images. However, the unavoidable presence of clothing information in the fused features limits the number of
connected positive pairs, while generating a large number

19251

