This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MegaSaM: Accurate, Fast, and Robust Structure and Motion from
Casual Dynamic Videos
Zhengqi Li1
Richard Tucker1
Forrester Cole1
Qianqian Wang1,2
Linyi Jin1,3
2
2
1,2
Vickie Ye
Angjoo Kanazawa
Aleksander Holynski
Noah Snavely1
1

Google DeepMind

2

UC Berkeley

3

University of Michigan

Abstract
We present a system that allows for accurate, fast, and
robust estimation of camera parameters and depth maps
from casual monocular videos of dynamic scenes. Most conventional structure from motion and monocular SLAM techniques assume input videos that feature predominantly static
scenes with large amounts of parallax. Such methods tend
to produce erroneous estimates in the absence of these conditions. Recent neural network-based approaches attempt
to overcome these challenges; however, such methods are
either computationally expensive or brittle when run on dynamic videos with uncontrolled camera motion or unknown
field of view. We demonstrate the surprising effectiveness of
a deep visual SLAM framework: with careful modifications
to its training and inference schemes, this system can scale
to real-world videos of complex dynamic scenes with unconstrained camera paths, including videos with little camera
parallax. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real
videos demonstrate that our system is significantly more accurate and robust at camera pose and depth estimation when
compared with prior and concurrent work, with faster or
comparable running times. See interactive results on our
project page: mega-sam.github.io.

Figure 1. MegaSaM enables accurate, fast and robust estimation
of cameras and scene structure from a casually captured monocular
video of a dynamic scene. Top: input video frames (every tenth
frame shown). Bottom: our estimated camera and 3D point clouds
unprojected by predicted video depths without any postprocessing.

efforts to address these challenges have focused on two primary strategies: optimizing camera and scene geometry by
fine-tuning mono-depth networks or reconstructing radiance
fields [34, 35, 76, 77]; or combining intermediate estimates
derived from monocular video, such as depth, flows, longterm trajectory and motion segmentation, into a global optimization framework [6, 26, 34, 75, 78]. However, these
approaches are computational expensive or brittle when applied to unconstrained videos that feature long time duration,
unconstrained camera paths, or complex scene dynamics.

1. Introduction
Extracting camera parameters and scene geometry from a
set of images is a fundamental problem in computer vision,
commonly referred to as structure from motion (SfM) or
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM). While
decades of research have yielded mature algorithms for stationary scenes with large camera baselines, these methods
often falter when applied to casual monocular videos captured in uncontrolled setting [26, 77]. Such videos, frequently captured by handheld cameras, typically exhibit
limited camera motion parallax (e.g., nearly stationary or
rotational cameras) and a broad range of focal lengths, and
often include moving objects and scene dynamics. Recent

In this work, we present MegaSaM, a full pipeline for accurate, fast and robust camera tracking and depth estimation
from in-the-wild monocular videos of dynamic scenes. Our
approach combines the strengths of several prior works, leading to results with previously unachievable quality, as shown
in Fig. 1. In particular, we reexamine and extend prior deep
visual SLAM framework for camera tracking. A defining feature of deep visual SLAM systems like DROID-SLAM [58]
is that they adopt a differentiable bundle adjustment (BA)
layer that iteratively updates scene geometry and camera

10486

