This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProbPose: A Probabilistic Approach to 2D Human Pose Estimation
Miroslav Purkrabek and Jiri Matas
Visual Recognition Group
Department of Cybernetics
Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Czech Technical University in Prague
purkrmir@fel.cvut.cz

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art Human Pose Estimation methods ignore out-of-image keypoints in both training and evaluation and use uncalibrated heatmaps as keypoint location
representations. We propose ProbPose, which predicts for
each keypoint: a calibrated probability of keypoint presence at each location in the activation window, the probability of being outside of it, and its predicted visibility. To
address the lack of evaluation protocols for out-of-image
keypoints, we introduce the CropCOCO dataset and the Extended OKS (Ex-OKS) metric, which extends OKS to out-ofimage points. Tested on COCO, CropCOCO, and OCHuman, ProbPose shows significant gains in out-of-image keypoint localization while also improving in-image localization through data augmentation. Additionally, the model
improves robustness along the edges of the bounding box
and offers better flexibility in keypoint evaluation. The code
and weights are available on the project website1 .

Figure 1. ProbPose (left) vs. ViTPose [32] (right) output on a
cropped image with the dark part removed. The bounding box, on
which the pose estimators operate, is detected by YOLOX-x [5].
ProbPose estimates keypoints outside of the image better, e.g. the
right leg which is wrongly aligned with the left leg by ViTPose,
for which out-of-image keypoints represent a domain shift.

1. Introduction

Top-down methods localize keypoints within a specific
region called the activation window. This activation window is the part of the image mapped to the predicted
heatmap. The activation window often matches the model
input and it may exceed image boundaries due to preprocessing steps, such as maintaining aspect ratios or enlarging
bounding boxes.
Under challenging conditions, such as heavy occlusion
or cropped images, keypoints may fall outside the activation
window. Current methods do not address this issue and simply ignore out-of-window keypoints during training. Even
more concerning, evaluation metrics such as OKS (Object
Keypoint Similarity) and PCK (Percentage of Correct Keypoints) assess only in-image keypoints. This lack of accountability often leads models to predict keypoints inaccurately on other joints when the actual keypoint is not visible
in the image. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, the left leg
is mistakenly assigned to the same joints as the right leg.
Furthermore, current top-down models do not provide any

Human pose estimation (HPE) has seen significant
progress, achieving robust performance on standard
datasets. The most successful models like ViTPose [32]
typically use a top-down, heatmap-based approach, where
heatmaps serve as dense representations of keypoint locations across an image.
In this paper, we address two limitations of top-down
HPE methods: (1) all previous methods overlook out-ofimage keypoints during training and, more importantly, ignore them in evaluation, and (2) heatmaps restrict their use
to simple point estimates. While seemingly separate, these
issues are interrelated and can be addressed through an appropriate choice of representation and loss function.
1 MiraPurkrabek.github.io/ProbPose/

27124

