This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

4Real-Video: Learning Generalizable Photo-Realistic 4D Video Diffusion
Aliaksandr Siarohin1
Chaoyang Wang1, *† Peiye Zhuang1, * Tuan Duc Ngo1,2, * Willi Menapace1
Michael Vasilkovsky1
Ivan Skorokhodov1
Sergey Tulyakov1
Peter Wonka1,3
Hsin-Ying Lee1
1
2
3
Snap Inc Umass Amherst KAUST
https://snap-research.github.io/4Real-Video/
Time

4D Video
Diffusion
Model Output

View

Input freeze-time video

Input fixed-view video

Real-World Capture

“move a truck towards right”

“a yellow lego brick turns into a cat”

Figure 1. 4Real-Video is a 4D generation framework that (top-left) takes a fixed-view video and a freeze-time video as input and generates
a grid of consistent video frames. One axis of the grid varies in time, and the other axis varies the viewpoint. The input videos can be real
videos or videos generated by a video model. Note that our method can generate grids larger than 8 × 8 videos. Here, we present subsets
of frames as an example. (top-right) 4D videos generated from generated videos. (bottom) We can also capture a real-world scene, and
generate a 4D video given different prompts.

Abstract
We propose 4Real-Video, a novel framework for generating
4D videos, organized as a grid of video frames with both
time and viewpoint axes. In this grid, each row contains
frames sharing the same timestep, while each column contains frames from the same viewpoint. We propose a novel
two-stream architecture. One stream performs viewpoint
updates on columns, and the other stream performs tempo-

ral updates on rows. After each diffusion transformer layer,
a synchronization layer exchanges information between the
two token streams. We propose two implementations of the
synchronization layer, using either hard or soft synchronization. This feedforward architecture improves upon previous
work in three ways: higher inference speed, enhanced visual quality (measured by FVD, CLIP, and VideoScore), and
improved temporal and viewpoint consistency (measured by
VideoScore and Dust3R-Confidence).

* main contributor, † project lead.

17723

