This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Doppelgangers++: Improved Visual Disambiguation with Geometric 3D Features
Yuanbo Xiangli1

Image Pairs (Streets)

SfM (Landmarks)

COLMAP

Ruojin Cai1 Hanyu Chen1 Jeffrey Byrne2
1
Cornell University, 2 Visym Labs

Alexander Nevsky Cathedral

Palacio de Comunicaciones

Reichstag (building)

Noah Snavely1
York Minster

Royal Liver Building

Ours + MASt3R-SfM

GT:1 / DG-OG: 0.235 / Ours: 0.982

GT:1 / DG-OG: 0.190 / Ours: 0.971 GT:1 / DG-OG: 0.378 / Ours: 0.952 GT:0 / DG-OG: 0.993 / Ours: 0.025 GT:0 / DG-OG: 0.994 / Ours: 0.031

SfM (Streets)

VisymSite0042

COLMAP (Incorrect Cameras)

DG-OG (Over-split)

Ours + MASt3R-SfM

Figure 1. Visual aliasing, or doppelgangers, poses severe challenges to 3D reconstruction. We propose Doppelganger++, an enhanced pairwise image
classifier that excels in visual disambiguation across diverse and challenging scenes. (Top) We seamlessly integrate Doppelganger++ into SfM, successfully
disambiguating each scene. (Middle) Compared to prior work (which we refer to as DG-OG [3]), Doppelgangers++ is more robust for everyday scenes,
showing improved accuracy and robustness. We show pairs that DG-OG classifies incorrectly and ours gets correct. (Bottom) Our new VisymScenes dataset,
featuring complex daily scenes, is particularly challenging for COLMAP and DG-OG, but our method can achieve correct and complete reconstructions.

Abstract
Accurate 3D reconstruction is frequently hindered by visual aliasing, where visually similar but distinct surfaces
(aka, doppelgangers), are incorrectly matched. These spurious matches distort the structure-from-motion (SfM) process,
leading to misplaced model elements and reduced accuracy.
Prior efforts addressed this with CNN classifiers trained
on curated datasets, but these approaches struggle to generalize across diverse real-world scenes and can require
extensive parameter tuning. In this work, we present Doppelgangers++, a method to enhance doppelganger detection
and improve 3D reconstruction accuracy. Our contribu-

tions include a diversified training dataset that incorporates
geo-tagged images from everyday scenes to expand robustness beyond landmark-based datasets. We further propose a
Transformer-based classifier that leverages 3D-aware features from the MASt3R model, achieving superior precision
and recall across both in-domain and out-of-domain tests.
Doppelgangers++ integrates seamlessly into standard SfM
and MASt3R-SfM pipelines, offering efficiency and adaptability across varied scenes. To evaluate SfM accuracy, we
introduce an automated, geotag-based method for validating reconstructed models, eliminating the need for manual
inspection. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate
that Doppelgangers++ significantly enhances pairwise vi-

27166

