This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Token Cropr: Faster ViTs for Quite a Few Tasks
Benjamin Bergner1,3,* , Christoph Lippert1,2 , Aravindh Mahendran4
1
Hasso Plattner Institute for Digital Engineering, University of Potsdam
2
Hasso Plattner Institute for Digital Health at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
3
Amazon 4 Google DeepMind
Abstract

Head

The adoption of Vision Transformers (ViTs) in resourceconstrained applications necessitates improvements in inference throughput. To this end several token pruning and
merging approaches have been proposed that improve efficiency by successively reducing the number of tokens. However, it remains an open problem to design a token reduction
method that is fast, maintains high performance, and is applicable to various vision tasks. In this work, we present a
token pruner that uses auxiliary prediction heads that learn
to select tokens end-to-end based on task relevance. These
auxiliary heads can be removed after training, leading to
throughput close to that of a random pruner. We evaluate our method on image classification, semantic segmentation, object detection, and instance segmentation, and show
speedups of 1.5 – 4x with small drops in performance. As
a best case, on the ADE20k semantic segmentation benchmark, we observe a 2x speedup relative to the no-pruning
baseline, with a negligible performance penalty of 0.1 median mIoU across 5 seeds.

ViT Block

Cropr

ViT Block
Keep
Cropr

Pruned

Keep

Pruned

..

Salient & Pruned

ViT Block

...
Input tokens
Figure 1. Cross-attention pruning (Cropr) modules successively
prune less relevant tokens, retaining only the most discriminative
ones for deeper layers. Our method accelerates ViTs while maintaining high performance and is applicable to many vision tasks,
from classification to segmentation and detection. The example
castle images illustrate the pruning process. The heatmap visualizes which tokens were pruned at each block 1 to L in the network.

1. Introduction
The Vision Transformer [11] is a widely used architecture for computer vision tasks such as image classification,
segmentation, and object detection [20]. ViTs represent
images as a sequence of per-patch tokens, that they process using multi-head self-attention (MHSA) transformer
blocks. The self-attention mechanism computes a pairwise
dot product between all tokens, which results in a quadratic
time
! and
" space complexity with respect to sequence length,
O n2 [48]. For real-world applications that require low latency or a small compute budget, sequence length thus becomes a burden, especially in the light of increasing model
sizes [8], image resolutions [2], and finer tokenization [3].
Images, such as the example used in Fig. 1, are spatially
redundant containing non-salient background and repetitive
patterns. This suggests that several patches could be pro-

cessed using fewer transformer blocks, providing an opportunity to prune uninformative tokens, reduce sequence
length in higher layers, and thus improve computational efficiency. However, this raises a central question: How can
we accurately and efficiently assess the importance of individual tokens for a given task?
Recent token pruning methods rely on heuristics, such as
self-attention scores, to identify informative tokens [14, 27].
Alternative approaches reduce token count by merging similar tokens [4, 12, 32]. However, these methods do not explicitly model the importance of a token for a given task,
which can lead to a significant drop in task performance. In

* Work done prior to joining Amazon.

9740

