This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Non-uniform Timestep Sampling for
Accelerating Diffusion Model Training
Myunsoo Kim1∗

Donghyeon Ki1∗ Seong-Woong Shim1
1
Korea University 2 Gauss Labs Inc.

Byung-Jun Lee1,2

{m970326, peop1e1n, ssw030830, byungjunlee}@korea.ac.kr

7

Abstract

6
5

FID

As a highly expressive generative model, diffusion models
have demonstrated exceptional success across various domains, including image generation, natural language processing, and combinatorial optimization. However, as data
distributions grow more complex, training these models to
convergence becomes increasingly computationally intensive. While diffusion models are typically trained using
uniform timestep sampling, our research shows that the
variance in stochastic gradients varies significantly across
timesteps, with high-variance timesteps becoming bottlenecks that hinder faster convergence. To address this issue, we introduce a non-uniform timestep sampling method
that prioritizes these more critical timesteps. Our method
tracks the impact of gradient updates on the objective for
each timestep, adaptively selecting those most likely to minimize the objective effectively. Experimental results demonstrate that this approach not only accelerates the training
process, but also leads to improved performance at convergence. Furthermore, our method shows robust performance
across various datasets, scheduling strategies, and diffusion
architectures, outperforming previously proposed timestep
sampling and weighting heuristics that lack this degree of
robustness.

Baseline (DDPM)
P2
Min-SNR
Log-Normal
SpeeD
Ours

4

3
0.0

0.5

1.0

Wall Clock Time (D)

1.2

1.4

Figure 1. Comparison of FID scores of our approach and other
acceleration methods against relative wall clock time, where 1D
represents the time it takes for the baseline to converge. Although
our learning method is initially slower than the heuristics due to its
learning-based nature, it converges to a point with better optimality
within 1D, and achieves a significantly lower FID score by 1.2D.

hours for video training. These high computational costs
not only pose significant barriers to advancing generative
AI applications but also have negative environmental consequences.
While numerous studies have explored ways to accelerate diffusion model training, our research specifically targets modifications to the uniform training process of diffusion models across diffusion timesteps. It is well recognized
that non-uniform training schemes over timesteps can enhance training speed. For example, several heuristics have
been proposed [7, 11, 17, 31].
However, the underlying reasons for the success of these
methods remain largely unexplored, and they are often regarded as heuristics that may have potential limitations in
robustness across diverse experimental conditions.
Through a series of experiments, we observed significant
variation in the stochastic gradient variance across different
diffusion training timesteps.
We hypothesize that this variability plays a key role in
the imbalanced training observed with uniform sampling

1. Introduction
In recent years, diffusion models have demonstrated their
high expressive power and achieved significant success
across a wide range of domains, including image [9, 23, 24],
video [18, 35], text [4, 12, 22], audio generation [26],
combinatorial optimization [25, 30], reinforcement learning [1, 15, 32], and more. However, with the increasing
complexity of target data distributions, achieving convergence in diffusion model training has become increasingly
computationally demanding. For example, training images
with Stable-Diffusion-2.0 [24] requires 24,000 A100 GPU
hours, while Open-Sora [35] requires 48,000 H800 GPU
* These authors contributed equally.

2513

