This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Believing is Seeing: Unobserved Object Detection using Generative Models
Subhransu S. Bhattacharjee, Dylan Campbell, Rahul Shome
School of Computing, The Australian National University
{subhransu.bhattacharjee, dylan.campbell, rahul.shome}@anu.edu.au

Abstract

I

Can objects that are not visible in an image—but are in the
vicinity of the camera—be detected? This study introduces
the novel tasks of 2D, 2.5D and 3D unobserved object detection for predicting the location of nearby objects that are
occluded or lie outside the image frame. We adapt several
state-of-the-art pre-trained generative models to address
this task, including 2D and 3D diffusion models and vision–
language models, and show that they can be used to infer the
presence of objects that are not directly observed. To benchmark this task, we propose a suite of metrics that capture
different aspects of performance. Our empirical evaluation
on indoor scenes from the RealEstate10k and NYU Depth
V2 datasets demonstrate results that motivate the use of
generative models for the unobserved object detection task.

1. Introduction
Object detection [90] is a fundamental building block of
autonomous systems that are capable of making sense of
their surroundings. However, it is limited to visible surfaces
within the camera’s field-of-view. While amodal object detection and segmentation [35, 89] relaxes this requirement
to permit partially visible objects, we propose to go further
and detect those objects that are near the camera but were
not observed at all.
In this paper, we propose the novel task of unobserved
object detection in 2D, 2.5D and 3D for inferring the presence of objects not seen in an image within a domain that
extends beyond the camera frustum and behind the visible
surfaces. We are particularly motivated by perceptual and
planning tasks such as visual search [84, 88], where a robot
might be expected to use its understanding of a scene beyond what it can directly observe. For example, consider
the setup in Fig. 1. A robot tasked with locating someone who is seated might find it useful to look to the right,
where it is likely that additional chairs would be found, or
to move to view a potentially occluded chair. Predicted spatial likelihoods of objects in a scene that was only partially

3D
I DI,chair

c

pchair (x | I)
I
A

2D
DI,chair

V

B

Figure 1. Unobserved object detection aims to infer the location
of objects that were not directly observed in an image. Consider
this toy example of a dining table and chairs. Here we visualize a
2D
top-down view (slice) of the predicted discrete distributions DIo
3D
and DIo
for the object label o of “chair,” conditioned on the image
I, where darker is more probable. The presence of an occluded
chair (A) is predicted as relatively likely, as is the presence of an
out-of-frame chair (B). Crucially, the domain V of the predicted 3D
distribution exceeds the camera frustum (drawn in black), and the
domain I of the 2D distribution extends beyond the image plane I.

observed can inform probabilistic models [28, 31, 45] for
planning under uncertainty. In this work we recover such
spatio-semantic distributions over observed and unobserved
parts of the scene. We expect progress on this task to benefit
downstream applications in which decisions are made in the
presence of uncertainty arising from partial observations,
such as active vision, navigation, visual search, adaptive
planning and scene exploration [1, 5, 18, 24, 27, 63, 84].
While explicitly learning spatio-semantic distributions
of scenes and objects is challenging [78], they can be variationally inferred using generative models trained on 2D
image datasets [2, 30]. Novel view synthesis and semantic
scene completion [7, 11, 17, 33, 55, 60, 73, 77] can offer
useful spatio-semantic priors that can be used to render full
3D volumes given partial observations. However, occlusions and incomplete or sparse data still pose significant
challenges to 3D scene generation methods. Image diffusion

19366

