This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video-ColBERT: Contextualized Late Interaction for Text-to-Video Retrieval
Arun Reddy1,2 * Alexander Martin2 * Eugene Yang2,3 Andrew Yates2,3 Kate Sanders2
Kenton Murray2,3 Reno Kriz2,3 Celso M. de Melo4 Benjamin Van Durme2,3 Rama Chellappa2
1
3

Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory

2

Human Language Technology Center of Excellence

4

Johns Hopkins University

DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory

Abstract

Video Similarity
Mean

In this work, we tackle the problem of text-to-video retrieval (T2VR). Inspired by the success of late interaction
techniques in text-document, text-image, and text-video retrieval, our approach, Video-ColBERT, introduces a simple
and efficient mechanism for fine-grained similarity assessment between queries and videos. Video-ColBERT is built
upon three main components: a fine-grained spatial and
temporal token-wise interaction, query and visual expansions, and a dual sigmoid loss during training. We find that
this interaction and training paradigm leads to strong individual, yet compatible, representations for encoding video
content. These representations lead to increases in performance on common text-to-video retrieval benchmarks compared to other bi-encoder methods.

MaxSim

MaxSim

MaxSim

Video
Tokens
Query
Tokens

Frame
Tokens

MaxSim

MaxSim

MaxSim

Mean

Frame Similarity

Figure 1. V IDEO -C OL BERT architecture, combining token-wise
interaction on both static frame features (green) and temporally
contextualized video features (red).

1. Introduction
With an ever-increasing amount of video data being generated and stored daily, the need for effective and efficient retrieval methods has become more pressing than ever. Textto-video retrieval (T2VR) aims to address this by ranking
large collections of videos based on their relevance to natural language queries. However, the task remains challenging due to the inherent modality gap between text and video
representations. While recent advances in cross-modal retrieval have started to bridge this gap [7, 32, 44, 53, 54],
significant progress is still needed to achieve reliable and
scalable performance in real-world settings.
A common approach to efficient retrieval is the use of
a bi-encoder method [27, 42, 43], where the query and
document are encoded separately. Bi-encoders offer efficiency advantages over cross encoders [21, 30, 39, 46] because they do not require expensive interactions at retrieval
time and can instead operate on a pre-computed index of
the target data. Some bi-encoder T2VR techniques [13, 35]
use single vectors to represent the text query and the video
* Equal contribution.

(e.g. through mean pooling), then use a single dot product
for similarity calculation at retrieval time. While this simple interaction may be sufficient for settings like languageimage pre-training [42, 62, 63], it can be challenging to encode video content and query concepts within single feature
vectors [26, 47]. Other works [36, 50] have applied more
expressive interactions, like tokenwise interaction, to the
video retrieval problem using CLIP [42] adapted for videos.
We argue that these works are limited in their exploration of
tokenwise interaction. Specifically, these approaches employ overly complicated interaction mechanisms or have
limited final representation(s) used in their interactions.
ColBERT [28] is a text-to-text retrieval model that uses
a multi-vector bi-encoder retrieval method. This approach
achieves an effective middle ground between expensive
cross-encoders and single-vector bi-encoders by enabling
late interaction between individual query and document tokens, which maintains the efficiency of simple dot productbased interactions but captures more of the relevant con-

19691

