This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Physical Plausibility-aware Trajectory Prediction via Locomotion Embodiment
Hiromu Taketsugu1
Takeru Oba1
Takahiro Maeda1
Shohei Nobuhara2
Norimichi Ukita1
1
2
Toyota Technological Institute, Japan
Kyoto Institute of Technology, Japan
{sd23426, sd21502, sd21601}@toyota-ti.ac.jp, nob@kit.ac.jp, ukita@toyota-ti.ac.jp

Abstract

Plausibility score

Humans can predict future human trajectories even from
momentary observations by using human pose-related cues.
However, previous Human Trajectory Prediction (HTP) methods leverage the pose cues implicitly, resulting in implausible predictions. To address this, we propose Locomotion
Embodiment, a framework that explicitly evaluates the physical plausibility of the predicted trajectory by locomotion
generation under the laws of physics. While the plausibility
of locomotion is learned with an indifferentiable physics
simulator, it is replaced by our differentiable Locomotion
Value function to train an HTP network in a data-driven
manner. In particular, our proposed Embodied Locomotion
loss is beneficial for efficiently training a stochastic HTP
network using multiple heads. Furthermore, the Locomotion
Value filter is proposed to filter out implausible trajectories
at inference. Experiments demonstrate that our method enhances even the state-of-the-art HTP methods across diverse
datasets and problem settings. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/ImIntheMiddle/EmLoco.

1 (High)

: Score=0.9

: Score=0.7

Physics-based
plausibility
score learning

: Score=0.3

GT future

0 (Low)

Observation

Plausibility
score
evaluation
at inference

: Score=0.5

: Score=0.7

: Score=0.8

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Overview of our method. Unlike existing methods, which
often predict physically implausible trajectories, our framework
uses locomotion generation in a physics simulator to incorporate
the laws of physics to HTP by training the plausibility score as
the consistency between the observed 3D pose and future possible
trajectories, which are indicated by j0 and τf1,2,3 , respectively,
in the figure. Additionally, at inference, our method can evaluate
predicted trajectories, τ̂f1,2,3 , to filter out implausible ones.

Human Trajectory Prediction (HTP), which predicts future human trajectories, is actively studied [2, 18, 29,
37, 49, 63, 64, 70] due to its importance for applications such as autonomous driving [3, 8, 41, 60, 61, 70],
robotics [34, 37, 50, 73], and security systems [10, 66, 72].
These HTP methods assume the availability of sufficiently
long past observations and rely solely on a past trajectory.
Due to this limitation, these methods cannot handle safetycritical situations in a momentary observation setting, where
only a few frames of the past trajectory are available, such
as when people suddenly emerge from behind obstacles.
Regarding this issue, prior work [26, 35, 42, 47, 50] validates that human pose-related cues, such as body orientations
and limb motions are beneficial for inferring future trajectories, especially in a momentary observation setting. These
methods learn the consistency between human past poses
and future trajectories in a data-driven manner alone.

The data-driven approach can prove its ability with a
large-scale dataset that covers most possible combinations
of poses and trajectories. However, such datasets are unavailable in the literature because human locomotion is diverse. In
particular, it is difficult to collect a large number of accurate
pose annotations, which are collected by time-consuming
delicate motion capture systems [30]. Instead, we propose to
fully leverage the beneficial cues of human poses, by assessing the physical consistency between observed poses and
future trajectories for physical plausibility-aware HTP.
For this physical plausibility-aware HTP, we present Locomotion Embodiment, a framework that incorporates the laws
of physics into an HTP network. This is achieved by physically simulating the locomotion conditioned by observed
poses and future trajectories in a physics simulator [31]; refer to Fig. 1 to see the effect of our framework. As a typical

12324

