This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MLVU: Benchmarking Multi-task Long Video Understanding
Junjie Zhou* 1,2 , Yan Shu⇤2 , Bo Zhao⇤3,2 , Boya Wu2 , Zhengyang Liang2 , Shitao Xiao2 ,
Minghao Qin2 , Xi Yang2 , Yongping Xiong1 , Bo Zhang4 , Tiejun Huang2,5 , Zheng Liu† 2
1
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
3
School of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Zhejiang University 5 Peking University
Abstract
The evaluation of Long Video Understanding (LVU) performance poses an important but challenging research problem.
Despite previous efforts, the existing video understanding
benchmarks are severely constrained by several issues, especially the insufficient lengths of videos, a lack of diversity
in video types and evaluation tasks, and the inappropriateness for evaluating LVU performances. To address the above
problems, we propose a new benchmark called MLVU (Multitask Long Video Understanding Benchmark) for the comprehensive and in-depth evaluation of LVU. MLVU presents
the following critical values: 1) The substantial and flexible
extension of video lengths, which enables the benchmark to
evaluate LVU performance across a wide range of durations.
2) The inclusion of various video genres, such as movies,
surveillance, egocentric videos, and cartoons, reflects the
models’ LVU performances in different scenarios. 3) The
development of diversified evaluation tasks, which enables a
comprehensive examination of MLLMs’ key abilities in longvideo understanding. The empirical study with 23 latest
MLLMs reveals significant room for improvement in today’s
technique, as all existing methods struggle with most of the
evaluation tasks and exhibit severe performance degradation when handling longer videos. Additionally, it suggests
that factors such as context length, image-understanding
ability, and the choice of LLM backbone can play critical
roles in future advancements. We anticipate that MLVU will
advance the research of LVU by providing a comprehensive
and in-depth analysis of MLLMs. The code and dataset can
be accessed from https://github.com/JUNJIE99/MLVU.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are growing into a general
solution for numerous AI tasks [6, 48]. In recent years,
it becomes increasingly emphasized to extend LLMs with
* Co-first authors
† Corresponding author

multi-modal capabilities and thus bring the Multimodal LLM
(MLLM). Remarkably, it has been made possible for today’s
MLLMs to perceive information in texts, images, videos,
etc., and solve complicated problems in physical environments [1, 47]. Along with the development of MLLMs, new
benchmarks are continuously created to facilitate comprehensive and in-depth analysis of MLLMs [12, 27, 33, 34, 60].
However, it remains a great challenge to evaluate the
MLLMs’ long-video understanding (LVU) performances
given the following limitations. Firstly, the majority of existing video understanding benchmarks are made up of short
videos [20, 23, 27, 38, 55], whose lengths can be merely a
few seconds. As a result, they are insufficient to reflect the
MLLMs’ long-video understanding capabilities. Secondly,
there is a notable lack of diversity in both video genres and
evaluation tasks. Existing benchmarks often concentrate on
a single video type, such as egocentric videos [15, 36], or
focus on one specific task, like captioning [55]. These limitations hinder comprehensive evaluation of LVU capabilities.
Last but not least, many previous evaluation tasks are not
properly designed for LVU, as they can be solved without
using the complex information from long videos. For example, many questions are simply about one single frame
in the long videos [44, 63]. Besides, numerous others are
about popular movies and celebrities [13, 28], which can be
answered directly by MLLMs based on the textual prompts.
Conceptually, MLLMs are expected to handle any type of
long video and accomplish any related tasks. Therefore, the
evaluation of LVU should emphasize two important properties: length and diversity. Furthermore, it is crucial that
the evaluation tasks are specifically designed to leverage the
complex information inherent in long videos, addressing
the shortcomings of previous benchmarks. Based on these
principles, we propose a novel benchmark called MLVU
(Mult-task Long Video Understanding Benchmark), which
presents the following critical advantages.
• It makes a substantial extension for the video length.
MLVU is created based on long videos of diversified

13691

