This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Universal Domain Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation
Seun-An Choe1

Keon-Hee Park1

Jinwoo Choi1

Gyeong-Moon Park2†
1

1

Kyung Hee University, Yongin, Republic of Korea
2
Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea

{dragoon0905, pgh2874, jinwoochoi}@khu.ac.kr

2

gm-park@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation for semantic segmentation (UDA-SS) aims to transfer knowledge from labeled
source data to unlabeled target data. However, traditional
UDA-SS methods assume that category settings between
source and target domains are known, which is unrealistic
in real-world scenarios. This leads to performance degradation if private private classes exist. To address this limitation, we propose Universal Domain Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation (UniDA-SS), achieving robust adaptation even without prior knowledge of category settings.
We define the problem in the UniDA-SS scenario as low
confidence scores of common classes in the target domain,
which leads to confusion with private classes. To solve
this problem, we propose UniMAP: UniDA-SS with Image
Matching and Prototype-based Distinction, a novel framework composed of two key components. First, DomainSpecific Prototype-based Distinction (DSPD) divides each
class into two domain-specific prototypes, enabling finer
separation of domain-specific features and enhancing the
identification of common classes across domains. Second,
Target-based Image Matching (TIM) selects a source image containing the most common-class pixels based on the
target pseudo-label and pairs it in a batch to promote effective learning of common classes. We also introduce a
new UniDA-SS benchmark and demonstrate through various experiments that UniMAP significantly outperforms
baselines. The code is available at https://github.
com/KU-VGI/UniMAP.

Figure 1. Visualization results of the UDA-SS models across different scenarios. We select MIC and BUS, which achieve the best
performance in CDA-SS and ODA-SS, respectively, and visualize their results in PDA-SS and OPDA-SS. The images illustrate
the performance degradation caused by the introduction of sourceprivate classes.

and is essential in fields like autonomous driving, medical
imaging, and human-machine interaction. However, training segmentation models requires pixel-level annotations,
which are costly and time-consuming. To address this, researchers have explored Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
for Semantic Segmentation (UDA-SS) methods, which aim
to learn domain-invariant representations from labeled synthetic data (source) to unlabeled real-world data (target).
While UDA-SS has shown effectiveness in addressing
domain shift, existing UDA-SS methods rely on the assumption that source and target categories are known in advance. This assumption is often impractical in real-world
scenarios, as target labels are typically unavailable. As a
result, the target domain frequently includes unseen classes
that are absent in the source domain (target-private classes),
or conversely, the source domain may contain classes not
found in the target domain (source-private classes). This
limitation can lead to negative transfer, where models incor-

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental computer vision
task that predicts the class of each pixel in an image
† Corresponding author.

4607

