This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling Properties of Diffusion Models For Perceptual Tasks
Rahul Ravishankar* , Zeeshan Patel* , Jathushan Rajasegaran, Jitendra Malik
UC Berkeley
rravishankar@berkeley.edu, zeeshanp@berkeley.edu

Figure 1. A Unified Framework: We fine-tune a pre-trained Diffusion Model (DM) for visual perception tasks. We take a RGB image,
and a conditional image (i.e. next video frame, occlusion mask, etc.), along with the noised image of the ground truth prediction. Our
model generates predictions for visual tasks such as depth estimation, optical flow prediction, and amodal segmentation, based on the
conditional task embedding. We train a generalist model that can perform all three tasks with exceptional performance.

Abstract
In this paper, we argue that iterative computation with diffusion models offers a powerful paradigm for not only generation but also visual perception tasks. We unify tasks
such as depth estimation, optical flow, and amodal segmentation under the framework of image-to-image translation,
and show how diffusion models benefit from scaling training
and test-time compute for these perceptual tasks. Through
a careful analysis of these scaling properties, we formulate compute-optimal training and inference recipes to scale
diffusion models for visual perception tasks. Our models
achieve competitive performance to state-of-the-art methods using significantly less data and compute. We release
code and models at scaling-diffusion-perception.github.io.

vision tasks individually. Building on these prior works, we
systematically explore the benefits of scaling across the axes
of pre-training, fine-tuning, and test-time compute for image diffusion models. We establish scaling power laws for
depth estimation and display their transferability to other
perceptual tasks. Using these scaling laws, we formulate
compute-optimal recipes for diffusion training and inference for multiple downstream perceptual tasks. Our work
shows that a limited compute budget can be efficiently allocated for strong downstream performance.

1. Introduction

Recent works in other fields have also focused on scaling test-time compute to enhance the capabilities of modern
LLMs [7, 30]. We show that increasing test-time compute
compensates for the 3-4 orders of magnitude reduced
pre-training budgets we use. This redistribution allows us
to achieve competitive results while using significantly less
data and overall training compute, highlighting the tradeoff
between training and test-time compute.

Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful tool for generating images and videos with excellent scaling behaviors.
In this paper, we present a unified framework to perform a
variety of perceptual tasks — depth estimation, optical flow
estimation, and amodal segmentation — with a single diffusion model, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Previous works such as Marigold [20], FlowDiffuser [28], and pix2gestalt [31] demonstrate the potential
of repurposing image diffusion models for various inverse
* Equal Contribution.

We scale test-time compute by exploiting the iterative
and stochastic nature of diffusion. By increasing the number of denoising steps, allocating more compute to early
denoising steps, and ensembling multiple denoised predictions, we consistently achieve higher accuracy on these perceptual tasks. Our results provide evidence on the benefits
of scaling test-time compute for inverse vision problems under constrained compute budgets, bringing a new perspective to the conventional paradigm of training-centric scaling
for generative models.

12945

