This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Multiview Relighting for
3D Reconstruction under Extreme Illumination Variation
Hadi Alzayer1,2 Philipp Henzler1 Jonathan T. Barron1
Jia-Bin Huang2 Pratul P. Srinivasan1 Dor Verbin1
1

Google

2

University of Maryland, College Park

https://relight-to-reconstruct.github.io/
Reference light

Baseline

Input images with varying illumination

Ours

Ground truth

Novel views under reference illumination

Figure 1. 3D reconstruction under extreme illumination variation. We propose a method for 3D reconstruction from a set of images
captured under strongly varying illumination. Our method recovers high-fidelity appearance details including specular highlights that prior
state-of-the-art approaches cannot recover (top baseline: NeRF-Casting [47] with appearance embeddings, bottom baseline: NeROIC [25]).

Abstract
Reconstructing the geometry and appearance of objects
from photographs taken in different environments is difficult as the illumination and, therefore, the object appearance vary across captured images. This is particularly challenging for specular objects whose appearance strongly depends on the viewing direction. Some prior approaches
model appearance variation across images using a perimage embedding vector, while others use physically-based
rendering to recover the materials and per-image illumination. Such approaches fail at faithfully recovering viewdependent appearance given the significant variation in input illumination and tend to produce mostly diffuse results.
We present an approach that reconstructs objects from images taken under different illuminations by first relighting
the images under a single reference illumination with a mul-

tiview relighting diffusion model and then reconstructing
the object’s geometry and appearance with a radiance field
architecture that is robust to the minor remaining inconsistencies among the relit images. We validate our approach
on synthetic and real datasets and demonstrate that it outperforms existing techniques at reconstructing high-fidelity
appearance from images taken under extreme illumination
variation. Moreover, our approach is particularly effective
at recovering view-dependent “shiny” appearance which
cannot be reconstructed by prior methods.

1. Introduction

10933

A common strategy for performing novel view synthesis is
to recover a 3D representation from a collection of photographs of a scene and then use it to render novel views
from unseen viewpoints. Most view synthesis approaches

