This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniAP: Unifying Inter- and Intra-Layer Automatic Parallelism by Mixed Integer
Quadratic Programming
Hao Lin*, Ke Wu*, Jie Li*, Jun Li, Wu-Jun Li†
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
School of Computer Science
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{hao.lin, ke.wu, jie-li, lijun}@smail.nju.edu.cn, liwujun@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Distributed learning is commonly used for training deep
learning models, especially large models. In distributed
learning, manual parallelism (MP) methods demand considerable human effort and have limited flexibility. Hence,
automatic parallelism (AP) methods have recently been proposed for automating the parallel strategy optimization process. Existing AP methods suffer from sub-optimal solutions
because they do not jointly optimize the two categories of parallel strategies (i.e., inter-layer parallelism and intra-layer
parallelism). In this paper, we propose a novel AP method
called UniAP, which unifies inter- and intra-layer automatic
parallelism by mixed integer quadratic programming. To the
best of our knowledge, UniAP is the first parallel method that
can jointly optimize the two categories of parallel strategies
to find an optimal solution. Experimental results show that
UniAP outperforms state-of-the-art methods by up to 3.80×
in throughput and reduces strategy optimization time by up
to 107× across five Transformer-based models.

1. Introduction
Distributed learning (also called parallel learning) on clusters with several machines or GPUs is commonly used for
training deep learning models, especially for some large
models with billions of parameters [1, 40, 41]. Several parallel strategies, including pipeline parallelism (PP), data
parallelism (DP), tensor parallelism (TP), and fully sharded
data parallelism (FSDP), have been proposed for distributed
learning. These parallel strategies can be divided into two
main categories: inter-layer parallelism and intra-layer parallelism. Inter-layer parallelism [7, 9, 10, 15, 20, 21, 28, 29],
which includes PP, partitions the model into disjoint sets

without partitioning tensors in each layer. Intra-layer parallelism [8, 22, 30, 34], which includes DP, TP, and FSDP,
partitions tensors in a layer along one or more axes.
The parallel method1 in one specific distributed learning
method or system typically adopts one parallel strategy or
a combination of several parallel strategies. Existing parallel methods can be divided into two categories: manual
parallelism (MP) methods and automatic parallelism (AP)
methods. In MP methods [30, 37, 44], one or several parallel
strategies are manually optimized by researchers or developers. MP methods require extensive domain knowledge
in deep learning models and hardware architectures. With
the rapid development of deep learning models and the increasing diversity of modern hardware architectures [11, 12],
MP methods demand considerable human effort and have
limited flexibility.
To address the two limitations of MP methods, AP methods [14, 28, 47] have recently been proposed for automating
the parallel strategy optimization process. Although existing AP methods have achieved promising progress, they
optimize the two categories of parallel strategies separately
rather than jointly. More specifically, some methods optimize only one category of parallel strategies [2, 16, 17, 23,
36, 42, 46], and the others optimize inter- and intra-layer
parallelism hierarchically [9, 14, 28, 38, 39, 47]. Hence,
existing AP methods suffer from sub-optimal solutions.
In this paper, we propose a novel AP method called
UniAP for distributed learning. The contributions of UniAP
are outlined as follows:
• UniAP unifies inter- and intra-layer automatic parallelism
by mixed integer quadratic programming (MIQP) [19].
• To the best of our knowledge, UniAP is the first parallel
method that can optimize the two categories of parallel
strategies jointly rather than separately to find an optimal
solution.

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

1 To avoid confusion, we treat ‘parallel method’ and ‘parallel strategy’
as two different terminologies in this paper.

20947

