This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Localizing Events in Videos with Multimodal Queries
Jialu Ma 1
Yan Xia 2,4†
Mang Ling Ada Fok 2 *
Gengyuan Zhang 1,4 *
Daniel Cremers 2,4
Philip Torr 3
Volker Tresp 1,4
Jindong Gu 3
1
2
3
LMU Munich
TU Munich
University of Oxford
4
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
{zhang, tresp}@dbs.ifi.lmu.de

{ada.fok, yan.xia, daniel.cremers}@tum.de

{philip.torr, jindong.gu}@eng.ox.ac.uk

Semantic Query

Abstract

So far, we only use Natural

Past

Language Query (NLQ) 𝑞!
query: Woman holds her a lobster coffee

Localizing events in videos based on semantic queries is
a pivotal task in video understanding research and useroriented applications like video search. Yet, current research predominantly relies on natural language queries
(NLQs), overlooking the potential of using multimodal
queries (MQs) that incorporate images to flexibly represent
semantic queries, particularly when it is difficult to express
non-verbal or unfamiliar concepts in words. To bridge this
gap, we introduce ICQ, a new benchmark designed for localizing events in videos with MQs, alongside an evaluation dataset ICQ-Highlight. To adapt and reevaluate existing video localization models for this new task, we propose 3 Multimodal Query Adaptation methods and a novel
Surrogate Fine-tuning strategy, serving as strong baseline
methods. ICQ systematically benchmarks 12 state-of-theart backbone models, spanning from specialized video localization models to Video Large Language Models. Our
extensive experiments highlight the high potential of using
MQs in real-world applications. We believe this is a first
step toward video event localization with MQs1 .

mug.

What comes next?
Multimodal Query (MQ) 𝑞" :
query:

Target event

+ in the kitchen

Future

(a)

Using MQs for …

Search in a compilation
video of swimming races

(i) Defining fine-grained concepts
+ in the pool

(ii) Discovering unknown concepts

Show me this unknown
animal in a documentary

s
+ on the gras

(iii) Locating hard-to-verbalize concepts
th this
+ a window wi
n
er
tt
pa

Find a building like this
in this Arabic culture documentary

(b)

Figure 1. Localizing Events in Videos with Semantics Queries.
Fig. 1a: So far, the community has only focused on natural language query-based video event localization as in [42]. Our benchmark ICQ focuses on a more general scenario: localizing events in
video with multimodal queries (MQs). Fig. 1b: Localizing video
events with MQs has broad applications: users often use brief,
ambiguous text queries like “swimming” or struggle to find precise terms when it comes to unfamiliar or abstract concepts. MQs
—like scribbles or example images— can help in such cases.

1. Introduction
Localizing semantic events in videos has long been a prominent task in the field of video understanding [5, 41, 64, 66,
88, 91, 97]. User-centric applications like streaming media
and short video platforms underscore the growing need to
parse video segments for video search and video highlight
or recommend video moments given user needs.
Conventional video event localization encompasses a
broad spectrum of related tasks explored in prior research,
such as video moment retrieval [20, 21, 53], highlight detection [2, 42, 60], and video temporal grounding [14, 15,

18, 23, 31, 73, 91]. A plethora of datasets and benchmarks [6, 22, 42, 70] has been established for exploring
video event localization using Natural Language Queries
(NLQs) as semantic queries. Building on these foundations, existing models have primarily focused on the NLQ
setting [1, 8–12, 15, 18, 22, 25, 42, 80].
However, with the increasing need for human users to
efficiently process massive video data online, multimodal

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author
1 Our project is available at https://icq-benchmark.github.
io/

3339

