This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PIDLoc: Cross-View Pose Optimization Network Inspired by PID Controllers
Wooju Lee1 Juhye Park1 Dasol Hong1 Changki Sung1 Youngwoo Seo2 Dongwan Kang2 Hyun Myung1 *
1
2
Urban Robotics Lab, School of Elctrical Engineering, KAIST
Hanwha Aerospace
1

{dnwn24,jhpark12,ds.hong,cs1032,hmyung}@kaist.ac.kr 2 {youngwoo.seo,dongwan.kang}@hanwha.com

Abstract
Accurate localization is essential for autonomous driving,
but GNSS-based methods struggle in challenging environments such as urban canyons. Cross-view pose optimization
offers an effective solution for localization by directly estimating vehicle pose using satellite-view images. However,
existing methods primarily rely on cross-view features at a
given pose, neglecting fine-grained contexts for precision
and global contexts for robustness against large initial pose
errors. To overcome these limitations, we propose PIDLoc,
a novel cross-view pose optimization approach inspired by
the proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller. Using
RGB images and LiDAR data, the PIDLoc models crossview feature relationships through the PID branches and estimates pose via the spatially aware pose estimator (SPE).
To enhance localization accuracy, the PID branches leverage feature differences for local context (P), aggregated feature differences for global context (I), and gradients of feature differences for fine-grained context (D). Integrated with
the PID branches, the SPE captures spatial relationships
within the PID-branch features for consistent localization.
Experimental results demonstrate that the PIDLoc achieves
state-of-the-art performance in cross-view pose estimation
for the KITTI dataset, reducing position error by 37.8%
compared with the previous state-of-the-art. Our code is
available at https://github.com/url-kaist/PIDLoc

1. Introduction
Localization [2, 11, 19, 20, 29, 31] is an essential component of autonomous driving systems, enabling reliable navigation across diverse environments. While the global navigation satellite system (GNSS) is commonly used for geographic positioning, it is vulnerable to interference, jamming, and signal blockage in challenging environments
such as urban canyons [15, 16, 36]. Thus, autonomous driving systems relying on GNSS encounter significant challenges in GNSS-denied or GNSS-limited scenarios.
* Corresponding author

(a) P branch

(b) I branch

(c) D branch

Figure 1. PIDLoc performs localization by incorporating local,
global, and fine-grained contexts. In (a)-(c), the red, green, and
blue circular sectors represent the current, ground-truth, and predicted pose, respectively. The blue and black arrows represent the
position adjustment of the given pose during the single and final iteration. The yellow region represents the range of poses addressed
by each branch. (a) Similar to existing methods [19, 29–31], the
P branch relies solely on the given pose, often converging to a local optimum. (b) The I branch incorporates global context from
diverse poses, enabling robust pose estimation even under large
initial pose errors. (c) The D branch leverages gradients of feature
differences to perform fine-grained pose adjustments.

Cross-view geo-localization has been proposed to address this challenge by leveraging satellite-view images to
estimate the global pose of a vehicle. A common approach
in this field is cross-view image retrieval [9, 12, 13, 18,
21, 27, 33–35], which matches ground-view images to geotagged satellite-view images. However, the localization accuracy is constrained by the partitioning resolution of satellite maps [19], often leading to lower precision compared
with commercial GNSS [28].
Recently, cross-view pose optimization methods [19, 22,
23, 25, 29–32] have been proposed to improve localization accuracy. Given an initial pose roughly estimated from
cross-view image retrieval, these methods directly estimate
the global pose (position and orientation) of the groundview image relative to the satellite-view image. These di-

21981

