This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Making Old Film Great Again: Degradation-aware State Space Model for Old
Film Restoration
Yudong Mao1,* , Hao Luo1,* , Zhiwei Zhong1 , Peilin Chen1 , Zhijiang Zhang2 , Shiqi Wang1, †
1
Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
Inspur Intelligent Terminal Co., Ltd

Abstract
Unlike modern native digital videos, the restoration of old
films requires addressing specific degradations inherent to
analog sources. However, existing specialized methods still
fall short compared to general video restoration techniques.
In this work, we propose a new baseline to re-examine the
challenges in old film restoration. First, we develop an
improved Mamba-based framework, dubbed MambaOFR,
which can dynamically adjust the degradation removal patterns by generating degradation-aware prompts to tackle
the complex and composite degradations present in old
films. Second, we introduce a flow-guided mask deformable
alignment module to mitigate the propagation of structured
defect features in the temporal domain. Third, we introduce
the first benchmark dataset that includes both synthetic and
real-world old film clips. Extensive experiments show that
the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance,
outperforming existing advanced approaches in old film
restoration. The implementation and model is available at
https://github.com/MaoAYD/MambaOFR.

ual work of restoration professionals is of significant importance for the preservation of old films.
Removing degradation from old films is a complex issue. There are two primary challenges. First, old films suffer from complex degradation under both analog and digital
conditions, resulting in mixed and often unknown types of
deterioration. This complexity poses challenges for various
video restoration methods that typically target single types
of degradation [8, 11, 40]. Second, old films typically exhibit structural defects, such as cracks, corrosion spots, and
stripe noise, which are prominent and significantly compromise the internal integrity of video frames. These degradations are difficult to automatically distinguish from the true
content of the frames and are challenging to remove using
adjacent pixel information within a single frame.
Current methods remain significantly limited in addressing these issues. Some video restoration techniques [6, 28,
31] attempt to tackle complex mixed degradation within a
single framework, but these methods primarily focus on unstructured degradations such as noise and blur, which struggle to comprehensively address the broader challenges of
old film restoration. In contrast, methods specifically designed for old film restoration [46, 47] attempt to explicitly
address structured defects. However, these approaches fail
to effectively leverage complementary temporal features or
aggregate global spatial features. Furthermore, they have
not comprehensively considered the propagation of structured defects across the temporal domain. As a result, these
methods struggle to achieve restoration results on par with
state-of-the-art video restoration techniques.
In this work, we propose a new baseline to re-examine
the challenges of old film restoration. Our goal is to adaptively address all types of degradation in old films within
a unified framework. We develop an enhanced Mambabased [15] framework, dubbed MambaOFR, for old film
restoration. Taking advantage of the long-range modeling
capability of 2-D selective state space [16] and an efficient
global receptive field, our framework effectively aggregates
spatial complementary features for restoration. Building

1. Introduction
The preservation and restoration of old films are crucial for
safeguarding the cultural and historical heritage encapsulated within the moving images of the past. As physical
film materials deteriorate over time, the rich narratives and
artistic expressions they convey risk being lost forever. Digitization offers the possibility of revitalizing old films [51].
However, due to limitations in the technology available at
the time of filming, as well as factors such as preservation
conditions, old films often lack the visual appeal necessary for modern audiences This limits their dissemination
on modern media platforms, such as streaming services.
Therefore, developing automated methods for the restoration of old films [19, 47] to replace labor intensive man→ Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

28039

