This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A4A: Adapter for Adapter Transfer via All-for-All Mapping for
Cross-Architecture Models
Keyu Tu, Mengqi Huang, Zhuowei Chen, Zhendong Mao*
University of Science and Technology of China
{kytu, huangmq, chenzw01}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zdmao}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Large-scale text-to-image models evolve rapidly in size
and architecture. The existing adapters struggle to keep
pace with these models, requiring extensive retraining. This
paper proposes a novel adapter transfer framework, A4A
(Adapter for Adapter), which uses an all-for-all mapping
approach to seamlessly transfer attention-based adapters
across different model architectures (e.g., U-Net to transformer). The framework consists of Coupling Space Projection and Upgraded Space Mapping. During Coupling
Space Projection, all attention features of the pretrained
adapter are aggregated to fully capture the coupling relationship before being projected into a unified space. The
unified space maintains coupling features in a consistent dimension, effectively and efficiently addressing feature scale
discrepancies arising from the base model’s architecture.
In the Upgraded Space Mapping Module, randomly initialized learnable features are introduced to connect the unified
and upgraded spaces by integrating reference features via
the attention mechanism. The learned features are adaptively injected into the upgrade model through the Alignment module, which bridges the discrepancies between the
models using the all-for-all mapping. Experimental results
on personalized image generation tasks demonstrate that
A4A outperforms previous methods in transferring adapters
while being the first to achieve adapter transfer across
model architectures.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in large-scale text-to-image diffusion
models [5, 11, 23, 26] have significantly improved their
ability to generate high-quality, realistic images based on
user-friendly textual prompts. Building on these generative
capabilities, numerous adapters have been developed upon
these pretrained models to further endow them with new
control conditions, such as pose and human identity control,

thereby fostering the growth of downstream real-world applications like personalized image creation. As pretrained
models rapidly evolve, with increasing parameters (e.g.,
from SD1.5’s 860M to SDXL’s 2600M) and developing architectures (e.g., from the convolution U-Net [27] to the
transformer [22]), the original adapters built on base models require substantial resources for retraining and significant effort for redesign to accommodate upgraded models.
This leads to a lag in adapter development compared to the
progression of upgraded models 1 . Therefore, the adapter
transfer task, i.e., effectively and efficiently transferring existing adapters from base models to upgraded models to
leverage the strong control capabilities of the original welldeveloped adapters and the superior generative abilities of
the upgraded models, has become an increasingly important
and urgent requirement in both academia and industry.
Given the substantial potential benefits of adapter transfer, several prior studies have been conducted in this field.
For instance, Ctrl-Adapter [19] has been proposed to transfer the ControlNet [41] architecture by fusing the output of
the zero-convolution from the pretrained ControlNet into
the corresponding layer in the upgraded model. Concurrently, X-Adapter [25] has been explored for mapping the
latent from the base model’s decoder block and adding them
to the corresponding location within the upgraded model’s
decoder. In summary, existing adapter transfer methods primarily focus on addition-based adapters (i.e., the control
conditions are injected into the pretrained models by simple
addition, typically, ControlNet), through a layer-by-layer
mapping, i.e., the output of each layer in the base model’s
adapters are mapped to the semantically equivalent layer in
the upgraded model.
However, in this study, we argue that the existing layerby-layer mapping fails to fully exploit the coupling between
original adapters and base models to effectively bridge the

* Zhendong Mao is the corresponding author.

18476

1 In this study, we define “base models” as the original pretrained textto-image models with well-developed adapters (e.g., SD1.5), and “upgraded models” as those pretrained models that require adapter transfer
(e.g., SDXL). Upgraded models typically have more parameters and advanced architectural designs compared to the base models.

