This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreeSim: Toward Free-viewpoint Camera Simulation in Driving Scenes
Lue Fan1,2,3∗ , Hao Zhang2,3∗ , Qitai Wang1 , Hongsheng Li2,3B , Zhaoxiang Zhang1B
1
NLPR & MAIS, CASIA 2 MMLab, CUHK 3 CPII under InnoHK
{lue.fan, wangqitai2020, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn

{1155231340@link, hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk

Project page: https://drive-sim.github.io/freesim

Baseline

Ours

(a) 3-meter left

(b) Recorded viewpoint

(c) 3-meter right

Figure 1. The proposed FreeSim can obtain high-quality camera simulation results in viewpoints largely deviated from the recorded
trajectories. Here we adopt pioneering work PVG [4] as the baseline for demonstration. We highlight the delicate power lines with orange
bounding boxes.

process, starting from slightly off-trajectory viewpoints and
moving progressively farther away. With this progressive
generation-reconstruction pipeline, FreeSim supports highquality off-trajectory view synthesis under large deviations
of more than 3 meters.

Abstract
We propose FreeSim, a camera simulation method for autonomous driving via 3D Gaussian Splatting and diffusionbased image generation. FreeSim emphasizes high-quality
rendering from viewpoints beyond the recorded ego trajectories. In such viewpoints, previous methods have unacceptable degradation because the training data of these viewpoints is unavailable. To address such data scarcity, we first
propose a generative enhancement model with a matched
data construction strategy. The resulting model can generate high-quality images in a viewpoint slightly deviated
from the recorded trajectories, conditioned on the degraded
rendering of this viewpoint. We then propose a progressive reconstruction strategy, which progressively adds generated images of unrecorded views into the reconstruction

1. Introduction

∗ Equal contribution. B Corresponding authors.

Realistic simulation is widely recognized as a foundational
component of embodied intelligence and autonomous driving. With the advent of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
[11], camera simulation for driving has rapidly advanced. A
line of works [4, 5, 10, 18, 30, 32, 35, 41] utilizing 3DGS
have achieved efficient reconstruction and high-quality rendering in driving scenes. However, most of them only focus
on reconstructing and rendering along recorded trajectories,
limiting their generalizability to unrecorded off-trajectory
viewpoints (e.g., the viewpoints shifted 3 meters right in

12004

