This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Group Proportional Representation for Text-to-Image Models
Sangwon Jung1 Alex Oesterling2 Claudio Mayrink Verdun2
Sajani Vithana2 Taesup Moon1,3 Flavio P. Calmon2
1
2

Harvard University

ECE, Seoul National University
3
ASRI/INMC/IPAI/AIIS, Seoul National University

Abstract

historically inaccurate images [57] and received significant
attention in the press [55].

Text-to-image (T2I) generative models can create vivid, realistic images from textual descriptions. As these models
proliferate, they expose new concerns about their ability to
represent diverse demographic groups, propagate stereotypes, and efface minority populations. Despite growing
attention to the “safe” and “responsible” design of artificial intelligence (AI), there is no established methodology to
systematically measure and control representational harms
in image generation. This paper introduces a novel framework to measure the representation of intersectional groups
in images generated by T2I models by applying the MultiGroup Proportional Representation (MPR) metric. MPR
evaluates the worst-case deviation of representation statistics across given population groups in images produced by a
generative model, allowing for flexible and context-specific
measurements based on user requirements. We also develop
an algorithm to optimize T2I models for this metric. Through
experiments, we demonstrate that MPR can effectively measure representation statistics across multiple intersectional
groups and, when used as a training objective, can guide
models toward a more balanced generation across demographic groups while maintaining generation quality. 1

The challenge of achieving fair representation in generative AI requires, first and foremost, a precise methodology
for measuring representation. However, current approaches
that assess representation in T2I models face several limitations surrounding how they define and measure representational fairness [63]. Most studies [16, 23, 64] focus on a
single axis of outward-facing identity representation, such
as gender, overlooking the complex interplay of multiple
identity factors. While some research attempts to consider
multiple axes of representation, e.g., [11, 59, 65, 66], there
is a lack of systematic measurement methods, particularly
for intersectional groups. Determining appropriate representation goals is also challenging. Recent frameworks like
BIGbench [40] and OpenBias [19] have proposed more systematic approaches to evaluate bias in text-to-image models
by leveraging multi-modal LLMs. However, these methods
still lack a theoretically grounded framework for measuring
representational fairness across intersectional groups and
optimizing generative models accordingly.

1. Introduction

Our proposed framework addresses these limitations by
providing a unified mathematical framework that can measure and mitigate representational harm. For instance, sometimes we may want equal representation (such as generating
images of a CEO with equal gender representation), and
in others, we may care about reflecting some real-world or
historically accurate distribution of identities (such as not
generating racially diverse 1943 German soldiers as done
by Gemini [57]). In this work, we apply a metric to T2I
models that can address both of these needs and allow us
to improve representation in image generation. Our approach represents the comprehensive framework that can
flexibly evaluate representation across various complexities
of intersectional groups while being adaptable enough to
accommodate both equal and proportional representation
goals, providing a principled foundation for measuring and
mitigating representational harm in T2I systems. Indeed, we
empirically show that optimizing a generative image model

Recent text-to-image (T2I) generative models, such as
Google Gemini [25], DALL-E [56], Midjourney [45], Adobe
Firefly [8] and Stable Diffusion [58], have pushed the boundaries of creativity with AI, offering new possibilities in fields
ranging from digital art to product design. However, as
these technologies become more prevalent, there has been a
surge in concerns about their portrayal of diverse population
groups [11], their potential biases [16], and their ability to
promote stereotypes [21, 42]. A notable example is the controversy surrounding Google’s Gemini AI, which produced
1 The code is available at https://github.com/sangwon-jung94/mpr-t2i

23744

