This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Poly-Autoregressive Prediction for Modeling Interactions
Neerja Thakkar1
1

Tara Sadjadpour1

Jathushan Rajasegeran1

Shiry Ginosar2,3

Jitendra Malik1

UC Berkeley, 2 Toyota Technical Institute at Chicago, 3 Google DeepMind
Autoregressive prediction

Autoregressive prediction

Agent N

Transformer Predictor

Transformer Predictor
Predicted

Agent N
…
Agent 2

Predicted

Ground Truth
Agent 1

(a) Autoregression (AR)

(b) Poly-autoregression (PAR)

Figure 1. Inference for (a) autoregressive (AR) models and (b) our proposed poly-autoregressive (PAR) model. Solid indicates ground-truth
tokens which represent a tracked data modality such as action or 6DOF pose; striped represents predicted output tokens. Color denotes agent
identity. Compared to AR models, the PAR model takes other agents’ tokens as inputs when making a prediction for the next timestep.

Abstract
We introduce a simple framework for predicting the behavior
of an agent in multi-agent settings. In contrast to autoregressive (AR) tasks, such as language processing, our focus is
on scenarios with multiple agents whose interactions are
shaped by physical constraints and internal motivations. To
this end, we propose Poly-Autoregressive (PAR) modeling,
which forecasts an ego agent’s future behavior by reasoning about the ego agent’s state history and the past and
current states of other interacting agents. At its core, PAR
represents the behavior of all agents as a sequence of tokens,
each representing an agent’s state at a specific timestep.
With minimal data pre-processing changes, we show that
PAR can be applied to three different problems: human action forecasting in social situations, trajectory prediction
for autonomous vehicles, and object pose forecasting during hand-object interaction. Using a small proof-of-concept
transformer backbone, PAR outperforms AR across these
three scenarios.

(AR) modeling, where each word token is predicted based
on a sequence of preceding word tokens. Building on the
success of AR modeling in the NLP community, this work focuses on modeling the dynamic relationships between agents
and entities in everyday interactions that occur in the physical
world, such as social interactions, driving, and hand-object
interactions.
Unlike language which is structured through grammar
and semantics, interactions in the physical world are dictated
by both the laws of physics (e.g. how a hand grasps an object)
and the internal state of each agent (e.g. the trajectory an
agent chooses to move a grasped object in) , a latent variable
that we know nothing about. Furthermore, as opposed to text
where each word follows another unidimensionally, the states
of multiple agents are changing simultaneously. For example,
in social situations, the history of a single person’s past states
does not alone determine the dynamics of their future states;
we also need to consider the states of other agents. We argue,
therefore, that AR modeling alone is insufficient.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we introduce poly-autoregressive (PAR)
modeling, a simple unifying approach to model the influence
of other agents and entities on one’s behavior. We model
behavior as a temporal sequence of states and predict an
ego agent’s future behavior conditioned on the history of
behavior of the ego agent as well as the rest of the agents. By
considering other agents’ behaviors, we demonstrate that our
approach significantly improves upon the ill-posed problem

Large language models (LLMs) have been very successful
with natural language processing (NLP) tasks, which require
accurate reasoning over relationships words have within a
body of text. A key component of LLMs is autoregressive

12402

