This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EnliveningGS: Active Locomotion of 3DGS
Siyuan Shen1 Tianjia Shao1∗ Kun Zhou1 Chenfanfu Jiang 2 Yin Yang3
1
State Key Laboratory of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, 2 UCLA, 3 University of Utah

Abstract
This paper presents a novel pipeline named EnliveningGS,
which enables active locomotion of 3D models represented
with 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS). We are inspired by
the fact that real-world lives pose their bodies in a natural and physically meaningful manner by compressing or
elongating muscle fibers embedded in the body. EnliveningGS aims to replicate the similar functionality of 3DGS
models so that the object within a 3DGS scene acts like a
living creature rather than a static shape — they walk, jump,
and twist in the scene under provided motion trajectories
driven by muscle activations. While the concept is straightforward, many challenging technical difficulties need to be
taken care of. Synthesizing realistic locomotion of a 3DGS
model embodies an inverse physics problem of very high
dimensions. The core challenge is how to efficiently and
robustly model frictional contacts between an “enlivened
model” and the environment, as it is the composition of contact/collision/friction forces triggered by muscle activation
that generates the final movement of the object. We propose
a hybrid numerical method mixing LCP and penalty method
to tackle this NP-hard problem robustly. Our pipeline also
addresses the limitation of existing 3DGS deformation algorithms and inpainting the missing information when models
move around.

time

Figure 1. Jumping Chess. We use static 3DGS as input and generates physics-aware 4D animations. The chess piece contracts and
expands its body, creating jumping motions through collisions and
friction with the chessboard, fitting the user’s input trajectory.

particle-based discretization to animate 3DGS scenes with
fluids [10]. Those frameworks allow deeper integrations of
3DGS with relevant downstream graphics/vision tasks, enabling a wide range of exciting applications.
It is a common paradigm, when combining physics and
3DGS, that the physical effects of the neural scene are passively triggered by external forces, which are normally specified by the user or pre-scripted (e.g., the gravity force).
This makes sense for inanimate objects — they are not
changing their kinematic states unless forced by external
excitements. However, the locomotion of a living being follows a distinct modality. Rather than relying on external
forces passively, a living entity actively adjusts its poses to
achieve a desired movement such as walking, bending, or
jumping. The enabler of such locomotion is muscle activations that contract or elongate different parts of the body,
which interact with the environment e.g., the floor. The resultant contact and friction forces, in turn, provide the necessary momentum of the motion. This procedure is beyond
the capability of existing physics-based 3DGS techniques
as the muscle activations can hardly be measured or synthesized with a passive physics simulator. It is unfortunate that
an interesting 3DGS scene can only house lifeless objects.
In this paper, we show a novel framework to further en-

1. Introduction
The advent of learning-based radiance field rendering
techniques like NeRF [34] and 3D Gaussian splitting
(3DGS) [26] have rebranded the pipeline of novel view synthesis. From synthesized RGB information, users can further alter and edit the illumination, appearance, and geometry. It is also possible to integrate those neural scene representations with physics to synthesize plausible physicsbased dynamics. For instance, PIE-NeRF uses a quadratic
moving least square interpolation to approximate the nonlinear elastodynamics of a NeRF model [11]. PhysGaussian [45] integrates 3DGS with the material point method
(MPM) [39]. GaussianSplashing leverages a universal
* Corresponding author.

896

