This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Composing Parts for Expressive Object Generation
Harsh Rangwani1 Aishwarya Agarwal1 Kuldeep Kulkarni1
R. Venkatesh Babu2 Srikrishna Karanam1
1

Adobe Research

2

Indian Institute of Science

a full body portrait photo of a person wearing a dress with long hair and glasses
PartComposer: hair, glasses, dress

A photo of a yellow warbler
PartComposer: beak → a hens beak

a photo of a white swan, 8k, full hd
PartComposer: crown → a crown of a peacock

A young woman sits at a table in a beautiful, lush garden, painting by claude monet
PartComposer: dress → a dress in Ukiyo-e style

Figure 1. Base Generation (left) Comparison with Methods for Generations with Parts Details (right). PartComposer allows the
generation of object images with specified attributes (color, style etc.) of parts for the chosen object in the base text prompt. StableDiffusion
and Rich-Text [18] methods with part details either ignore the part instructions or generate inconsistent ojects.

Abstract
Image composition and generation are processes where the
artists need control over various parts of the generated
images. However, the current state-of-the-art generation
models, like Stable Diffusion, cannot handle fine-grained
part-level attributes in the text prompts. Specifically, when
additional attribute details are added to the base text prompt,
these text-to-image models either generate an image vastly
different from the image generated from the base prompt
or ignore the attribute details. To mitigate these issues, we
introduce PartComposer, a training-free method that enables
image generation based on fine-grained part-level attributes
specified for objects in the base text prompt. This allows
more control for artists and enables novel object compositions by combining distinctive object parts. PartComposer
first localizes object parts by denoising the object region
from a specific diffusion process. This enables each part
token to be localized to the right region. After obtaining part
masks, we run a localized diffusion process in each part region based on fine-grained part attributes and combine them
to produce the final image. All stages of PartComposer are
based on repurposing a pre-trained diffusion model, which

enables it to generalize across domains. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of part-level control provided by PartComposer through qualitative visual examples and quantitative
comparisons with contemporary baselines.

1. Introduction

13209

Image generation with large generative diffusion models
like StableDiffusion [40], DALLE [38], etc., has become
prevalent due to their superior quality and extensive world
knowledge. These models are trained on large image-caption
datasets and are trained to generate images based on a given
text prompt (description). As image composition and creation are creative processes where the artists need control
over various parts of the image being generated. However,
adding additional details for controlling part appearance in
the text prompt either changes the generated image entirely
or ignores the part instructions [9] (Fig. 1).
Various works aim to provide improved spatial controls
to image generation, as they allow image generation conditioned on segmentation masks [5], edge maps [55], bounding boxes [10, 27] etc. Popular methods such as Control-

