This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MExD: An Expert-Infused Diffusion Model for Whole-Slide Image Classification
Jianwei Zhao1 , Xin Li2 , Fan Yang2 ,* Qiang Zhai3 , Ao Luo4 , Yang Zhao1 ,
Hong Cheng1 , and Huazhu Fu5
1
2
UESTC, AIQ, 3 SICAU, 4 SWJTU, 5 IHPC, A*STAR

Abstract
Whole Slide Image (WSI) classification poses unique challenges due to the vast image size and numerous noninformative regions, which introduce noise and cause data
imbalance during feature aggregation. To address these
issues, we propose MExD, an Expert-Infused Diffusion
Model that combines the strengths of a Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE) mechanism with a diffusion model for enhanced
classification. MExD balances patch feature distribution
through a novel MoE-based aggregator that selectively emphasizes relevant information, effectively filtering noise,
addressing data imbalance, and extracting essential features. These features are then integrated via a diffusionbased generative process to directly yield the class distribution for the WSI. Moving beyond conventional discriminative approaches, MExD represents the first generative
strategy in WSI classification, capturing fine-grained details for robust and precise results. Our MExD is validated
on three widely-used benchmarks—Camelyon16, TCGANSCLC, and BRACS—consistently achieving state-of-theart performance in both binary and multi-class tasks. Our
code and model are available at https://github.
com/JWZhao-uestc/MExD.

1. Introduction
Histological Whole Slide Image (WSI) classification is essential in digital pathology, automating diagnosis and subtyping while extracting insights from high-resolution scans
to support prognosis and treatment planning [2, 11, 32].
WSIs, with sizes ranging from 100 million to 10 billion pixels, are too large for conventional deep learning techniques,
which were originally designed for much smaller natural or
medical images. To tackle this, the “decompose and aggregate” strategy has proven effective, breaking down WSIs
into manageable patches to extract features and then combining them into a final representation for classification. A
promising application of this strategy is Multiple Instance
* Corresponding author: Fan Yang (fanyang uestc@hotmail.com)

Figure 1. Idea Illustration. (a) Unlike the conventional MILbased discriminative approaches for WSI processing, (b) we employ the Dyn-MoE to extract/mine effective conditional information from WSI, employing a generative framework to infer classification results.

Learning (MIL), which treats each WSI as a bag containing
smaller image patches. By analyzing each patch individually and then aggregating the results, MIL enables efficient
slide-level classification with a single label, effectively addressing the challenges of WSI analysis [1, 12].
However, despite its effectiveness, this strategy faces
several challenges. A significant issue is data imbalance:
within a bag, positive instances (e.g., those containing cancerous cells) are often vastly outnumbered by negative ones.
This imbalance can bias the model toward the majority
class, leading it to overlook or misclassify important minority instances and resulting in poor sensitivity for detecting
rare but clinically significant features. Although clustering [24, 50] and attention mechanisms [23, 30] have been
introduced to tackle this issue, these methods may still not
fully mitigate the bias toward the majority class. This is especially true when positive instances are extremely scarce;
under such circumstances, these mechanisms may be less
effective because they typically operate within a unified
model that processes all patches collectively, lacking dedicated components focused on minority classes.
Another challenge lies in the current shortcomings of
feature integration methods. Aggregating the extracted features from individual patches into a comprehensive slide-

20789

