This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pursuing Temporal-Consistent Video Virtual Try-On
via Dynamic Pose Interaction
Dong Li1 , Wenqi Zhong2∗ , Wei Yu1 , Yingwei Pan1 , Dingwen Zhang2 ,
Ting Yao1 , Junwei Han2 , and Tao Mei1
1

HiDream.ai Inc.

2

Northwest Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China

lidong@hidream.ai, wenqizhong@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {yuwei, pandy}@hidream.ai
zhangdingwen2006yyy@gmail.com, tiyao@hidream.ai, junweihan2010@gmail.com
tmei@hidream.ai

Abstract
Video virtual try-on aims to seamlessly dress a subject
in a video with a specific garment. The primary challenge
involves preserving the visual authenticity of the garment
while dynamically adapting to the pose and physique of
the subject. While existing methods have predominantly focused on image-based virtual try-on, extending these techniques directly to videos often results in temporal inconsistencies. Most current video virtual try-on approaches alleviate this challenge by incorporating temporal modules,
yet still overlook the critical spatiotemporal pose interactions between human and garment. Effective pose interactions in videos should not only consider spatial alignment between human and garment poses in each frame but
also account for the temporal dynamics of human poses
throughout the entire video. With such motivation, we propose a new framework, namely Dynamic Pose Interaction
Diffusion Models (DPIDM), to leverage diffusion models
to delve into dynamic pose interactions for video virtual
try-on. Technically, DPIDM introduces a skeleton-based
pose adapter to integrate synchronized human and garment
poses into the denoising network. A hierarchical attention module is then exquisitely designed to model intraframe human-garment pose interactions and long-term human pose dynamics across frames through pose-aware spatial and temporal attention mechanisms. Moreover, DPIDM
capitalizes on a temporal regularized attention loss between
consecutive frames to enhance temporal consistency. Extensive experiments conducted on VITON-HD, VVT and
ViViD datasets demonstrate the superiority of our DPIDM
against the baseline methods. Notably, DPIDM achieves
VFID score of 0.506 on VVT dataset, leading to 60.5% improvement over the state-of-the-art GPD-VVTO approach.

Figure 1. Given a garment and a person video, DPIDM generates a
lifelike video that preserves the visual authenticity of the garment
while adapting to the individual’s pose and physique.

1. Introduction

∗ Equal contribution. This work was performed at HiDream.ai.

Generative models have made tremendous progress in recent years, with wide-ranging applications across various
fields, including computer vision [9, 36, 59], computer
graphics [6, 13], aesthetic design [35], and medical research
[18]. Virtual try-on is a quintessential generative task that
aims to synthesize a lifelike image/video of the specific person wearing the provided garment. By harnessing the powerful generative capacities of diffusion models, this field has
emerged as a promising domain with versatile applications
in immersive e-commerce and short-form video platforms.
Prior research mainly focused on image-based virtual
try-on. The earlier approaches typically build on Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [7, 19, 39, 45], incorporating
a warping module alongside a try-on generator. The warping module deforms clothing to align with the human body,
and then the warped garment is fused with the person image
through the try-on generator. However, in light of the recent
emergence of UNet-based Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs)
[5, 8, 50, 56, 62], researchers have progressively directed
their focus towards these innovative models. A diffusionbased try-on network combines the warping and blending

22648

