This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoGuide: Improving Video Diffusion Models without Training
Through a Teacher’s Guide
Geon Yeong Park2
Jong Chul Ye1
Bryan Sangwoo Kim1 *
Dohun Lee1 *
1
2
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, Bio and Brain Engineering
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
* indicates co-first authors
{leedh7, bryanswkim, pky3436, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr
Base

Ours

Base

"A drone view of celebration with Christmas tree and fireworks"

Base

Ours

"A boat sailing in the middle of the ocean"

Ours

Base

"Slow motion footage of a racing car"

Ours

"A dog drinking water"

Figure 1. VideoGuide is a novel framework for improving temporal consistency while preserving imaging quality, enabling high-quality
video generation for diverse text prompts. By applying VideoGuide to underperforming base models, we can significantly improve temporal
consistency with no additional training or fine-tuning. Best viewed with Acrobat Reader. Click each image to play the video clip.

Abstract

To address these issues we introduce VideoGuide, a novel
framework that enhances the temporal consistency of pretrained T2V models without the need for additional training
or fine-tuning. Instead, VideoGuide leverages any pretrained
video diffusion model (VDM) or itself as a guide during the
early stages of inference, improving temporal quality by interpolating the guiding model’s denoised samples into the
sampling model’s denoising process. The proposed method

Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models have revolutionized visual content creation, but extending these capabilities to textto-video (T2V) generation remains a challenge, particularly
in preserving temporal consistency. Existing methods that
aim to improve consistency often cause trade-offs such as
reduced imaging quality and impractical computational time.

2599

