This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SocialGesture: Delving into Multi-person Gesture Understanding
Xu Cao1 , Pranav Virupaksha1 , Wenqi Jia1 , Bolin Lai2 , Fiona Ryan2 , Sangmin Lee3†, James M. Rehg1†
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Georgia Institute of Technology
3
Sungkyunkwan University
{xucao2,pranavv3,wenqij5,jrehg}@illinois.edu {bolin.lai,fkryan}@gatech.edu
sangmin.lee@skku.edu

Abstract
Previous research in human gesture recognition has
largely overlooked multi-person interactions, which are
crucial for understanding the social context of naturally
occurring gestures. This limitation in existing datasets
presents a significant challenge in aligning human gestures
with other modalities like language and speech. To address this issue, we introduce SocialGesture, the first largescale dataset specifically designed for multi-person gesture analysis. SocialGesture features a diverse range of
natural scenarios and supports multiple gesture analysis
tasks, including video-based recognition and temporal localization, providing a valuable resource for advancing the
study of gesture during complex social interactions. Furthermore, we propose a novel visual question answering
(VQA) task to benchmark vision language models’ (VLMs)
performance on social gesture understanding. Our findings
highlight several limitations of current gesture recognition
models, offering insights into future directions for improvement in this field. SocialGesture is available at huggingface.co/datasets/IrohXu/SocialGesture.

1. Introduction
Long before the development of spoken language in human
history, deictic gestures played an important role in human
social communication, serving as one of the earliest communication tools for expressing thoughts, emotions, and intentions. In contemporary communication, both verbal (e.g.,
speech) and non-verbal (e.g., gesture) cues work in concert.
While spoken words express direct meanings, understanding
the complete social context often requires more than just the
words alone. Gestures play an important role in clarifying
intention or points of emphasis, and augment spoken communication with additional social context. Theoretical analysis
suggests that both speech and gesture originate from a shared
† Corresponding author

NVGesture

IPN Hand

EgoGesture

HaGRID

LD-ConGR

SocialGesture (ours)

Figure 1. Example frames from six gesture datasets. SocialGesture
is the only dataset featuring multi-person interactions and focusing
on natural gestures with meaningful social communication.

cognitive system, with gestures representing imagery-driven
data and speech representing symbolic data [6]. Together,
they reflect a unified communicative intent.
Recent advancements in machine learning have driven
research on the understanding of human social communication [27, 58], yet most of the latest social research predominantly focuses on linguistic modalities, often overlooking
visual social cues like gestures [28]. While there have been
machine learning works on human gestures, most of them
have focused on gestures for device manipulation or sign languages [42, 44], and the problem of analyzing natural social
gestures between multiple people has not received significant
attention. A primary reason for this limitation is the lack
of gesture data and annotations that capture multi-person
interactions and the use of gestures in realistic social contexts. While recent datasets such as HaGRID [23] and LDConGR [31] address high-resolution and long-distance gesture collection (Figure 1), they remain confined to controlled,

19509

