This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WeatherGen: A Unified Diverse Weather Generator for LiDAR Point Clouds via
Spider Mamba Diffusion
Yang Wu1 Yun Zhu1 Kaihua Zhang2 Jianjun Qian1 Jin Xie3,4 * Jian Yang1
1
PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
3
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
4
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou, China
{wuyang98, zhu.yun, csjqian, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn; zhkhua@gmail.com; csjxie@nju.edu.cn

Non-learnable

Abstract

Simulated
data

Rain simulator

3D scene perception demands a large amount of adverseweather LiDAR data, yet the cost of LiDAR data collection presents a significant scaling-up challenge. To this
end, a series of LiDAR simulators have been proposed.
Yet, they can only simulate a single adverse weather with
a single physical model, and the fidelity of the generated
data is quite limited. This paper presents WeatherGen, the
first unified diverse-weather LiDAR data diffusion generation framework, significantly improving fidelity. Specifically, we first design a map-based data producer, which
can provide a vast amount of high-quality diverse-weather
data for training purposes. Then, we utilize the diffusiondenoising paradigm to construct a diffusion model. Among
them, we propose a spider mamba generator to restore
the disturbed diverse weather data gradually. The spider
mamba models the feature interactions by scanning the LiDAR beam circle or central ray, excellently maintaining the
physical structure of the LiDAR data. Subsequently, following the generator to transfer real-world knowledge, we
design a latent feature aligner. Afterward, we devise a contrastive learning-based controller, which equips weather
control signals with compact semantic knowledge through
language supervision, guiding the diffusion model to generate more discriminative data. Extensive evaluations demonstrate the high generation quality of WeatherGen. Through
WeatherGen, we construct the mini-weather dataset, promoting the performance of the downstream task under adverse weather conditions. Code is available: https:
//github.com/wuyang98/weathergen

Learnable
WeatherGen

Snow simulator

Unified √
Fidelity
Applicable

(a) Previous methods

(b) Our method

Fog simulator

Generated
data

Figure 1. (a) Previous simulation-based methods [3, 9, 10, 15] can
only provide a single non-learnable simulator for a single weather
condition. Due to the complexity of optical propagation, previous simulated data all suffer from insufficient fidelity issues. (b)
Our method is the first unified generative framework. Through
learning, the generated data has higher fidelity and can be more
conducive to promoting downstream tasks under diverse weather.

1. Introduction

such as detection and trajectory planning emerge continuously. Despite extensive research and satisfactory performance under clear weather, 3D scene perception under adverse weather is less studied due to the scarcity of largescale LiDAR datasets in such scenarios [1, 16].
Under adverse weather, lasers scatter and diffract, causing point noise and drop [29]. This leads to serious reliability issues, limiting the application expansions of existing
models. Unfortunately, collecting LiDAR data under adverse weather is very time, labor, and cost intensive [1, 9,
10]. Some simulation-based methods try to improve this
issue through non-learnable simulators [3, 9, 10, 15]. As
shown in Figure 1, they utilize a single physical model for a
single condition. Due to the incomplete knowledge of sensor parameters and the complexity of optical propagation,
these methods inevitably suffer from domain shifts and poor
fidelity compared to real-world data.
Thus far, an inevitable question arises: can we construct
a unified and high-fidelity diverse-weather LiDAR data generation framework? To achieve this goal, we have to solve
three challenging points: (1) High-quality data Producer.
LiDAR data are scarce under diverse weather conditions,

With the advent of large-scale autonomous driving datasets,
a multitude of innovative solutions for 3D perception tasks,
* Corresponding author.

17019

