This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mamba4D: Efficient 4D Point Cloud Video Understanding with Disentangled
Spatial-Temporal State Space Models
Jiuming Liu1 , Jinru Han1 , Lihao Liu2 , Angelica I. Aviles-Rivero2
Chaokang Jiang3 , Zhe Liu4 , Hesheng Wang1 *
1
2
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
University of Cambridge
3
China University of Mining and Technology
4
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Point cloud videos can faithfully capture real-world spatial geometries and temporal dynamics, which are essential for enabling intelligent agents to understand the dynamically changing world. However, designing an effective 4D backbone remains challenging, mainly due to the
irregular and unordered distribution of points and temporal inconsistencies across frames. Also, recent transformerbased 4D backbones commonly suffer from large computational costs due to their quadratic complexity, particularly
for long video sequences. To address these challenges, we
propose a novel point cloud video understanding backbone
purely based on the State Space Models (SSMs). Specifically, we first disentangle space and time in 4D video sequences and then establish the spatio-temporal correlation
with the unified spatial-temporal Mamba blocks. The Intraframe Spatial Mamba module is developed to encode locally similar geometric structures within a certain temporal
stride. Subsequently, locally correlated tokens are delivered
to the Inter-frame Temporal Mamba module, which integrates long-term point features across the entire video with
linear complexity. Our proposed Mamba4D achieves competitive performance on the MSR-Action3D action recognition (+10.4% accuracy), HOI4D action segmentation (+0.7
F1 Score), and Synthia4D semantic segmentation (+0.19
mIoU) datasets. Mamba4D also has a significant efficiency
improvement, especially for long video sequences, with
87.5% GPU memory reduction and ×5.36 speed-up. Codes
are released at https://github.com/IRMVLab/Mamba4D.

Point 4D Convolution
Transformer
Class

Pick up
High throw

…
(a) Previous works

Spatio-temporal
Mamba
Class

Pick up
High throw
…

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Comparison with previous 4D backbones. Recent
SOTA works [8, 10, 52] mostly leverage the combination of convolution and transformer to capture the short-term and long-term
dynamics, respectively. Our Mamba4D instead utilizes a unified
spatio-temporal Mamba module for efficient 4D processing.

1. Introduction

ical world [8]. They play a crucial role in enabling intelligent agents to perceive dynamics, comprehend environmental changes, and interact effectively with the world
[33]. Therefore, point cloud video modeling has recently attracted remarkable research interest [45, 46, 52], with wideranging applications, e.g., robotics [6, 42, 62, 63], augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR) [47], and SLAM systems [22, 26, 48], etc.
Despite great success in understanding the static 3D
point cloud [3, 25, 43, 44, 54], developing effective backbones for dynamic 4D point cloud sequences remains a significant challenge [52]. Unlike conventional RGB videos
that have structured grids [38, 60], point cloud videos are
inherently irregular and unordered along the spatial dimension [8]. Therefore, existing backbones and techniques used
for grid-based video or static point cloud modeling, e.g., 3D
convolutions [18, 27, 59], cannot be directly applied. One
straightforward method to effectively capture point dynam-

4D point cloud videos, which incorporate 3D space and
1D time, can faithfully represent the geometric structures
and temporal motions of our dynamically changing phys* Corresponding Author. The first two authors contribute equally.

17626

