This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unlocking Generalization Power in LiDAR Point Cloud Registration
Zhenxuan Zeng1,2 , Qiao Wu1,2 , Xiyu Zhang1,2 , Lin Yuanbo Wu3 , Pei An4
Jiaqi Yang1,2 *, Ji Wang1,2∗ , Peng Wang1,2
1
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China.
2
Ningbo Institute, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China.
3
Department of Computer Science, Swansea University, United Kingdom.
4
HuaZhong University of Science and Technology, China.
{zengzhenxuan,qiaowu}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn {jqyang, j.wang, peng.wang}@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
In real-world environments, a LiDAR point cloud registration method with robust generalization capabilities
(across varying distances and datasets) is crucial for ensuring safety in autonomous driving and other LiDAR-based
applications. However, current methods fall short in achieving this level of generalization. To address these limitations, we propose UGP, a pruned framework designed
to enhance generalization power for LiDAR point cloud
registration. The core insight in UGP is the elimination
of cross-attention mechanisms to improve generalization,
allowing the network to concentrate on intra-frame feature extraction. Additionally, we introduce a progressive
self-attention module to reduce ambiguity in large-scale
scenes and integrate Bird’s Eye View (BEV) features to
incorporate semantic information about scene elements.
Together, these enhancements significantly boost the network’s generalization performance. We validated our approach through various generalization experiments in multiple outdoor scenes. In cross-distance generalization experiments on KITTI and nuScenes, UGP achieved stateof-the-art mean Registration Recall rates of 94.5% and
91.4%, respectively. In cross-dataset generalization from
nuScenes to KITTI, UGP achieved a state-of-the-art mean
Registration Recall of 90.9%. Code will be available at
https://github.com/peakpang/UGP

1. Introduction
LiDAR point cloud registration is essential in applications
such as autonomous driving [14] and SLAM [24, 25, 29].
The dynamic nature of LiDAR scenes often necessitates
pairwise registration of point clouds that exhibit 1) crossdistance variations (e.g., point clouds captured at different
* Corresponding author

training set (KITTI@10m)

cross-distance (KITTI@40m)

training set (nuScenes@10m)

cross-dataset (KITTI@10m)

CoFiNet

GeoTrans

(a) cross-distance

PARE

UGP (Ours)

(b) cross-dataset

Figure 1. Illustration of the generalization performance of leading methods [28, 38, 39] in cross-distance and cross-dataset.
(a) Cross-distance generalization: train on KITTI@10m, test
on KITTI@40m. (b) Cross-dataset generalization: train on
nuScenes@10m [4], test on KITTI@10m. These methods experience substantial performance degradation due to poor generalization. In contrast, our method achieves the best registration results
on both cross-distance and cross-dataset.

speeds or times) and 2) cross-dataset variations (e.g., point
clouds collected in distinct environments). To tackle these
real-world challenges, this research seeks to develop a LiDAR point cloud registration framework that can effectively
generalize across both cross-distance and cross-dataset variations.
Recently, learning-based methods for point cloud registration have gained prominence [1, 3, 5, 9, 13, 16, 27, 40].
However, most of these methods focus on enhancing per-

22244

