This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RAP: Retrieval-Augmented Personalization for Multimodal Large
Language Models
Haoran Hao1,2∗ , Jiaming Han1∗ , Changsheng Li3 , Yu-Feng Li2 , Xiangyu Yue1†
MMLab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
3
Beijing Institute of Technology
1

2

This is <K>,
She lives in Korea.

remember

This is <J>,
He is <K>’s boyfriend.
<J>

Personalized Captioning

user database

<K>

K

J

<K> and <J> enjoying a relaxing afternoon at a
trendy café.

L

A

Personalized Conversation
What is <K> doing?

retrieve

<K> is sitting at a table in a café, wearing a blue
polka-dot dress. She is holding a glass of a pinkish
drink with a straw and appears to be sipping from it.

generate

What’s the relationship between them?
<J> is <K>’s boyfriend, based on the image, they
appear to be enjoying each other's company at a
café, their relaxed body language and the casual
setting imply a close and comfortable relationship.

RAP-MLLM

Figure 1. Introduce some user-specific concepts to our RAP-MLLM, it can remember them and achieve excellent performance in a variety
of personalized multimodal generation tasks.

concept editing via updating the external database. To further improve generation quality and alignment with userspecific information, we design a pipeline for data collection and create a specialized dataset for personalized training of MLLMs. Based on the dataset, we train a series
of MLLMs as personalized multimodal assistants. By pretraining on large-scale dataset, RAP-MLLMs can generalize to infinite visual concepts without additional finetuning. Our models demonstrate outstanding flexibility and
generation quality across a variety of tasks, such as personalized image captioning, question answering and visual
recognition. The code, data and models are available at
https://hoar012.github.io/RAP-Project/.

Abstract
The development of large language models (LLMs) has significantly enhanced the capabilities of multimodal LLMs
(MLLMs) as general assistants. However, lack of userspecific knowledge still restricts their application in human’s daily life. In this paper, we introduce the Retrieval
Augmented Personalization (RAP) framework for MLLMs’
personalization. Starting from a general MLLM, we turn
it into a personalized assistant in three steps. (a) Remember: We design a key-value database to store userrelated information, e.g., user’s name, avatar and other
attributes. (b) Retrieve: When the user initiates a conversation, RAP will retrieve relevant information from the
database using a multimodal retriever. (c) Generate: The
input query and retrieved concepts’ information are fed into
MLLMs to generate personalized, knowledge-augmented
responses. Unlike previous methods, RAP allows real-time

1. Introduction

∗ Equal contribution † Corresponding author

Recently, the development of large language models
(LLMs) has significantly enhanced their language processing and generating capabilities [60]. Building on this
foundation, the integration of visual and textual ability

14538

