This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

M3 -VOS: Multi-Phase, Multi-Transition, and Multi-Scenery
Video Object Segmentation
Zixuan Chen1 * Jiaxin Li1,2 * Junxuan Liang1 Liming Tan1 Yejie Guo1
Cewu Lu1,2 Yong-Lu Li1,2†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute
{m13953842591, li jiaxin, whitefork, spinningfever, gyj123, lucewu, yonglu li}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Intelligent robots need to interact with diverse objects
across various environments. The appearance and state
of objects frequently undergo complex transformations depending on the object properties, e.g., phase transitions.
However, in the vision community, segmenting dynamic
objects with phase transitions is overlooked. In light of
this, we introduce the concept of phase in segmentation,
which categorizes real-world objects based on their visual characteristics and potential morphological and appearance changes. Then, we present a new benchmark,
Multi-Phase, Multi-Transition, and Multi-Scenery Video
Object Segmentation (M3 -VOS), to verify the ability of
models to understand object phases, which consists of
471 high-resolution videos spanning over 10 distinct everyday scenarios. It provides dense instance mask annotations that capture both object phases and their transitions. We evaluate state-of-the-art methods on M3 -VOS,
yielding several key insights. Notably, current appearancebased approaches show significant room for improvement
when handling objects with phase transitions. The inherent changes in disorder suggest that the predictive performance of the forward entropy-increasing process can
be improved through a reverse entropy-reducing process.
These findings lead us to propose ReVOS, a new plug-andplay model that improves its performance by reversal refinement. Our data and code will be publicly available
at https://zixuan-chen.github.io/M-cubeVOS.github.io/.

shifting from traditional category recognition [14] to deeper
levels of comprehension, such as identifying higher-level
affordances [10] and attributes [12], which help establishing
the concepts of objects in interactions with environment.
In the real world, intelligent robots need to interact with
various objects in diverse ways, during which objects exhibit a range of morphological and appearance changes influenced by their inherent characteristics, the nature of the
environment, and the specific interactions occurring. Particularly, the phase characteristics of objects describe their
intrinsic morphological features and change dynamics.
Objects with different phase characteristics exhibit distinct change features when subjected to the same interactions. For instance, placing solid coffee beans in a blender
results in their transformation into a powdered form. In contrast, pouring milk into the blender causes it to splash and
flow continuously during blending, potentially even leading to separation at the end. In addition to transformations
within phase states, cross-state phase changes are common
in the real world, endowing objects with properties they
originally did not have. For example, dry ice rapidly sublimates, producing a lot of mist and water droplets, which
will quickly frost at lower temperatures as Fig. 1. Therefore,
a deep understanding of an object’s intrinsic phase characteristics and the properties of phase transition is crucial for
robots to perceive the world, manipulate objects, and fulfill
various complex functions according to human needs.
Despite efforts to explore the visual understanding of object change characteristics from various perspectives, such
as OCL [18], which focuses on changes in object usability,
VOST [32] and VSCOS [37], which emphasize the segmentation of objects with appearance variations, most works remain limited to a single phase. They often overlook the understanding of object knowledge across phase transitions.
Thus, to address the absence of object phase transition
understanding, we first categorize different objects based on
their visual features and change characteristics commonly
observed in daily life. Furthermore, we introduce M3 VOS, a fine-grained text-visual annotated dataset for object

1. Introduction
Object understanding is crucial, especially for Embodied
AI. Lately, large-scale datasets and data-driven methods
[6, 19] have advanced research in object understanding,
* The first two authors contribute equally.
† Corresponding author.

29193

