This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MIMO: A medical vision language model with visual referring multimodal input
and pixel grounding multimodal output
Yanyuan Chen1† , Dexuan Xu2† , Yu Huang3* , Songkun Zhan1 , Hanpin Wang2
Dongxue Chen4 , Xueping Wang4 , Meikang Qiu5 , Hang Li6*
1

School of Software & Microelectronics, Peking University, 2 School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University
4
Peking University Sixth Hospital, 5 Augusta University, 6 Peking University First Hospital

Abstract
Currently, medical vision language models are widely
used in medical vision question answering tasks. However, existing models are confronted with two issues: for
input, the model only relies on text instructions and lacks
direct understanding of visual clues in the image; for output, the model only gives text answers and lacks connection
with key areas in the image. To address these issues, we
propose a unified medical vision language model MIMO,
with visual referring Multimodal Input and pixel grounding Multimodal Output. MIMO can not only combine visual clues and textual instructions to understand complex
medical images and semantics, but can also ground medical
terminologies in textual output within the image. To overcome the scarcity of relevant data in the medical field, we
propose MIMOSeg, a comprehensive medical multimodal
dataset including 895K samples. MIMOSeg is constructed
from four different perspectives, covering basic instruction
following and complex question answering with multimodal
input and multimodal output. We conduct experiments
on several downstream medical multimodal tasks. Extensive experimental results verify that MIMO can uniquely
combine visual referring and pixel grounding capabilities,
which are not available in previous models. Our project can
be found in https://github.com/pkusixspace/
MIMO.

1. Introduction
Currently, medical vision-language models (MVLMs)
equip large language models (LLMs) with visual perception
modules for image understanding and leverage the powerful capabilities of LLMs to comprehend complex textual
† Equally contributing first authors.
* Yu Huang and Hang Li are corresponding authors.

(a)
Traditional
Medical VLMs

✖︎visual referring
✖︎pixel grounding

In this chest CT scan, a mass is observed in the hilar region of the
middle and lower lobes of the right lung. I am referring to the
irregular mass with smooth outer edges that appears as a wall-like
feature. Specifically, it is located in the left half of the image, near
the right edge of the large dark translucent area on the left side of
the image. What's its relationship with adjacent organs suggest?
There are signs of lung atelectasis in the right middle lobe, with the
mass protruding from the edge of the atelectatic lung. The right
middle bronchus shows local bronchial lumen obstruction and bronchial
wall thickening. These findings suggest a high likelihood of
advanced-stage central squamous cell carcinoma.

(b)
Ours: MIMO

☑︎visual referring
☑︎pixel grounding

In this chest CT scan, the bounding box indicates a mass in the
hilar region of the middle and lower lobes of the right lung, it appears
as a wall-like feature with smooth outer edges. What's its relationship
with adjacent organs suggest?

There are signs of lung atelectasis in the right middle lobe, with
the mass protruding from the edge of the atelectatic lung. The right
middle bronchus shows local bronchial lumen obstruction and bronchial
wall thickening. These findings suggest a high likelihood of advancedstage central squamous cell carcinoma.

Figure 1. An illustration of visual referring and pixel grounding
capabilities.

queries [7, 14, 19], demonstrating outstanding performance
in medical visual question answering (MVQA). However,
current models mainly use textual instructions to query the
entire image, and subsequently output textual responses for
image-related question answering tasks. While this approach enables a rich variety of queries and responses on
the text side, it exhibits significant shortcomings in MVLM:
unlike general domains, most medical terminologies typically involve specialized expressions. The limitations of
text-based input and output may lead to expressions that are
either overly concise or excessively complicated.

24732

