This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gyro-based Neural Single Image Deblurring
Heemin Yang1

Jaesung Rim2

Seungyong Lee1

Seung-Hwan Baek1,2

Sunghyun Cho1,2

POSTECH CSE1 & GSAI2
{heeminid, jsrim123, leesy, shwbaek, s.cho}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we present GyroDeblurNet, a novel singleimage deblurring method that utilizes a gyro sensor to resolve the ill-posedness of image deblurring. The gyro sensor
provides valuable information about camera motion that
can improve deblurring quality. However, exploiting realworld gyro data is challenging due to errors from various
sources. To handle these errors, GyroDeblurNet is equipped
with two novel neural network blocks: a gyro refinement
block and a gyro deblurring block. The gyro refinement
block refines the erroneous gyro data using the blur information from the input image. The gyro deblurring block removes blur from the input image using the refined gyro data
and further compensates for gyro error by leveraging the
blur information from the input image. For training a neural network with erroneous gyro data, we propose a training strategy based on the curriculum learning. We also introduce a novel gyro data embedding scheme to represent
real-world intricate camera shakes. Finally, we present both
synthetic and real-world datasets for training and evaluating gyro-based single image deblurring. Our experiments
demonstrate that our approach achieves state-of-the-art deblurring quality by effectively utilizing erroneous gyro data.

(a) Real‐world image (b) Gyro visualization (c) Deblurred result

Figure 1. Our method shows robust performance even with errors
in real-world gyro data. (a) A real-world blurry image. (b) Gyro
data visualization onto the blurry image. The gyro data do not perfectly match the blur trajectories due to errors. (c) Our deblurred
result.

1. Introduction

proaches based on blur models use gyro data to guide blur
kernel estimation [10, 14, 16, 29, 41, 42]. However, their
performance is limited by restrictive blur models that struggle to handle noise, nonlinear camera response functions,
saturated pixels, moving objects, and other challenges effectively. With the advancement of deep learning, DNNbased approaches have also been proposed to exploit gyro
data [15, 23, 30, 34, 46]. Thanks to the remarkable capabilities of DNNs and the rich information from gyro sensors,
these methods demonstrate superior performance compared
to the classical gyro-based approaches.
However, recent DNN-based methods that utilize gyro
data are still limited in handling real-world blurred images.
First, gyro data from mobile devices such as smartphones
usually contain a significant amount of noise caused by various sources [8, 16, 17]. Second, gyro sensors measure the
angular velocity around their center. Therefore, recent gyrobased methods assume that the gyro sensor and the camera
share the same center and that the camera is only affected
by rotational motions. However, in practice, the positions
of the camera and the gyro sensor differ, and the camera experiences more complex shakes. Third, real-world blurred
images may have moving objects with different blur trajectories that cannot be captured by gyro sensors. All these
factors cause the motion information encoded in the gyro
data to be inconsistent with the blur in the blurred image
(Fig. 1-(b)), making it challenging to exploit gyro data in

Blur caused by camera shakes severely degrades image
quality as well as the performance of various computer vision tasks. To overcome the image degradation caused by
blur, single image deblurring has been extensively studied
for decades [5, 11, 14, 16, 33, 49, 53]. Recently, various
deep neural network (DNN)-based approaches have been
proposed and have shown significant performance improvements over classical approaches. [3, 6, 21, 22, 31, 44, 52,
54]. Nonetheless, they still fail on images with large blur
due to the severe ill-posedness of deblurring.
To address the ill-posedness of image deblurring, several attempts have been made to exploit the gyro sensors
that most smartphones are now equipped with. Classical ap-

23111

