This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mind the Time: Temporally-Controlled Multi-Event Video Generation
Ziyi Wu1,2,3 , Aliaksandr Siarohin1 , Willi Menapace1 , Ivan Skorokhodov1 ,
Yuwei Fang1 , Varnith Chordia1 , Igor Gilitschenski2,3,→ , Sergey Tulyakov1,→
1
Snap Research, 2 University of Toronto, 3 Vector Institute

Prompts: “An old lady waves her right hand” → “makes a thumbs-up gesture” → “makes a heart gesture” → “gives a blow kiss”

Prompts: “A man is typing on a laptop” → “touches his headphone with his right hand” → “closes the laptop with his left hand” → “stands up”

Prompts: “A man is smiling” → “looks to his left with a surprised face” → “lowers his head with a sad face” → “smiles to the camera again”

Prompts: “A cat is on a table” → “jumps to the floor” → “jumps to the sofa” → “walks to the table again” → “sits down and looks around”

Figure 1. Time-controlled multi-event video generation with MinT. Given a sequence of event text prompts and their desired start and
end timestamps, MinT synthesizes smoothly connected events with consistent subjects and backgrounds. In addition, it can control the
time span of each event flexibly. Here, we show the results of sequential gestures, daily activities, facial expressions, and cat movements.

Abstract
Real-world videos consist of sequences of events. Generating such sequences with precise temporal control is infeasible with existing video generators that rely on a single paragraph of text as input. When tasked with generating multiple events described using a single prompt, such
methods often ignore some of the events or fail to arrange
them in the correct order. To address this limitation, we
present MinT, a multi-event video generator with temporal
control. Our key insight is to bind each event to a specific
period in the generated video, which allows the model to
focus on one event at a time. To enable time-aware interactions between event captions and video tokens, we design
a time-based positional encoding method, dubbed ReRoPE.
This encoding helps to guide the cross-attention operation.
By fine-tuning a pre-trained video diffusion transformer on
temporally grounded data, our approach produces coherent videos with smoothly connected events. For the first
time in the literature, our model offers control over the
timing of events in generated videos. Extensive experi-

ments demonstrate that MinT outperforms existing commercial and open-source models by a large margin. Additional
results and details are available at our project page.

1. Introduction

23989

Recent research in video diffusion models [39] has achieved
tremendous progress [9, 10, 14, 15, 28, 38, 71]. These approaches typically rely on a single text prompt, and generate
videos capturing only a single event. In contrast, real-world
videos often comprise sequences of events with rich dynamics. Thus, achieving realism requires the ability to generate
multiple events with fine-grained temporal control [65, 90].
A naive solution to multi-event video generation is to
concatenate all event descriptions into a single, extended
prompt, such as “A man raises his arms, lowers them down,
and then moves them left and right”. However, Fig. 2 shows
that even state-of-the-art video models struggle to produce
satisfactory results from such prompts. Some recent works
tackle this problem in an autoregressive way [65, 89]. They
generate each event individually with its own prompt, and

