This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Precise Embodied Dialogue Localization
via Causality Guided Diffusion
Haoyu Wang1 Le Wang1∗ Sanping Zhou1 Jingyi Tian1
Zheng Qin1 Yabing Wang1 Gang Hua2 Wei Tang3
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Dolby Laboratories at Bellevue 3 University of Illinois at Chicago
Abstract

(a) Denoising

Embodied localization based on vision and natural language dialogues presents a persistent challenge in embodied intelligence. Existing methods often approach this
task as an image translation problem, leveraging encoderdecoder architectures to predict heatmaps. However, these
methods frequently experience a deﬁciency in accuracy,
largely due to their heavy reliance on resolution. To address
this issue, we introduce CGD, a novel framework that utilizes causality guided diffusion model to directly model coordinate distributions. Speciﬁcally, CGD employs a denoising network to regress coordinates, while integrating causal
learning modules, namely back-door adjustment (BDA) and
front-door adjustment (FDA) to mitigate confounders during the diffusion process. This approach reduces the dependency on high resolution for improving accuracy, while
effectively minimizing spurious correlations, thereby promoting unbiased learning. By guiding the denoising process with causal adjustments, CGD offers ﬂexible control
over intensity, ensuring seamless integration with diffusion
models. Experimental results demonstrate that CGD outperforms state-of-the-art methods across all metrics. Additionally, we also evaluate CGD in a multi-shot setting,
achieving consistently high accuracy.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of embodied intelligence in
the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence, precise localization has
become a key capability for agents to perform downstream tasks such as emergency rescue [33, 45] and navigation [7, 22, 65]. However, achieving precise localization
is still challenging for agents, especially in many humanrobot interaction application scenarios [43]. To address this
* Corresponding author.

Guidance by causality

(b) Language Intervention

(c) Vision Intervention

Which room are you in?
A bedroom with Christmas tree.
Where are you standing exactly?

Christmas tree
bed

Left side of the end of bed

p Y = bed X = left = 67%

p Y = bed X = Christmas tree = 56%

p Y = bed do X = left = 54%

p Y = bed do X = Christmas tree = 43%

Figure 1. Thumbnail of CGD. De-confounded features are used
to guide stable and unbiased denoising process. Interventions are
implemented in both language and vision, enhancing the model’s
ability to generalize to unfamiliar environments.

problem, Embodied Dialogue Localization (EDL) [18] is
emerging as an important area of research that aims to provide agents with human-like map localization capabilities.
The main challenge of EDL is to achieve cross-modal
alignment and accurate localization on top-down maps. Previous approaches [17, 18, 71] modeled this challenge as
an image-to-image transformation problem, using UNet or
encoder-decoder architectures that convert raw images into
heatmaps to predict the probability of coordinates. However, while these methods achieve good accuracy in a coarse
range, they struggle with precise localization. DiaLoc [71]
attempts to alleviate this problem by dividing dialogs into
multiple rounds and updating the heatmap iteratively. However, heatmap-based methods are highly dependent on resolution, and resolution increase leads to exponential growth
in computational complexity. On the other hand, these
methods experience signiﬁcant accuracy drops when generalized to unseen environments. Although using data augmentation or generating additional dialogs using LLMs

13350

