This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PatchDEMUX: A Certifiably Robust Framework for Multi-label Classifiers
Against Adversarial Patches
Dennis Jacob
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA

Chong Xiang
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ, USA

Prateek Mittal
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ, USA

djacob18@berkeley.edu

cxiang@princeton.edu

pmittal@princeton.edu

Abstract

typically fall into one of two categories: empirical defenses
and certifiable defenses. The former leverages clever observations and heuristics to prevent attacks, but can be vulnerable to
adaptive attacks which bypass the defense through fundamental
weaknesses in design [5, 14, 25]. As a result, certifiable defenses against patch attacks have become popular for computer
vision tasks such as single-label classification and object detection [6, 17, 24, 29, 31–35, 37]; these methods feature provable
guarantees on robustness under any arbitrary patch attack.
Despite these successes, progress on certifiable defenses
against patch attacks has been limited for multi-label classification. Multi-label classifiers provide important capabilities
for simultaneously tracking multiple objects while maintaining
scalability. Many safety-critical systems depend on the visual
sensing capabilities of multi-label classifiers, such as traffic pattern recognition in autonomous vehicles [16], video surveillance
[10], and product identification for retail checkout [13]. Some
of these applications have become mainstream in industry (i.e.,
Waymo robotaxis, Just Walk Out checkout, etc.).
To address this challenge we propose PatchDEMUX, a certifiably robust framework against patch attacks for the multi-label
classification domain. Our design objective is to extend any
existing certifiable defense for single-label classification to the
multi-label classification domain. To do so, we leverage the
key insight that any multi-label classifier can be separated into
individual binary classification tasks. This approach allows us
to bootstrap notions of certified robustness based on precision
and recall; these are lower bounds on performance which are
guaranteed across all attack strategies in the patch threat model.
We also consider the scenario where an attacker is restricted
to a single patch and propose a novel certification procedure
that achieves stronger robustness bounds by using constraints in
vulnerable patch locations.
We find that PatchDEMUX achieves non-trivial robustness
on the MS-COCO and PASCAL VOC datasets while maintaining high performance on clean data. Specifically, when using
the current SOTA single-label certifiable defense PatchCleanser
as a backbone, PatchDEMUX attains 85.276% average precision on clean MS-COCO images and 44.902% certified robust
average precision. On the PASCAL VOC dataset PatchDEMUX achieves 92.593% clean average precision and 56.030%

Deep learning techniques have enabled vast improvements in
computer vision technologies. Nevertheless, these models are
vulnerable to adversarial patch attacks which catastrophically
impair performance. The physically realizable nature of these
attacks calls for certifiable defenses, which feature provable
guarantees on robustness. While certifiable defenses have been
successfully applied to single-label classification, limited work
has been done for multi-label classification. In this work, we
present PatchDEMUX, a certifiably robust framework for multilabel classifiers against adversarial patches. Our approach is a
generalizable method which can extend any existing certifiable
defense for single-label classification; this is done by considering the multi-label classification task as a series of isolated
binary classification problems to provably guarantee robustness.
Furthermore, in the scenario where an attacker is limited to a
single patch we propose an additional certification procedure
that can provide tighter robustness bounds. Using the current
state-of-the-art (SOTA) single-label certifiable defense PatchCleanser as a backbone, we find that PatchDEMUX can achieve
non-trivial robustness on the MS-COCO and PASCAL VOC
datasets while maintaining high clean performance1.

1. Introduction
Deep learning-based computer vision systems have helped transform modern society, contributing to the development of technologies such as self-driving cars, facial recognition, and more
[18]. Unfortunately, these performance boosts have come at a
security cost; attackers can use adversarial patches to perturb
patch-shaped regions in images and fool deep learning systems
[4, 30]. The patch threat model presents a unique challenge for
the security community due to its physically-realizable nature;
for instance, even a single well-designed patch that is printed
out can induce failure in the wild [4, 12, 26].
The importance of adversarial patches has made the design
of effective defenses a key research goal. Defense strategies
1 Our source code is available at https://github.com/inspiregroup/PatchDEMUX

9944

