This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CrossSDF: 3D Reconstruction of Thin Structures From Cross-Sections
Thomas Walker1 *

Salvatore Esposito1 *

Daniel Rebain2

Changjian Li1
1

Amir Vaxman1

Arno Onken1

Oisin Mac Aodha1
2

University of Edinburgh

University of British Columbia

Figure 1. We propose CrossSDF, a novel approach for reconstructing a 3D signed-distance field from 2D cross-sections. The input is a
set of 2D cross-sections that sample an unobserved ground-truth geometric object by planar intersection (denoted as black lines overlayed
on the ground truth Alveolis structure on the left). CrossSDF (middle) accurately reconstructs thin structures without breakages, oversmoothing, or cross-sectional artifacts observed in competing methods (right).

Abstract

1. Introduction

Reconstructing complex structures from planar crosssections is a challenging problem, with wide-reaching applications in medical imaging, manufacturing, and topography. Out-of-the-box point cloud reconstruction methods can
often fail due to the data sparsity between slicing planes,
while current bespoke methods struggle to reconstruct thin
geometric structures and preserve topological continuity.
This is important for medical applications where thin vessel structures are present in CT and MRI scans. This paper
introduces CrossSDF, a novel approach for extracting a 3D
signed distance field from 2D signed distances generated
from planar contours. Our approach makes the training of
neural SDFs contour-aware by using losses designed for the
case where geometry is known within 2D slices. Our results
demonstrate a significant improvement over existing methods, effectively reconstructing thin structures and producing accurate 3D models without the interpolation artifacts
or over-smoothing of prior approaches.

Reconstructing three-dimensional structures from sparse
two-dimensional cross-sectional data is a challenging task
often encountered in medical imaging [16, 18, 23], manufacturing [12], and topography [46]. In medical imaging
in particular, intricate branching structures such as blood
vessels and neural tissues must be reconstructed for their
correct interpretation in diagnoses and interventions [2].
These structures often appear as sparse and incoherent
within cross-sectional scan data, which presents a significant problem for reconstruction methods. While traditional
optimization-based reconstruction techniques designed for
slice data can be effective for parallel cross-sections sampled from simple shapes [6, 7, 10], they rely on interpolating between cross-sections, which can lead to significant
ridging artifacts between the slices [33]. Bespoke reconstruction algorithms that handle the more challenging problem of non-parallel cross-sections can scale poorly [9, 46],

30928

* Equal contribution.
† Project website: https://iamsalvatore.io/cross sdf

