This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

H ELVIPAD: A Real-World Dataset for Omnidirectional Stereo Depth Estimation
Mehdi Zayene1 Jannik Endres1,2 Albias Havolli1 Charles Corbière1 *
Salim Cherkaoui1 Alexandre Kontouli1 Alexandre Alahi1
1

EPFL, Switzerland 2 TU Darmstadt, Germany
https://vita-epfl.github.io/Helvipad/

Figure 1. Examples from the H ELVIPAD dataset in diverse settings (indoor, outdoor), under varied lighting (day, night). The dataset
consists of paired top-bottom images with corresponding depth maps, captured from a robot navigating in dynamic human environments.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Despite progress in stereo depth estimation, omnidirectional imaging remains underexplored, mainly due to the
lack of appropriate data. We introduce H ELVIPAD, a realworld dataset for omnidirectional stereo depth estimation,
featuring 40K video frames from video sequences across diverse environments, including crowded indoor and outdoor
scenes with various lighting conditions. Collected using
two 360° cameras in a top-bottom setup and a LiDAR sensor, the dataset includes accurate depth and disparity labels
by projecting 3D point clouds onto equirectangular images.
Additionally, we provide an augmented training set with
an increased label density by using depth completion. We
benchmark leading stereo depth estimation models for both
standard and omnidirectional images. The results show that
while recent stereo methods perform decently, a challenge
persists in accurately estimating depth in omnidirectional
imaging. To address this, we introduce necessary adaptations to stereo models, leading to improved performance.
* Project lead, contact: charles.corbiere@gmail.com.

26975

Mobile robots are increasingly used in real-world applications such as autonomous driving [18], healthcare [20], or
agriculture [12], where accurate 3D representations of dynamic human environments are crucial for navigation and
interaction. Depth estimation [14, 34, 38, 41] aims to help
build these representations by estimating the distance of surrounding objects from the robot’s viewpoint.
Historically, LiDAR sensors have been the gold standard
for capturing high-quality depth information due to their
precision and their 360° coverage. They come, however,
with significant limitations [39], such as providing point
clouds that are sparse, especially for objects in far range,
and with high deployment costs. This has driven growing interest in estimating depth from more accessible imaging devices, such as stereo cameras. In recent years, deep
learning approaches [19, 38, 42] and the release of larger
and more challenging benchmarks [17, 39] have greatly advanced the field of depth estimation. Yet, existing datasets
collected with stereo systems typically offer a limited field
of view, capturing frontal images or panoramic views that

