This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video-Guided Foley Sound Generation with Multimodal Controls
∗

Prem Seetharaman2
Bryan Russell2
Oriol Nieto2
Ziyang Chen1,2
David Bourgin2
Andrew Owens1
Justin Salamon2
1

2

University of Michigan

Adobe Research

https://ificl.github.io/MultiFoley/
(a) Foley with text control

(b) Foley with audio control

(c) Foley audio extension

Silent skateboard video

Silent cat video

+ ”skateboard,
wheels spinning”
− ”wind noise”

+ ”lion roaring”
− ”cat meowing”

Text prompt

Text prompt

Reference dog bark

Reference drum audio

Partial audio track

Partial audio track

Generated audio

Generated audio

Generated audio

Generated audio

Generated audio

Generated audio

+

+

Silent dog bark video

+

Silent basketball video

+

Silent footstep video

+

Silent splash video

+

audio to be
extended
(from sound effects database)

Figure 1. MultiFoley for video-guided sound generation with multimodal controls. We generate Foley sounds for silent videos with
various control signals to shape their audio. (a) Text prompts, both positive and negative, guide synchronized Foley generation. (b) Reference
audio from sound libraries defines the customized audio style. (c) A partial audio track is extended to produce a complete Foley sound. We
encourage the reader to watch and listen to the results in our website.

Abstract

across varied conditional inputs and outperforms existing
methods. Please see our project page for video results:
https://ificl.github.io/MultiFoley/

Generating sound effects for videos often requires creating
artistic sound effects that diverge significantly from reallife sources and flexible control in the sound design. To
address this problem, we introduce MultiFoley, a model
designed for video-guided sound generation that supports
multimodal conditioning through text, audio, and video.
Given a silent video and a text prompt, MultiFoley allows
users to create clean sounds (e.g., skateboard wheels spinning without wind noise) or more whimsical sounds (e.g.,
making a lion’s roar sound like a cat’s meow). MultiFoley also allows users to choose reference audio from sound
effects (SFX) libraries or partial videos for conditioning.
A key novelty of our model lies in its joint training on
both internet video datasets with low-quality audio and
professional SFX recordings, enabling high-quality, fullbandwidth (48kHz) audio generation. Through automated
evaluations and human studies, we demonstrate that MultiFoley successfully generates synchronized high-quality sounds

1. Introduction

* Work done during an internship at Adobe.

Sound designers, often create sound effects from different
sources that may not resemble the original video, such as
everyday objects or pre-recorded sound libraries, to create a
soundtrack for a video that synchronizes with on-screen actions. For example, they use crinkling paper for a warm fire,
a coconut shell for horse hooves, or the cracking of celery for
breaking bones. This process is known as Foley [1]. Instead
of replicating the true sounds, sound designers aim to achieve
an artistic effect that enhances the viewers’ experience.
Recent works [63, 66, 87, 90, 92] mainly formulated the
Foley problem as a video-to-audio generation task, generating sound effects that align temporally and semantically with
the video. However, those approaches restrict audio content
and lack the control designers need, as they often create

18770

