This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MMAudio: Taming Multimodal Joint Training
for High-Quality Video-to-Audio Synthesis
Masato Ishii2
Akio Hayakawa2
Takashi Shibuya2
1
2,3
Alexander Schwing
Yuki Mitsufuji
1
2
3
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Sony AI
Sony Group Corporation
Ho Kei Cheng1 *

{hokeikc2,aschwing}@illinois.edu, {masato.a.ishii,akio.hayakawa,takashi.tak.shibuya,yuhki.mitsufuji}@sony.com

     

Abstract

"Birds chirping, with
soft leaf rustling"

“birds”

We propose to synthesize high-quality and synchronized audio, given video and optional text conditions, using a novel
multimodal joint training framework (MMAudio). In contrast to single-modality training conditioned on (limited)
video data only, MMAudio is jointly trained with largerscale, readily available text-audio data to learn to generate
semantically aligned high-quality audio samples. Additionally, we improve audio-visual synchrony with a conditional
synchronization module that aligns video conditions with
audio latents at the frame level. Trained with a flow matching objective, MMAudio achieves new video-to-audio stateof-the-art among public models in terms of audio quality,
semantic alignment, and audio-visual synchronization, while
having a low inference time (1.23s to generate an 8s clip)
and just 157M parameters. MMAudio also achieves surprisingly competitive performance in text-to-audio generation,
showing that joint training does not hinder single-modality
performance. Code, models, and demo are available at:
hkchengrex.github.io/MMAudio.

1. Introduction
We are interested in Foley, i.e., for a given video we want to
synthesize ambient sound (e.g., rain, river flow) and sound
effects induced by visible events (e.g., a dog barks, a racket
hits a tennis ball). Note, Foley does not focus on synthesizing
background music or human speech, which is often added in
post-processing. Importantly, Foley requires to synthesize
convincing high-quality audio that is 1) semantically and 2)
temporally aligned to an input video. For semantic alignment, methods need to understand scene contexts and their
association with audio – the visual concept of rain should be
associated with the sound of splashing raindrops. For temporal alignment, methods need to understand audio-visual synchrony as humans can perceive audio-visual misalignment as

    



  




 

“heavy rain,
punctuated by
thunderclaps”

 
      


Figure 1. In addition to training on audio-visual-(text) datasets,
we perform multimodal joint training with high-quality, abundant
audio-text data which enables effective data scaling. At inference,
MMAudio generates conditions-aligned audio with video and/or
text guidance.

slight as 25 ms [51]. Inspired by the efficacy of training data
scaling demonstrated by recent works [8, 21, 53], we pursue
a data-driven approach to synthesize high-quality audio that
respects these two types of alignment.
Current state-of-the-art video-to-audio methods either
train only on audio-visual data [1] from scratch [67] or train
new “control modules” [20, 66, 69, 73] for pretrained textto-audio models on audio-visual data. The former is limited
by the amount of available training data: the most commonly used audio-visual dataset VGGSound [1] contains
only around 550 hours of videos. Audio-visual data are
expensive to curate at a large scale, as in-the-wild videos
from the Internet 1) contain music and speech1 , which has
limited utility for training a general Foley model, and 2)
contain non-diegetic [58] sounds such as background music
or sound effects added in post-processing, again unsuitable
for a Foley model. The latter, i.e., finetuning pretrained
text-to-audio models (with added control modules) on audiovisual data, enables models to benefit from audio-generation
knowledge obtained from larger-scale audio-text data (e.g.,
1 In AudioSet [9] (collected from YouTube), 82.48% of videos contain
either human speech or music according to the provided audio labels.

* Work done during an internship at Sony AI.

28901

