This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ROBO G ROUND: Robotic Manipulation with Grounded Vision-Language Priors
Haifeng Huang1,2∗ Xinyi Chen2∗ Yilun Chen2‡ Hao Li2 Xiaoshen Han2
Zehan Wang1 Tai Wang2 Jiangmiao Pang2
Zhou Zhao1,2†
1
2
Zhejiang University
Shanghai AI Laboratory
{huanghaifeng}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Previous Work

Recent advancements in robotic manipulation have highlighted the potential of intermediate representations for improving policy generalization. In this work, we explore
grounding masks as an effective intermediate representation, balancing two key advantages: (1) effective spatial
guidance that specifies target objects and placement areas
while also conveying information about object shape and
size, and (2) broad generalization potential driven by largescale vision-language models pretrained on diverse grounding datasets. We introduce ROBO G ROUND, a groundingaware robotic manipulation policy that leverages grounding
masks as an intermediate representation to guide policy networks in object manipulation tasks. To further explore and
enhance generalization, we propose an automated pipeline
for generating large-scale, simulated data with a diverse
set of objects and instructions. Extensive experiments show
the value of our dataset and the effectiveness of grounding masks as intermediate guidance, significantly enhancing the generalization abilities of robot policies. Code and
data will be available at robo-ground.github.io.

MimicGen

∗ Equal contribution.
‡ Project lead.
† Corresponding author.

• Work done during an internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory.

CALVIN

RoboGround (Ours)

Placement Area

Target Object

Figure 1. Examples of generated data and mask guidance for
robot policy. The generated data includes more object distractors
in the scene, leading to higher scene complexity. The robot policy
is guided by masks to localize the target object and placement area.

1. Introduction
The early low-level policies for manipulation [8, 25, 38,
50] primarily relied on imitation learning from collected
demonstrations, focusing on acquiring specific skills within
predefined scenes. Consequently, these policies exhibited
limited generalization capabilities. More recently, VisionLanguage-Action (VLA) models [5, 19] have emerged as a
promising approach for learning generalizable robotic policies. These models leverage large-scale robot training data
alongside pretrained Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [23,
32, 51] to develop broad manipulation capabilities. However, it is still challenging for these methods to generalize

RoboCasa

to novel settings without access to extensive datasets and
additional fine-tuning, both of which are costly.
Intermediate representations [2, 3, 15, 37] offer an alternative approach to generalized policy learning by providing
structured guidance to policy networks across diverse scenarios. Research in this area typically falls into two categories: accessible yet coarse-grained representations, such
as language instructions [2, 49], which are easy to generate but often lack the spatial precision required for finegrained object manipulation; and fine-grained but resourceintensive representations, such as goal images [4] or point

22540

