This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Link to the Past: Temporal Propagation for Fast 3D Human Reconstruction
from Monocular Video
Matthew Marchellus, Nadhira Noor, and In Kyu Park
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Inha University
Incheon 22212, Korea
{marchellusmatthew@gmail.com, nadhirannoor@gmail.com, pik@inha.ac.kr}

Figure 1. We propose TemPoFast3D, a novel pipeline to leverage the temporal coherency of human appearance for efficient and accurate
3D human reconstruction from monocular videos. We temporally propagate information from the past frames result by blending the pixelaligned implicit function and avatar reconstruction method.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Real-time 3D human reconstruction from monocular video
streams is a fundamental challenge that could revolutionize virtual reality, telepresence, and human-computer interaction. These applications demand methods that can accurately reconstruct 3D clothed humans from single images or video streams, capturing both detailed geometry and
realistic appearance. However, existing approaches often
struggle to balance the computational efficiency required
for video with the high fidelity demanded by real-world applications.

Fast 3D clothed human reconstruction from monocular
video remains a significant challenge in computer vision,
particularly in balancing computational efficiency with reconstruction quality. Current approaches are either focused
on static image reconstruction but too computationally intensive, or achieve high quality through per-video optimization that requires minutes to hours of processing, making
them unsuitable for real-time applications. To this end, we
present TemPoFast3D, a novel method that leverages temporal coherency of human appearance to reduce redundant
computation while maintaining reconstruction quality. Our
approach is a “plug-and play” solution that uniquely transforms pixel-aligned reconstruction networks to handle continuous video streams by maintaining and refining a canonical appearance representation through efficient coordinate
mapping. Extensive experiments demonstrate that TemPoFast3D matches or exceeds state-of-the-art methods across
standard metrics while providing high-quality textured reconstruction across diverse pose and appearance, with a
maximum speed of 12 FPS.

Recent approaches to 3D clothed human reconstruction primarily follow two distinct paradigms. (i) Singleimage reconstruction methods rely on pixel-aligned features [1, 9, 30, 31, 36, 37, 43, 45] to capture detailed geometry and textures through implicit functions. (ii) Video-based
reconstruction methods leverage pose deformation with either implicit neural fields [7, 13–15, 27, 33–35] or Gaussian splatting [11, 23, 28, 32] for articulated 3D modeling.
While producing high-quality results, these methods require
extensive optimization (i.e. minutes to hours) and multiple passes over the video, making them unsuitable for real-

6190

