This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Crab: A Unified Audio-Visual Scene Understanding Model
with Explicit Cooperation

20241114

Henghui Du1,3,* , Guangyao Li2 , Chang Zhou3 , Chunjie Zhang3 , Alan Zhao3 , Di Hu1,B
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
AI Technology Center, Online Video Business Unit, Tencent PCG
1
3

{cserdu,dihu}@ruc.edu.cn, 2 guangyaoli@tsinghua.edu.cn

{cserdu,chanzhou,Chunjie Zhang,Alan Zhao}@tencent.com

Temporal localization
Please describe the events and time range that occurred in the video.
A red car appears from a distance and
drives down a dirt road, kicking up
dust and creating a cloud of smoke.
The car is visible and audible from the
4th to the 9th second.

Audio-visual scene understanding task
AVE/AVVP/AVQA/AVS/ARIG/…

Spatial localization
Please recognize the category of
object that makes the sound and then
output the location
coordinates.

Pixel-level understanding

Spatio-temporal reasoning
What is the left
instrument of the first
sounding instrument?

In the video, three people are playing musical instruments in front of a
Christmas tree. The man on the left is playing the cello, the man in the middle
is playing the violin, and the man on the right is playing the piano. At the 2nd
second, the piano sounds first. Then, starting from the 4th second, three
instruments play together. The instrument on the left of the piano is the cello.
So the answer is cello.

MLLMs

Temporal localization
Spatial localization
Spatio-temporal reasoning
Pixel-level understanding

Please segment out
the object that makes
sound on the left.

Please segment out
the sounding object.

Figure 1. We present Crab, a unified audio-visual scene understanding model with explicit cooperation, which can complete various
audio-visual tasks. It is trained on an instruction-tuning dataset with explicit reasoning process, which clarifies the cooperative relationship
among tasks. Furthermore, to alleviate the interference caused by the learning process of complex audiovisual data and facilitate concrete
cooperation, an interaction-aware LoRA structure is designed to enable the model focus on different aspects of data interaction.

cooperation from both the perspectives of data and model
thoroughly. Specifically, considering the labels of existing
datasets are simple words, we carefully refine these datasets
and construct an Audio-Visual Unified Instruction-tuning
dataset with Explicit reasoning process (AV-UIE), which
clarifies the cooperative relationship among tasks. Subsequently, to facilitate concrete cooperation in learning stage,
an interaction-aware LoRA structure with multiple LoRA
heads is designed to learn different aspects of audiovisual
data interaction. By unifying the explicit cooperation across
the data and model aspect, our method not only surpasses
existing unified audio-visual model on multiple tasks, but
also outperforms most specialized models for certain tasks.
Furthermore, we also visualize the process of explicit cooperation and surprisingly find that each LoRA head has certain audio-visual understanding ability. Code and dataset:
https://github.com/GeWu-Lab/Crab

Abstract
In recent years, numerous tasks have been proposed to
encourage model to develop specified capability in understanding audio-visual scene, primarily categorized into
temporal localization, spatial localization, spatio-temporal
reasoning, and pixel-level understanding. Instead, human possesses a unified understanding ability for diversified tasks. Therefore, designing an audio-visual model
with general capability to unify these tasks is of great
value. However, simply joint training for all tasks can
lead to interference due to the heterogeneity of audiovisual data and complex relationship among tasks. We argue that this problem can be solved through explicit cooperation among tasks. To achieve this goal, we propose a
unified learning method which achieves explicit inter-task
* Intern at Tencent PCG, B Corresponding author.

18804

