This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Preserve or Modify? Context-Aware Evaluation for Balancing
Preservation and Modification in Text-Guided Image Editing
∗

Yoonjeon Kim1, Soohyun Ryu1,* Yeonsung Jung1
Joowon Kim1 June Yong Yang1 Jaeryong Hwang2
1

KAIST

2

Republic of Korea Naval Academy

Hyunkoo Lee1
Eunho Yang1,3,†
3

AITRICS

https://augclip.github.io/

Abstract

Preserve

The development of vision-language and generative
models has significantly advanced text-guided image
editing, which seeks the preservation of core elements
in the source image while implementing modifications
based on the target text. However, existing metrics have
a context-blindness problem, indiscriminately applying the same evaluation criteria on completely different pairs of source image and target text, biasing towards either modification or preservation. Directional
CLIP similarity, the only metric that considers both
source image and target text, is also biased towards
modification aspects and attends to irrelevant editing
regions of the image. We propose AugCLIP, a contextaware metric that adaptively coordinates preservation
and modification aspects, depending on the specific context of a given source image and target text. This
is done by deriving the CLIP representation of an
ideally edited image, that preserves the source image
with necessary modifications to align with target text.
More specifically, using a multi-modal large language
model, AugCLIP augments the textual descriptions of
the source and target, then calculates a modification
vector through a hyperplane that separates source and
target attributes in CLIP space. Extensive experiments
on five benchmark datasets, encompassing a diverse
range of editing scenarios, show that AugCLIP aligns
remarkably well with human evaluation standards, outperforming existing metrics. The code is available at
https: // github. com/ augclip/ augclip_ eval .

OR

Modify ?

Sitting down

P✓

M✗

m△

P✓

Tree in behind

P✓

M✗

m△

P✓

Orange T-shirt

P✗

M✓

M✓

M✓

Blue cap

P✗

M✓

M✓

Modify

Presv. Modif. CLIP
!"# AugCLIP
Metric Metric

(b) Guideline

(c) Evaluation Standard of Metrics

Preserve
Red armor suit

“Turn into Ironman”

(a) Given Context

Ironman mask

M✓
<latexit sha1_base64="pXCDjGcYCpyCy1Nr/J7nNgYK5Aw=">AAAB+XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/oh69BIvgqSTi17Hai4KHCvYD2lA22227dLMJu5NiCf0nXjwo4tV/4s1/47bNQasPBh7vzTAzL4gF1+i6X1ZuaXlldS2/XtjY3NresXf36jpKFGU1GolINQOimeCS1ZCjYM1YMRIGgjWCYWXqN0ZMaR7JBxzHzA9JX/IepwSN1LHtNrJHREyvkn7l7rY66dhFt+TO4PwlXkaKkKHasT/b3YgmIZNIBdG65bkx+ilRyKlgk0I70SwmdEj6rGWoJCHTfjq7fOIcGaXr9CJlSqIzU39OpCTUehwGpjMkONCL3lT8z2sl2Lv0Uy7jBJmk80W9RDgYOdMYnC5XjKIYG0Ko4uZWhw6IIhRNWAUTgrf48l9SPyl556Wz+9Ni+TqLIw8HcAjH4MEFlOEGqlADCiN4ghd4tVLr2Xqz3uetOSub2YdfsD6+AYmuk5s=</latexit>

Figure 1. Context Blindness Problem of Existing
Evaluation Metrics. Evaluation metrics should consider
the specific context of a given source image and target text.
However, existing metrics exhibit context-blindness, applying the same criteria of either ‘preserve’ (P) or ‘modify’ (M)
across the entire image. Our proposed metric, AugCLIP, is a
context-aware metric that flexibly applies different criteria
to local regions of the image.

1. Introduction

been widely utilized as creative tools for image editing
via text instructions. Text-guided image editing models
enable the modification of images in response to textual
guidance, ensuring that changes are aligned with the
provided instructions. The primary objective of these
models is to apply the necessary modifications guided
by the target text while preserving most of the source
image.
Despite the remarkable advancements in editing
models, there has been a lack of rigorous evaluation
methods, tailored specifically for text-guided image
editing. Consequently, most studies [1, 2, 6, 9, 13, 15,
26] have heavily relied on human evaluation, which provides balanced consideration of preservation and modification aspects. However, as it is costly and impractical
for real-world applications, researchers have adapted
automatic evaluation metrics [3, 10, 11, 29] originally

Building on advancements in vision-language models [7, 19, 24], recent generative models [2, 8, 12] have
∗ Equal contribution,† Corresponding Author.

23474

