This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoadSocial: A Diverse VideoQA Dataset and Benchmark for Road Event
Understanding from Social Video Narratives
Chirag Parikh*, Deepti Rawat*, Rakshitha R. T., Tathagata Ghosh, and Ravi Kiran Sarvadevabhatla
CVIT & iHub-Data, IIIT Hyderabad, India
https://roadsocial.github.io

Abstract
We introduce RoadSocial, a large-scale, diverse VideoQA
dataset tailored for generic road event understanding from
social media narratives. Unlike existing datasets limited
by regional bias, viewpoint bias and expert-driven annotations, RoadSocial captures the global complexity of road
events with varied geographies, camera viewpoints (CCTV,
handheld, drones) and rich social discourse. Our scalable semi-automatic annotation framework leverages Text
LLMs and Video LLMs to generate comprehensive questionanswer pairs across 12 challenging QA tasks, pushing the
boundaries of road event understanding. RoadSocial is derived from social media videos spanning 14M frames and
414K social comments, resulting in a dataset with 13.2K
videos, 674 tags and 260K high-quality QA pairs. We evaluate 18 Video LLMs (open-source and proprietary, drivingspecific and general-purpose) on our road event understanding benchmark. We also demonstrate RoadSocial’s
utility in improving road event understanding capabilities
of general-purpose Video LLMs.

1. Introduction
A road event typically refers to any incident, activity, or
condition occurring on or around the roadway that affects
traffic flow, safety, or road usage. The ability to recognize
and interpret road events is essential for safe and reliable intelligent vehicles and transportation systems. In this regard,
large-scale video datasets of road events are used to develop
assistive models [2, 3, 8, 20, 23, 27]. Many recent datasets
contain videos with accompanying question-answer text
pairs and other text metadata [16, 21, 22, 26]. Such datasets
have become a de facto choice for training Video Large Language Models (Video LLMs) [7, 13, 26, 38].
However, current video-based road event understanding
approaches are limited by region-specific datasets, neglect* Equal contribution.

ing the diversity of global road scenarios. Most datasets
focus on dashcam views for autonomous driving, overlooking other camera types such as CCTV, handheld, and
drone-based. They also lack annotations on generic events
(e.g. defensive driving, near-misses). Due to the reliance
on regionally-biased expert annotators, the broader and
richer contextual insights from real-world social discourse
on road events are absent. Furthermore, existing evaluation frameworks fail to test the Video LLMs’ ability to distinguish informative road event details from misleading information, essential for developing reliable, hallucinationresistant road event understanding systems.
To address these limitations and to enable foundational
video language models for generic road event understanding, we introduce RoadSocial, a large-scale and diverse
Video Question Answer (VideoQA) dataset. RoadSocial is
obtained by processing social media videos and the narratives accompanying these videos. The inherent diversity
of social media in terms of geographical locations, camera viewpoints, road event types and social commentary
addresses shortcomings of video datasets mentioned previously. Specifically, we make the following contributions:
• RoadSocial: a large-scale, diverse VideoQA resource for
road events, derived from social media videos spanning
14M frames and 414K social comments, resulting in a
dataset with 13.2K videos, 674 unique tags, and 260K
high-quality QA pairs.
• A semi-automatic annotation framework using Text LLM
and Video LLM that processes social media video narratives and generates comprehensive QA pairs across 12
distinct challenging tasks.
• A robust evaluation framework incorporating non-road
event videos and irrelevant questions to assess the robustness of Video LLMs to hallucinations.
• A demonstration of RoadSocial’s utility in improving
road event understanding capabilities of general-purpose
Video LLM.
• Critical insights into 18 Video LLMs’ performance on
road event understanding, obtained from their evaluation

19002

