This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EMOE: Modality-Specific Enhanced Dynamic Emotion Experts
Yiyang Fang*, Wenke Huang*, Guancheng Wan*, Kehua Su†, Mang Ye†
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University.
{fangyiyang, wenkehuang, yemang}@whu.edu.cn
https://github.com/fuyyyyy/EMOE

Language

Language

…

I’m fine

Vision

Vision

…

Acoustic

Acoustic

…

Importance

Multimodal Emotion Recognition (MER) aims to predict
human emotions by leveraging multiple modalities, such as
vision, acoustics, and language. However, due to the heterogeneity of these modalities, MER faces two key challenges: modality balance dilemma and modality specialization disappearance. Existing methods often overlook
the varying importance of modalities across samples in
tackling the modality balance dilemma. Moreover, mainstream decoupling methods, while preserving modalityspecific information, often neglect the predictive capability
of unimodal data. To address these, we propose a novel
model, Modality-Specific Enhanced Dynamic Emotion Experts (EMOE), consisting of: (1) Mixture of Modality Experts for dynamically adjusting modality importance based
on sample features, and (2) Unimodal Distillation to retain single-modality predictive ability within fused features.
EMOE enables adaptive fusion by learning a unique modality weight distribution for each sample, enhancing multimodal predictions with single-modality predictions to balance invariant and specific features in emotion recognition. Experimental results on benchmark datasets show that
EMOE achieves superior or comparable performance to
state-of-the-art methods. Additionally, we extend EMOE to
Multimodal Intent Recognition (MIR), further demonstrating its effectiveness and versatility.

This movie is
absolutely
amazing!

Importance

Abstract

Modality

…
Modality

(a) Modality Importance Examples
unimodal

Fusion
Network

multimodal

(b) Multimodal Fusion Process

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustration of modality importance examples and multimodal fusion process in MER. (a) illustrates a phenomenon where
the modality content in different samples affects the varying importance of each modality during fusion. (In this paper, sample
refers to the inputs from all modalities for a single instance.) (b)
shows that during fusion, the model emphasizes multimodal invariant features while disregarding unimodal ability.

Multimodal Emotion Recognition (MER) is a critical task
in affective computing that aims to predict human emotions
by leveraging multiple data modalities, including vision,
acoustics, and language. Compared to a single modality,
different modalities provide unique and complementary in* Equal contributions
† Corresponding Author

14314

formation [54], which can enhance the prediction of emotional behaviors. With the development of deep learning
[1, 19, 20, 59], MER has emerged as a rapidly expanding research field in affective computing [40], offering numerous
applications, like intelligent tutoring systems [38], product
feedback assessment [33], and robotics [31].
For MER, different modalities within the same video
segment are often complementary, providing additional
cues for semantic and emotional disambiguation. However, due to differences in how each modality captures and
expresses information, as well as the varying amounts of

