This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HandOS: 3D Hand Reconstruction in One Stage
Xingyu Chen1 * Zhuheng Song3 * Xiaoke Jiang2 Yaoqing Hu1 Junzhi Yu1B Lei Zhang2B
1
Department of Advanced Manufacturing and Robotics, College of Engineering, Peking University
2
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA Research)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
idea-research.github.io/HandOSweb

Previous art

Det. & Crop

Ours

Flip & Fuse

Input

2D box and joints

3D mesh

HandOS

Recon.

Left? & Flip
Figure 1. We present HandOS, a one-stage approach for hand reconstruction that substantially streamlines the paradigm. Additionally, we
demonstrate that HandOS effectively adapts to diverse complex scenarios, making it highly applicable to real-world applications.

Abstract
Existing approaches of hand reconstruction predominantly
adhere to a multi-stage framework, encompassing detection, left-right classification, and pose estimation. This
paradigm induces redundant computation and cumulative
errors. In this work, we propose HandOS, an end-to-end
framework for 3D hand reconstruction. Our central motivation lies in leveraging a frozen detector as the foundation
while incorporating auxiliary modules for 2D and 3D keypoint estimation. In this manner, we integrate the pose estimation capacity into the detection framework, while at the
same time obviating the necessity of using the left-right category as a prerequisite. Specifically, we propose an interactive 2D-3D decoder, where 2D joint semantics is derived
from detection cues while 3D representation is lifted from

those of 2D joints. Furthermore, hierarchical attention is
designed to enable the concurrent modeling of 2D joints, 3D
vertices, and camera translation. Consequently, we achieve
an end-to-end integration of hand detection, 2D pose estimation, and 3D mesh reconstruction within a one-stage
framework, so that the above multi-stage drawbacks are
overcome. Meanwhile, the HandOS reaches state-of-the-art
performances on public benchmarks, e.g., 5.0 PA-MPJPE
on FreiHand and 64.6% PCK@0.05 on HInt-Ego4D.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution. B Corresponding author. This work was done
during Xingyu Chen’s academic visit at IDEA Research and while
Zhuheng Song was an intern at IDEA Research.

The intellectual superiority of humans is expressed through
their ability to use the hand to create, shape, and interact
with the world. In the era of computer science and intelligence, hand understanding is crucial in reality technique
[20, 53], behavior understanding [26, 42], interaction modeling [13, 63], embodied intelligence [10, 56], and etc.

17304

