This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Blurred LiDAR for Sharper 3D: Robust Handheld
3D Scanning with Diffuse LiDAR and RGB
Nikhil Behari1 , Aaron Young1 , Siddharth Somasundaram1 ,
Tzofi Klinghoffer1 , Akshat Dave 1 , Ramesh Raskar1
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{nbehari,aryoung,sidsoma,tzofi,ad74,raskar}@mit.edu

Figure 1. Blurred LiDAR for Sharper 3D: We propose leveraging (a) the complementary strengths of RGB with a diffuse (blurred) LiDAR for robust handheld scanning (b) on limited views in challenging low-texture, low-light, low-albedo scenes. Our method dynamically
balances RGB and diffuse LiDAR sensor inputs to estimate (c) precise color, depth, and normals, from which we can (d) reconstruct accurate color-3D meshes. Our approach leveraging blurred LiDAR, counterintuitively, can (e) improve 3D reconstruction over conventional
LiDAR, which uses sparse spot illumination.

Abstract

1. Introduction

3D surface reconstruction is essential across applications
of virtual reality, robotics, and mobile scanning. However,
RGB-based reconstruction often fails in low-texture, lowlight, and low-albedo scenes. Handheld LiDARs, now common on mobile devices, aim to address these challenges
by capturing depth information from time-of-flight measurements of a coarse grid of projected dots. Yet, these
sparse LiDARs struggle with scene coverage on limited input views, leaving large gaps in depth information. In this
work, we propose using an alternative class of “blurred”
LiDAR that emits a diffuse flash, greatly improving scene
coverage but introducing spatial ambiguity from mixed
time-of-flight measurements across a wide field of view. To
handle these ambiguities, we propose leveraging the complementary strengths of diffuse LiDAR with RGB. We introduce a Gaussian surfel-based rendering framework with
a scene-adaptive loss function that dynamically balances
RGB and diffuse LiDAR signals. We demonstrate that, surprisingly, diffuse LiDAR can outperform traditional sparse
LiDAR, enabling robust 3D scanning with accurate color
and geometry estimation in challenging environments.

3D reconstruction has become increasingly important in
applications such as virtual reality, mobile scanning, and
robotics. In each such field, it is desirable to have compact,
low-bandwidth, and low-cost capture hardware. Yet, simultaneously, 3D reconstruction must be robust to many challenging conditions, such as low-texture and low-albedo objects, and low-lighting scenes. Such qualities are common
in real-world settings–for example, when a robot navigates
an indoor space with textureless walls or when the Mars Helicopter scans dark, featureless sand dunes [24]. Thus, an
ideal setup combines lightweight, compact hardware with
accurate, robust reconstruction capabilities.

*
Project page (with code+data): nikhilbehari.github.io/bls3d-web/

While recent work has extensively explored 3D reconstruction from RGB, these methods struggle to achieve robust performance in these challenging low texture, albedo,
and lighting settings. For instance, recent work in Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [29] has enabled high-fidelity
novel view synthesis in ideal settings; extensions have also
demonstrated accurate reconstruction using signed distance
fields [51] and Gaussian Surfels [7] for precise depth, normal and mesh estimation. However, NeRFs and Gaussian
Splatting [18] primarily rely on multi-view appearance vari-

26954

