This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAT-HMR: Real-Time Multi-Person 3D Mesh Estimation via
Scale-Adaptive Tokens
Chi Su1 Xiaoxuan Ma1,B Jiajun Su5 Yizhou Wang1,2,3,4,B
1
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Inst. for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 3 Nat’l Eng. Research Center of Visual Technology
4
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
5
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
suchi@stu.pku.edu.cn, {maxiaoxuan, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn, sujiajun@idea.edu.cn
B

Predictions

110

Mean Vertex Error (mm)

Image

Corresponding authors

100

Scale-adaptive Tokens

ROMP
(512)
BEV (512)

90
80
70
60

Multi-HMR (896)

Ours (644*)

Multi-HMR (1288)

AiOS (1333)

50 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450

Inference time (ms)

Elevated View

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) We propose scale-adaptive tokens in our one-stage framework for real-time multi-person 3D mesh estimation. Our
method introduces scale-adaptive tokens, dynamically adjusted based on the relative size of individuals in the image, to more efficiently
encode features, enabling real-time and accurate multi-person mesh estimation. We present a conceptual visualization of the scale-adaptive
tokens. The right column visualizes the predicted meshes projected onto an image from 3DPW [49] dataset and from an elevated view. (b)
Comparison of estimation error and inference time across different methods, with input resolutions in parentheses. Our method,
using a mixed resolution with a base resolution of 644, achieves comparable performance to state-of-the-art methods on AGORA [33] test
set while maintaining real-time inference efficiency. Code and models are available at https://ChiSu001.github.io/SAT-HMR/.

Abstract
We propose SAT-HMR, a one-stage framework for real-time
multi-person 3D human mesh estimation from a single RGB
image. While current one-stage methods, which follow a
DETR-style pipeline, achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance with high-resolution inputs, we observe that this
particularly benefits the estimation of individuals in smaller
scales of the image (e.g., those of young age or far from the
camera), but at the cost of significantly increased computation overhead. To address this, we introduce scale-adaptive
tokens that are dynamically adjusted based on the relative

scale of each individual in the image within the DETR framework. Specifically, individuals in smaller scales are processed at higher resolutions, larger ones at lower resolutions, and background regions are further distilled. These
scale-adaptive tokens more efficiently encode the image features, facilitating subsequent decoding to regress the human
mesh, while allowing the model to allocate computational
resources more effectively and focus on more challenging
cases. Experiments show that our method preserves the
accuracy benefits of high-resolution processing while substantially reducing computational cost, achieving real-time
inference with performance comparable to SOTA methods.

16796

