This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Optimizing Large-Scale Multi-Graph Matching in Bioimaging
Max Kahl*1

Sebastian Stricker*1 Lisa Hutschenreiter1 Florian Bernard2
Carsten Rother1 Bogdan Savchynskyy1
1
Heidelberg University 2 University of Bonn
Vr

Abstract
1

Multi-graph matching is an important problem in computer
vision. Our task comes from bioimaging, where a set of 100
3D-microscopic images of worms have to be brought into
correspondence. Surprisingly, virtually all existing methods are not applicable to this large-scale, real-world problem since they either assume a complete or dense problem
setting, and they have so far only been applied to smallscale, toy or synthetic problems. Despite claims in literature that methods addressing complete multi-graph matching are applicable in an incomplete setting, our first contribution is to prove that their runtime would be excessive
and impractical. Our second contribution is a new method
for incomplete multi-graph matching that applies to realworld, larger-scale problems. We experimentally show that
for our bioimaging application we are able to attain results
in less than two minutes, whereas the only competing approach requires at least half an hour while producing far
worse results. Furthermore, even for small-scale, dense or
complete problem instances we achieve results that are at
least on par with the leading methods, but an order of magnitude faster.

2

3

4

p,r
C13,34

1

1

q,r
C34,34

2
Vp

2
3

3

Vq

Figure 1. Multi-graph matching and cycle consistency. Shown
are three objects (solid rectangles) V p , V q , V r , whose keypoints
(circles) must be matched (edges). By construction, the setting is
incomplete since V r has 4 keypoints, whereas V p , V q only 3. The
blue and green matchings are cycle-consistent and form cliques
in the shown 3-partite graph. The orange matching is not cycleconsistent and as such does not form a clique. Examples of linear
and quadratic costs (dashed arrows) and their associated matchings
are also shown.

1. Introduction

ologist can extract various statistics [29] about the worm.
The matching must satisfy several conditions, see Fig. 1:
• Uniqueness. Each keypoint of a given object can be
matched to at most one keypoint of any other object. If
“at most” is substituted by “exactly”, one speaks of a complete and otherwise of an incomplete matching. Due to
occlusions or noise during the keypoint extraction process, the incomplete setting is prevalent in practice.
• Cycle consistency. If keypoint 1 in object V p is matched
to keypoint 2 in object V q and keypoint 3 in object V r ,
then keypoint 2 must be matched to keypoint 3. Similar
transitivity conditions must hold for all matching cycles
across arbitrary object subsets.
• Costs. Matchings must be minimal w.r.t. the given costs,
quantifying the similarity between all keypoints. Costs
for d objects decompose into a sum of costs for each of the
d(d−1)/2 object pairs. The latter, in turn, are sums of linear, keypoint-to-keypoint costs and quadratic, keypointpair-to-keypoint-pair costs. Quadratic costs allow the
modeling of mutual geometric relations between keypoints, considerably improving matching accuracy [17].

Establishing correspondences across multiple finite sets is
a fundamental combinatorial problem important for 3D
model retrieval [32], shape matching [16, 38], statistical
shape modeling [18, 47], federated learning [28], and genomic data analysis [11]. Typically, each object, such as an
image or shape, is represented by a set of keypoints, which
stand for semantically meaningful parts of an object. The
task is to bring these keypoints into correspondence. Fig. 2
shows the primary application of our work, where 100 C. elegans worms have to be matched, and the keypoints are
candidates for nuclei. This is a large-scale problem with
about 45M possible keypoint correspondences, a factor of
89 more than previously considered. Given a matching, bi* The two authors contributed equally to this paper.

11569

