This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detecting Adversarial Data Using Perturbation Forgery
Qian Wang1 , Chen Li1 , Yuchen Luo2 , Hefei Ling1 ,* Shijuan Huang1 , Ruoxi Jia3 , Ning Yu4
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China 2 Wuhan University, China
3
Virginia Tech, USA 4 Netflix Eyeline, USA
{yqwq1996, lhefei, llichen, shijuan huang}@hust.edu.cn, {yuchenluo}@whu.edu.cn,
ruoxijia@vt.edu, ningyu.hust@gmail.com

Abstract
As a defense strategy against adversarial attacks, adversarial detection aims to identify and filter out adversarial data from the data flow based on discrepancies in distribution and noise patterns between natural and adversarial data. Although previous detection methods achieve
high performance in detecting gradient-based adversarial
attacks, new attacks based on generative models with imbalanced and anisotropic noise patterns evade detection.
Even worse, the significant inference time overhead and
limited performance against unseen attacks make existing
techniques impractical for real-world use. In this paper,
we explore the proximity relationship among adversarial
noise distributions and demonstrate the existence of an open
covering for these distributions. By training on the open
covering of adversarial noise distributions, a detector with
strong generalization performance against various types of
unseen attacks can be developed. Based on this insight,
we heuristically propose Perturbation Forgery, which includes noise distribution perturbation, sparse mask generation, and pseudo-adversarial data production, to train
an adversarial detector capable of detecting any unseen
gradient-based, generative-based, and physical adversarial
attacks. Comprehensive experiments conducted on multiple
general and facial datasets, with a wide spectrum of attacks,
validate the strong generalization of our method.1

nerability reduces the reliability of deep learning systems,
highlighting the urgent need for defense techniques. Some
approaches employ adversarial training techniques [48],
which incorporate adversarial data into the training process
to inherently bolster the model’s immunity against adversarial noise (adv-noise). Other methods utilize adversarial purification [47] to cleanse the input data of adv-noise
before model inference. Unfortunately, adversarial training often results in diminished classification accuracy on
adversarial data and may sacrifice performance on natural
data [1]. While purification techniques may seem more reliable, the denoising process can inadvertently smooth the
high-frequency texture of clean images, leading to suboptimal accuracy on both natural and adversarial images.
Another branch of adversarial defense is adversarial detection [12, 28], which aims to filter out adversarial data before they are fed into target systems. These methods rely on
discerning the discrepancies between adversarial and natural distributions, thereby maintaining the integrity of target systems while achieving high performance in defending
against adversarial attacks. However, existing adversarial
detection approaches primarily train specialized detectors
tailored for specific attacks or classifiers [8], which may not
generalize well to unseen advanced attacks [2, 39].
Some recent approaches [40, 49] have attempted to enhance the generalization of adversarial detectors by leveraging diffusion models and manually designed pseudo-noise.
Nevertheless, as shown in Table 1, this improvement often comes at the expense of increased inference overhead,
and even well-trained detectors still struggle with adversarial data produced by generative models such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) and diffusion models.
Specifically, generative-based adversarial attacks, such as
M3D [51] and Diff-PGD [44], are recently developed techniques designed to generate more natural adversarial data.
Unlike traditional gradient-based attacks like PGD [29],
generative-based attacks tend to create imbalanced and
anisotropic perturbations that are intense in high-frequency
and salient areas but mild in low-frequency and background

1. Introduction
Numerous studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of
deep neural networks (DNNs) in various tasks [36]. However, it is also well-known that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, which generate adversarial data by adding
imperceptible perturbations to natural images, potentially
causing the model to make abnormal predictions. This vul* Corresponding author
1 Code at https://github.com/cc13qq/PFD

13917

