This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Precise Scaling Laws for Video Diffusion Transformers
Yuanyang Yin1,3 *
Yaqi Zhao2,3 *
Mingwu Zheng3
Ke Lin3
Jiarong Ou3
Rui Chen3
Victor Shea-Jay Huang2
Jiahao Wang3
Xin Tao3†
3
3
1†
2†
Pengfei Wan
Di Zhang
Baoqun Yin
Wentao Zhang
Kun Gai3
1

University of Science and Technology of China
Abstract

2

Peking University

3

Kuaishou Technology

Achieving optimal performance of video diffusion transformers within given data and compute budget is crucial
due to their high training costs. This necessitates precisely
determining the optimal model size and training hyperparameters before large-scale training. While scaling laws
are employed in language models to predict performance,
their existence and accurate derivation in visual generation models remain underexplored. In this paper, we systematically analyze scaling laws for video diffusion transformers and confirm their presence. Moreover, we discover
that, unlike language models, video diffusion models are
more sensitive to learning rate and batch size—two hyperparameters often not precisely modeled. To address this,
we propose a new scaling law that predicts optimal hyperparameters for any model size and compute budget. Under
these optimal settings, we achieve comparable performance
and reduce inference costs by 40.1% compared to conventional scaling methods, within a compute budget of 1e10
TFlops. Furthermore, we establish a more generalized and
precise relationship among validation loss, any model size,
and compute budget. This enables performance prediction
for non-optimal model sizes, which may also be appealed
under practical inference cost constraints, achieving a better trade-off.

ply scaling up the model size often yields improved performance. Currently, the largest video generation model like
Movie Gen [45], has reached a parameter count of 30 billion, which is significantly larger than the initial video DiT
around 700M [39, 68].
However, due to limited training budgets, infinitely scaling up transformer size is not feasible. Consequently, determining the optimal DiT size within a given budget has
become a critical challenge. Early research on transformerbased language models [1, 12, 19, 26, 30] revealed that
model performance (measured by validation loss L), the
model size N , and the given compute budget C, exhibit a
power-law relationship, known as scaling laws. This discovery enables the use of smaller models for experiments
to predict the performance of larger models, thereby enabling the selection of the optimal model size under realworld constrains.
In the field of computer vision, researchers have primarily made empirical attempts in the scaling properties [33,
38, 41, 44, 47] of image DiT, seldom modeling precise scaling laws as done in language models. In the domain of video
generation, such research is virtually nonexistent. Given the
complexity and importance of video models—which must
not only model visual structures but also simulate and understand complex real-world dynamics over time dimension—they are often trained at very high costs; for example, Movie Gen was trained using 6,144 H100 GPUs [45].
Therefore, developing accurate and practical scaling laws
for large-scale video generation models is particularly important, as selecting the correct model size and training configurations can greatly reduce costs.
This study aims to investigate the scaling laws of video
diffusion transformers by addressing the following key
question: Given a specific video transformer architecture
and training budget, how can we predict the optimal model
size, along with its corresponding performance and optimal hyperparameters—specifically, batch size and learning
rate?
We began our investigation by applying a commonly

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in Diffusion Transformers (DiT) [24,
38, 44, 52] have significantly enhanced video generation
capabilities over previous convolutional-based neural models [3, 6, 15, 25, 50], demonstrating superior quality and
diversity in generated video content [5, 14, 31, 37, 39, 42,
66, 68]. The success of video DiT can be largely attributed
to the scalability of transformer architecture, where sim* Equal contribution

* Work done during an internship at Kuaishou Technology.
† Corresponding Author.

18155

