This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frequency-Biased Synergistic Design for Image Compression and Compensation
Jiaming Liu1,† , Qi Zheng1,† , Zihao Liu2 , Yilian Zhong1 , Peiye Liu2 , Tao Liu3 , Shusong Xu2 ,
Yanheng Lu2 , Sicheng Li2 , Dimin Niu2 , and Yibo Fan1,∗
1

2

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Chips and Systems, Fudan University,
Damo Academy & Hupan Lab, Alibaba Group, 3 Lawrence Technological University

Figure 1. Comparison of five compression and/or compensation frameworks at the same LPIPS 0.164. The proposed Lo-Hi framework
achieves up to 60.29% and 43.75% BPP savings compared to JPEG and SOTA NN-based CAR method, respectively. Moreover, the
proposed framework achieves 376.75× and 153× latency reduction compared with VVC and HEVC, respectively.

Abstract

that our approach significantly reduces bitrate consumption
while delivering high perceptual quality.

Compression artifacts removal (CAR), an effective postprocessing method to reduce compression distortion in edgeside codecs, demonstrates remarkable results by utilizing
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on high computational power cloud side. Traditional image compression
reduces redundancy in the frequency domain, and we observed that CNNs also exhibit a bias in frequency domain
when handling compression distortions. However, no prior
research leverages this frequency bias to design compression methods tailored to CAR CNNs, or vice versa. In this
paper, we present a synergistic design that bridges the gap
between image compression and learnable compensation for
CAR. Our investigation reveals that different compensation
networks have varying effects on low and high-frequencies.
Building upon these insights, we propose a pioneering redesign of the quantization process, a fundamental component
in lossy image compression, to more effectively compress
low-frequency information. Additionally, we devise a novel
compensation framework that applies different neural networks for reconstructing different frequencies, incorporating
a basis attention block to prioritize intentionally dropped
low-frequency information, thereby enhancing the overall
compensation. We instantiate two compensation networks
based on this synergistic design and conduct extensive experiments on three image compression standards, demonstrating
This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China
(2023YFB4502802), in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(62031009), in part by Fudan-ZTE joint lab, in part by Alibaba Innovative Research
(AIR) Program, in part by Alibaba Research Fellow (ARF) Program. † contribute
equally. ∗ Yibo Fan is the corresponding author (fanyibo@fudan.edu.cn).

1. Introduction
The surge in mobile data has increased the need to transmit vast volumes of internet traffic from edge devices to the
cloud [3]. Addressing this challenge typically involves two
solutions: (1) high-quality compression at low-bitrate on the
edge (2) low-quality post-compensation in the cloud [21].
At the compression stage, advanced codecs such as
H.265/HEVC [28] and H.266/VVC [6], achieve lower bitrates at high perceptual quality, yet at the cost of increased
computational complexity. In contrast, earlier codecs like
JPEG, while computationally simpler, consume more bitrates to maintain perceptual quality, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
The resource-constrained edge devices make the computationally heavy approach impractical. Thus, achieving high
perceptual quality at low bitrates on resource-constrained
edge devices remains challenging.
At the compensation stage, the cloud’s extensive computational resources enable the use of complex post-processing
methods, i.e., neural network-based CAR models [15, 17,
32], which correct distortions introduced by edge compression. However, the compensation benefits are gradually
diminished by increasing computational complexity or enlarging the model size. One significant reason is that the
design of compression and compensation are separate, failing to exploit the inherent connection between compression
and compensation in information processing. Therefore, we
aim to develop a synergistic design to fully explore potential

12820

