This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ACAttack: Adaptive Cross Attacking RGB-T Tracker via
Multi-Modal Response Decoupling
Xinyu Xiang

Qinglong Yan Hao Zhang* Jiayi Ma*
Wuhan University, China

xiangxinyu@whu.edu.cn, qinglong_yan@whu.edu.cn, zhpersonalbox@gmail.com, jyma2010@gmail.com

RGB

Abstract
The research on adversarial attacks against trackers primarily concentrates on the RGB modality, whereas the
methodology for attacking RGB-T multi-modal trackers has
seldom been explored so far. This work represents an
innovative attempt to develop an adaptive cross attack
framework via multi-modal response decoupling, generating multi-modal adversarial patches to evade RGB-T trackers. Specifically, a modal-aware adaptive attack strategy is
introduced to weaken the modality with high common information contribution alternately and iteratively, achieving the modal decoupling attack. In order to perturb the
judgment of the modal balance mechanism in the tracker,
we design a modal disturbance loss to increase the distance of the response map of the single-modal adversarial
samples in the tracker. Besides, we also propose a novel
spatio-temporal joint attack loss to progressively deteriorate the tracker’s perception of the target. Moreover, the
design of the shared adversarial shape enables the generated multi-modal adversarial patches to be readily deployed
in real-world scenarios, effectively reducing the interference of the patch posting process on the shape attack of the
infrared adversarial layer. Extensive digital and physical
domain experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
multi-modal adversarial patch attack. Our code is available at https://github.com/Xinyu-Xiang/ACAttack.

Feature Extracting
RGB > TIR RGB < TIR

TIR

RGB = TIR

Feature Fusion
Predicted Head

push away

intense
attack

modal contribution

mild
attack

Attack on modal balance

RGB

feature response

TIR

Attack on modal decoupling

Figure 1. Our attack strategy against RGB-T trackers. An adaptive attack strategy, sensitive to modality, is introduced to alternately and iteratively suppress the modality with a high contribution of shared information. Additionally, a modal disturbance loss
is crafted to enlarge the response map distance for single-modal
adversarial samples within the tracker.

1. Introduction

fields such as autonomous driving and urban security [16].
To address the urgent need to explore the security of
trackers, adversarial attack techniques for trackers have
emerged in rapid succession, including traditional gradientbased attack approaches and deep-network-based attacks.
The former methods [10, 11] utilize hand-crafted parameters and apply many times of gradient ascent to maximize
an adversarial loss function for misguiding deep networks.
Although it can achieve certain attack effects for specific
types of trackers, it is challenging to comprehensively explore and attack the potential vulnerabilities of the different
trackers due to the limitations of inflexible pattern design.
Nonetheless, the latter one [6] applies tremendous data to
train an adversarial patches-generator including flexible architectures and optimization strategies to better automatically search for model weaknesses and realize tracker attacks. Therefore, in comparison with a traditional gradientbased attack approach, deep-network-based paradigm can
more automatically and flexibly excavate the security issues
within the tracker.

The adversarial attack on visual object tracking (VOT) [1,
26] aims to mislead the prediction results of the tracker
through the generated adversarial disturbance, find the
model vulnerabilities, and then promote the security of
the tracking model in real-life. Single-modal tracking attack methods have been extensively studied, but with the
wide application of multi-modal devices [19, 20, 24], multimodal trackers are widely used in safety-critical real-world
* Corresponding authors.

22099

