This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DPC: Dual-Prompt Collaboration for Tuning Vision-Language Models
Haoyang Li1,2

Liang Wang1,2 Chao Wang1 * Jing Jiang2 Yan Peng1 * Guodong Long2 *
1
Shanghai University, 2 University of Technology Sydney

haoyang.li-3@student.uts.edu.au, {cwang, pengyan}@shu.edu.cn, guodong.long@uts.edu.au

Abstract

87.55
86.86

The Base-New Trade-off (BNT) problem universally exists during the optimization of CLIP-based prompt tuning,
where continuous fine-tuning on base (target) classes leads
to a simultaneous decrease of generalization ability on new
(unseen) classes. Existing approaches attempt to regulate
the prompt tuning process to balance BNT by appending
constraints. However, imposed on the same target prompt,
these constraints fail to fully avert the mutual exclusivity
between the optimization directions for base and new. As a
novel solution to this challenge, we propose the plug-andplay Dual-Prompt Collaboration (DPC) framework, the first
that decoupling the optimization processes of base and new
tasks at the prompt level. Specifically, we clone a learnable parallel prompt based on the backbone prompt, and
introduce a variable Weighting-Decoupling framework to
independently control the optimization directions of dual
prompts specific to base or new tasks, thus avoiding the
conflict in generalization. Meanwhile, we propose a Dynamic Hard Negative Optimizer, utilizing dual prompts to
construct a more challenging optimization task on base
classes for enhancement. For interpretability, we prove
the feature channel invariance of the prompt vector during
the optimization process, providing theoretical support for
the Weighting-Decoupling of DPC. Extensive experiments
on multiple backbones demonstrate that DPC can significantly improve base performance without introducing any
external knowledge beyond the base classes, while maintaining generalization to new classes. Code is available at:
https://github.com/JREion/DPC.

1. Introduction
Vision-Language Models (VLMs), represented by CLIP
[27], have revealed cogent cross-modal open-domain representation and zero-shot capabilities. To further efficiently
utilize pre-trained VLMs, Prompt Tuning acquires significant attention as a Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT)
* Corresponding authors.

85.93

86.10

85.15

83.82
83.52

84.08
83.45

82.91
81.98

Figure 1. Average classification accuracy of 4 mainstream prompt
tuning backbone models on base (target) classes over 11 datasets.
DPC achieves state-of-the-art performance compared with baselines and another leading plug-and-play model DePT [45].

method [48, 49]. Freezing the vision and text encoders, it
employs a learnable lightweight prompt vector as a query to
guide the output of CLIP towards the target task.
Unfortunately, the optimization process of prompt tuning often encounters a Base-New Trade-off (BNT) problem
[45, 48]. As the prompt increasingly aligns with the target
task, the model may overfit to the base (target) classes, resulting in reduced generalization performance on new (unseen) classes. To alleviate the BNT problem, previous approaches attempt to adjust loss functions [15, 42], apply
constraints to prompts [43, 48], add extra feature extractors
[7, 30], or involve external knowledge [16, 20, 46]. However, all these methods treat prompts as a single entity to
be optimized for a balanced performance between base and
new classes. Due to the shift of data distribution, the optimization directions of the two are likely to interfere with
each other, making it tough to achieve the global optimum.
To mitigate such interference caused by the mutual exclusivity of optimization directions in prompt tuning for
base or new tasks, we propose the Dual-Prompt Collaboration (DPC) framework. This approach is the first to introduce dual prompts optimized in two distinct directions,
overcoming BNT problem by decoupling base and new
tasks at the prompt level. Since the optimization in prompt
tuning basically targets the learnable prompts, we believe

25623

