This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SynerGen-VL: Towards Synergistic Image Understanding and Generation with
Vision Experts and Token Folding
Hao Li1,2∗† , Changyao Tian2,1∗† , Jie Shao3,1∗† , Xizhou Zhu4,6∗ , Zhaokai Wang5,1† , Jinguo Zhu1 ,
Wenhan Dou4,1† , Xiaogang Wang2 , Hongsheng Li2 , Lewei Lu6 , Jifeng Dai4,1B
1 OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory
3 Nanjing University

4 Tsinghua University

2 MMLab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
The remarkable success of Large Language Models (LLMs)
has extended to the multimodal domain, achieving outstanding performance in image understanding and generation. Recent efforts to develop unified Multimodal Large
Language Models (MLLMs) that integrate these capabilities have shown promising results. However, existing approaches often involve complex designs in model architecture or training pipeline, increasing the difficulty of
model training and scaling. In this paper, we propose
SynerGen-VL, a simple yet powerful encoder-free MLLM
capable of both image understanding and generation. To
address challenges identified in existing encoder-free unified MLLMs, we introduce the token folding mechanism and
the vision-expert-based progressive alignment pretraining
strategy, which effectively support high-resolution image
understanding while reducing training complexity. After being trained on large-scale mixed image-text data with a unified next-token prediction objective, SynerGen-VL achieves
or surpasses the performance of existing encoder-free unified MLLMs with comparable or smaller parameter sizes,
and narrows the gap with task-specific state-of-the-art models, highlighting a promising path toward future unified
MLLMs. Our code and models are released at
https://github.com/cpsxhao/SynerGen-VL.

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of Large Language Models
(LLMs) [7, 60, 85] has been extended to the multimodal
domain, achieving impressive performance in image understanding [12, 45, 81, 99] and image generation [76, 84, 96].
Recent research has aimed to develop unified Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs) with synergistic image
understanding and generation capabilities [8, 21, 82, 93, 95,
107]. Although they have demonstrated competitive perfor* Equal contribution. † Interns at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
B Corresponding to Jifeng Dai <daijifeng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

29767

6 SenseTime Research

mance in both tasks, they often involve complex designs as
illustrated in Fig. 1(a)∼(d), such as (a) relying on external
diffusion models for image generation [21, 25, 82, 108], (b)
using different training objectives (i.e. diffusion and autoregression) for the two tasks [97, 107], (c) employing distinct
image encoders for each task [93], and (d) require additional semantic pretraining for image tokenizers [95]. These
complexities disrupt the simplicity of the next token prediction paradigm of LLMs, increasing systematic difficulty and
limiting scalability.
To address these complexities, some studies have tried
to develop unified MLLMs with simple architectures, eliminating dependencies on external models, distinct taskspecific models, and additional semantic pretraining [8, 46,
92]. As shown in Fig. 1(e), these approaches adopt a similar
tokenization strategy for both images and text, and model
both image understanding and generation tasks within a
unified next token prediction framework. The image tokenizers [23] are pretrained for reconstruction on pure image
data, without requiring human annotations or text supervision, which allows for a broad data distribution and strong
scalability. These concise and scalable designs have demonstrated a promising path toward synergistic image understanding and generation.
Nevertheless, these methods still face some key challenges in practical use. Specifically, (1) since both image
understanding and generation rely entirely on MLLMs, substantial training is required to incorporate vision capabilities into MLLMs. However, this may interfere with the
pretrained knowledge of LLMs, resulting in reduced general perception and generalization capabilities. Although
existing methods try to avoid this by training MLLM from
scratch using mixed text and multimodal data, they face
considerable challenges in optimizing stability, data quality, and training cost [8, 92]; (2) current visual tokenizers
require low feature downsample ratios to ensure reconstruction with fine details [23]. This results in long visual token
sequences for high-resolution images, which is unsuitable
to LLMs and limits the use of high-resolution images, thus

