This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

T-FAKE: Synthesizing Thermal Images for Facial Landmarking
Philipp Flotho*

Moritz Piening*

Anna Kukleva

Gabriele Steidl

Saarland University

Technical University of Berlin

MPI for Informatics, SIC

Technical University of Berlin

Abstract
Facial analysis is a key component in a wide range of applications such as healthcare, autonomous driving, and entertainment. Despite the availability of various facial RGB
datasets, the thermal modality, which plays a crucial role
in life sciences, medicine, and biometrics, has been largely
overlooked. To address this gap, we introduce the T-FAKE
dataset, a new large-scale synthetic thermal dataset with
sparse and dense landmarks. To facilitate the creation of
the dataset, we propose a novel RGB2Thermal loss function, which enables the domain-adaptive transfer of RGB
faces to thermal style. By utilizing the Wasserstein distance between thermal and RGB patches and the statistical analysis of clinical temperature distributions on faces,
we ensure that the generated thermal images closely resemble real samples. Using RGB2Thermal style transfer based
on our RGB2Thermal loss function, we create the largescale synthetic thermal T-FAKE dataset† with landmark
and segmentation annotations. Leveraging our novel TFAKE dataset, probabilistic landmark prediction, and label
adaptation networks, we demonstrate significant improvements in landmark detection methods on thermal images
across different landmark conventions. Our models show
excellent performance with both sparse 70-point landmarks
and dense 478-point landmark annotations. Moreover, our
RGB2Thermal loss leads to notable results in terms of perceptual evaluation and temperature prediction.

Figure 1. Predictions of 70 (middle) and 478 (bottom) point facial
landmarks on the challenging CHARLOTTE dataset which are estimated accurately by training a model with our synthetic data.

1. Introduction

landmark annotations contain only tens to hundreds of individuals [3, 12, 29, 45], while the largest datasets for face
detection for RGB images reached the mark of a million
faces (of more than 500k individuals) with the MegaFace
benchmark already in 2016 [24]. Moreover, large synthetic
RGB datasets, like FAKE [54], appeared to be valuable for
sparse and dense landmark detection training. Generally,
the detection of facial landmarks is an important task for
further facial analysis. These 2D coordinates of corresponding points across faces are relevant for, e.g., face alignment
[55], animation of 3D avatars [35], motion magnification
[13, 14] or deepfakes [48]. The most common convention
for facial landmark annotations uses 68 points across the
face and face boundary [51]. Even though the 68-point convention remains challenging for thermal images [37, 44],
there is additional demand for dense landmarkers with more
than 300 points. [35, 54, 55].
Faces in thermal images share structural similarities with
RGB images. However, temporally varying environmental
factors such as temperature and rain droplets, and physiological factors such as blood perfusion changes and vascular details lead to much higher variability in the appearance of faces within individuals [18]. Sweating, flushing, or outdoor rain can result in time-dependent texture
changes. Features that are very stable in RGB images such

Functional thermal imaging is an acquisition modality with
growing importance in many areas from life sciences over
medicine to biometrics. Due to the close relation of body
temperature with physiological states, thermal imaging of
faces emerged as an important tool for screening infectious
diseases [4, 40, 47] and for the analysis of neurocognitive
and affective states [21]. As a consequence, there exists
a growing need for thermal images with annotated facial
landmarks. However, in contrast to RGB images, annotated data for thermal images of faces is still rarely available. For example, the largest thermal datasets with facial
*Equal Contribution; † https://github.com/phflot/tfake

26356

