This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bias for Action: Video Implicit Neural Representations with Bias Modulation
Alper Kayabasi1 , Anil Kumar Vadathya3 , Guha Balakrishnan2 , Vishwanath Saragadam1
1
University of California Riverside, 2 Rice University
3
Neal Cancer Center, Houston Methodist Hospital
{akaya003,vishwanath.saragadam}@ucr.edu, guha@rice.edu, avadathya@houstonmethodist.org

Abstract

𝑡

Bias INR

𝑏ത𝑡

We propose a new continuous video modeling framework
based on implicit neural representations (INRs) called ActINR. At the core of our approach is the observation that
INRs can be considered as a learnable dictionary, with the
shapes of the basis functions governed by the weights of
the INR, and their locations governed by the biases. Given
compact non-linear activation functions, we hypothesize
that an INR’s biases are suitable to capture motion across
images, and facilitate compact representations for video sequences. Using these observations, we design ActINR to
share INR weights across frames of a video sequence, while
using unique biases for each frame. We further model the
biases as the output of a separate INR conditioned on time
index to promote smoothness. By training the video INR
and this bias INR together, we demonstrate unique capabilities, including 10× video slow motion, 4× spatial super
resolution along with 2× slow motion, denoising, and video
inpainting. ActINR performs remarkably well across numerous video processing tasks (often achieving more than
6dB improvement), setting a new standard for continuous
modeling of videos.

𝑥, 𝑦

Continuous video
representation

Frame INR (𝑊, 𝑏ത𝑡 )

Ground Truth

ActINR
32.0 dB

HNeRV-Boost
26.00 dB

ResFields
23.00 dB

1. Introduction

Figure 1. ActINR: Continuous Video Representation via Bias
Modulation. We propose a new continuous representation of
videos called ActINR. At its core is a frame INR that takes continuous spatial coordinates, and a bias INR that takes continuous
time coordinates, and outputs bias values for the frame INR at
that instant. This bias modulated framework enables us to represent videos in a concise manner, enabling several video processing
applications. Shown above is a 10× video slow-motion generated through temporal interpolation. ActINR achieves considerably higher PSNR, with visually pleasing interpolated results.

An Implicit Neural Representations (INR) aims to approximate a continuous signal by fitting a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) with non-linear activation functions to the signal. INRs compactly encode the signal into the weights of
an MLP, establishing a mapping from input coordinates to
corresponding output values. For instance, a video INR
may map a spatiotemporal (x, y, t) coordinate to an output RGB color value. By preserving the main characteristics of signals in a smooth manner, INRs serve as versatile
tools capable of performing interpolation [14, 48], inpainting [46, 49], and denoising [3, 36]. Owing to these noteworthy features, INRs have been successfully applied in diverse applications, including novel view synthesis [25, 38],
inverse problems [41], image generation [32], physics sim-

27999

ulation [7], and shape representation [6, 26].
INRs have more recently been explored for representing
videos, starting with the seminal work of NeRV [3] and followed by several works that expanded upon its speed and
representation capacity [4, 5, 12, 17, 20, 35, 46]. Crucial to
modeling videos is the ability to capture motion at various
spatiotemporal scales, from minute to large displacements
per frame and across time. However, existing video INRs
still often struggle at modeling patterns of large spatial or
temporal distance, as evidenced by their poor performance
on dramatic interpolation tasks. For this reason, works such

