This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AIpparel: A Multimodal Foundation Model for Digital Garments
Kiyohiro Nakayama1∗ Jan Ackermann1,2∗† Timur Levent Kesdogan1,2∗†
Yang Zheng1 Maria Korosteleva2 Olga Sorkine-Hornung2
Leonidas J. Guibas1 Guandao Yang1 Gordon Wetzstein1
1

2

Stanford University

ETH Zürich

Multimodal Input
"A knee-length
jumpsuit with
long sleeves."

AI pparel
Draping
Simulation

Text-to-Garment
Generation

Text-and-Imageto-Garment Generation
Image-to-Garment Generation

Sewing Pattern

Garment Editing - "asymmetric sleeve"

Figure 1. AIpparel. We present a multimodal foundation model for digital garments trained by fine-tuning a large multimodal model on
a custom sewing pattern dataset using a novel tokenization scheme for these patterns. AIpparel generates complex, diverse, high-quality
sewing patterns based on multimodal inputs, such as text and images, and it unlocks new applications such as language-instructed sewing
pattern editing. The generated sewing patterns can be directly used to simulate the corresponding 3D garments.

Abstract
Apparel is essential to human life, offering protection, mirroring cultural identities, and showcasing personal style. Yet, the creation of garments remains a timeconsuming process, largely due to the manual work involved
in designing them. To simplify this process, we introduce
AIpparel, a multimodal foundation model for generating
and editing sewing patterns. Our model fine-tunes stateof-the-art large multimodal models (LMMs) on a customcurated large-scale dataset of over 120,000 unique garments, each with multimodal annotations including text,
images, and sewing patterns. Additionally, we propose
a novel tokenization scheme that concisely encodes these
complex sewing patterns so that LLMs can learn to predict them efficiently. AIpparel achieves state-of-the-art performance in single-modal tasks, including text-to-garment
and image-to-garment prediction, and enables novel multimodal garment generation applications such as interactive garment editing. The project website is at https:
//georgenakayama.github.io/AIpparel/.

∗ Equal Contribution.
† Work done as a visiting researcher at Stanford.

1. Introduction
Clothing plays a crucial role in society, serving as a barrier against the elements, a reflection of societal norms, and
a means of personal expression. A key stage in garment
production is the development of sewing patterns—a set of
flat 2D panels with standardized assembly instructions that
form a complete 3D garment [4]. Pattern making is a challenging task due to the complex geometric relationship between the 2D pattern and the draped 3D shape of the sewn
garment. Even an experienced tailor must go through multiple iterations, incorporating feedback from various sources,
including verbal descriptions of the garment’s fit and feel, as
well as visual references of its appearance. To simplify the
pattern-making process, we explore strategies to leverage
emerging generative models with multimodal inputs, such
as language and images.
State-of-the-art sewing pattern prediction methods are
designed to work with one specific input modality, such
as 3D points [6, 14, 28], images [43, 47, 65, 70, 74], or
language [21]. While effective within their respective domains, these single-modal approaches are often challenging to adapt to garment prediction tasks requiring different or combined input modalities. Expanding these meth-

8138

