This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Consistency Posterior Sampling for Diverse Image Synthesis
Vishal Purohit1, *, Matthew Repasky2, *, Jianfeng Lu3,4 , Qiang Qiu1 ,
Yao Xie2 , and Xiuyuan Cheng3,†‡
1
2

Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, USA

H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
3
4

Department of Mathematics, Duke University, USA

Department of Physics and Department of Chemistry, Duke University, USA

Abstract
Posterior sampling in high-dimensional spaces using generative models holds significant promise for various applications, including but not limited to inverse problems and
guided generation tasks. Generating diverse posterior samples remains expensive, as existing methods require restarting the entire generative process for each new sample. In this
work, we propose a posterior sampling approach that simulates Langevin dynamics in the noise space of a pre-trained
generative model. By exploiting the mapping between the
noise and data spaces which can be provided by distilled
flows or consistency models, our method enables seamless
exploration of the posterior without the need to re-run the
full sampling chain, drastically reducing computational overhead. Theoretically, we prove a guarantee for the proposed
noise-space Langevin dynamics to approximate the posterior,
assuming that the generative model sufficiently approximates
the prior distribution. Our framework is experimentally validated on image restoration tasks involving noisy linear and
nonlinear forward operators applied to LSUN-Bedroom (256
× 256) and ImageNet (64 × 64) datasets. The results demonstrate that our approach generates high-fidelity samples with
enhanced semantic diversity even under a limited number
of function evaluations, offering superior efficiency and performance compared to existing diffusion-based posterior
sampling techniques.

1. Introduction
Generative models that approximate complex data priors
have been widely used for guided generation [12, 14]. While
early approaches relied on GANs [4, 18, 27, 28, 39, 43], diffusion models have since outperformed them, becoming the

Figure 1. (Top): Posterior samples generated by our method and
DPS-DM [12]. Our approach exhibits higher perceptual diversity,
capturing variations in high-level features such as lighting, window
style, and wall patterns. Red boxes highlight uncertain semantic
features, while green boxes show persistent properties. (Bottom)
: A schematic representation of posterior sampling via Langevin
dynamics in our proposed framework. The sampling process begins
(0)
with an initial sample x1 from the noise space and maps to data
(0)
space as x0 using a deterministic mapper Φ and progressively
updates the noise space input to obtain diverse posterior samples.

state-of-the-art for conditional generation [9, 14, 22, 23, 47].
Posterior sampling methods have gained traction for inverse problems, where the goal is to sample from p(x | y) ∝
p(y | x)p(x)[12, 30, 31]. Although these posteriors are often
intractable, generative models enable efficient approximations. Earlier diffusion-based solutions required task-specific
training[34, 38, 44–46], while recent works use pre-trained
diffusion priors in a training-free manner [10, 11, 30, 31, 53],
with extensions to nonlinear tasks [12, 21, 48, 49].
Inverse problem solvers are typically grouped into point
estimate or multiple estimate approaches. Most recent methods focus on the former [12, 21, 48, 49] and face chal-

* The first two authors contributed equally and are listed alphabetically.
† Email: xiuyuan.cheng@duke.edu
‡ Code: https://github.com/Vishal-S-P/CPS_Diverse

28327

