This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OpenMIBOOD: Open Medical Imaging Benchmarks for
Out-Of-Distribution Detection
Max Gutbrod1,2 , David Rauber1 , Danilo Weber Nunes1,2 , Christoph Palm1,2
1
2

Regensburg Medical Image Computing (ReMIC), OTH Regensburg, Regensburg, 93053, Germany

Regensburg Center of Health Sciences and Technology (RCHST), OTH Regensburg, Regensburg, 93053, Germany
{max.gutbrod,christoph.palm}@oth-regensburg.de

Abstract
The growing reliance on Artificial Intelligence (AI) in critical domains such as healthcare demands robust mechanisms to ensure the trustworthiness of these systems, especially when faced with unexpected or anomalous inputs. This paper introduces the Open Medical Imaging
Benchmarks for Out-Of-Distribution Detection (OpenMIBOOD), a comprehensive framework for evaluating out-ofdistribution (OOD) detection methods specifically in medical imaging contexts. OpenMIBOOD includes three benchmarks from diverse medical domains, encompassing 14
datasets divided into covariate-shifted in-distribution, nearOOD, and far-OOD categories. We evaluate 24 post-hoc
methods across these benchmarks, providing a standardized reference to advance the development and fair comparison of OOD detection methods. Results reveal that findings
from broad-scale OOD benchmarks in natural image domains do not translate to medical applications, underscoring the critical need for such benchmarks in the medical
field. By mitigating the risk of exposing AI models to inputs
outside their training distribution, OpenMIBOOD aims to
support the advancement of reliable and trustworthy AI systems in healthcare. The repository is available at https:
//github.com/remic-othr/OpenMIBOOD.

1. Introduction
The rapid proliferation of AI systems in everyday life raises
concerns about their trustworthiness. According to the technical specification ISO/IEC TS5723:2022 [30], an important aspect of trustworthiness concerns a system’s ability to
handle unexpected inputs. Such inputs pose significant risks
in safety-critical areas, including autonomous driving [11]
and the healthcare sector [74]. Most AI systems are still
trained and evaluated under the assumption that the training data distribution – referred to as in-distribution (ID)
data – matches the distribution of data encountered post-

25874

deployment. However, this assumption overlooks the possibility of encountering data from unknown and unseen distributions, known as out-of-distribution (OOD) data. When
confronted with such data, AI models often exhibit high
confidence in their predictions, even when these predictions
are entirely incorrect [18]. Such behavior can result in silent
and potentially catastrophic failures, particularly in highstakes domains like healthcare, where erroneous predictions
could directly impact patient safety. To address this, OOD
detection methods help distinguish ID from OOD inputs,
allowing models to flag or discard unreliable predictions or
refer them for human review. Since 2016, numerous OOD
detection methods have emerged [72], but a unified, comprehensive benchmark was lacking. Yang et al. addressed
this by introducing OpenOOD [72], an open-source codebase that integrates related fields and provides a consistent
evaluation framework.
In their framework, OOD is divided into two categories.
The more challenging near-OOD, characterized by exhibiting similar semantics or styles compared to the ID datasets,
making it particularly difficult to distinguish them. And the
less challenging far-OOD, typically featuring different semantic labels and styles [16, 72].
In a follow-up version, OpenOOD v1.5 [77], Zhang et
al. expanded their framework to encompass large-scale and
full-spectrum OOD detection [73], covering over 50 methods. In this full-spectrum setting, the authors merged ID
with covariate-shifted in-distribution (cs-ID) data – data,
retaining the same labels and class relationships as the ID
data while exhibiting variations in the distribution of input
features. They argue that this approach evaluates not only
OOD detection capabilities but also the generalization performance of an AI system. While this approach has undeniable value, we argue for analyzing OOD detection and
model generalization independently to yield more precise
insights. Furthermore, depending on the application, distinguishing between ID and cs-ID can be just as critical. For
instance, in medical imaging, where training data is often
limited or inaccessible due to privacy constraints, achieving

