This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SeaLion: Semantic Part-Aware Latent Point Diffusion Models for 3D Generation
Dekai Zhu1,2,3 , Yan Di1 , Stefan Gavranovic2 , and Slobodan Ilic1,2
1
Technical University of Munich 2 Siemens AG 3 Munich Center for Machine Learning
{firstname.lastname}@tum.de

Abstract
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models have achieved
significant success in point cloud generation, enabling numerous downstream applications, such as generative data
augmentation and 3D model editing. However, little attention has been given to generating point clouds with pointwise segmentation labels, as well as to developing evaluation metrics for this task. Therefore, in this paper, we
present SeaLion, a novel diffusion model designed to generate high-quality and diverse point clouds with fine-grained
segmentation labels. Specifically, we introduce the semantic part-aware latent point diffusion technique, which
leverages the intermediate features of the generative models to jointly predict the noise for perturbed latent points
and associated part segmentation labels during the denoising process, and subsequently decodes the latent points to
point clouds conditioned on part segmentation labels. To effectively evaluate the quality of generated point clouds, we
introduce a novel point cloud pairwise distance calculation
method named part-aware Chamfer distance (p-CD). This
method enables existing metrics, such as 1-NNA, to measure both the local structural quality and inter-part coherence of generated point clouds. Experiments on the largescale synthetic dataset ShapeNet and real-world medical
dataset IntrA, demonstrate that SeaLion achieves remarkable performance in generation quality and diversity, outperforming the existing state-of-the-art model, DiffFacto,
by 13.33% and 6.52% on 1-NNA (p-CD) across the two
datasets. Experimental analysis shows that SeaLion can
be trained semi-supervised, thereby reducing the demand
for labeling efforts. Lastly, we validate the applicability of
SeaLion in generative data augmentation for training segmentation models and the capability of SeaLion to serve as
a tool for part-aware 3D shape editing.

Figure 1. Leveraging the proposed semantic part-aware latent
point diffusion technique, SeaLion generates high-quality point
clouds with high inter-part coherence and accurate point-wise
segmentation labels. The generated data has significant application potential, including enlarging the training sets for data-driven
3D segmentation models, particularly in medical examination domains where labeled data is scarce (①). Moreover, SeaLion can
serve as an editing tool, allowing designers to easily replace parts
within a 3D shape. ② shows examples of generated cars with varying shapes (green) and a fixed-shape hood (gray).

1. Introduction

2D image to point cloud generation [6, 9, 15] and point
cloud completion [14, 36]. However, little effort has been
devoted to the generative models capable of generating 3D
point clouds with semantic segmentation labels. Exiting
works [10, 19, 28, 38] can generate point clouds composed
of detachable sub-parts. Nevertheless, these sub-parts lack
clear semantic meaning, hindering the application of generated point clouds in domains such as generative data augmentation for training segmentation models and semantic
part-aware 3D shape editing.
Attributed to the effective approximation to the real
data distribution, denoising diffusion probabilistic models
(DDPMs) [13] outperform many other generative models
such as variational autoencoders (VAEs) [16] and generative adversarial networks (GANs) [5] in generation quality and diversity. Current state-of-the-art diffusion-based
point cloud generative models [21, 37, 40] have achieved
impressive performance. However, they still lack the ability to generate semantic labels. To the best of our knowledge, DiffFacto [23] is the only recent work capable of

In the past few years, 3D point cloud generation based on
deep neural networks has attracted significant interest and
achieved remarkable success in downstream tasks, such as

11789

