This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Densification: Learning to Densify Gaussians for High-Fidelity
Generalizable 3D Reconstruction
Seungtae Nam1 * Xiangyu Sun2 * Gyeongjin Kang2 Younggeun Lee2 Seungjun Oh2 Eunbyung Park1†
1

Yonsei University 2 Sungkyunkwan University

https://stnamjef.github.io/GenerativeDensification/

Figure 1. Our method selectively densifies (a) coarse Gaussians from generalized feed-forward models. (c) The top K Gaussians with
large view-space positional gradients are selected, and (d-e) their fine Gaussians are generated in each densification layer. (g) The final
Gaussians are obtained by combining (b) the remaining (non-selected) Gaussians with (f) the union of each layer’s output Gaussians.

Abstract
Generalized feed-forward Gaussian models have made significant strides in sparse-view 3D reconstruction by leveraging prior knowledge from large multi-view datasets.
However, these models often struggle to represent highfrequency details primarily due to the limited number of
Gaussians. While the densification strategy from per-scene
3D Gaussian splatting can be adapted for feed-forward
models, it typically requires tens of thousands of optimization steps to reconstruct fine details and can easily lead
to overfitting in sparse-view scenarios. In this paper, we
propose Generative Densification, an efficient and generalizable densification strategy specifically tailored for feedforward models. Instead of iteratively splitting and cloning
raw Gaussian parameters, our method up-samples feature
representations produced by feed-forward models and generates their corresponding fine Gaussians in a single forward pass, leveraging learned prior knowledge for en-

hanced generalization. Experimental results on both objectlevel and scene-level reconstruction tasks demonstrate that
our method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches with
comparable or smaller model sizes, achieving notable improvements in representing fine details.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

3D Gaussian splatting (3D-GS) [18] has been a massive
success in high-quality 3D scene reconstruction and realtime novel view synthesis, representing a 3D scene with a
set of learnable Gaussian primitives and exploiting a fast
differentiable rasterization pipeline. Since its introduction,
numerous studies have explored 3D-GS as a versatile 3D
representation with various applications extending beyond
the per-scene optimization. One notable example is generalized feed-forward Gaussian models [3, 7, 49], which generate Gaussian primitives to reconstruct 3D scenes or objects in a single forward pass. By leveraging prior knowledge learned from large multi-view datasets (e.g., Objaverse [9, 10], RE10k [50]), these models can reconstruct
3D scenes or objects from just a single or a few images.

26683

