This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PUP 3D-GS: Principled Uncertainty Pruning
for 3D Gaussian Splatting
Alex Hanson*

Allen Tu*
Vasu Singla
Mayuka Jayawardhana
Matthias Zwicker
Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland, College Park

PUP 3D-GS (Ours)

3D-GS

2.65M Gaussians

76.65 FPS

0.265M Gaussians

318.06 FPS

LightGaussian

0.265M Gaussians

261.27 FPS

Figure 1. We prune the 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) reconstruction of the Deep Blending playroom scene from 2.65M Gaussians to
0.265M Gaussians using our PUP 3D-GS pipeline, accelerating rendering speed from 76.65 FPS to 318.06 FPS – a 4.15× speed-up on
this scene– while preserving fine details. In comparison, LightGaussian, a recent high-performing post-hoc pruning pipeline for pretrained
3D-GS models, loses substantially more fine details than PUP 3D-GS and achieves a slower rendering speed of 261.27 FPS.

Abstract

tial parameters of each Gaussian. Additionally, we propose
a multi-round prune-refine pipeline that can be applied to
any pretrained 3D-GS model without changing its training
pipeline. After pruning 90 % of Gaussians, a substantially
higher percentage than previous methods, our PUP 3D-GS
pipeline increases average rendering speed by 3 .56 × while
retaining more salient foreground information and achieving higher image quality metrics than existing techniques on
scenes from the Mip-NeRF 360, Tanks & Temples, and Deep
Blending datasets. Code and additional visualizations are
available at https://pup3dgs.github.io/.

Recent advances in novel view synthesis have enabled
real-time rendering speeds with high reconstruction accuracy. 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS), a foundational pointbased parametric 3D scene representation, models scenes
as large sets of 3D Gaussians. However, complex scenes
can consist of millions of Gaussians, resulting in high storage and memory requirements that limit the viability of
3D-GS on devices with limited resources. Current techniques for compressing these pretrained models by pruning Gaussians rely on combining heuristics to determine
which Gaussians to remove. At high compression ratios,
these pruned scenes suffer from heavy degradation of visual fidelity and loss of foreground details. In this paper,
we propose a principled sensitivity pruning score that preserves visual fidelity and foreground details at significantly
higher compression ratios than existing approaches. It is
computed as a second-order approximation of the reconstruction error on the training views with respect to the spa-

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis aims to render views from new viewpoints given a set of 2D images. Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRFs) [20] use volume rendering to represent the 3D
scene using a multilayer perceptron that can be used to render novel views. Although NeRF and its variants achieve
high-quality reconstructions, they suffer from slow inference and require several seconds to render a single image.

* denotes equal contribution.

5949

