This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tracktention: Leveraging Point Tracking to Attend Videos Faster and Better
Zihang Lai
Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group (VGG), University of Oxford
{zlai,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

(off the shelf)

Point Tracker

Tracktention
Point Tracks

Image Network

Video Network

Figure 1. Left: The Tracktention Layer is a plug-and-play module that can convert an image-based network (e.g., for monocular depth
prediction) into a state-of-the-art video network (e.g., for video depth prediction). It does so by integrating the output of any off-the-shelf,
modern, and powerful point trackers via track cross-attention. Right: For example, Tracktention achieves state-of-the-art and efficient
video depth prediction by transforming Depth Anything into a video depth model. See Tab. 2 for detailed results. ⇤ Single-image models.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Temporal consistency is critical in video prediction to ensure that outputs are coherent and free of artifacts. Traditional methods, such as temporal attention and 3D convolution, may struggle with significant object motion and
may not capture long-range temporal dependencies in dynamic scenes. To address this gap, we propose the Tracktention Layer, a novel architectural component that explicitly
integrates motion information using point tracks, i.e., sequences of corresponding points across frames. By incorporating these motion cues, the Tracktention Layer enhances
temporal alignment and effectively handles complex object motions, maintaining consistent feature representations
over time. Our approach is computationally efficient and
can be seamlessly integrated into existing models, such as
Vision Transformers, with minimal modification. It can be
used to upgrade image-only models to state-of-the-art video
ones, sometimes outperforming models natively designed
for video prediction. We demonstrate this on video depth
prediction and video colorization, where models augmented
with the Tracktention Layer exhibit significantly improved
temporal consistency compared to baselines. Project website: zlai0.github.io/TrackTention.

Compared to image analysis tasks, video analysis tasks,
such as video segmentation, video depth estimation, and
video colorization, pose additional challenges due to the
temporal dimension inherent in video data. A particularly
important challenge is ensuring that outputs are temporally
consistent across frames, which is necessary to produce coherent and artifact-free results. Temporal inconsistencies,
such as flickering or abrupt changes in predicted object attributes, are especially noticeable in applications like colorization, where the output is a new video.
An aspect of video analysis that has seen significant
progress in recent years is point tracking. New trackers
such as PIPs [19], TAPIR [12], BootsTAP [13], and CoTracker [26] can now track quasi-dense collections of points
across long video sequences with high reliability and efficiency. So far, these trackers have been primarily used
in selected applications like 3D reconstruction and object
tracking through ad-hoc algorithms. In this paper, we ask
whether progress in point tracking can benefit a much wider
range of video analysis tasks.
To answer this question, we propose the Tracktention
Layer, a novel architectural component designed to enhance
temporal consistency in video transformers. Tracktention
integrates seamlessly into vision transformers as a new at-

22809

