Knowledge Transfer for Scene-Specific Motion
Prediction
Lamberto Ballan1(B) , Francesco Castaldo2 , Alexandre Alahi1 ,
Francesco Palmieri2 , and Silvio Savarese1
1

Computer Science Department, Stanford University, Stanford, USA
lballan@cs.stanford.edu
2
Department of Industrial and Information Engineering,
Seconda Università di Napoli, Caserta, Italy

Abstract. When given a single frame of the video, humans can not
only interpret the content of the scene, but also they are able to forecast the near future. This ability is mostly driven by their rich prior
knowledge about the visual world, both in terms of (i) the dynamics of
moving agents, as well as (ii) the semantic of the scene. In this work we
exploit the interplay between these two key elements to predict scenespeciﬁc motion patterns. First, we extract patch descriptors encoding
the probability of moving to the adjacent patches, and the probability of
being in that particular patch or changing behavior. Then, we introduce
a Dynamic Bayesian Network which exploits this scene speciﬁc knowledge for trajectory prediction. Experimental results demonstrate that our
method is able to accurately predict trajectories and transfer predictions
to a novel scene characterized by similar elements.

1

Introduction

Humans glance at an image and grasp what objects and regions are present in the
scene, where they are, and how they interact with each other. But they can do
even more. Humans are not only able to infer what is happening at the present
instant, but also predict and visualize what can happen next. This ability to
forecast the near future is mostly driven by the rich prior knowledge about the
visual world. Although many ingredients are involved in this process, we believe
two are the main sources of prior knowledge: (i ) the static semantic of the scene
and (ii ) the dynamic of agents moving in this scenario. This is supported also
by experiments showing that the human brain combines motion cues with static
form cues, in order to imply motion in our natural environment [18].
Computer vision has a rich literature on analysing human trajectories and
scenes, but most of the previous work addresses these problems separately. Kitani
et al. [16] have recently shown that by modeling the eﬀect of the physical scene
on the choice of human actions, it is possible to infer the future activity of
people from visual data. Similarly, Walker et al. [37] forecast not only the possible
motion in the scene but also predict visual appearances in the future. Although
these works show very interesting results, they considered only a few selected
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 697–713, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 42

