LSTM-CF: Unifying Context Modeling
and Fusion with LSTMs for RGB-D
Scene Labeling
Zhen Li1 , Yukang Gan2 , Xiaodan Liang2 , Yizhou Yu1 , Hui Cheng2 ,
and Liang Lin2(B)
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
lizhen36@hku.hk, yizhouy@acm.org
2
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
ganyk@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, xdliang328@gmail.com, chengh9@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
linliang@ieee.org

Abstract. Semantic labeling of RGB-D scenes is crucial to many intelligent applications including perceptual robotics. It generates pixelwise
and ﬁne-grained label maps from simultaneously sensed photometric
(RGB) and depth channels. This paper addresses this problem by (i)
developing a novel Long Short-Term Memorized Context Fusion (LSTMCF) Model that captures and fuses contextual information from multiple channels of photometric and depth data, and (ii) incorporating this
model into deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for end-to-end
training. Speciﬁcally, contexts in photometric and depth channels are,
respectively, captured by stacking several convolutional layers and a
long short-term memory layer; the memory layer encodes both shortrange and long-range spatial dependencies in an image along the vertical
direction. Another long short-term memorized fusion layer is set up to
integrate the contexts along the vertical direction from diﬀerent channels, and perform bi-directional propagation of the fused vertical contexts along the horizontal direction to obtain true 2D global contexts.
At last, the fused contextual representation is concatenated with the
convolutional features extracted from the photometric channels in order
to improve the accuracy of ﬁne-scale semantic labeling. Our proposed
model has set a new state of the art, i.e., 48.1% and 49.4% average
class accuracy over 37 categories (2.2% and 5.4% improvement) on the
large-scale SUNRGBD dataset and the NYUDv2 dataset, respectively.
Keywords: RGB-D scene labeling · Image context modeling · Long
short-term memory · Depth and photometric data fusion

This work was support by Projects on Faculty/Student Exchange and Collaboration Scheme between the Higher Education in Hong Kong and the Mainland,
Guangzhou Science and Technology Program under grant 1563000439, and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 541–557, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 34

