Head Reconstruction from Internet Photos
Shu Liang(B) , Linda G. Shapiro, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman
Computer Science and Engineering Department,
University of Washington, Seattle, USA
{liangshu,shapiro,kemelmi}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract. 3D face reconstruction from Internet photos has recently produced exciting results. A person’s face, e.g., Tom Hanks, can be modeled
and animated in 3D from a completely uncalibrated photo collection.
Most methods, however, focus solely on face area and mask out the rest
of the head. This paper proposes that head modeling from the Internet
is a problem we can solve. We target reconstruction of the rough shape
of the head. Our method is to gradually “grow” the head mesh starting
from the frontal face and extending to the rest of views using photometric stereo constraints. We call our method boundary-value growing
algorithm. Results on photos of celebrities downloaded from the Internet
are presented.
Keywords: Internet photo collections · Head modeling · In the wild ·
Unconstrained 3D reconstruction · Uncalibrated

1

Introduction
“If two heads are better than one, then what about double chins? On that
note, I will help myself to seconds.” —Jarod Kintz

Methods that reconstruct 3D models of people’s heads from images need
to account for varying 3D pose, lighting, non-rigid changes due to expressions,
relatively smooth surfaces of faces, ears and neck, and ﬁnally, the hair. Great
reconstructions can be achieved nowadays in case the input photos are captured
in a calibrated lab setting or semi-calibrated setup where the person has to participate in the capturing session (see related work). Reconstructing from Internet
photos, however, is an open problem due to the high degree of variability across
uncalibrated photos; lighting, pose, cameras and resolution change dramatically
across photos. In recent years, reconstruction of faces from the Internet have
received a lot of attention. All face-focused methods, however, mask out the
head using a ﬁxed face mask and focus only on the face area. For real-life applications, we must be able to reconstruct a full head.
So what is it there to reconstruct except for the face? At the minimum, to
create full head models we need to be able to reconstruct the ears, and at least
part of the neck, chin, and overall head shape. Additionally, hair reconstruction
is a diﬃcult problem. One approach is to use morphable model methods. These,
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 360–374, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 23

