Natural Image Matting Using Deep
Convolutional Neural Networks
Donghyeon Cho1(B) , Yu-Wing Tai2 , and Inso Kweon1
1

KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
cdh12242@gmail.com, iskweon@kaist.ac.kr
2
SenseTime Group Limited, Hong Kong, China
yuwing@gmail.com
https://sites.google.com/site/cnnmatting/

Abstract. We propose a deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
method for natural image matting. Our method takes results of the closed
form matting, results of the KNN matting and normalized RGB color
images as inputs, and directly learns an end-to-end mapping between the
inputs, and reconstructed alpha mattes. We analyze pros and cons of the
closed form matting, and the KNN matting in terms of local and nonlocal
principle, and show that they are complementary to each other. A major
beneﬁt of our method is that it can “recognize” diﬀerent local image
structures, and then combine results of local (closed form matting), and
nonlocal (KNN matting) matting eﬀectively to achieve higher quality
alpha mattes than both of its inputs. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our proposed deep CNN matting produces visually and quantitatively high-quality alpha mattes. In addition, our method has achieved
the highest ranking in the public alpha matting evaluation dataset in
terms of the sum of absolute diﬀerences, mean squared errors, and gradient errors.
Keywords: Alpha matting · Deep CNN · Local and nonlocal matting

1

Introduction and Related Work

Image matting aims to extract an alpha matte of foreground given a trimap of
an image. This problem can be expressed as a linear combination of foreground
and background colors as follows [1]:
I = αF + (1 − α)B,

(1)

where I, F, B, and α denote the observed image (usually in RGB), foreground,
background and mixing coeﬃcients (alpha matte) respectively. Given an input
I, ﬁnding F, B, and α simultaneously is a highly ill-posed problem.
Previous works in image matting have shown that, if we make proper assumptions, e.g. the color line model, about F and B, we can solve α in a closed form [2].
Local aﬃnity based methods [2,3] analyze statistical correlation among local pixels to propagate alpha values from known regions to unknown pixels. When their
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 626–643, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 39

