Learning to Track at 100 FPS with Deep
Regression Networks
David Held(B) , Sebastian Thrun, and Silvio Savarese
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, USA
{davheld,thrun,ssilvio}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract. Machine learning techniques are often used in computer
vision due to their ability to leverage large amounts of training data
to improve performance. Unfortunately, most generic object trackers are
still trained from scratch online and do not beneﬁt from the large number of videos that are readily available for oﬄine training. We propose
a method for oﬄine training of neural networks that can track novel
objects at test-time at 100 fps. Our tracker is signiﬁcantly faster than previous methods that use neural networks for tracking, which are typically
very slow to run and not practical for real-time applications. Our tracker
uses a simple feed-forward network with no online training required. The
tracker learns a generic relationship between object motion and appearance and can be used to track novel objects that do not appear in the
training set. We test our network on a standard tracking benchmark
to demonstrate our tracker’s state-of-the-art performance. Further, our
performance improves as we add more videos to our oﬄine training set.
To the best of our knowledge, our tracker (Our tracker is available at
http://davheld.github.io/GOTURN/GOTURN.html) is the ﬁrst neuralnetwork tracker that learns to track generic objects at 100 fps.
Keywords: Tracking · Deep learning · Neural networks · Machine
learning

1

Introduction

Given some object of interest marked in one frame of a video, the goal of “singletarget tracking” is to locate this object in subsequent video frames, despite object
motion, changes in viewpoint, lighting changes, or other variations. Single-target
tracking is an important component of many systems. For person-following applications, a robot must track a person as they move through their environment. For
autonomous driving, a robot must track dynamic obstacles in order to estimate
where they are moving and predict how they will move in the future.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46448-0 45) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 749–765, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 45

