Playing for Data: Ground Truth from Computer
Games
Stephan R. Richter1(B) , Vibhav Vineet2 , Stefan Roth1 , and Vladlen Koltun2
1

TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
stephan.richter@visinf.tu-darmstadt.de
2
Intel Labs, Santa Clara, USA

Abstract. Recent progress in computer vision has been driven by highcapacity models trained on large datasets. Unfortunately, creating large
datasets with pixel-level labels has been extremely costly due to the
amount of human eﬀort required. In this paper, we present an approach to rapidly creating pixel-accurate semantic label maps for images
extracted from modern computer games. Although the source code and
the internal operation of commercial games are inaccessible, we show that
associations between image patches can be reconstructed from the communication between the game and the graphics hardware. This enables
rapid propagation of semantic labels within and across images synthesized by the game, with no access to the source code or the content. We
validate the presented approach by producing dense pixel-level semantic
annotations for 25 thousand images synthesized by a photorealistic openworld computer game. Experiments on semantic segmentation datasets
show that using the acquired data to supplement real-world images signiﬁcantly increases accuracy and that the acquired data enables reducing
the amount of hand-labeled real-world data: models trained with game
data and just 13 of the CamVid training set outperform models trained
on the complete CamVid training set.

1

Introduction

Recent progress in computer vision has been driven by high-capacity models
trained on large datasets. Image classiﬁcation datasets with millions of labeled
images support training deep and highly expressive models [24]. Following their
success in image classiﬁcation, these models have recently been adapted for
detailed scene understanding tasks such as semantic segmentation [28]. Such
semantic segmentation models are initially trained for image classiﬁcation, for
which large datasets are available, and then ﬁne-tuned on semantic segmentation
datasets, which have fewer images.
We are therefore interested in creating very large datasets with pixel-accurate
semantic labels. Such datasets may enable the design of more diverse model

S.R. Richter and V. Vineet—Authors contributed equally.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 102–118, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 7

