Real-Time RGB-D Activity Prediction
by Soft Regression
Jian-Fang Hu2,3,4 , Wei-Shi Zheng2,3(B) , Lianyang Ma4 , Gang Wang4 ,
and Jianhuang Lai1,3
1

Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology,
Guangzhou, China
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing,
MOE, Guangzhou, China
wszheng@ieee.org
3
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
hujianf@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn
4
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
wanggang@ntu.edu.sg, lianyangma2012@gmail.com

Abstract. In this paper, we propose a novel approach for predicting
ongoing activities captured by a low-cost depth camera. Our approach
avoids a usual assumption in existing activity prediction systems that the
progress level of ongoing sequence is given. We overcome this limitation
by learning a soft label for each subsequence and develop a soft regression framework for activity prediction to learn both predictor and soft
labels jointly. In order to make activity prediction work in a real-time
manner, we introduce a new RGB-D feature called “local accumulative
frame feature (LAFF)”, which can be computed eﬃciently by constructing an integral feature map. Our experiments on two RGB-D benchmark
datasets demonstrate that the proposed regression-based activity prediction model outperforms existing models signiﬁcantly and also show that
the activity prediction on RGB-D sequence is more accurate than that
on RGB channel.
Keywords: Activity prediction · RGB-D · Soft regression

1

Introduction

Recognizing activities before they are fully executed is very important for some
real-world applications like visual surveillance, robot designing [1,2], and clinical monitoring [3]. Activity prediction is to predict ongoing activities using the
observed subsequences that only contain partial activity execution.
Existing action/activity prediction model [4] requires manual labeling of a
large amount of video segments, which however record mostly low level actions
shared among activities, and thus it is too expensive and sometimes is diﬃcult
to label. Although an alternative way is to simply label a subsequence1 as the
1

In this work, the subsequence of an activity means the accumulation of consecutive
segments from the start of the activity.

c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 280–296, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 17

