Ambient Sound Provides Supervision
for Visual Learning
Andrew Owens1(B) , Jiajun Wu1 , Josh H. McDermott1 , William T. Freeman1,2 ,
and Antonio Torralba1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA
andrewo@mit.edu
2
Google Research, Cambridge, USA

Abstract. The sound of crashing waves, the roar of fast-moving cars –
sound conveys important information about the objects in our surroundings. In this work, we show that ambient sounds can be used as a
supervisory signal for learning visual models. To demonstrate this, we
train a convolutional neural network to predict a statistical summary of
the sound associated with a video frame. We show that, through this
process, the network learns a representation that conveys information
about objects and scenes. We evaluate this representation on several
recognition tasks, ﬁnding that its performance is comparable to that of
other state-of-the-art unsupervised learning methods. Finally, we show
through visualizations that the network learns units that are selective to
objects that are often associated with characteristic sounds.
Keywords: Sound · Convolutional networks · Unsupervised learning

1

Introduction

Sound conveys important information about the world around us – the bustle
of a café tells us that there are many people nearby, while the low-pitched roar
of engine noise tells us to watch for fast-moving cars [10]. Although sound is
in some cases complementary to visual information, such as when we listen
to something out of view, vision and hearing are often informative about the
same structures in the world. Here we propose that as a consequence of these
correlations, concurrent visual and sound information provide a rich training
signal that we can use to learn useful representations of the visual world.
In particular, an algorithm trained to predict the sounds that occur within
a visual scene might be expected to learn objects and scene elements that are
associated with salient and distinctive noises, such as people, cars, and ﬂowing
water. Such an algorithm might also learn to associate visual scenes with the
ambient sound textures [25] that occur within them. It might, for example,
associate the sound of wind with outdoor scenes, and the buzz of refrigerators
with indoor scenes.
Although human annotations are indisputably useful for learning, they are
expensive to collect. The correspondence between ambient sounds and video is,
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 801–816, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 48

