Human Re-identification in Crowd Videos Using
Personal, Social and Environmental Constraints
Shayan Modiri Assari(B) , Haroon Idrees, and Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision,
University of Central Florida, Orlando, USA
{smodiri,haroon,shah}@cs.ucf.edu

Abstract. This paper addresses the problem of human re-identiﬁcation
in videos of dense crowds. Re-identiﬁcation in crowded scenes is a challenging problem due to large number of people and frequent occlusions,
coupled with changes in their appearance due to diﬀerent properties and
exposure of cameras. To solve this problem, we model multiple Personal,
Social and Environmental (PSE) constraints on human motion across
cameras in crowded scenes. The personal constraints include appearance and preferred speed of each individual, while the social inﬂuences
are modeled by grouping and collision avoidance. Finally, the environmental constraints model the transition probabilities between gates
(entrances/exits). We incorporate these constraints into an energy minimization for solving human re-identiﬁcation. Assigning 1–1 correspondence while modeling PSE constraints is NP-hard. We optimize using a
greedy local neighborhood search algorithm to restrict the search space
of hypotheses. We evaluated the proposed approach on several thousand
frames of PRID and Grand Central datasets, and obtained signiﬁcantly
better results compared to existing methods.
Keywords: Video surveillance · Re-identiﬁcation · Dense crowds ·
Social constraints · Multiple cameras · Human tracking

1

Introduction

Human re-identiﬁcation is a fundamental and crucial problem for multi-camera
surveillance systems [17,49]. It involves re-identifying individuals after they leave
ﬁeld-of-view (FOV) of one camera and appear in FOV of another camera (see
Fig. 1(a)). The investigation process of the Boston Marathon bombing serves
to highlight the importance of re-identiﬁcation in crowded scenes. Authorities
had to sift through a mountain of footage from government surveillance cameras, private security cameras and imagery shot by bystanders on smart phones
[22]. Therefore, automatic re-identiﬁcation in dense crowds will allow successful
monitoring and analysis of crowded events.
Dense crowds are the most challenging scenario for human re-identiﬁcation.
For large number of people, appearance alone provides a weak cue. Often, people
in crowds wear similar clothes that makes re-identiﬁcation even harder (Fig. 1c).
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 119–136, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 8

