Convolutional Oriented Boundaries
Kevis-Kokitsi Maninis1(B) , Jordi Pont-Tuset1 , Pablo Arbeláez2 ,
and Luc Van Gool1,3
1

ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
kmaninis@vision.ee.ethz.ch
2
Universidad de Los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia
3
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

Abstract. We present Convolutional Oriented Boundaries (COB),
which produces multiscale oriented contours and region hierarchies starting from generic image classiﬁcation Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs). COB is computationally eﬃcient, because it requires a single
CNN forward pass for contour detection and it uses a novel sparse boundary representation for hierarchical segmentation; it gives a signiﬁcant leap
in performance over the state-of-the-art, and it generalizes very well to
unseen categories and datasets. Particularly, we show that learning to
estimate not only contour strength but also orientation provides more
accurate results. We perform extensive experiments on BSDS, PASCAL
Context, PASCAL Segmentation, and MS-COCO, showing that COB
provides state-of-the-art contours, region hierarchies, and object proposals in all datasets.
Keywords: Contour detection · Contour orientation estimation ·
Hierarchical image segmentation · Object proposals

1

Introduction

The adoption of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) has caused a profound
change and a large leap forward in performance throughout the majority of ﬁelds
in computer vision. In the case of a traditionally category-agnostic ﬁeld such as
contour detection, it has recently fostered the appearance of systems [1–6] that
rely on large-scale category-speciﬁc information in the form of deep architectures
pre-trained on Imagenet for image classiﬁcation [7–10].
This paper proposes Convolutional Oriented Boundaries (COB), a generic
CNN architecture that allows end-to-end learning of multiscale oriented contours, and we show how it translates top performing base CNN networks into
high-quality contours; allowing to bring future improvements in base CNN architectures into semantic grouping. We then propose a sparse boundary representation for eﬃcient construction of hierarchical regions from the contour signal.
Our overall approach is both eﬃcient (it runs in 0.8 seconds per image) and
highly accurate (it produces state-of-the-art contours and regions on PASCAL
and on the BSDS). Figure 1 shows an overview of our system.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 580–596, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 35

