The Curious Robot: Learning Visual
Representations via Physical Interactions
Lerrel Pinto(B) , Dhiraj Gandhi, Yuanfeng Han, Yong-Lae Park,
and Abhinav Gupta
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
lerrel.pinto@gmail.com

Abstract. What is the right supervisory signal to train visual representations? Current approaches in computer vision use category labels from
datasets such as ImageNet to train ConvNets. However, in case of biological agents, visual representation learning does not require millions of
semantic labels. We argue that biological agents use physical interactions
with the world to learn visual representations unlike current vision systems which just use passive observations (images and videos downloaded
from web). For example, babies push objects, poke them, put them in
their mouth and throw them to learn representations. Towards this goal,
we build one of the ﬁrst systems on a Baxter platform that pushes, pokes,
grasps and observes objects in a tabletop environment. It uses four diﬀerent types of physical interactions to collect more than 130K datapoints,
with each datapoint providing supervision to a shared ConvNet architecture allowing us to learn visual representations. We show the quality of
learned representations by observing neuron activations and performing
nearest neighbor retrieval on this learned representation. Quantitatively,
we evaluate our learned ConvNet on image classiﬁcation tasks and show
improvements compared to learning without external data. Finally, on
the task of instance retrieval, our network outperforms the ImageNet
network on recall@1 by 3 %.

1

Introduction

Recently most computer vision systems have moved from using hand-designed
features to feature learning paradigm. Much of the visual feature learning is
done in a completely supervised manner using category labels. However, in case
of biological agents, visual learning typically does not require categorical labels
and happens in a “unsupervised” manner1 .
Recently there has been a strong push to learn visual representations without using any category labels. Examples include using context from images [1],
diﬀerent viewpoints from videos [2], ego-motion from videos [3] and generative
models of images and videos [4–7]. However, all these approaches still observe
1

By “unsupervised” we mean no supervision from other agents but supervision can
come from other modalities or from time.

c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 3–18, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 1

