Image Co-localization by Mimicking a Good
Detector’s Confidence Score Distribution
Yao Li, Lingqiao Liu, Chunhua Shen(B) , and Anton van den Hengel
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract. Given a set of images containing objects from the same category, the task of image co-localization is to identify and localize each
instance. This paper shows that this problem can be solved by a simple
but intriguing idea, that is, a common object detector can be learnt by
making its detection conﬁdence scores distributed like those of a strongly
supervised detector. More speciﬁcally, we observe that given a set of
object proposals extracted from an image that contains the object of
interest, an accurate strongly supervised object detector should give high
scores to only a small minority of proposals, and low scores to most of
them. Thus, we devise an entropy-based objective function to enforce
the above property when learning the common object detector. Once
the detector is learnt, we resort to a segmentation approach to reﬁne the
localization. We show that despite its simplicity, our approach outperforms state-of-the-arts.
Keywords: Image co-localization · Unsupervised object discovery

1

Introduction

There has been an explosion of images available on the Internet in recent years,
largely due to the popularity of photo sharing sites like Facebook and Flicker.
However, most of these images are either unlabeled or weakly-labeled. One way of
accessing these images is ﬁnding images depicting the same object, for instance,
Google Image Search will return images containing a common object described
by the user input keyword. In this paper, we aim to localize the common object
in this scenario (without using any other forms of supervision, e.g., manuallylabeled negative samples). This task is known as the image co-localization task
in literature [4,17,30].
Image co-localization is a particularly challenging task, and thus there exist
a limited number of comparable methods [4,17,30]. These methods address this
problem from various perspectives. The work in [30] introduces binary latent
variables to indicate the presence of the common object and formulates the colocalization via latent variable inference. The work of [4], in contrast, localizes
the common object by matching common object parts. Our work diﬀers from
First two authors contributed equally.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 19–34, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 2

