Fashion Landmark Detection in the Wild
Ziwei Liu1 , Sijie Yan1 , Ping Luo1,2(B) , Xiaogang Wang1,2 , and Xiaoou Tang1,2
1

Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China
{lz013,siyan,pluo,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
2
Shenzhen Key Laboratory for Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, Shenzhen, China

Abstract. Visual fashion analysis has attracted many attentions in the
recent years. Previous work represented clothing regions by either bounding boxes or human joints. This work presents fashion landmark detection or fashion alignment, which is to predict the positions of functional
key points deﬁned on the fashion items, such as the corners of neckline,
hemline, and cuﬀ. To encourage future studies, we introduce a fashion
landmark dataset (The dataset is available at http://mmlab.ie.cuhk.edu.
hk/projects/DeepFashion/LandmarkDetection.html.) with over 120K
images, where each image is labeled with eight landmarks. With this
dataset, we study fashion alignment by cascading multiple convolutional
neural networks in three stages. These stages gradually improve the accuracies of landmark predictions. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
eﬀectiveness of the proposed method, as well as its generalization ability to pose estimation. Fashion landmark is also compared to clothing
bounding boxes and human joints in two applications, fashion attribute
prediction and clothes retrieval, showing that fashion landmark is a more
discriminative representation to understand fashion images.
Keywords: Clothes landmark detection · Cascaded deep convolutional
neural networks · Attribute prediction · Clothes retrieval

1

Introduction

Visual fashion analysis has drawn lots of attentions recently, due to its wide
spectrum of applications such as clothes recognition [1–3], retrieval [3–5], and
recommendation [6,7]. It is a challenging task because of the large variations
presented in the clothing items, such as the changes of poses, scales, and appearances. To reduce these variations, existing works tackled the problem by looking
for informative regions, i.e. detecting the clothes bounding boxes [1,2] or the
human joints [8,9]. We go beyond the above by studying a more discriminative
representation, fashion landmark, which is the key-point located at the functional region of clothes, for example the neckline and the cuﬀ.
The ﬁrst two authors contribute equally and share ﬁrst authorship.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 229–245, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 15

