Deep Automatic Portrait Matting
Xiaoyong Shen(B) , Xin Tao, Hongyun Gao, Chao Zhou, and Jiaya Jia
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Sha Tin, Hong Kong
xyshen@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
http://www.cse.cuhk.edu.hk/leojia/projects/automatting

Abstract. We propose an automatic image matting method for portrait images. This method does not need user interaction, which was
however essential in most previous approaches. In order to accomplish
this goal, a new end-to-end convolutional neural network (CNN) based
framework is proposed taking the input of a portrait image. It outputs
the matte result. Our method considers not only image semantic prediction but also pixel-level image matte optimization. A new portrait image
dataset is constructed with our labeled matting ground truth. Our automatic method achieves comparable results with state-of-the-art methods
that require speciﬁed foreground and background regions or pixels. Many
applications are enabled given the automatic nature of our system.
Keywords: Portrait · Matting · Automatic method · Neural network

1

Introduction

Prevalence of smart phones makes self-portrait photography, i.e., selﬁe, possible
whenever wanted. Accordingly image enhancement software gets popular for portrait beatiﬁcation, image stylization, etc. to meet various aesthetic requirements.
Interaction is a key component in many of these algorithms to draw strokes and
select necessary areas. One important technique that is generally not automatic
is image matting, which is widely employed in image composition and object
extraction. Interaction is involved in existing systems to select foreground and
background color samples using either strokes or regions.
Image matting takes a color image I as input and decomposes it into background B and foreground F assuming that I is blended linearly by F and B.
Such composite can be expressed as
I = (1 − α)B + αF,

(1)

where α is the alpha matte for each pixel with range in [0, 1]. Since F , B and
α are unknown, seven variables are to be estimated for each pixel, which makes
the original matting problem ill-posed. Image matting techniques [1,2] require
users specify foreground and background color samples with strokes or trimaps
as shown in Fig. 1.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 92–107, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 6

