Non-rigid 3D Shape Retrieval via Large Margin
Nearest Neighbor Embedding
Ioannis Chiotellis1(B) , Rudolph Triebel1,2 , Thomas Windheuser1 ,
and Daniel Cremers1
1

Department of Computer Science, TU Munich, Garching, Germany
{chiotell,triebel,windheus,cremers}@in.tum.de
2
Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics, Department of Perception and Cognition,
German Aerospace Center (DLR), Oberpfaﬀenhofen-Weßling, Germany
rudolph.triebel@dlr.de

Abstract. In this paper, we propose a highly eﬃcient metric learning approach to non-rigid 3D shape analysis. From a training set of 3D
shapes from diﬀerent classes, we learn a transformation of the shapes
which optimally enforces a clustering of shapes from the same class. In
contrast to existing approaches, we do not perform a transformation of
individual local point descriptors, but a linear embedding of the entire
distribution of shape descriptors. It turns out that this embedding of the
input shapes is suﬃciently powerful to enable state of the art retrieval
performance using a simple nearest neighbor classiﬁer. We demonstrate
experimentally that our approach substantially outperforms the state of
the art non-rigid 3D shape retrieval methods on the recent benchmark
data set SHREC’14 Non-Rigid 3D Human Models, both in classiﬁcation
accuracy and runtime.

Keywords: Shape retrieval
learning

1

· Shape representation · Supervised

Introduction

The analysis of 3D shapes is becoming more and more important with increasing amounts of 3D shape data becoming available through novel 3D scanning
technology and 3D modeling software. Among the numerous challenges in 3D
shape analysis, we will focus on the problems of non-rigid shape similarity and
non-rigid 3D shape retrieval: Given a set of 3D shapes and a previously unobserved query shape, we would like to eﬃciently determine the similarity of the
query to all shapes in the database and identify the most similar shapes in the
database – see Fig. 1. The computation of shape similarity is a diﬃcult problem, in particular if we wish to allow for non-rigid deformations of the shapes.
Under such deformations the appearance of the object may change signiﬁcantly.
For many real-world retrieval applications on large 3D shape databases, it is of
importance that the retrieval of similar shapes can be computed eﬃciently.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 327–342, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 21

