DeepWarp: Photorealistic Image Resynthesis
for Gaze Manipulation
Yaroslav Ganin(B) , Daniil Kononenko, Diana Sungatullina,
and Victor Lempitsky
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Skolkovo, Moscow Region, Russia
{ganin,daniil.kononenko,d.sungatullina,lempitsky}@skoltech.ru

Abstract. In this work, we consider the task of generating highlyrealistic images of a given face with a redirected gaze. We treat this problem as a speciﬁc instance of conditional image generation and suggest a
new deep architecture that can handle this task very well as revealed
by numerical comparison with prior art and a user study. Our deep
architecture performs coarse-to-ﬁne warping with an additional intensity correction of individual pixels. All these operations are performed
in a feed-forward manner, and the parameters associated with diﬀerent
operations are learned jointly in the end-to-end fashion. After learning,
the resulting neural network can synthesize images with manipulated
gaze, while the redirection angle can be selected arbitrarily from a certain range and provided as an input to the network.
Keywords: Gaze correction · Warping · Spatial transformers · Supervised learning · Deep learning

1

Introduction

In this work, we consider the task of learning deep architectures that can transform input images into new images in a certain way (deep image resynthesis).
Generally, using deep architectures for image generation has become a very active
topic of research. While a lot of very interesting results have been reported over
recent years and even months, achieving photo-realism beyond the task of synthesizing small patches has proven to be hard.
Previously proposed methods for deep resynthesis usually tackle the resynthesis problem in a general form and strive for universality. Here, we take
an opposite approach and focus on a very speciﬁc image resynthesis problem
(gaze manipulation) that has a long history in the computer vision community [1,7,13,16,18,20,24,26,27] and some important real-life applications. We
show that by restricting the scope of the method and exploiting the speciﬁcs
of the task, we are indeed able to train deep architectures that handle gaze
manipulation well and can synthesize output images of high realism (Fig. 1).
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46475-6 20) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 311–326, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 20

