Fast Global Registration
Qian-Yi Zhou, Jaesik Park, and Vladlen Koltun(B)
Intel Labs, Santa Clara, USA
vladlen.koltun@intel.com

Abstract. We present an algorithm for fast global registration of partially overlapping 3D surfaces. The algorithm operates on candidate
matches that cover the surfaces. A single objective is optimized to align
the surfaces and disable false matches. The objective is deﬁned densely
over the surfaces and the optimization achieves tight alignment with
no initialization. No correspondence updates or closest-point queries are
performed in the inner loop. An extension of the algorithm can perform joint global registration of many partially overlapping surfaces.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that the presented approach matches
or exceeds the accuracy of state-of-the-art global registration pipelines,
while being at least an order of magnitude faster. Remarkably, the presented approach is also faster than local reﬁnement algorithms such as
ICP. It provides the accuracy achieved by well-initialized local reﬁnement algorithms, without requiring an initialization and at lower computational cost.

1

Introduction

Registration of three-dimensional surfaces is a central problem in computer
vision, computer graphics, and robotics. The problem is particularly challenging
when the surfaces only partially overlap and no initial alignment is given. This
diﬃcult form of the problem is encountered in scene reconstruction [7,39], 3D
object retrieval [15,29], camera relocalization [13], and other applications.
In order to deal with noisy data and partial overlap, practical registration
pipelines employ iterative model ﬁtting frameworks such as RANSAC [31]. Each
iteration samples a set of candidate correspondences, produces an alignment
based on these correspondences, and evaluates this alignment. If a satisfactory
alignment is found, it is reﬁned by a local registration algorithm such as ICP
[30]. The combination of sampling-based coarse alignment and iterative local
reﬁnement is common in practice and is designed to produce a tight registration
even with challenging input [7,19,39].
While such registration pipelines are common, they have signiﬁcant drawbacks. Both the model ﬁtting and the local reﬁnement stages are iterative and
perform computationally expensive nearest-neighbor queries in their inner loops.
Much of the computational eﬀort is expended on testing candidate alignments
that are subsequently discarded. And the inelegant decomposition into a global
alignment stage and a local reﬁnement stage is itself a consequence of the low
precision of global alignment frameworks.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 766–782, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 47

