An Eﬃcient Fusion Move Algorithm
for the Minimum Cost Lifted Multicut Problem
Thorsten Beier1(B) , Björn Andres2 , Ullrich Köthe1 , and Fred A. Hamprecht1
1

HCI/IWR, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany
{thorsten.beier,ullrich.koethe,fred.hamprecht}@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de
2
Computer Vision and Multimodal Computing,
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
andres@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract. Many computer vision problems can be cast as an optimization problem whose feasible solutions are decompositions of a graph. The
minimum cost lifted multicut problem is such an optimization problem.
Its objective function can penalize or reward all decompositions for which
any given pair of nodes are in distinct components. While this property
has many potential applications, such applications are hampered by the
fact that the problem is NP-hard. We propose a fusion move algorithm
for computing feasible solutions, better and more eﬃciently than existing algorithms. We demonstrate this and applications to image segmentation, obtaining a new state of the art for a problem in biological image
analysis.

1

Introduction and Related Work

In 2011, Andres et al. [1], Bagon and Galun [2], Kim et al. [3,4] and Yarkony
et al. [5] independently proposed formulating the image segmentation problem
[6] as a minimum cost multicut problem [7,8] on a suitable graph. Given, for
every pair of neighboring nodes, a cost or reward (negative cost) to be paid if
these nodes are assigned to distinct components, the minimum cost multicut
problem consists in ﬁnding a decomposition of the graph with minimal sum of
costs. In 2015, Keuper et al. [9], using a construction from [10], proposed the
minimum cost lifted multicut problem, a generalization with an identical feasible set whose objective function can assign a cost or reward to every pair of
nodes, not just neighboring ones. These non-local interactions are represented in
the graph by “lifted” edges which are subjected to slightly diﬀerent constraints
than the regular edges. The introduction of lifted edges is appealing for image
segmentation, because non-local interactions can now be added without losing
two key advantages of the multicut: (i) Every feasible solution of the optimization problem corresponds to a decomposition of the graph, i.e. to a consistent
segmentation. (ii) No assumptions on the number or size of segments are made,
making the method applicable in the typical and important scenario where such
prior knowledge is not available. Since standard and lifted multicut are both NPhard integer linear programming problems [7,8] – even for planar graphs [11,12]
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 715–730, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 44

