RepMatch: Robust Feature Matching and Pose
for Reconstructing Modern Cities
Wen-Yan Lin1(B) , Siying Liu2,3 , Nianjuan Jiang1 , Minh. N. Do3 , Ping Tan4 ,
and Jiangbo Lu1(B)
1

Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore, Singapore
linwenyan.daniel@gmail.com, jiangbo.lu@adsc.com.sg
2
Institute of Infocomm Research, Singapore, Singapore
3
University of Illinois Urbana-Champagne, Champaign, USA
4
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada

Abstract. A perennial problem in recovering 3-D models from images
is repeated structures common in modern cities. The problem can be
traced to the feature matcher which needs to match less distinctive features (permitting wide-baselines and avoiding broken sequences), while
simultaneously avoiding incorrect matching of ambiguous repeated features. To meet this need, we develop RepMatch, an epipolar guided
(assumes predominately camera motion) feature matcher that accommodates both wide-baselines and repeated structures. RepMatch is based
on using RANSAC to guide the training of match consistency curves
for diﬀerentiating true and false matches. By considering the set of all
nearest-neighbor matches, RepMatch can procure very large numbers of
matches over wide baselines. This in turn lends stability to pose estimation. RepMatch’s performance compares favorably on standard datasets
and enables more complete reconstructions of modern architectures.
Keywords: Structure from motion · Correspondence · RANSAC

1

Introduction

Structure-from-Motion or SfM is the recovery of 3-D structure from image sets.
Over the years, SfM has made remarkable progress. Current technology can
create impressively large scale reconstructions, a signature achievement being
the reconstruction of ancient Rome by leveraging the abundance of Internet
images [1]. However, SfM systems have diﬃculty reconstructing modern buildings
from small, user-captured datasets.
J. Lu—This study is supported by the HCCS grant at ADSC from Singapore’s
Agency for Science, Technology and Research.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46448-0 34) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 562–579, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 34

