Robust Facial Landmark Detection
via Recurrent Attentive-Refinement Networks
Shengtao Xiao1(B) , Jiashi Feng1 , Junliang Xing3 , Hanjiang Lai1 ,
Shuicheng Yan1,2 , and Ashraf Kassim1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
xiao shengtao@u.nus.edu, {elefjia,eleyans,ashraf}@nus.edu.sg,
laihanj3@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute, 360, Beijing, China
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
jlxing@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract. In this work, we introduce a novel Recurrent AttentiveReﬁnement (RAR) network for facial landmark detection under unconstrained conditions, suﬀering from challenges like facial occlusions and/or
pose variations. RAR follows the pipeline of cascaded regressions that
reﬁnes landmark locations progressively. However, instead of updating
all the landmark locations together, RAR reﬁnes the landmark locations
sequentially at each recurrent stage. In this way, more reliable landmark
points are reﬁned earlier and help to infer locations of other challenging
landmarks that may stay with occlusions and/or extreme poses. RAR can
thus eﬀectively control detection errors from those challenging landmarks
and improve overall performance even in presence of heavy occlusions
and/or extreme conditions. To determine the sequence of landmarks,
RAR employs an attentive-reﬁnement mechanism. The attention LSTM
(A-LSTM) and reﬁnement LSTM (R-LSTM) models are introduced in
RAR. At each recurrent stage, A-LSTM implicitly identiﬁes a reliable
landmark as the attention center. Following the sequence of attention
centers, R-LSTM sequentially reﬁnes the landmarks near or correlated
with the attention centers and provides ultimate detection results ﬁnally.
To further enhance algorithmic robustness, instead of using mean shape
for initialization, RAR adaptively determines the initialization by selecting from a pool of shape centers clustered from all training shapes. As
an end-to-end trainable model, RAR demonstrates superior performance
in detecting challenging landmarks in comprehensive experiments and it
also establishes new state-of-the-arts on the 300-W, COFW and AFLW
benchmark datasets.
Keywords: Facial landmark detection · Occlusion · Face alignment ·
Recurrent neural network

c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 57–72, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 4

