Title Generation for User Generated Videos
Kuo-Hao Zeng1 , Tseng-Hung Chen1 , Juan Carlos Niebles2 , and Min Sun1(B)
1

Departmant of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University,
Hsinchu, Taiwan
s103061614@m103.nthu.edu.tw, s104061544@m104.nthu.edu.tw,
sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw
2
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, USA
jniebles@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract. A great video title describes the most salient event compactly and captures the viewer’s attention. In contrast, video captioning
tends to generate sentences that describe the video as a whole. Although
generating a video title automatically is a very useful task, it is much
less addressed than video captioning. We address video title generation
for the ﬁrst time by proposing two methods that extend state-of-the-art
video captioners to this new task. First, we make video captioners highlight sensitive by priming them with a highlight detector. Our framework
allows for jointly training a model for title generation and video highlight
localization. Second, we induce high sentence diversity in video captioners, so that the generated titles are also diverse and catchy. This means
that a large number of sentences might be required to learn the sentence structure of titles. Hence, we propose a novel sentence augmentation method to train a captioner with additional sentence-only examples
that come without corresponding videos. We collected a large-scale Video
Titles in the Wild (VTW) dataset of 18100 automatically crawled usergenerated videos and titles. On VTW, our methods consistently improve
title prediction accuracy, and achieve the best performance in both automatic and human evaluation. Finally, our sentence augmentation method
also outperforms the baselines on the M-VAD dataset.
Keywords: Video captioning · Video and language

1

Introduction

Generating a natural language description of the visual contents of a video is one
of the holy grails in computer vision. Recently, thanks to breakthroughs in deep
learning [1] and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), many attempts [2–4] have
been made to jointly model videos and their corresponding sentence descriptions.
This task is often referred to as video captioning. Here, we focus on a much more
challenging task: video title generation. A great video title compactly describes
the most salient event as well as catches people’s attention (e.g., “bmx rider gets
hit by scooter at park” in Fig. 1-Top). In contrast, video captioning generates a
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 609–625, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 38

