Eﬃcient Multi-view Surface Reﬁnement
with Adaptive Resolution Control
Shiwei Li, Sing Yu Siu, Tian Fang(B) , and Long Quan
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Kowloon, Hong Kong
{slibc,sysiuaa,tianft,quan}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract. The existing stereo reﬁnement methods optimize a surface
representation using a multi-view photo-consistency functional. Such optimization is iterative and requires repeated computation of gradients over
all surface regions, which is the bottleneck aﬀecting adversely the computational eﬃciency of the reﬁnement. In this paper, we present a ﬂexible and
eﬃcient framework for mesh surface reﬁnement in multi-view stereo. The
newly proposed Adaptive Resolution Control (ARC) evaluates an optimal
trade-oﬀ between the geometry accuracy and the performance via curve
analysis. Then, it classiﬁes the regions into the signiﬁcant and insigniﬁcant
ones using a graph-cut optimization. After that, each region is subdivided
and simpliﬁed accordingly in the remaining reﬁnement process, producing
a triangular mesh in adaptive resolutions. Consequently, the ARC accelerates the stereo reﬁnement by severalfold by culling out most insignificant regions, while still maintaining a similar level of geometry details
that the state-of-the-art methods could achieve. We have implemented the
ARC and demonstrated intensively on both public benchmarks and private datasets, which all conﬁrm the eﬀectiveness and the robustness of the
ARC.

1

Introduction

Recovering a realistic 3D model from images is the ultimate goal of Multiple View
Stereo (MVS) methods. Boosted by the public MVS benchmarks [7,15,16], the
accuracy of stereovision has dramatically increased in last decade. It is believed
the key factor to high accuracy is the ﬁnal surface reﬁnement step. With a
triangular mesh representing the surface, reﬁnement is a process of iterative
adjustment of vertex locations by optimizing multi-view photo-consistency.
Such iterative reﬁnement is of heavy computation. The primary reason is
the repeated computation of reﬁnement gradient over all visible surface areas.
Another reason is that mesh subdivision used in the reﬁnement will dramatically
increase the #vertices to be optimized. The higher density of mesh vertex also
leads to slower mesh-related operations, e.g., mesh smoothing, visibility testing.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46448-0 21) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 349–364, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 21

