Grounding of Textual Phrases in Images
by Reconstruction
Anna Rohrbach1(B) , Marcus Rohrbach2,3 , Ronghang Hu2 , Trevor Darrell2 ,
and Bernt Schiele1
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
{arohrbach,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.des
2
UC Berkeley EECS, Berkeley, CA, USA
{rohrbach,ronghang,trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu
3
ICSI, Berkeley, CA, USA

Abstract. Grounding (i.e. localizing) arbitrary, free-form textual
phrases in visual content is a challenging problem with many applications
for human-computer interaction and image-text reference resolution. Few
datasets provide the ground truth spatial localization of phrases, thus it
is desirable to learn from data with no or little grounding supervision.
We propose a novel approach which learns grounding by reconstructing
a given phrase using an attention mechanism, which can be either latent
or optimized directly. During training our approach encodes the phrase
using a recurrent network language model and then learns to attend to
the relevant image region in order to reconstruct the input phrase. At test
time, the correct attention, i.e., the grounding, is evaluated. If grounding supervision is available it can be directly applied via a loss over the
attention mechanism. We demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our approach
on the Flickr30k Entities and ReferItGame datasets with diﬀerent levels
of supervision, ranging from no supervision over partial supervision to
full supervision. Our supervised variant improves by a large margin over
the state-of-the-art on both datasets.

1

Introduction

Language grounding in visual data is an interesting problem studied both in
computer vision [18,24,25,28,35] and natural language processing [29,34] communities. Such grounding can be done on diﬀerent levels of granularity: from
coarse, e.g. associating a paragraph of text to a scene in a movie [41,52], to ﬁne,
e.g. localizing a word or phrase in a given image [18,35]. In this work we focus
on the latter scenario. Many prior eﬀorts in this area have focused on rather
constrained settings with a small number of nouns to ground [28,31]. On the
contrary, we want to tackle the problem of grounding arbitrary natural language
phrases in images. Most parallel corpora of sentence/visual data do not provide localization annotations (e.g. bounding boxes) and the annotation process
is costly. We propose an approach which can learn to localize phrases relying
only on phrases associated with images without bounding box annotations but
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 817–834, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 49

