Real-Time Joint Tracking of a Hand
Manipulating an Object from RGB-D Input
Srinath Sridhar1 , Franziska Mueller1 , Michael Zollhöfer1 , Dan Casas1 ,
Antti Oulasvirta2 , and Christian Theobalt1(B)
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
{ssridhar,frmueller,mzollhoef,dcasas,theobalt}@mpi-inf.mpg.de
2
Aalto University, Espoo, Finland
antti.oulasvirta@aalto.fi

Abstract. Real-time simultaneous tracking of hands manipulating and
interacting with external objects has many potential applications in augmented reality, tangible computing, and wearable computing. However,
due to diﬃcult occlusions, fast motions, and uniform hand appearance,
jointly tracking hand and object pose is more challenging than tracking
either of the two separately. Many previous approaches resort to complex
multi-camera setups to remedy the occlusion problem and often employ
expensive segmentation and optimization steps which makes real-time
tracking impossible. In this paper, we propose a real-time solution that
uses a single commodity RGB-D camera. The core of our approach is
a 3D articulated Gaussian mixture alignment strategy tailored to handobject tracking that allows fast pose optimization. The alignment energy
uses novel regularizers to address occlusions and hand-object contacts.
For added robustness, we guide the optimization with discriminative part
classiﬁcation of the hand and segmentation of the object. We conducted
extensive experiments on several existing datasets and introduce a new
annotated hand-object dataset. Quantitative and qualitative results show
the key advantages of our method: speed, accuracy, and robustness.

1

Introduction

The human hand exhibits incredible capacity for manipulating external objects
via gripping, grasping, touching, pointing, caging, and throwing. We can use
our hands with apparent ease, even for subtle and complex motions, and with
remarkable speed and accuracy. However, this dexterity also makes it hard to
track a hand in close interaction with objects. While a lot of research has explored
real-time tracking of hands or objects in isolation, real-time hand-object tracking
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46475-6 19) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 294–310, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 19

