Region-Based Semantic Segmentation
with End-to-End Training
Holger Caesar(B) , Jasper Uijlings, and Vittorio Ferrari
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland
holger.caesar@ed.ac.uk

Abstract. We propose a novel method for semantic segmentation, the
task of labeling each pixel in an image with a semantic class. Our method
combines the advantages of the two main competing paradigms. Methods based on region classiﬁcation oﬀer proper spatial support for appearance measurements, but typically operate in two separate stages, none
of which targets pixel labeling performance at the end of the pipeline.
More recent fully convolutional methods are capable of end-to-end training for the ﬁnal pixel labeling, but resort to ﬁxed patches as spatial support. We show how to modify modern region-based approaches to enable
end-to-end training for semantic segmentation. This is achieved via a
diﬀerentiable region-to-pixel layer and a diﬀerentiable free-form Regionof-Interest pooling layer. Our method improves the state-of-the-art in
terms of class-average accuracy with 64.0 % on SIFT Flow and 49.9 % on
PASCAL Context, and is particularly accurate at object boundaries.

1

Introduction

We address the task of semantic segmentation, labeling each pixel in an image
with a semantic class. Currently, there are two main paradigms: classical
region-based approaches [1–17] and, inspired by the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) revolution, fully convolutional approaches [18–26].
In the fully convolutional approach the idea is to directly learn a mapping
from image pixels to class labels using a CNN. This results in a single model,
directly optimized end-to-end for the task at hand, including the intermediate image representations (i.e. the hidden layers in the network). However, the
spatial support on which predictions are based are ﬁxed-size square patches of
the input image. Intuitively, this is suboptimal since: (I) Objects are free-form
rather than square, so ideally the intermediate representations should take this
into account. (II) Objects do not have a ﬁxed size, but occur at various scales.
Hence many patches either cover pieces of multiple objects and mix their representations, or cover a piece of an object, which is sometimes diﬃcult to recognize
in isolation (e.g. a patch on the belly of a cow). An additional problem is that
fully convolutional methods typically make predictions at a coarse resolution,
which often results in inaccurate object boundaries [18,20–22,24,26]. Figure 1
illustrates this on example outputs of [20].
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 381–397, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 23

