A Recurrent Encoder-Decoder Network
for Sequential Face Alignment
Xi Peng1(B) , Rogerio S. Feris2 , Xiaoyu Wang3 , and Dimitris N. Metaxas1
1

Rutgers University, Piscataway, USA
{xipeng.cs,dnm}@rutgers.edu
2
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, USA
rsferis@us.ibm.com
3
Snapchat Research, Venice, CA, USA
xiaoyu.wang@snapchat.com

Abstract. We propose a novel recurrent encoder-decoder network
model for real-time video-based face alignment. Our proposed model predicts 2D facial point maps regularized by a regression loss, while uniquely
exploiting recurrent learning at both spatial and temporal dimensions.
At the spatial level, we add a feedback loop connection between the
combined output response map and the input, in order to enable iterative coarse-to-ﬁne face alignment using a single network model. At the
temporal level, we ﬁrst decouple the features in the bottleneck of the
network into temporal-variant factors, such as pose and expression, and
temporal-invariant factors, such as identity information. Temporal recurrent learning is then applied to the decoupled temporal-variant features,
yielding better generalization and signiﬁcantly more accurate results at
test time. We perform a comprehensive experimental analysis, showing
the importance of each component of our proposed model, as well as
superior results over the state-of-the-art in standard datasets.
Keywords: Recurrent learning · Encoder-decoder · Face alignment

1

Introduction

Face landmark detection plays a fundamental role in many computer vision
tasks, such as face recognition, expression analysis, and 3D face modeling. In
the past few years, many methods have been proposed to address this problem,
with signiﬁcant progress being made towards systems that work in real-world
conditions (“in the wild”).
Regression-based approaches [6,50] have achieved impressive results by cascading discriminative regression functions that directly map facial appearance
to landmark coordinates. In this framework, deep convolutional neural networks
have proven eﬀective as a choice for feature extraction and non-linear regression
modeling [21,54,55]. Although these methods can achieve very reliable results in
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 38–56, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 3

