Photometric Stereo Under Non-uniform Light
Intensities and Exposures
Donghyeon Cho1(B) , Yasuyuki Matsushita2 , Yu-Wing Tai3 , and Inso Kweon1
1

KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
cdh12242@gmail.com, iskweon@kaist.ac.kr
2
Osaka University, Suita, Japan
yasumat@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
3
SenseTime Group Limited, Beijing, China
yuwing@gmail.com
Abstract. This paper studies the eﬀects of non-uniform light intensities and sensor exposures across observed images in photometric stereo.
While conventional photometric stereo methods typically assume that
light intensities are identical and sensor exposure is constant across
observed images taken under varying lightings, these assumptions easily
break down in practical settings due to individual light bulb’s characteristics and limited control over sensors. Our method explicitly models
these non-uniformities and develops a method for accurately determining
surface normal without aﬀected by these factors. In addition, we show
that our method is advantageous for general photometric stereo settings,
where auto-exposure control is desirable. We compare our method with
conventional least-squares and robust photometric stereo methods, and
the experimental result shows superior accuracy of our method in this
practical circumstance.
Keywords: Photometric stereo · Shape estimation · Unknown light
intensity and exposure · Surface normal

1

Introduction

Non-uniform light intensities and exposures across observed images are a practical and common circumstance in data acquisition for photometric stereo that
uses multiple images under distinct light directions. For example, diﬀerent light
bulbs with diﬀerent intensity characteristics may be used for illuminating a scene.
Even with identical light bulbs, due to that scene radiance is determined by
surface normal and light directions, auto-adjusted sensor exposure is desirable
depending on the light directions to avoid over-/under-exposures, which results
in non-uniform exposures (equivalently, non-uniform light intensities). Therefore, the capability of properly handling varying and unknown light intensities
and exposures across observed images is an important feature for making photometric stereo practical.
Part of this work was done while the ﬁrst author was an intern at Microsoft Research
Asia.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 170–186, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 11

