Learnable Histogram: Statistical Context
Features for Deep Neural Networks
Zhe Wang, Hongsheng Li(B) , Wanli Ouyang, and Xiaogang Wang(B)
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Sha Tin, Hong Kong
{zwang,hsli,wlouyang,xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract. Statistical features, such as histogram, Bag-of-Words (BoW)
and Fisher Vector, were commonly used with hand-crafted features in
conventional classiﬁcation methods, but attract less attention since the
popularity of deep learning methods. In this paper, we propose a learnable histogram layer, which learns histogram features within deep neural
networks in end-to-end training. Such a layer is able to back-propagate
(BP) errors, learn optimal bin centers and bin widths, and be jointly
optimized with other layers in deep networks during training. Two vision
problems, semantic segmentation and object detection, are explored by
integrating the learnable histogram layer into deep networks, which show
that the proposed layer could be well generalized to diﬀerent applications.
In-depth investigations are conducted to provide insights on the newly
introduced layer.
Keywords: Histogram · Deep learning · Semantic segmentation ·
Object detection

1

Introduction

Context features play a crucial role in many vision classiﬁcation problems, such
as semantic segmentation [1–6], object detection [7,8] and pose estimation [9,10].
As illustrated by the toy example in Fig. 1, when performing classiﬁcation on the
blurry white objects with similar appearance, if the semantic histogram from the
whole image has a higher bin on the class “sea”, then the object is more likely
to be classiﬁed as a “boat”; if the histogram has a higher bin on the class “sky”,
then it is more likely to be classiﬁed as a “bird”. The semantic context thus acts
as an important indicator for this classiﬁcation task.
Context features could be mainly categorized into statistical and nonstatistical ones depending on whether they abandon the spatial orders of the
context information. On the one hand, for most deep learning methods that
gain increasing attention in recent years, non-statistical context features dominate. Some examples include [11] for object detection and [12] for semantic
segmentation.
On the other hand, statistical context features were mostly used in conventional classiﬁcation methods with hand-crafted features. Commonly used statistical features include histogram, Bag-of-Words (BoW) [13], Fisher vector [14],
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 246–262, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 15

