Photo Aesthetics Ranking Network
with Attributes and Content Adaptation
Shu Kong1(B) , Xiaohui Shen2 , Zhe Lin2 , Radomir Mech2 ,
and Charless Fowlkes1
1

UC Irvine, Irvine, USA
{skong2,fowlkes}@ics.uci.edu
2
Adobe Research, San Jose, USA
{xshen,zlin,rmech}@adobe.com
Abstract. Real-world applications could beneﬁt from the ability to
automatically generate a ﬁne-grained ranking of photo aesthetics. However, previous methods for image aesthetics analysis have primarily
focused on the coarse, binary categorization of images into high- or
low-aesthetic categories. In this work, we propose to learn a deep convolutional neural network to rank photo aesthetics in which the relative
ranking of photo aesthetics are directly modeled in the loss function. Our
model incorporates joint learning of meaningful photographic attributes
and image content information which can help regularize the complicated
photo aesthetics rating problem.
To train and analyze this model, we have assembled a new aesthetics and attributes database (AADB) which contains aesthetic scores and
meaningful attributes assigned to each image by multiple human raters.
Anonymized rater identities are recorded across images allowing us to
exploit intra-rater consistency using a novel sampling strategy when computing the ranking loss of training image pairs. We show the proposed
sampling strategy is very eﬀective and robust in face of subjective judgement of image aesthetics by individuals with diﬀerent aesthetic tastes.
Experiments demonstrate that our uniﬁed model can generate aesthetic
rankings that are more consistent with human ratings. To further validate
our model, we show that by simply thresholding the estimated aesthetic
scores, we are able to achieve state-or-the-art classiﬁcation performance
on the existing AVA dataset benchmark.
Keywords: Convolutional neural network · Image aesthetics rating ·
Rank loss · Attribute learning

1

Introduction

Automatically assessing image aesthetics is increasingly important for a variety
of applications [1,2], including personal photo album management, automatic
photo editing, and image retrieval. While judging image aesthetics is a subjective
task, it has been an area of active study in recent years and substantial progress
has been made in identifying and quantifying those image features that are
predictive of favorable aesthetic judgements by most individuals [1–5].
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 662–679, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 40

