Smooth Neighborhood Structure Mining
on Multiple Aﬃnity Graphs with Applications
to Context-Sensitive Similarity
Song Bai1(B) , Shaoyan Sun2 , Xiang Bai1 , Zhaoxiang Zhang3 , and Qi Tian4
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
{songbai,xbai}@hust.edu.cn
2
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
sunshy@mail.ustc.edu.cn
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology,
CASIA, Beijing, China
zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn
4
University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, USA
qi.tian@utsa.edu

Abstract. Due to the ability of capturing geometry structures of the
data manifold, diﬀusion process has demonstrated impressive performances in retrieval task by spreading the similarities on the aﬃnity
graph. In view of robustness to noise edges, diﬀusion process is usually localized, i.e., only propagating similarities via neighbors. However,
selecting neighbors smoothly on graph-based manifolds is more or less
ignored by previous works. In this paper, we propose a new algorithm
called Smooth Neighborhood (SN) that mines the neighborhood structure to satisfy the manifold assumption. By doing so, nearby points on
the underlying manifold are guaranteed to yield similar neighbors as
much as possible. Moreover, SN is adjusted to tackle multiple aﬃnity
graphs by imposing a weight learning paradigm, and this is the primary diﬀerence compared with related works which are only applicable
with one aﬃnity graph. Exhausted experimental results and comparisons against other algorithms manifest the eﬀectiveness of the proposed
algorithm.
Keywords: Diﬀusion process · Image/shape retrieval · Aﬃnity graph

1

Introduction

In recent years, context-sensitive similarity has attracted much attention due
to its superior performances in image/shape retrieval. These approaches have a
very diverse nomenclature, such as contextual dissimilarity measure [1], graph
transduction [2–4], aﬃnity learning [5,6], ranking list comparison [7–9], reranking [10–12]. However, their inherent principle is almost the same, that is, the
similarity between two images can be measured more accurately by taking the
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 592–608, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 37

