SDF-2-SDF: Highly Accurate
3D Object Reconstruction
Miroslava Slavcheva1,2(B) , Wadim Kehl1 , Nassir Navab1 , and Slobodan Ilic1,2
1

Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany
{mira.slavcheva,nassir.navab}@tum.de, {kehl,slobodan.ilic}@in.tum.de
2
Siemens AG, Munich, Germany
Abstract. This paper addresses the problem of 3D object reconstruction
using RGB-D sensors. Our main contribution is a novel implicit-to-implicit
surface registration scheme between signed distance ﬁelds (SDFs), utilized
both for the real-time frame-to-frame camera tracking and for the subsequent global optimization. SDF-2-SDF registration circumvents expensive
correspondence search and allows for incorporation of multiple geometric
constraints without any dependence on texture, yielding highly accurate
3D models. An extensive quantitative evaluation on real and synthetic data
demonstrates improved tracking and higher ﬁdelity reconstructions than
a variety of state-of-the-art methods. We make our data publicly available,
creating the ﬁrst object reconstruction dataset to include ground-truth
CAD models and RGB-D sequences from sensors of various quality.
Keywords: Object reconstruction · Signed distance ﬁeld · RGB-D sensors

1

Introduction

The persistent progress in RGB-D sensor technology has prompted exceptional
focus on 3D object reconstruction. A key research goal is recovering the geometry of a static target from a moving depth camera. This entails estimating the
device motion and fusing the acquired range images into consistent 3D models.
Depending on the particular task, methods diﬀer in their speed, accuracy and
generality. Most existing solutions are SLAM-like, thus their applications lie in
the ﬁeld of robotic navigation where precise reconstructions are of secondary
importance. In contrast, the growing markets of 3D printing, reverse engineering, industrial design, and object inspection require rapid prototyping of high
quality models, which is the aim of our system.
One of the most inﬂuential works capable of real-time reconstruction is
KinectFusion [12,24]. It conveniently stores the recovered geometry in an incrementally built signed distance ﬁeld (SDF). However, its frame-to-model camera
tracking via iterative closest points (ICP [1,6]) limits it to objects with distinct
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46448-0 41) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 680–696, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 41

