Branching Path Following for Graph Matching
Tao Wang1,2(B) , Haibin Ling1,3 , Congyan Lang2 , and Jun Wu2
1

Meitu HiScene Lab, HiScene Information Technologies, Shanghai, China
twang@bjtu.edu.cn
2
School of Computer and Information Technology,
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
{cylang,wuj}@bjtu.edu.cn
3
Computer and Information Sciences Department,
Temple University, Philadelphia, USA
hbling@temple.edu
Abstract. Recently, graph matching algorithms utilizing the path following strategy have exhibited state-of-the-art performances. However,
the paths computed in these algorithms often contain singular points,
which usually hurt the matching performance. To deal with this issue,
in this paper we propose a novel path following strategy, named branching path following (BPF), which consequently improves graph matching
performance. In particular, we ﬁrst propose a singular point detector by
solving an KKT system, and then design a branch switching method
to seek for better paths at singular points. Using BPF, a new graph
matching algorithm named BPF-G is developed by applying BPF to a
recently proposed path following algorithm named GNCCP (Liu &Qiao
2014). For evaluation, we compare BPF-G with several recently proposed
graph matching algorithms on a synthetic dataset and four public benchmark datasets. Experimental results show that our approach achieves
remarkable improvement in matching accuracy and outperforms other
algorithms.
Keywords: Graph matching · Path following · Numerical continuation · Singular point · Branch switching

1

Introduction

Graph matching is a fundamental problem in computer science and closely relates
to many computer vision problems including feature registration [1–3], shape
matching [4–6], object recognition [7,8], visual tracking [9], activity analysis [10],
etc. Despite decades of research eﬀort devoted to graph matching, it remains a
challenging problem due to the non-convexity in the objective function and the
constraints over the solutions. A typical way is to utilize relaxation to harness
the solution searching. Popular algorithms include, but not limited to, three categories: spectral relaxation [11–13], continuous optimization [14–18] and probabilistic modeling [19,20].
Among recently proposed graph matching algorithms, the ones utilizing the
path-following strategy have exhibited state-of-the-art performances [15–18].
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 508–523, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 32

