Weakly Supervised Localization Using Deep
Feature Maps
Archith John Bency1(B) , Heesung Kwon2 , Hyungtae Lee2,3 , S. Karthikeyan1 ,
and B.S. Manjunath1
1

University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA
{archith,karthikeyan,manj}@ece.ucsb.edu
2
Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, USA
heesung.kwon.civ@mail.mil, htlee@umiacs.umd.edu
3
Booz Allen Hamilton Inc., McLean, VA, USA
Abstract. Object localization is an important computer vision problem
with a variety of applications. The lack of large scale object-level annotations and the relative abundance of image-level labels makes a compelling case for weak supervision in the object localization task. Deep
Convolutional Neural Networks are a class of state-of-the-art methods
for the related problem of object recognition. In this paper, we describe
a novel object localization algorithm which uses classiﬁcation networks
trained on only image labels. This weakly supervised method leverages
local spatial and semantic patterns captured in the convolutional layers of classiﬁcation networks. We propose an eﬃcient beam search based
approach to detect and localize multiple objects in images. The proposed
method signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art in standard object
localization data-sets.
Keywords: Weakly supervised methods · Object localization · Deep
convolutional networks

1

Introduction

Given an image, an object localization method aims to recognize and locate
interesting objects within the image. The ability to localize objects in images
and videos eﬃciently and accurately opens up a lot of applications like automated
vehicular systems, searching online shopping catalogues, home and health-care
automation among others. Objects can occur in images in varying conditions of
occlusion, illumination, scale, pose and context. These variations make object
detection a challenging problems in the ﬁeld of computer vision.
The current state of the art in object detection includes methods which
involve ‘strong’ supervision. In the context of object detection, strong supervision entails annotating localization and pose information about present objects
of interest. Generating such rich annotations is a time-consuming process and is
The rights of this work are transferred to the extent transferable according to title
17 §105 U.S.C.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016 (outside the US)
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 714–731, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 43

