Accelerating the Super-Resolution Convolutional
Neural Network
Chao Dong, Chen Change Loy(B) , and Xiaoou Tang
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China
{dc012,ccloy,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract. As a successful deep model applied in image super-resolution
(SR), the Super-Resolution Convolutional Neural Network (SRCNN)
[1, 2] has demonstrated superior performance to the previous handcrafted models either in speed and restoration quality. However, the high
computational cost still hinders it from practical usage that demands
real-time performance (24 fps). In this paper, we aim at accelerating the
current SRCNN, and propose a compact hourglass-shape CNN structure for faster and better SR. We re-design the SRCNN structure mainly
in three aspects. First, we introduce a deconvolution layer at the end
of the network, then the mapping is learned directly from the original
low-resolution image (without interpolation) to the high-resolution one.
Second, we reformulate the mapping layer by shrinking the input feature
dimension before mapping and expanding back afterwards. Third, we
adopt smaller ﬁlter sizes but more mapping layers. The proposed model
achieves a speed up of more than 40 times with even superior restoration quality. Further, we present the parameter settings that can achieve
real-time performance on a generic CPU while still maintaining good
performance. A corresponding transfer strategy is also proposed for fast
training and testing across diﬀerent upscaling factors.

1

Introduction

Single image super-resolution (SR) aims at recovering a high-resolution (HR)
image from a given low-resolution (LR) one. Recent SR algorithms are mostly
learning-based (or patch-based) methods [1–8] that learn a mapping between
the LR and HR image spaces. Among them, the Super-Resolution Convolutional Neural Network (SRCNN) [1,2] has drawn considerable attention due to
its simple network structure and excellent restoration quality. Though SRCNN is
already faster than most previous learning-based methods, the processing speed
on large images is still unsatisfactory. For example, to upsample an 240 × 240
image by a factor of 3, the speed of the original SRCNN [1] is about 1.32 fps,
which is far from real-time (24 fps). To approach real-time, we should accelerate SRCNN for at least 17 times while keeping the previous performance. This
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46475-6 25) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 391–407, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 25

