Coarse-to-fine Planar Regularization for Dense
Monocular Depth Estimation
Stephan Liwicki1(B) , Christopher Zach1 , Ondrej Miksik2 , and Philip H.S. Torr2
1

Toshiba Research Europe, Cambridge, UK
stephan.liwicki@crl.toshiba.co.uk
2
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

Abstract. Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) using the
whole image data is an appealing framework to address shortcoming of
sparse feature-based methods – in particular frequent failures in textureless environments. Hence, direct methods bypassing the need of feature extraction and matching became recently popular. Many of these
methods operate by alternating between pose estimation and computing (semi-)dense depth maps, and are therefore not fully exploiting the
advantages of joint optimization with respect to depth and pose. In this
work, we propose a framework for monocular SLAM, and its local model
in particular, which optimizes simultaneously over depth and pose. In
addition to a planarity enforcing smoothness regularizer for the depth
we also constrain the complexity of depth map updates, which provides
a natural way to avoid poor local minima and reduces unknowns in the
optimization. Starting from a holistic objective we develop a method suitable for online and real-time monocular SLAM. We evaluate our method
quantitatively in pose and depth on the TUM dataset, and qualitatively
on our own video sequences.

Keywords: SLAM
mapping

1

· Monocular odometry · Dense tracking and

Introduction

Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), also known as online structure
from motion, aims to produce trajectory estimations and a 3D reconstruction of
the environment in real-time. In modern technology, its application ranges from
autonomous driving, navigation and robotics to interactive learning, gaming and
enhanced reality [1–7]. Typically, SLAM comprises two key components: (1) a
local model, which generates fast initial odometry measurements (which often
includes a local 3D reconstruction – e.g. a depth map – as byproduct), and
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46475-6 29) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 458–474, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 29

