Embedding Deep Metric for Person
Re-identification: A Study Against
Large Variations
Hailin Shi1,2 , Yang Yang1,2 , Xiangyu Zhu1,2 , Shengcai Liao1,2 , Zhen Lei1,2(B) ,
Weishi Zheng3 , and Stan Z. Li1,2
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition and Center for Biometrics and Security
Research, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{hailin.shi,yang.yang,xiangyu.zhu,scliao,zlei,szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China

Abstract. Person re-identiﬁcation is challenging due to the large variations of pose, illumination, occlusion and camera view. Owing to these
variations, the pedestrian data is distributed as highly-curved manifolds
in the feature space, despite the current convolutional neural networks
(CNN)’s capability of feature extraction. However, the distribution is
unknown, so it is diﬃcult to use the geodesic distance when comparing
two samples. In practice, the current deep embedding methods use the
Euclidean distance for the training and test. On the other hand, the manifold learning methods suggest to use the Euclidean distance in the local
range, combining with the graphical relationship between samples, for
approximating the geodesic distance. From this point of view, selecting
suitable positive (i.e. intra-class) training samples within a local range
is critical for training the CNN embedding, especially when the data
has large intra-class variations. In this paper, we propose a novel moderate positive sample mining method to train robust CNN for person
re-identiﬁcation, dealing with the problem of large variation. In addition, we improve the learning by a metric weight constraint, so that
the learned metric has a better generalization ability. Experiments show
that these two strategies are eﬀective in learning robust deep metrics
for person re-identiﬁcation, and accordingly our deep model signiﬁcantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on several benchmarks of person re-identiﬁcation. Therefore, the study presented in this paper may be
useful in inspiring new designs of deep models for person re-identiﬁcation.
Keywords: Person re-identiﬁcation · Deep learning · CNN

1

Introduction

Given a set of pedestrian images, person re-identiﬁcation aims to identify the
probe image that generally captured by diﬀerent cameras. Nowadays, person
re-identiﬁcation becomes increasingly important for surveillance and security
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 732–748, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 44

