Shuﬄe and Learn: Unsupervised Learning
Using Temporal Order Veriﬁcation
Ishan Misra1(B) , C. Lawrence Zitnick2 , and Martial Hebert1
1

The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
{imisra,hebert}@cs.cmu.edu
2
Facebook AI Research, Menlo Park, USA
zitnick@fb.com

Abstract. In this paper, we present an approach for learning a visual
representation from the raw spatiotemporal signals in videos. Our representation is learned without supervision from semantic labels. We formulate our method as an unsupervised sequential veriﬁcation task, i.e.,
we determine whether a sequence of frames from a video is in the correct temporal order. With this simple task and no semantic labels, we
learn a powerful visual representation using a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). The representation contains complementary information to
that learned from supervised image datasets like ImageNet. Qualitative
results show that our method captures information that is temporally
varying, such as human pose. When used as pre-training for action recognition, our method gives signiﬁcant gains over learning without external
data on benchmark datasets like UCF101 and HMDB51. To demonstrate
its sensitivity to human pose, we show results for pose estimation on the
FLIC and MPII datasets that are competitive, or better than approaches
using signiﬁcantly more supervision. Our method can be combined with
supervised representations to provide an additional boost in accuracy.
Keywords: Unsupervised learning · Videos · Sequence veriﬁcation ·
Action recognition · Pose estimation · Convolutional neural networks

1

Introduction

Sequential data provides an abundant source of information in the form of auditory and visual percepts. Learning from the observation of sequential data is a
natural and implicit process for humans [1–3]. It informs both low level cognitive
tasks and high level abilities like decision making and problem solving [4]. For
instance, answering the question “Where would the moving ball go?”, requires
the development of basic cognitive abilities like prediction from sequential data
like video [5].
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46448-0 32) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 527–544, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 32

