Scene Depth Profiling Using
Helmholtz Stereopsis
Hironori Mori(B) , Roderick Köhle, and Markus Kamm
Sony European Technology Center, Stuttgart, Germany
{Hironori.Mori,Roderick.Koehle,Markus.Kamm}@eu.sony.com

Abstract. Helmholtz stereopsis is a 3D reconstruction technique, capturing surface depth independent of the reﬂection properties of the material by using Helmholtz reciprocity. In this paper we are interested in
studying the applicability of Helmholtz stereopsis for surface and depth
proﬁling of objects and general scenes in the context of perspective stereo
imaging. Helmholtz stereopsis captures a pair of reciprocal images by
exchanging the position of light source and camera. The resulting image
pair relates the image intensities and scene depth proﬁle by a partial
diﬀerential equation. The solution of this diﬀerential equation depends
on the boundary conditions provided by the scene. We propose to limit
the illumination angle of the light source, such that only mutually visible
parts are imaged, resulting in stable boundary conditions. By simulation
and experiment we show that a unique depth proﬁle can be recovered
for a large class of scenes including multiple occluding objects.
Keywords: 3D reconstruction · Depth proﬁling · Stereopsis · Helmholtz
reciprocity

1

Introduction

Three-dimensional optical depth proﬁling and sensing is one of the most actively
pursuit research areas in computational vision. Some of the key applications
are industrial metrology, robotic vision, automotive driver assistance systems,
3D object scanning and media user interfaces. Optical depth sensing may be
categorized in two groups, passive depth sensing such as stereo-vision or depthfrom-defocus and active sensing technologies requiring an auxiliary light source,
such as laser scanning or structured light.
Passive methods such as stereo-vision rely on the availability of scene features
and require the measurement object to have diﬀuse reﬂection properties. Fringe
projection methods [1] extend the applicability of stereoscopy to surfaces with
homogeneous texture. The surface to be measured is illuminated by using a light
projector to project a line or dot grid pattern. Since usually a repetitive pattern
is used, one requirement of the fringe projection is the surface to be suﬃciently
smooth. For discontinuous surfaces with large height steps, phase ambiguities
arise and a unique disparity assignment may not be possible. Structured light [2]
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 462–476, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 28

