Visual Relationship Detection
with Language Priors
Cewu Lu(B) , Ranjay Krishna(B) , Michael Bernstein, and Li Fei-Fei
Stanford University, Stanford, USA
{cwlu,ranjaykrishna,msb,feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu
Abstract. Visual relationships capture a wide variety of interactions
between pairs of objects in images (e.g. “man riding bicycle” and “man
pushing bicycle”). Consequently, the set of possible relationships is
extremely large and it is diﬃcult to obtain suﬃcient training examples
for all possible relationships. Because of this limitation, previous work
on visual relationship detection has concentrated on predicting only a
handful of relationships. Though most relationships are infrequent, their
objects (e.g. “man” and “bicycle”) and predicates (e.g. “riding” and
“pushing”) independently occur more frequently. We propose a model
that uses this insight to train visual models for objects and predicates
individually and later combines them together to predict multiple relationships per image. We improve on prior work by leveraging language
priors from semantic word embeddings to ﬁnetune the likelihood of a predicted relationship. Our model can scale to predict thousands of types of
relationships from a few examples. Additionally, we localize the objects
in the predicted relationships as bounding boxes in the image. We further demonstrate that understanding relationships can improve content
based image retrieval.

1

Introduction

While objects are the core building blocks of an image, it is often the relationships between objects that determine the holistic interpretation. For example,
an image with a person and a bicycle might involve the man riding, pushing,
or even falling off of the bicycle (Fig. 1). Understanding this diversity of relationships is central to accurate image retrieval and to a richer semantic understanding of our visual world.
Visual relationships are a pair of localized objects connected via a predicate
(Fig. 2). We represent relationships as object1 -predicate-object2 1 . Visual
relationship detection involves detecting and localizing pairs of objects in an
1

In natural language processing [2–5], relationships are deﬁned as subjectpredicate-object. In this paper, we deﬁne them as object1 -predicate-object2 
for simplicity.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46448-0 51) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.

c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 852–869, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 51

