Human Pose Estimation Using Deep Consensus
Voting
Ita Lifshitz, Ethan Fetaya(B) , and Shimon Ullman
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
ethan.fetaya@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract. In this paper we consider the problem of human pose estimation from a single still image. We propose a novel approach where
each location in the image votes for the position of each keypoint using a
convolutional neural net. The voting scheme allows us to utilize information from the whole image, rather than rely on a sparse set of keypoint
locations. Using dense, multi-target votes, not only produces good keypoint predictions, but also enables us to compute image-dependent joint
keypoint probabilities by looking at consensus voting. This diﬀers from
most previous methods where joint probabilities are learned from relative keypoint locations and are independent of the image. We ﬁnally
combine the keypoints votes and joint probabilities in order to identify
the optimal pose conﬁguration. We show our competitive performance
on the MPII Human Pose and Leeds Sports Pose datasets.

1

Introduction

In recent years, with the resurgence of deep learning techniques, the accuracy
of human pose estimation from a single image has improved dramatically. Yet
despite this recent progress, it is still a challenging computer vision task and
state-of-the-art results are far from human performance.
The general approach in previous works, such as [22,26], is to train a deep
neural net as a keypoint detector for all keypoints. Given an image I, the net
is fed a patch of the image Iy ⊂ I centered around pixel y and predicts if y
is one of the M keypoints of the model. This process is repeated in a sliding
window approach, using a fully convolutional implementation, to produce M
heat maps, one for each keypoint. Structured prediction, usually by a graphical
model, is then used to combine these heat maps into a single pose prediction.
This approach has several drawbacks. First, most pixels belonging to the person
are not themselves any of the keypoints and therefore contribute only limited
information to the pose estimation process. Information from the entire person
can be used to get more reliable predictions, particularly in the face of partial
I. Lifshitz and E. Fetaya—Equal contribution.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46475-6 16) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 246–260, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 16

