Facilitating and Exploring Planar Homogeneous
Texture for Indoor Scene Understanding
Shahzor Ahmad(B) and Loong-Fah Cheong
Department of ECE, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
shahzor.ahmad@gmail.com, eleclf@nus.edu.sg

Abstract. Indoor scenes tend to be abundant with planar homogeneous
texture, manifesting as regularly repeating scene elements along a plane.
In this work, we propose to exploit such structure to facilitate high-level
scene understanding. By robustly ﬁtting a texture projection model to
optimal dominant frequency estimates in image patches, we arrive at
a projective-invariant method to localize such semantically meaningful
regions in multi-planar scenes. The recovered projective parameters also
allow an aﬃne-ambiguous rectiﬁcation in real-world images marred with
outliers, room clutter, and photometric severities. Qualitative and quantitative results show our method outperforms existing representative
work for both rectiﬁcation and detection. We then explore the potential of homogeneous texture for two indoor scene understanding tasks.
In scenes where vanishing points cannot be reliably detected, or the
Manhattan assumption is not satisﬁed, homogeneous texture detected
by the proposed approach provides alternative cues to obtain an indoor
scene geometric layout. Second, low-level feature descriptors extracted
upon aﬃne rectiﬁcation of detected texture are found to be not only
class-discriminative but also complementary to features without rectiﬁcation, improving recognition performance on the MIT Indoor67 benchmark.
Keywords: Homogeneous texture · Shape from texture · Planar
rectiﬁcation · Invariant detection · Indoor scene understanding ·
Geometric layout · Scene classiﬁcation

1

Introduction

Man-made environments abound with varied manifestation of planar homogeneous texture, i.e., regularly repeating structure or motifs aligned along
planes. Figure 1 depicts such “texture” from various indoor scenes in the MIT
Indoor67 dataset [1] — repeating objects deﬁning scene content (stacked laundry machines, bookshelves, wine barrels, theater seating, etc.), architectural and
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46475-6 3) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 35–51, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 3

