Geometric Neural Phrase Pooling: Modeling
the Spatial Co-occurrence of Neurons
Lingxi Xie1 , Qi Tian2(B) , John Flynn3 , Jingdong Wang4 , and Alan Yuille1
1

Center for Imaging Science, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
198808xc@gmail.com, alan.l.yuille@gmail.com
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at San Antonio,
San Antonio, TX, USA
qitian@cs.utsa.edu
3
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
john flynn@mac.com
4
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
jingdw@microsoft.com
http://bigml.cs.tsinghua.edu.cn/~lingxi/Projects/GNPP.html
Abstract. Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are playing
important roles in state-of-the-art visual recognition. This paper focuses
on modeling the spatial co-occurrence of neuron responses, which is less
studied in the previous work. For this, we consider the neurons in the hidden layer as neural words, and construct a set of geometric neural phrases
on top of them. The idea that grouping neural words into neural phrases
is borrowed from the Bag-of-Visual-Words (BoVW) model. Next, the
Geometric Neural Phrase Pooling (GNPP) algorithm is proposed
to eﬃciently encode these neural phrases. GNPP acts as a new type of
hidden layer, which punishes the isolated neuron responses after convolution, and can be inserted into a CNN model with little extra computational overhead. Experimental results show that GNPP produces
signiﬁcant and consistent accuracy gain in image classiﬁcation.
Keywords: Image classiﬁcation · Convolutional Neural Networks · Spatial co-occurrence of neurons · Geometric Neural Phrase Pooling

1

Introduction

We have witnessed a signiﬁcant revolution in computer vision brought by the
deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). With powerful computational
resources (e.g., GPUs) and a large amount of labeled training data (e.g., [1]), a
hierarchical structure containing diﬀerent levels of visual concepts is constructed
and trained [2] to produce impressive performance on large-scale visual recognition tasks [3]. A pre-trained deep network is also capable of generating deep
features for various tasks, such as image classiﬁcation [4,5], image retrieval [6,7]
and object detection [8,9].
CNN is composed of several stacked layers, each of which contains a number
of neurons. We argue that modeling the co-occurrence of neuron responses is
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 645–661, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 39

