Localizing and Orienting Street Views
Using Overhead Imagery
Nam N. Vo(B) and James Hays
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA
{namvo,hays}@gatech.edu
Abstract. In this paper we aim to determine the location and orientation of a ground-level query image by matching to a reference database
of overhead (e.g. satellite) images. For this task we collect a new dataset
with one million pairs of street view and overhead images sampled from
eleven U.S. cities. We explore several deep CNN architectures for crossdomain matching – Classiﬁcation, Hybrid, Siamese, and Triplet networks.
Classiﬁcation and Hybrid architectures are accurate but slow since they
allow only partial feature precomputation. We propose a new loss function
which signiﬁcantly improves the accuracy of Siamese and Triplet embedding networks while maintaining their applicability to large-scale retrieval
tasks like image geolocalization. This image matching task is challenging
not just because of the dramatic viewpoint diﬀerence between groundlevel and overhead imagery but because the orientation (i.e. azimuth)
of the street views is unknown making correspondence even more diﬃcult. We examine several mechanisms to match in spite of this – training for rotation invariance, sampling possible rotations at query time, and
explicitly predicting relative rotation of ground and overhead images with
our deep networks. It turns out that explicit orientation supervision also
improves location prediction accuracy. Our best performing architectures
are roughly 2.5 times as accurate as the commonly used Siamese network
baseline.
Keywords: Image geolocalization · Image matching · Deep learning ·
Siamese network · Triplet network

1

Introduction

In this work we propose deep learning approaches to the problem of ground to
overhead image matching. Such approaches enable large scale image geolocalization techniques to use widely-available overhead/satellite imagery to estimate
the location of ground level photos. This is in contrast to typical image geolocalization which relies on matching “ground-to-ground” using a reference database
of geotagged photographs. It is comparatively easy (for humans and machines)
to determine if two ground level photographs depict the same location, but the
world is very non-uniformly sampled by tourists and street-view vehicles. On the
other hand, overhead imagery densely covers the Earth thanks to satellites and
other aerial surveys. Because of this widespread coverage, matching ground-level
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 494–509, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 30

