Double-Opponent Vectorial Total Variation
Freddie Åström(B) and Christoph Schnörr
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing, Image and Pattern Analysis Group,
Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
freddie.astroem@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract. We present a new vectorial total variation (VTV) method
that addresses the problem of color consistent image ﬁltering. Our approach combines insights based on the double-opponent cell representation in the visual cortex with state-of-the-art variational modelling using
VTV regularization. Existing methods of vectorial total variation regularizers have insuﬃcient (even no) coupling between the color channels
and thus may introduce color artifacts. We address this problem by introducing a novel color channel coupling inspired from a pullback-metric
from an opponent space to the observation space. We show existence and
uniqueness of a solution in the space of vectorial functions of bounded
variation. In experiments, we demonstrate that our novel approach compares favorably to state-of-the-art methods w.r.t. to structure coherence
and color consistency.

1

Introduction

Color image processing poses several challenges, since the notion of
a “color edge” or a “color boundary” has no unique natural characterization. In this work we address the
problem of adaptive color image ﬁltering exploring biological ﬁndings in the
visual cortex. We use these ﬁndings Fig. 1. Example of denoising with the profor image enhancement and design our posed double-opponent vectorial total varinew approach named double-opponent ation (right) of the noisy image (left).
vectorial total variation.
The connection between observed visual stimuli and color space models is
naturally described using tools from diﬀerential geometry. The model used in
this work is inspired from recent ﬁndings in color experience models and the
psychophysics of human color perception. Accordingly, we adopt a geometric
viewpoint to explore the relation between color edges and a regularizer based on
the color space geometry. Our presentation and treatment of the “geometry of
color” leads us to a perceptually plausible model for color image enhancement via
discontinuity preserving ﬁltering. Figure 1 illustrates that our approach provides
excellent recovery of color image data, retaining sharp edges, without introducing
color artifacts.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 644–659, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 40

