Deep Attributes Driven Multi-camera Person
Re-identification
Chi Su1 , Shiliang Zhang1(B) , Junliang Xing2 , Wen Gao1 , and Qi Tian3
1

Peking University, Beijing, China
{chisu,slzhang.jdl,wgao}@pku.edu.cn
2
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
jlxing@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at San Antonio,
San Antonio, USA
qi.tian@utsa.edu

Abstract. The visual appearance of a person is easily aﬀected by many
factors like pose variations, viewpoint changes and camera parameter
diﬀerences. This makes person Re-Identiﬁcation (ReID) among multiple cameras a very challenging task. This work is motivated to learn
mid-level human attributes which are robust to such visual appearance
variations. And we propose a semi-supervised attribute learning framework which progressively boosts the accuracy of attributes only using a
limited number of labeled data. Speciﬁcally, this framework involves a
three-stage training. A deep Convolutional Neural Network (dCNN) is
ﬁrst trained on an independent dataset labeled with attributes. Then it
is ﬁne-tuned on another dataset only labeled with person IDs using our
deﬁned triplet loss. Finally, the updated dCNN predicts attribute labels
for the target dataset, which is combined with the independent dataset
for the ﬁnal round of ﬁne-tuning. The predicted attributes, namely deep
attributes exhibit superior generalization ability across diﬀerent datasets.
By directly using the deep attributes with simple Cosine distance, we
have obtained surprisingly good accuracy on four person ReID datasets.
Experiments also show that a simple distance metric learning modular further boosts our method, making it signiﬁcantly outperform many
recent works.
Keywords: Deep attributes · Re-identiﬁcation

1

Introduction

Person Re-Identiﬁcation (ReID) targets to identify the same person from different cameras, datasets, or time stamps. As illustrated in Fig. 1, factors like
viewpoint variations, illumination conditions, camera parameter diﬀerences, as
well as body pose changes make person ReID a very challenging task. Due to its
important applications in public security, e.g., cross camera pedestrian searching, tracking, and event detection, person ReID has attracted lots of attention
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 475–491, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 30

