Multi-Task Zero-Shot Action Recognition
with Prioritised Data Augmentation
Xun Xu(B) , Timothy M. Hospedales, and Shaogang Gong
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science,
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
{xun.xu,t.hospedales,s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract. Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) promises to scale visual recognition by bypassing the conventional model training requirement of annotated examples for every category. This is achieved by establishing a
mapping connecting low-level features and a semantic description of the
label space, referred as visual-semantic mapping, on auxiliary data. Reusing the learned mapping to project target videos into an embedding
space thus allows novel-classes to be recognised by nearest neighbour
inference. However, existing ZSL methods suﬀer from auxiliary-target
domain shift intrinsically induced by assuming the same mapping for
the disjoint auxiliary and target classes. This compromises the generalisation accuracy of ZSL recognition on the target data. In this work, we
improve the ability of ZSL to generalise across this domain shift in both
model- and data-centric ways by formulating a visual-semantic mapping
with better generalisation properties and a dynamic data re-weighting
method to prioritise auxiliary data that are relevant to the target classes.
Speciﬁcally: (1) We introduce a multi-task visual-semantic mapping to
improve generalisation by constraining the semantic mapping parameters to lie on a low-dimensional manifold, (2) We explore prioritised data
augmentation by expanding the pool of auxiliary data with additional
instances weighted by relevance to the target domain. The proposed new
model is applied to the challenging zero-shot action recognition problem
to demonstrate its advantages over existing ZSL models.

1

Introduction

Action recognition has long been a central topic in computer vision [1]. A major
thrust in action recognition is scaling methods to a wider and ﬁner range of
categories [2–4]. The traditional approach to dealing with a growing number of
categories is to collect labeled training examples of each new category. This is
not scalable, particularly in the case of actions, due to the temporally extended
nature of videos compared to images, making annotation (segmentation in both
space and time) more onerous than for images. In contrast, the Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) [5,6] paradigm is gaining signiﬁcant interest by providing an alternative to classic supervised learning which does not require an ever increasing
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 343–359, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 22

