SSHMT: Semi-supervised Hierarchical Merge
Tree for Electron Microscopy Image
Segmentation
Ting Liu1(B) , Miaomiao Zhang2 , Mehran Javanmardi1 , Nisha Ramesh1 ,
and Tolga Tasdizen1
1

Scientiﬁc Computing and Imaging Institute,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
{ting,mehran,nshramesh,tolga}@sci.utah.edu
2
CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
miao86@mit.edu

Abstract. Region-based methods have proven necessary for improving segmentation accuracy of neuronal structures in electron microscopy
(EM) images. Most region-based segmentation methods use a scoring
function to determine region merging. Such functions are usually learned
with supervised algorithms that demand considerable ground truth data,
which are costly to collect. We propose a semi-supervised approach that
reduces this demand. Based on a merge tree structure, we develop a differentiable unsupervised loss term that enforces consistent predictions
from the learned function. We then propose a Bayesian model that combines the supervised and the unsupervised information for probabilistic
learning. The experimental results on three EM data sets demonstrate
that by using a subset of only 3 % to 7 % of the entire ground truth
data, our approach consistently performs close to the state-of-the-art
supervised method with the full labeled data set, and signiﬁcantly outperforms the supervised method with the same labeled subset.
Keywords: Image segmentation · Electron microscopy ·
Semi-supervised learning · Hierarchical segmentation · Connectomics

1

Introduction

Connectomics researchers study structures of nervous systems to understand
their function [1]. Electron microscopy (EM) is the only modality capable of
imaging substantial tissue volumes at suﬃcient resolution and has been used for
the reconstruction of neural circuitry [2–4]. The high resolution leads to image
data sets at enormous scale, for which manual analysis is extremely laborious
and can take decades to complete [5]. Therefore, reliable automatic connectome
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46448-0 9) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 144–159, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 9

