Foreground Segmentation via Dynamic
Tree-Structured Sparse RPCA
Salehe Erfanian Ebadi(B) and Ebroul Izquierdo
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science,
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
{s.erfanianebadi,e.izquierdo}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract. Video analysis often begins with background subtraction
which consists of creation of a background model, followed by a regularization scheme. Recent evaluation of representative background subtraction techniques demonstrated that there are still considerable challenges
facing these methods. We present a new method in which we regard the
image sequence as being made up of the sum of a low-rank background
matrix and a dynamic tree-structured sparse outlier matrix and solve
the decomposition using our approximated Robust Principal Component
Analysis method extended to handle camera motion. Our contribution
lies in dynamically estimating the support of the foreground regions via
a superpixel generation step, so as to impose spatial coherence on these
regions, and to obtain crisp and meaningful foreground regions. These
advantages enable our method to outperform state-of-the-art alternatives
in three benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Foreground segmentation plays a critical role in applications such as automated
surveillance, action recognition, and motion analysis. Despite the eﬀorts in this
ﬁeld, recent evaluation of state-of-the-art techniques [1,2] showed that there
are still shortcomings in addressing all challenges in foreground segmentation.
Addressing these challenges, leads to a number of considerations in designing
a background model, as well as expected behavior from foreground objects,
which in complex real-life applications remains an open problem. The background model can undergo sudden or gradual illumination changes, as well as
background motions such as trees swaying or water rippling in a lake. In addition, global motion caused by camera movement or jitter can aﬀect detection of
genuine foreground objects. Noise is another problematic factor which is interleaved with challenges of camouflage. In most cases noise can increase the range
of values considered to belong to the background, allowing camouﬂaged objects
to remain undetected. A desirable background model must be able to learn a
variety of modes from the video feed, such that it handles variations in the
background, moved objects, and noise without compromising its ability to detect
camouﬂaged regions.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 314–329, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 19

