Gaussian Process Density Counting
from Weak Supervision
Matthias von Borstel1 , Melih Kandemir1(B) , Philip Schmidt1 ,
Madhavi K. Rao2 , Kumar Rajamani2 , and Fred A. Hamprecht1
1

HCI, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
melih.kandemir@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de
2
Robert Bosch Engineering, Bangalore, India

Abstract. As a novel learning setup, we introduce learning to count
objects within an image from only region-level count information. This
level of supervision is weaker than earlier approaches that require segmenting, drawing bounding boxes, or putting dots on centroids of all
objects within training images. We devise a weakly supervised kernel learner that achieves higher count accuracies than previous counting models. We achieve this by placing a Gaussian process prior on
a latent function the square of which is the count density. We impose
non-negativeness and smooth the GP response as an intermediary step
in model inference. We illustrate the eﬀectiveness of our model on two
benchmark applications: (i) synthetic cell and (ii) pedestrian counting,
and one novel application: (iii) erythrocyte counting on blood samples
of malaria patients.

1

Introduction

Counting objects of interest within an image is a fundamental requirement of
many applications. Biologists gain insights on cell population dynamics from
such counts, pedestrian counting helps urban planners, and counting cars is
crucial for detecting or foreseeing traﬃc jams.
Traditional approaches to counting proceed by ﬁrst detecting all targets and
then counting them. The transductive principle [1], instead, suggests never to
solve a harder problem than the target application necessitates. As a consequence, recent models [2–4] exploit the fact that estimating the object count
does not necessarily require accurate detection of individual objects, let alone
their segmentation. They focus exclusively on the easier task of assigning each
pixel a density in such a way that when the densities within any image region are
integrated, a good prediction of the true object count in that region is obtained.
This approach is called density counting [2].
The main disadvantage of density counting is that it requires a suﬃciently
large number of per-object annotations. For instance, a common practice in cell
counting is to densely annotate a few tens of images by marking the centroids
of all cells with a dot. This task demands a considerable eﬀort from the annotator. Given the dots, the ground-truth density counts of individual pixels are
approximated by placing a Gaussian kernel on top of each dot within an image.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 365–380, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 22

