Support Discrimination Dictionary Learning
for Image Classification
Yang Liu1(B) , Wei Chen1,2 , Qingchao Chen3 , and Ian Wassell1
1

Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
{yl504,wc253,ijw24}@cam.ac.uk
2
State Key Laboratory of Rail Traﬃc Control and Safety,
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
3
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering,
University College London, London, UK
qingchao.chen.13@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract. Dictionary learning has been successfully applied in image
classiﬁcation. However, many dictionary learning methods that encode
only a single image at a time while training, ignore correlation and other
useful information contained within the entire training set. In this paper,
we propose a new principle that uses the support of the coeﬃcients to
measure the similarity between the pairs of coeﬃcients, instead of using
Euclidian distance directly. More speciﬁcally, we proposed a support discrimination dictionary learning method, which ﬁnds a dictionary under
which the coeﬃcients of images from the same class have a common
sparse structure while the size of the overlapped signal support of different classes is minimised. In addition, adopting a shared dictionary
in a multi-task learning setting, this method can ﬁnd the number and
position of associated dictionary atoms for each class automatically by
using structured sparsity on a group of images. The proposed model is
extensively evaluated using various image datasets, and it shows superior
performance to many state-of-the-art dictionary learning methods.

1

Introduction

Sparse representation has been successfully applied to a variety of problems in
image processing and computer vision, e.g., image denoising, image restoration
and image classiﬁcation. In the framework of sparse representation, an image can
be represented as a linear combination of a few bases selected sparsely from an
over-complete dictionary. The dictionaries can be predeﬁned by the use of some
oﬀ-the-shelf basis, such as the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) matrix and
the wavelet matrix. However, it has been shown that learning the dictionary
from the training data enables a more sparse representation of the image in
comparison to using a predeﬁned one, which can lead to improved performance in
the reconstruction task. Some typical reconstruction dictionary learning methods
include the Method of optimal direction (MOD) [1], and K-SVD [2].
Sparse representation has also been considered in pattern recognition applications. For example, it has been used in the Sparse representation classiﬁer
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 375–390, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 24

