Projective Bundle Adjustment from Arbitrary
Initialization Using the Variable
Projection Method
Je Hyeong Hong1(B) , Christopher Zach2 , Andrew Fitzgibbon3 ,
and Roberto Cipolla1
1

University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
{jhh37,rc10001}@cam.ac.uk
2
Toshiba Research Europe, Cambridge, UK
christopher.m.zach@gmail.com
3
Microsoft, Cambridge, UK
awf@microsoft.com

Abstract. Bundle adjustment is used in structure-from-motion pipelines
as ﬁnal reﬁnement stage requiring a suﬃciently good initialization to reach
a useful local mininum. Starting from an arbitrary initialization almost
always gets trapped in a poor minimum. In this work we aim to obtain
an initialization-free approach which returns global minima from a large
proportion of purely random starting points. Our key inspiration lies in
the success of the Variable Projection (VarPro) method for aﬃne factorization problems, which have close to 100 % chance of reaching a global
minimum from random initialization. We ﬁnd empirically that this desirable behaviour does not directly carry over to the projective case, and we
consequently design and evaluate strategies to overcome this limitation.
Also, by unifying the aﬃne and the projective camera settings, we obtain
numerically better conditioned reformulations of original bundle adjustment algorithms.
Keywords: Projective bundle adjustment · Variable Projection ·
Nonlinear least squares

1

Introduction

Standard structure from motion (SfM) approaches are typically multi-stage
pipelines comprising of feature matching or tracking, initial structure and camera estimation, and ﬁnal nonlinear reﬁnement stages. While feature matching
and tracking and the nonlinear reﬁnement stage have well-established gold standard implementations (most notably matching using SIFT features, tracking via
Lucas-Kanade and nonlinear reﬁnement via Levenberg-Marquardt), no elegant
J.H. Hong and R. Cipolla—Much of the work was done while the ﬁrst author was
an intern at Toshiba Research Europe.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 477–493, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 29

