Improving Multi-label Learning with Missing
Labels by Structured Semantic Correlations
Hao Yang1(B) , Joey Tianyi Zhou2 , and Jianfei Cai3
1

Rolls-Royce@NTU Corp Lab, Singapore, Singapore
lancelot365@gmail.com
2
IHPC, A*STAR, Singapore, Singapore
zhouty@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, NTU, Singapore, Singapore
ASJFCai@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract. Multi-label learning has attracted signiﬁcant interests in
computer vision recently, ﬁnding applications in many vision tasks such
as multiple object recognition and automatic image annotation. Associating multiple labels to a complex image is very diﬃcult, not only due to
the intricacy of describing the image, but also because of the incompleteness nature of the observed labels. Existing works on the problem either
ignore the label-label and instance-instance correlations or just assume
these correlations are linear and unstructured. Considering that semantic correlations between images are actually structured, in this paper we
propose to incorporate structured semantic correlations to solve the missing label problem of multi-label learning. Speciﬁcally, we project images
to the semantic space with an eﬀective semantic descriptor. A semantic graph is then constructed on these images to capture the structured
correlations between them. We utilize the semantic graph Laplacian as a
smooth term in the multi-label learning formulation to incorporate the
structured semantic correlations. Experimental results demonstrate the
eﬀectiveness of the proposed semantic descriptor and the usefulness of
incorporating the structured semantic correlations. We achieve better
results than state-of-the-art multi-label learning methods on four benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Multi-label learning has been an important research topic in machine learning [1–3] and data mining [4,5]. Unlike conventional classiﬁcation problems, in
multi-label learning each instance can be associated with multiple labels simultaneously. During recent years, multi-label learning has been applied on many
computer vision tasks, especially on visual object recognition [6–8] and automatic image annotation [9–11]. In addition to the diﬃculty of assigning multiple
labels/tags to complex images, multi-label learning often encounters the problem of incomplete labels. In real world scenarios, since the number of possible
labels/tags is often very large (could be as large as the whole vocabulary set)
and there often exist ambiguities among labels (e.g., “car” vs “SUV”), it is very
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 835–851, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 50

