Hollywood in Homes: Crowdsourcing Data
Collection for Activity Understanding
Gunnar A. Sigurdsson1(B) , Gül Varol2 , Xiaolong Wang1 , Ali Farhadi3,4 ,
Ivan Laptev2 , and Abhinav Gupta1,4
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
gsigurds@cs.cmu.edu
2
Inria, Rocquencourt, France
3
University of Washington, Seattle, USA
4
The Allen Institute for AI, Seattle, USA
http://allenai.org/plato/charades/

Abstract. Computer vision has a great potential to help our daily lives
by searching for lost keys, watering ﬂowers or reminding us to take a pill.
To succeed with such tasks, computer vision methods need to be trained
from real and diverse examples of our daily dynamic scenes. While most
of such scenes are not particularly exciting, they typically do not appear
on YouTube, in movies or TV broadcasts. So how do we collect suﬃciently many diverse but boring samples representing our lives? We propose a novel Hollywood in Homes approach to collect such data. Instead
of shooting videos in the lab, we ensure diversity by distributing and
crowdsourcing the whole process of video creation from script writing
to video recording and annotation. Following this procedure we collect a
new dataset, Charades, with hundreds of people recording videos in their
own homes, acting out casual everyday activities. The dataset is composed of 9,848 annotated videos with an average length of 30 s, showing
activities of 267 people from three continents. Each video is annotated by
multiple free-text descriptions, action labels, action intervals and classes
of interacted objects. In total, Charades provides 27,847 video descriptions, 66,500 temporally localized intervals for 157 action classes and
41,104 labels for 46 object classes. Using this rich data, we evaluate and
provide baseline results for several tasks including action recognition and
automatic description generation. We believe that the realism, diversity,
and casual nature of this dataset will present unique challenges and new
opportunities for computer vision community.

1

Introduction

Large scale visual learning fueled by huge datasets has changed the computer
vision landscape [1,2]. Given the source of this data, it’s not surprising that most
of our current success is biased towards static scenes and objects in Internet
images. As we move forward into the era of AI and robotics, however, new
questions arise. How do we learn about diﬀerent states of objects (e.g., cut vs.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 510–526, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 31

