Higher Order Conditional Random Fields
in Deep Neural Networks
Anurag Arnab(B) , Sadeep Jayasumana, Shuai Zheng, and Philip H.S. Torr
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
{anurag.arnab,sadeep.jayasumana,shuai.zheng,philip.torr}@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract. We address the problem of semantic segmentation using
deep learning. Most segmentation systems include a Conditional Random Field (CRF) to produce a structured output that is consistent with
the image’s visual features. Recent deep learning approaches have incorporated CRFs into Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), with some
even training the CRF end-to-end with the rest of the network. However, these approaches have not employed higher order potentials, which
have previously been shown to signiﬁcantly improve segmentation performance. In this paper, we demonstrate that two types of higher order
potential, based on object detections and superpixels, can be included in
a CRF embedded within a deep network. We design these higher order
potentials to allow inference with the diﬀerentiable mean ﬁeld algorithm.
As a result, all the parameters of our richer CRF model can be learned
end-to-end with our pixelwise CNN classiﬁer. We achieve state-of-the-art
segmentation performance on the PASCAL VOC benchmark with these
trainable higher order potentials.
Keywords: Semantic segmentation · Conditional random ﬁelds · Deep
learning · Convolutional Neural Networks

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation involves assigning a visual object class label to every
pixel in an image, resulting in a segmentation with a semantic meaning for
each segment. While a strong pixel-level classiﬁer is critical for obtaining high
accuracy in this task, it is also important to enforce the consistency of the
semantic segmentation output with visual features of the image. For example,
segmentation boundaries should usually coincide with strong edges in the image,
and regions in the image with similar appearance should have the same label.
Recent advances in deep learning have enabled researchers to create stronger
classiﬁers, with automatically learned features, within a Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) [1–3]. This has resulted in large improvements in semantic segmentation accuracy on widely used benchmarks such as PASCAL VOC [4]. CNN
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46475-6 33) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 524–540, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 33

