Perceptual Losses for Real-Time Style Transfer
and Super-Resolution
Justin Johnson(B) , Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, USA
{jcjohns,alahi,feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract. We consider image transformation problems, where an input
image is transformed into an output image. Recent methods for such
problems typically train feed-forward convolutional neural networks
using a per-pixel loss between the output and ground-truth images. Parallel work has shown that high-quality images can be generated by deﬁning and optimizing perceptual loss functions based on high-level features
extracted from pretrained networks. We combine the beneﬁts of both
approaches, and propose the use of perceptual loss functions for training
feed-forward networks for image transformation tasks. We show results
on image style transfer, where a feed-forward network is trained to solve
the optimization problem proposed by Gatys et al. in real-time. Compared to the optimization-based method, our network gives similar qualitative results but is three orders of magnitude faster. We also experiment
with single-image super-resolution, where replacing a per-pixel loss with
a perceptual loss gives visually pleasing results.
Keywords: Style transfer · Super-resolution · Deep learning

1

Introduction

Many classic problems can be framed as image transformation tasks, where a system receives some input image and transforms it into an output image. Examples from image processing include denoising, super-resolution, and colorization,
where the input is a degraded image (noisy, low-resolution, or grayscale) and
the output is a high-quality color image. Examples from computer vision include
semantic segmentation and depth estimation, where the input is a color image and
the output image encodes semantic or geometric information about the scene.
One approach for solving image transformation tasks is to train a feedforward convolutional neural network in a supervised manner, using a per-pixel
loss function to measure the diﬀerence between output and ground-truth images.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46475-6 43) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 694–711, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 43

