Fundamental Matrices from Moving Objects
Using Line Motion Barcodes
Yoni Kasten(B) , Gil Ben-Artzi, Shmuel Peleg, and Michael Werman
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
yonikasten@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract. Computing the epipolar geometry between cameras with
very diﬀerent viewpoints is often very diﬃcult. The appearance of objects
can vary greatly, and it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd corresponding feature points.
Prior methods searched for corresponding epipolar lines using points on
the convex hull of the silhouette of a single moving object. These methods
fail when the scene includes multiple moving objects. This paper extends
previous work to scenes having multiple moving objects by using the
“Motion Barcodes”, a temporal signature of lines. Corresponding epipolar lines have similar motion barcodes, and candidate pairs of corresponding epipoar lines are found by the similarity of their motion barcodes.
As in previous methods we assume that cameras are relatively stationary
and that moving objects have already been extracted using background
subtraction.
Keywords: Fundamental matrix · Epipolar geometry
barcodes · Epipolar lines · Multi-camera calibration

1

Introduction

1.1

Related Work

· Motion

Calibrating a network of cameras is typically carried out by ﬁnding corresponding
points between views. Finding such correspondences often fails when the cameras
have very diﬀerent viewpoints, since objects and background do not look similar
across these views. Previous approaches to solve this problem utilized points on
convex hull of the silhouette of a moving foreground object.
Sinha and Pollefeys [1] used silhouettes to calibrate a network of cameras,
assuming a single moving silhouette in a video. Each RANSAC iteration takes
a diﬀerent frame and samples two pairs of corresponding tangent lines to the
convex hull of the silhouette [2]. The intersection of each pair of lines proposes
an epipole.
Ben-Artzi et al. [3] proposed an eﬃcient way to accelerate Sinha’s method.
Generalizing the concept of Motion Barcodes [4] to lines, they proposed using
the best pair of matching tangent lines between the two views from each frame.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 220–228, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 14

