Eigen Appearance Maps of Dynamic Shapes
Adnane Boukhayma(B) , Vagia Tsiminaki, Jean-Sébastien Franco,
and Edmond Boyer
LJK, Université Grenoble Alpes, Inria Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, Grenoble, France
{adnane.boukhayma,vagia.tsiminaki,jean-sebastien.franco,
edmond.boyer}@inria.fr

Abstract. We address the problem of building eﬃcient appearance representations of shapes observed from multiple viewpoints and in several
movements. Multi-view systems now allow the acquisition of spatiotemporal models of such moving objects. While eﬃcient geometric representations for these models have been widely studied, appearance information, as provided by the observed images, is mainly considered on
a per frame basis, and no global strategy yet addresses the case where
several temporal sequences of a shape are available. We propose a per
subject representation that builds on PCA to identify the underlying
manifold structure of the appearance information relative to a shape.
The resulting eigen representation encodes shape appearance variabilities due to viewpoint and motion, with Eigen textures, and due to local
inaccuracies in the geometric model, with Eigen warps. In addition to
providing compact representations, such decompositions also allow for
appearance interpolation and appearance completion. We evaluate their
performances over diﬀerent characters and with respect to their ability
to reproduce compelling appearances in a compact way.

1

Introduction

The last decade has seen the emergence of 3D dynamic shape models of moving objects, in particular humans, acquired from multiple videos. These spatiotemporal models comprise geometric and appearance information extracted from
images, and they allow for subject motions to be recorded and reused. This is
of interest for applications that require real 3D contents for analysis, free viewpoint and animation purposes and also for interactive experiences made possible
with new virtual reality devices. This ability to now record datasets of subject
motions bolsters the need for shape and appearance representations that make
optimal use of the massive amount of image information usually produced. While
dynamic shape representations have been extensively studied, from temporally
coherent representations over a single sequence, to shape spaces that can encode
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46448-0 14) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 230–245, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 14

