Visual Motif Discovery via First-Person Vision
Ryo Yonetani1(B) , Kris M. Kitani2 , and Yoichi Sato1
1

The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
{yonetani,ysato}@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
2
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
kkitani@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract. Visual motifs are images of visual experiences that are significant and shared across many people, such as an image of an informative
sign viewed by many people and that of a familiar social situation such
as when interacting with a clerk at a store. The goal of this study is to
discover visual motifs from a collection of ﬁrst-person videos recorded by
a wearable camera. To achieve this goal, we develop a commonality clustering method that leverages three important aspects: inter-video similarity, intra-video sparseness, and people’s visual attention. The problem
is posed as normalized spectral clustering, and is solved eﬃciently using
a weighted covariance matrix. Experimental results suggest the eﬀectiveness of our method over several state-of-the-art methods in terms of both
accuracy and eﬃciency of visual motif discovery.
Keywords: Commonality discovery · First-person video

1

Introduction

We are interested in understanding from a data-driven perspective, what images
from a person’s visual experience are common among the majority. By developing
algorithms for automatically extracting such shared visual experiences, we aim to
understand what parts of the physical world are meaningful to people. We denote
these shared visual experiences that have signiﬁcance across many people as
visual motifs. While visual motifs can include images of physical objects like signs
and historic buildings, they can also be images of social situations or observed
human activities. Examples of visual motifs are illustrated in Fig. 1.
From a practical perspective, the ability to extract perceptually important
images can be useful for such tasks as life-logging, video summarization, scene
understanding, and assistive technologies for the blind. Automatically extracting
important visual motifs can be helpful for identifying meaningful images for lifelogging or summarization. By associating visual motifs to localized regions of the
environment, we can inform scene understanding by identifying what parts of
the scene are visual ‘hot-spots.’ The extraction of important visual information
in the environment can also be helpful for assistive technologies, by conveying
to blind people the information embedded in the visual world [1–3].
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 187–203, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 12

