Building Dual-Domain Representations
for Compression Artifacts Reduction
Jun Guo(B) and Hongyang Chao
School of Data and Computer Science, and SYSU-CMU Shunde International Joint
Research Institute, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, People’s Republic of China
artanis.protoss@outlook.com
Abstract. We propose a highly accurate approach to remove artifacts of
JPEG-compressed images. Our approach jointly learns a very deep convolutional network in both DCT and pixel domains. The dual-domain
representation can make full use of DCT-domain prior knowledge of
JPEG compression, which is usually lacking in traditional network-based
approaches. At the same time, it can also beneﬁt from the prowess and
the eﬃciency of the deep feed-forward architecture, in comparison to
capacity-limited sparse-coding-based approaches. Two simple strategies,
i.e., Adam and residual learning, are adopted to train the very deep
network and later proved to be a success. Extensive experiments demonstrate the large improvements of our approach over the state of the arts.
Keywords: Compression artifacts reduction · Dual-domain representation · Very deep convolutional network

1

Introduction

Image restoration is a classical problem in computer vision. Among various
sources of image degradation, one of the most common causes is lossy image
compression (e.g., JPEG [34], WebP [10] and HEVC-MSP [32]). To date, as the
popularity of mobile photo apps like Instagram and rich media social networks
such as Facebook, the number of images spreading on the Internet increases
rapidly. Hence, lots of companies are forced to employ lossy compression for
saving bandwidth and storage space. Unfortunately, to meet the bit-budget constraint, lossy compression will inevitably introduce irreversible information loss,
resulting in unwanted image artifacts. Considering that performances of miscellaneous visual tasks (e.g., image segmentation [27], image boundary detection [15], and image super-resolution [7]) greatly depend on the quality of inputs
images [9], how to reduce compression artifacts has attracted more and more
attentions.
Let us take JPEG as an example, as it is mostly used, to understand the compression artifacts introduced by lossy compression. As the input to the JPEG
encoder, original uncompressed images are grouped into 8 × 8 coding blocks,
and each block is forwarded to take the discrete cosine transform (DCT) separately. After DCT, each of the 64 DCT coeﬃcients is uniformly quantized in
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 628–644, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 38

