Taxonomy-Regularized Semantic Deep
Convolutional Neural Networks
Wonjoon Goo1 , Juyong Kim1 , Gunhee Kim1 , and Sung Ju Hwang2(B)
1

Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{wonjoon,gem0521,gunhee}@snu.ac.kr
2
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, UNIST, Ulsan, South Korea
sjhwang@unist.ac.kr
https://github.com/hiwonjoon/eccv16-taxonomy
Abstract. We propose a novel convolutional network architecture that
abstracts and diﬀerentiates the categories based on a given class hierarchy. We exploit grouped and discriminative information provided by
the taxonomy, by focusing on the general and speciﬁc components that
comprise each category, through the min- and diﬀerence-pooling operations. Without using any additional parameters or substantial increase in
time complexity, our model is able to learn the features that are discriminative for classifying often confused sub-classes belonging to the same
superclass, and thus improve the overall classiﬁcation performance. We
validate our method on CIFAR-100, Places-205, and ImageNet Animal
datasets, on which our model obtains signiﬁcant improvements over the
base convolutional networks.
Keywords: Deep learning
Ontology

1

· Object categorization · Taxonomy ·

Introduction

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [12–14,18] have received much
attention in recent years, due to its success on object categorization and many
other visual recognition tasks. They have achieved the state-of-the-art performances for challenging categorization datasets such as ImageNet [3], owing to
their ability to learn compositional representations for the target tasks, through
multiple levels of non-linear transformations. This multi-layer learning is biologically inspired by the human visual system that also processes the visual stimuli
through a similar hierarchical cascade.
However, while the deep CNNs closely resemble such low-level human visual
processing systems, they pay less attention to the high-level reasoning employed
for categorization. When performing categorization, humans do not treat each
category as an independent entity that is diﬀerent from everything else. Rather,
they understand each object category in relation to others, performing generalization and specialization focusing on their commonalities and diﬀerences, either
through observations or by the learned knowledge.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46475-6 6) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 86–101, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 6

