Modeling Context in Referring Expressions
Licheng Yu(B) , Patrick Poirson, Shan Yang, Alexander C. Berg,
and Tamara L. Berg
Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, USA
{licheng,poirson,alexyang,aberg,tlberg}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract. Humans refer to objects in their environments all the time,
especially in dialogue with other people. We explore generating and comprehending natural language referring expressions for objects in images.
In particular, we focus on incorporating better measures of visual context into referring expression models and ﬁnd that visual comparison
to other objects within an image helps improve performance signiﬁcantly. We also develop methods to tie the language generation process
together, so that we generate expressions for all objects of a particular category jointly. Evaluation on three recent datasets - RefCOCO,
RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg (Datasets and toolbox can be downloaded
from https://github.com/lichengunc/refer), shows the advantages of our
methods for both referring expression generation and comprehension.
Keywords: Language · Language and vision · Generation · Referring
expression generation

1

Introduction

In this paper, we look at the dual-tasks of generating and comprehending natural language expressions referring to particular objects within an image. Referring to objects is a natural and common experience. For example, one often
uses referring expressions in everyday speech to indicate a particular person or
object to a co-observer, e.g., “the man in the red hat” or “the book on the
table”. Computational models to generate and comprehend such expressions
would have applicability to human-computer interactions, especially for agents
such as robots, interacting with humans in the physical world.
Successful models will have to connect both recognition of visual attributes of
objects and eﬀective natural language generation to compose useful expressions
for dialogue. A broader version of this latter goal was considered in 1975 by
Paul Grice who introduced maxims describing cooperative conversation between
people [9]. These maxims, called the Gricean Maxims, describe a set of rational
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46475-6 5) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 69–85, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 5

