Superpixel Convolutional Networks
Using Bilateral Inceptions
Raghudeep Gadde1(B) , Varun Jampani2 , Martin Kiefel2,3 , Daniel Kappler2 ,
and Peter V. Gehler2,3
1

Université Paris-Est, Champs-sur-Marne, LIGM (UMR 8049), CNRS,
ENPC, ESIEE, UPEM, France
raghudeep.gadde@enpc.fr
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
varun.jampani@tuebingen.mpg.de
3
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Tübingen, Germany

Abstract. In this paper we propose a CNN architecture for semantic
image segmentation. We introduce a new “bilateral inception” module
that can be inserted in existing CNN architectures and performs bilateral
ﬁltering, at multiple feature-scales, between superpixels in an image. The
feature spaces for bilateral ﬁltering and other parameters of the module
are learned end-to-end using standard backpropagation techniques. The
bilateral inception module addresses two issues that arise with general
CNN segmentation architectures. First, this module propagates information between (super) pixels while respecting image edges, thus using the
structured information of the problem for improved results. Second, the
layer recovers a full resolution segmentation result from the lower resolution solution of a CNN. In the experiments, we modify several existing CNN architectures by inserting our inception module between the
last CNN (1 × 1 convolution) layers. Empirical results on three diﬀerent
datasets show reliable improvements not only in comparison to the baseline networks, but also in comparison to several dense-pixel prediction
techniques such as CRFs, while being competitive in time.

1

Introduction

In this paper we propose a CNN architecture for semantic image segmentation.
Given an image I = (x1 , . . . , xN ) with N pixels xi the task of semantic segmentation is to infer a labeling Y = (y1 , . . . , yN ) with a label yi ∈ Y for every pixel.
This problem can be naturally formulated as a structured prediction problem
g : I → Y . Empirical performance is measured by comparing Y to a human
labeled Y ∗ via a loss function Δ(Y, Y ∗ ), e.g., with the Intersection over Union
(IoU) or pixel-wise Hamming Loss.
The ﬁrst two authors contribute equally to this work.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46448-0 36) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 597–613, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 36

