DAVE: A Unified Framework for Fast Vehicle
Detection and Annotation
Yi Zhou1(B) , Li Liu1 , Ling Shao1 , and Matt Mellor2
1

Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 8ST, UK
{yi2.zhou,li2.liu,ling.shao}@northumbria.ac.uk
2
Createc, Cockermouth, Cumbria CA13 0HT, UK
matt.mellor@createc.co.uk

Abstract. Vehicle detection and annotation for streaming video data
with complex scenes is an interesting but challenging task for urban trafﬁc surveillance. In this paper, we present a fast framework of Detection
and Annotation for Vehicles (DAVE), which eﬀectively combines vehicle detection and attributes annotation. DAVE consists of two convolutional neural networks (CNNs): a fast vehicle proposal network (FVPN)
for vehicle-like objects extraction and an attributes learning network
(ALN) aiming to verify each proposal and infer each vehicle’s pose, color
and type simultaneously. These two nets are jointly optimized so that
abundant latent knowledge learned from the ALN can be exploited to
guide FVPN training. Once the system is trained, it can achieve eﬃcient vehicle detection and annotation for real-world traﬃc surveillance
data. We evaluate DAVE on a new self-collected UTS dataset and the
public PASCAL VOC2007 car and LISA 2010 datasets, with consistent
improvements over existing algorithms.
Keywords: Vehicle detection · Attributes annotation
knowledge guidance · Joint learning · Deep networks

1

·

Latent

Introduction and Related Work

Automatic analysis of urban traﬃc activities is an urgent need due to essential
traﬃc management and increased vehicle violations. Among many traﬃc surveillance techniques, computer vision-based methods have attracted a great deal of
attention and made great contributions to realistic applications such as vehicle
counting, target vehicle retrieval and behavior analysis. In these research areas,
eﬃcient and accurate vehicle detection and attributes annotation is the most
important component of traﬃc surveillance systems.
Vehicle detection is a fundamental objective of traﬃc surveillance. Traditional vehicle detection methods can be categorized into frame-based and
motion-based approaches [1,2]. For motion-based approaches, frames subtraction [3], adaptive background modeling [4] and optical ﬂow [5,6] are often utilized. However, some non-vehicle moving objects will be falsely detected with
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 278–293, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 18

