A Cluster Sampling Method for Image Matting
via Sparse Coding
Xiaoxue Feng, Xiaohui Liang(B) , and Zili Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems,
Beihang University, Beijing, China
{feng xiaoxue,liang xiaohui,zhangzili}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract. In this paper, we present a new image matting algorithm
which solves two major problems encountered by previous samplingbased algorithms. The ﬁrst is that existing sampling-based approaches
typically rely on certain spatial assumptions in collecting samples from
known regions, and thus their performance deteriorates if the underlying
assumptions are not satisﬁed. Here, we propose a method that a more
representative set of samples is collected so as not to miss out true samples. This is accomplished by clustering the foreground and background
pixels and collecting samples from each of the clusters. The second problem is that the quality of matting result is determined by the goodness
of a single sample pair which causes errors when sampling-based methods fail to select the best pairs. In this paper, we derive a new objective
function for directly obtaining the estimation of the alpha matte from a
bunch of samples. Comparison on a standard benchmark dataset demonstrates that the proposed approach generates more robust and accurate
alpha matte than state-of-the-art methods.
Keywords: Image matting · Sampling · Clustering · Sparse coding ·
Foreground extraction

1

Introduction

Estimation of foreground and background layers of an image is fundamental
in image and video editing. In the computer vision literatures, this problem
is known as image matting or alpha matting. Mathematically, the process is
modeled in [1] by considering the observed color of a pixel as a combination of
foreground color and background color:
Iz = αz Fz + (1 − αz Bz )

(1)

where Fz and Bz are the foreground and background colors of pixel z, αz represents the opacity of a pixel and takes values in the range [0,1] with αz = 1 for
foreground pixels and αz = 0 for background pixels. This is a highly ill-posed
problem since we have to estimate seven unknowns from three composition equations for each pixel - one for each color channel. Typically, matting approaches
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 204–219, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 13

