Semantic Clustering for Robust Fine-Grained
Scene Recognition
Marian George1(B) , Mandar Dixit2 , Gábor Zogg1 , and Nuno Vasconcelos2
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
mageorge@inf.ethz.ch, gzogg@student.ethz.ch
2
Statistical and Visual Computing Lab, UCSD, San Diego, CA, USA
{mdixit,nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu
Abstract. In domain generalization, the knowledge learnt from one or
multiple source domains is transferred to an unseen target domain. In
this work, we propose a novel domain generalization approach for ﬁnegrained scene recognition. We ﬁrst propose a semantic scene descriptor
that jointly captures the subtle diﬀerences between ﬁne-grained scenes,
while being robust to varying object conﬁgurations across domains. We
model the occurrence patterns of objects in scenes, capturing the informativeness and discriminability of each object for each scene. We then
transform such occurrences into scene probabilities for each scene image.
Second, we argue that scene images belong to hidden semantic topics that
can be discovered by clustering our semantic descriptors. To evaluate the
proposed method, we propose a new ﬁne-grained scene dataset in crossdomain settings. Extensive experiments on the proposed dataset and
three benchmark scene datasets show the eﬀectiveness of the proposed
approach for ﬁne-grained scene transfer, where we outperform state-ofthe-art scene recognition and domain generalization methods.

1

Introduction

Scene classiﬁcation is an important problem for computer vision. Discovering the
discriminative aspects of a scene in terms of its global representation, constituent
objects and parts, or their spatial layout remains a challenging endeavor. Indoor
scenes [1] are particularly important for applications such as robotics. They are
also particularly challenging, due to the need to understand images at multiple
levels of the continuum between things and stuﬀ [2]. Some scenes, such as a
garage or corridor, have a distinctive holistic layout. Others, such as a bathroom,
contain unique objects. All of these challenges are aggravated in the context
of ﬁne-grained indoor scene classiﬁcation. Fine-grained recognition targets the
problem of sub-ordinate categorization. While it has been studied in the realm of
objects, e.g. classes of birds [3], or ﬂowers [4], it has not been studied for scenes.
In real-world applications, vision systems are frequently faced with the need
to process images taken under very diﬀerent imaging conditions than those in
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46448-0 47) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 783–798, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 47

