Polysemous Codes
Matthijs Douze(B) , Hervé Jégou, and Florent Perronnin
Facebook AI Research, Paris, France
matthijs@fb.com

Abstract. This paper considers the problem of approximate nearest
neighbor search in the compressed domain. We introduce polysemous
codes, which oﬀer both the distance estimation quality of product quantization and the eﬃcient comparison of binary codes with Hamming distance. Their design is inspired by algorithms introduced in the 90’s to
construct channel-optimized vector quantizers. At search time, this dual
interpretation accelerates the search. Most of the indexed vectors are
ﬁltered out with Hamming distance, letting only a fraction of the vectors to be ranked with an asymmetric distance estimator. The method
is complementary with a coarse partitioning of the feature space such as
the inverted multi-index. This is shown by our experiments performed
on several public benchmarks such as the BIGANN dataset comprising
one billion vectors, for which we report state-of-the-art results for query
times below 0.3 millisecond per core. Last but not least, our approach
allows the approximate computation of the k-NN graph associated with
the Yahoo Flickr Creative Commons 100M, described by CNN image
descriptors, in less than 8 h on a single machine.

1

Introduction

Nearest neighbor search, or more generally similarity search, has received a sustained attention from diﬀerent research communities in the last decades. The
computer vision community has been especially active on this subject, which is
of utmost importance when dealing with very large visual collections.
While early approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) methods were mainly optimising the trade-oﬀ between speed and accuracy, many recent works [4,27,37,45]
put memory requirements as a central criterion for several reasons. For instance,
due to the memory hierarchy, using less memory means using faster memory:
disks are slower than the main memory, the main memory is slower than CPU
caches, etc. Accessing the memory may be the bottleneck of the search. Therefore algorithms using compact codes are likely to oﬀer a better eﬃciency than
those relying on full vectors. For these reasons, we focus on ANN search with
compact codes, which are able to make search in vector sets comprising as much
as one billion vectors on a single machine.
We distinguish two separate lines of research in ANN with compact codes.
The ﬁrst class of methods proposes to map the original vectors to the Hamming hypercube [33,37,49,51]. The resulting bit-vectors are eﬃciently compared
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 785–801, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 48

