Stereo Video Deblurring
Anita Sellent1,2(B) , Carsten Rother1 , and Stefan Roth2
1

Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany
anita.sellent@tu-dresden.de
2
Technische Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany

Abstract. Videos acquired in low-light conditions often exhibit motion
blur, which depends on the motion of the objects relative to the camera.
This is not only visually unpleasing, but can hamper further processing.
With this paper we are the ﬁrst to show how the availability of stereo
video can aid the challenging video deblurring task. We leverage 3D scene
ﬂow, which can be estimated robustly even under adverse conditions. We
go beyond simply determining the object motion in two ways: First, we
show how a piecewise rigid 3D scene ﬂow representation allows to induce
accurate blur kernels via local homographies. Second, we exploit the
estimated motion boundaries of the 3D scene ﬂow to mitigate ringing
artifacts using an iterative weighting scheme. Being aware of 3D object
motion, our approach can deal robustly with an arbitrary number of
independently moving objects. We demonstrate its beneﬁt over state-ofthe-art video deblurring using quantitative and qualitative experiments
on rendered scenes and real videos.

Keywords: Object motion blur
deblurring

1

· Scene ﬂow · Spatially-variant

Introduction

Stereo is one of the oldest areas of computer vision research [1]. Interestingly, the
arrival of mass-produced active depth sensors [2] seems to have renewed interest
also in passive stereo systems. In contrast to active depth sensors, stereo cameras
are also applicable in outdoor environments. Due to their more general applicability, stereo cameras are gaining increased adoption, for example in autonomous
driving [3]. Remarkably, the availability of stereo image pairs also helps in the
estimation of temporal correspondences: On the KITTI optical ﬂow benchmark
[4], the best performing algorithms [5,6] are indeed scene ﬂow algorithms that
jointly estimate depth and 3D motion from stereo videos. Part of their advantage stems from an increased robustness to adverse imaging conditions [6]. One
such adverse imaging condition is a shortage of light. In low-light conditions,
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46475-6 35) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 558–575, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 35

