Pedestrian Behavior Understanding
and Prediction with Deep Neural Networks
Shuai Yi1,2 , Hongsheng Li1(B) , and Xiaogang Wang1(B)
1

Department of Electronic Engineering,
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
{syi,hsli,xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
2
Sensetime Group Limited, Hong Kong, China
yishuai@sensetime.com

Abstract. In this paper, a deep neural network (Behavior-CNN) is proposed to model pedestrian behaviors in crowded scenes, which has many
applications in surveillance. A pedestrian behavior encoding scheme is
designed to provide a general representation of walking paths, which can
be used as the input and output of CNN. The proposed Behavior-CNN
is trained with real-scene crowd data and then thoroughly investigated
from multiple aspects, including the location map and location awareness
property, semantic meanings of learned ﬁlters, and the inﬂuence of receptive ﬁelds on behavior modeling. Multiple applications, including walking path prediction, destination prediction, and tracking, demonstrate
the eﬀectiveness of Behavior-CNN on pedestrian behavior modeling.

1

Introduction

Pedestrian behavior modeling is gaining increasing attention and can be used for
various applications including behavior prediction [1–4], pedestrian detection and
tracking [5–7], crowd motion analysis [8–11], and abnormal detection [12–14].
Modeling pedestrian behaviors is challenging. Pedestrian decision making is
complex and can be inﬂuenced by various factors. The decision making process
of individuals [15], the interactions among moving and stationary pedestrians
[4,16], and historical motion statistics of a scene provide information for predicting future behaviors of pedestrians. While existing works focused some of
these aspects with simpliﬁed rules or energy functions [15,17], our proposed
model takes all these factors into account through a complex deep convolution
neural network (Behavior-CNN) and makes more reliable predictions.
When using deep neural networks to model pedestrian behaviors, the main
diﬃculty is how to make good use of pedestrian walking information as the input
of networks. A straightforward way was to use dense optical ﬂow maps to describe
motions of a whole frame. However, it introduces ambiguities when merging and
splitting events happen frequently in crowded scenes. As shown in Fig. 1(c),
two separate pedestrians A and B at time t − 1 move to occlude each other at
location C at time t. The two ﬂow vectors (A → C) and (B → C) describe the
associations between t−1 and t. If the two pedestrians move to locations D and E
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 263–279, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 16

