4D Match Trees for Non-rigid Surface Alignment
Armin Mustafa(B) , Hansung Kim, and Adrian Hilton
CVSSP, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK
{a.mustafa,h.kim,a.hilton}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract. This paper presents a method for dense 4D temporal alignment of partial reconstructions of non-rigid surfaces observed from single
or multiple moving cameras of complex scenes. 4D Match Trees are introduced for robust global alignment of non-rigid shape based on the similarity between images across sequences and views. Wide-timeframe sparse
correspondence between arbitrary pairs of images is established using
a segmentation-based feature detector (SFD) which is demonstrated to
give improved matching of non-rigid shape. Sparse SFD correspondence
allows the similarity between any pair of image frames to be estimated for
moving cameras and multiple views. This enables the 4D Match Tree to
be constructed which minimises the observed change in non-rigid shape
for global alignment across all images. Dense 4D temporal correspondence across all frames is then estimated by traversing the 4D Match
tree using optical ﬂow initialised from the sparse feature matches. The
approach is evaluated on single and multiple view images sequences for
alignment of partial surface reconstructions of dynamic objects in complex indoor and outdoor scenes to obtain a temporally consistent 4D
representation. Comparison to previous 2D and 3D scene ﬂow demonstrates that 4D Match Trees achieve reduced errors due to drift and
improved robustness to large non-rigid deformations.
Keywords: Non-sequential tracking · Surface alignment · Temporal
coherence · Dynamic scene reconstruction · 4D modeling

1

Introduction

Recent advances in computer vision have demonstrated reconstruction of complex dynamic real-world scenes from multiple view video or single view depth
acquisition. These approaches typically produce an independent 3D scene model
at each time instant with partial and erroneous surface reconstruction for moving objects due to occlusion and inherent visual ambiguity [1–4]. For non-rigid
objects, such as people with loose clothing or animals, producing a temporally
coherent 4D representation from partial surface reconstructions remains a challenging problem.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46448-0 13) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 213–229, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 13

