SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector
Wei Liu1(B) , Dragomir Anguelov2 , Dumitru Erhan3 , Christian Szegedy3 ,
Scott Reed4 , Cheng-Yang Fu1 , and Alexander C. Berg1
1

UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, USA
{wliu,cyfu,aberg}@cs.unc.edu
2
Zoox Inc., Palo Alto, USA
drago@zoox.com
3
Google Inc., Mountain View, USA
{dumitru,szegedy}@google.com
4
University of Michigan, Ann-Arbor, USA
reedscot@umich.edu

Abstract. We present a method for detecting objects in images using
a single deep neural network. Our approach, named SSD, discretizes the
output space of bounding boxes into a set of default boxes over different aspect ratios and scales per feature map location. At prediction
time, the network generates scores for the presence of each object category in each default box and produces adjustments to the box to better
match the object shape. Additionally, the network combines predictions
from multiple feature maps with diﬀerent resolutions to naturally handle
objects of various sizes. SSD is simple relative to methods that require
object proposals because it completely eliminates proposal generation
and subsequent pixel or feature resampling stages and encapsulates all
computation in a single network. This makes SSD easy to train and
straightforward to integrate into systems that require a detection component. Experimental results on the PASCAL VOC, COCO, and ILSVRC
datasets conﬁrm that SSD has competitive accuracy to methods that utilize an additional object proposal step and is much faster, while providing
a uniﬁed framework for both training and inference. For 300 × 300 input,
SSD achieves 74.3 % mAP on VOC2007 test at 59 FPS on a Nvidia Titan
X and for 512 × 512 input, SSD achieves 76.9 % mAP, outperforming a
comparable state of the art Faster R-CNN model. Compared to other
single stage methods, SSD has much better accuracy even with a smaller
input image size. Code is available at https://github.com/weiliu89/caﬀe/
tree/ssd.
Keywords: Real-time object detection · Convolutional neural network

1

Introduction

Current state-of-the-art object detection systems are variants of the following approach: hypothesize bounding boxes, resample pixels or features for each box, and
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 21–37, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 2

