Semantic Object Parsing with Graph LSTM
Xiaodan Liang1 , Xiaohui Shen4 , Jiashi Feng3 , Liang Lin1(B) ,
and Shuicheng Yan2,3
1

Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
xdliang328@gmail.com, linliang@ieee.org
2
360 AI Institue, Singapore, Singapore
eleyans@nus.edu.sg
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
elefjia@nus.edu.sg
4
Adobe Research, San Jose, USA
xshen@adobe.com

Abstract. By taking the semantic object parsing task as an exemplar application scenario, we propose the Graph Long Short-Term Memory (Graph LSTM) network, which is the generalization of LSTM from
sequential data or multi-dimensional data to general graph-structured
data. Particularly, instead of evenly and ﬁxedly dividing an image to pixels or patches in existing multi-dimensional LSTM structures (e.g., Row,
Grid and Diagonal LSTMs), we take each arbitrary-shaped superpixel as
a semantically consistent node, and adaptively construct an undirected
graph for each image, where the spatial relations of the superpixels are
naturally used as edges. Constructed on such an adaptive graph topology,
the Graph LSTM is more naturally aligned with the visual patterns in the
image (e.g., object boundaries or appearance similarities) and provides a
more economical information propagation route. Furthermore, for each
optimization step over Graph LSTM, we propose to use a conﬁdencedriven scheme to update the hidden and memory states of nodes progressively till all nodes are updated. In addition, for each node, the forgets gates are adaptively learned to capture diﬀerent degrees of semantic
correlation with neighboring nodes. Comprehensive evaluations on four
diverse semantic object parsing datasets well demonstrate the signiﬁcant
superiority of our Graph LSTM over other state-of-the-art solutions.
Keywords: Object parsing · Graph LSTM · Recurrent neural networks

1

Introduction

Beyond traditional image semantic segmentation, semantic object parsing aims
to segment an object within an image into multiple parts with more ﬁne-grained
semantics and provide full understanding of image contents, as shown in Fig. 1.
Many higher-level computer vision applications [1,2] can beneﬁt from a powerful
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 125–143, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 8

