Leveraging Visual Question Answering
for Image-Caption Ranking
Xiao Lin(B) and Devi Parikh
Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, USA
{linxiao,parikh}@vt.edu

Abstract. Visual Question Answering (VQA) is the task of taking as
input an image and a free-form natural language question about the
image, and producing an accurate answer. In this work we view VQA as
a “feature extraction” module to extract image and caption representations. We employ these representations for the task of image-caption
ranking. Each feature dimension captures (imagines) whether a fact
(question-answer pair) could plausibly be true for the image and caption. This allows the model to interpret images and captions from a wide
variety of perspectives. We propose score-level and representation-level
fusion models to incorporate VQA knowledge in an existing state-of-theart VQA-agnostic image-caption ranking model. We ﬁnd that incorporating and reasoning about consistency between images and captions signiﬁcantly improves performance. Concretely, our model improves stateof-the-art on caption retrieval by 7.1 % and on image retrieval by 4.4 %
on the MSCOCO dataset.

Keywords: Visual question answering
Mid-level concepts

1

· Image-caption ranking ·

Introduction

Visual Question Answering (VQA) is an “AI-complete” problem that requires
knowledge from multiple disciplines such as computer vision, natural language
processing and knowledge base reasoning. A VQA system takes as input an
image and a free-form open-ended question about the image and outputs the
natural language answer to the question. A VQA system needs to not only
recognize objects and scenes but also reason beyond low-level recognition about
aspects such as intention, future, physics, material and commonsense knowledge.
For example (Q: Who is the person in charge in this picture? A: Chef) reveals
the most important person and occupation in the image. Moreover, answers
to multiple questions about the same image can be correlated and may reveal
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46475-6 17) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 261–277, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 17

