Learning to Count with CNN Boosting
Elad Walach(B) and Lior Wolf(B)
The Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
alandor@gmail.com, wolf@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract. In this paper, we address the task of object counting in
images. We follow modern learning approaches in which a density map
is estimated directly from the input image. We employ CNNs and incorporate two signiﬁcant improvements to the state of the art methods:
layered boosting and selective sampling. As a result, we manage both to
increase the counting accuracy and to reduce processing time. Moreover,
we show that the proposed method is eﬀective, even in the presence of
labeling errors. Extensive experiments on ﬁve diﬀerent datasets demonstrate the eﬃcacy and robustness of our approach. Mean Absolute error
was reduced by 20 % to 35 %. At the same time, the training time of each
CNN has been reduced by 50 %.
Keywords: Counting · Convolutional Neural Networks · Gradient
boosting · Sample selection

1

Introduction

Counting objects in still images and video is a well-deﬁned cognitive task in which
humans greatly outperform machines. In addition, automatic counting has many
important real-world applications, including medical microscopy, environmental
surveying, automated manufacturing, and surveillance.
Traditional approaches to visual object counting were based on object detection and segmentation. This direct approach assumes the existence of adequate
object localization algorithms. However, in many practical applications, object
delineation is limited by signiﬁcant inter-object occlusions or by cluttered background. Due to these limitations, in many cases, direct approaches can lead to
gross under- or over-counting.
Starting with the seminal work of Lempitsky and Zisserman [1], a density
based approach is used to translate the counting problem into a regression problem. This approach is demonstrated in Fig. 1. Each object is represented by a
density kernel in a density map F . The goal of the algorithm is to estimate F
directly from the image, turning the discrete counting problem to a multivariate regression problem. Counting is then performed by integrating the density
function over the entire image.
Recently, a method based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) has
been proposed for the problem of crowd counting [2]. The network estimates
the density map, which is then corrected by a second regression step. Like other
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 660–676, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 41

