Peak-Piloted Deep Network for Facial
Expression Recognition
Xiangyun Zhao1(B) , Xiaodan Liang2 , Luoqi Liu3,4 , Teng Li5 , Yugang Han3 ,
Nuno Vasconcelos1 , and Shuicheng Yan3,4
1

University of California, San Diego, USA
{xiz019,nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu
2
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
xdliang328@gmail.com
3
360 AI Institute, Beijing, China
{liuluoqi,hanyugang}@360.cn
4
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
eleyans@nus.edu.sg
5
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
tenglwy@gmail.com
Abstract. Objective functions for training of deep networks for facerelated recognition tasks, such as facial expression recognition (FER), usually consider each sample independently. In this work, we present a novel
peak-piloted deep network (PPDN) that uses a sample with peak expression (easy sample) to supervise the intermediate feature responses for a
sample of non-peak expression (hard sample) of the same type and from
the same subject. The expression evolving process from non-peak expression to peak expression can thus be implicitly embedded in the network to
achieve the invariance to expression intensities. A special-purpose backpropagation procedure, peak gradient suppression (PGS), is proposed for
network training. It drives the intermediate-layer feature responses of nonpeak expression samples towards those of the corresponding peak expression samples, while avoiding the inverse. This avoids degrading the recognition capability for samples of peak expression due to interference from their
non-peak expression counterparts. Extensive comparisons on two popular FER datasets, Oulu-CASIA and CK+, demonstrate the superiority of
the PPDN over state-of-the-art FER methods, as well as the advantages
of both the network structure and the optimization strategy. Moreover, it
is shown that PPDN is a general architecture, extensible to other tasks
by proper deﬁnition of peak and non-peak samples. This is validated by
experiments that show state-of-the-art performance on pose-invariant face
recognition, using the Multi-PIE dataset.
Keywords: Facial expression recognition · Peak-piloted · Deep network · Peak gradient suppression

1

Introduction

Facial Expression Recognition (FER) aims to predict the basic facial expressions (e.g. happy, sad, surprise, angry, fear, disgust) from a human face image, as
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 425–442, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 27

