An Empirical Study and Analysis of Generalized
Zero-Shot Learning for Object Recognition
in the Wild
Wei-Lun Chao1(B) , Soravit Changpinyo1 , Boqing Gong2 , and Fei Sha3
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, USA
{weilunc,schangpi}@usc.edu
2
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida,
Orlando, USA
bgong@crcv.ucf.edu
3
Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, USA
feisha@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract. We investigate the problem of generalized zero-shot learning
(GZSL). GZSL relaxes the unrealistic assumption in conventional zeroshot learning (ZSL) that test data belong only to unseen novel classes.
In GZSL, test data might also come from seen classes and the labeling space is the union of both types of classes. We show empirically
that a straightforward application of classiﬁers provided by existing ZSL
approaches does not perform well in the setting of GZSL. Motivated
by this, we propose a surprisingly simple but eﬀective method to adapt
ZSL approaches for GZSL. The main idea is to introduce a calibration
factor to calibrate the classiﬁers for both seen and unseen classes so as
to balance two conﬂicting forces: recognizing data from seen classes and
those from unseen ones. We develop a new performance metric called
the Area Under Seen-Unseen accuracy Curve to characterize this tradeoﬀ. We demonstrate the utility of this metric by analyzing existing ZSL
approaches applied to the generalized setting. Extensive empirical studies
reveal strengths and weaknesses of those approaches on three well-studied
benchmark datasets, including the large-scale ImageNet with more than
20,000 unseen categories. We complement our comparative studies in
learning methods by further establishing an upper bound on the performance limit of GZSL. In particular, our idea is to use class-representative
visual features as the idealized semantic embeddings. We show that there
is a large gap between the performance of existing approaches and the
performance limit, suggesting that improving the quality of class semantic embeddings is vital to improving ZSL.
W.-L. Chao and S. Changpinyo—Equal contribution.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46475-6 4) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 52–68, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 4

