Amodal Instance Segmentation
Ke Li(B) and Jitendra Malik
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
University of California, Berkeley, USA
{ke.li,malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract. We consider the problem of amodal instance segmentation,
the objective of which is to predict the region encompassing both visible
and occluded parts of each object. Thus far, the lack of publicly available amodal segmentation annotations has stymied the development of
amodal segmentation methods. In this paper, we sidestep this issue by
relying solely on standard modal instance segmentation annotations to
train our model. The result is a new method for amodal instance segmentation, which represents the ﬁrst such method to the best of our
knowledge. We demonstrate the proposed method’s eﬀectiveness both
qualitatively and quantitatively.
Keywords: Instance segmentation · Amodal completions · Occlusion
reasoning

1

Introduction

Consider the horse shown in the left panel of Fig. 1. The task of instance segmentation requires marking the visible region of the horse, as shown in the middle
panel, and has been tackled by several existing algorithms [6,7,18,19,27]. In this
paper, we consider a diﬀerent task, which requires marking both the visible and
the occluded regions of the horse, as shown in the right panel. In keeping with
terminology used in the psychology literature on visual perception [20], we refer
to the former task as modal instance segmentation and the latter task as amodal
instance segmentation.
A natural question to ask is if the task of amodal instance segmentation is
well-posed: given only the visible portions of an object, there are many possible
conﬁgurations of the hidden portions of the object, all of which appear to be
plausible hypotheses to a human. This is particularly true for articulated objects
under heavy occlusion. For example, if the lower body of a person is blocked from
view, there is no single correct hypothesis for the conﬁguration of the person’s
legs – the person could be sitting or standing, and so hypotheses consistent with
either pose would be equally valid. Despite this ambiguity, humans are capable
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46475-6 42) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 677–693, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 42

