A Software Platform for Manipulating
the Camera Imaging Pipeline
Hakki Can Karaimer(B) and Michael S. Brown
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Lassonde School of Engineering, York University, Toronto, Canada
karaimer@yorku.ca, mbrown@eecs.yorku.ca

Abstract. There are a number of processing steps applied onboard a
digital camera that collectively make up the camera imaging pipeline.
Unfortunately, the imaging pipeline is typically embedded in a camera’s
hardware making it diﬃcult for researchers working on individual components to do so within the proper context of the full pipeline. This not
only hinders research, it makes evaluating the eﬀects from modifying an
individual pipeline component on the ﬁnal camera output challenging, if
not impossible. This paper presents a new software platform that allows
easy access to each stage of the camera imaging pipeline. The platform
allows modiﬁcation of the parameters for individual components as well
as the ability to access and manipulate the intermediate images as they
pass through diﬀerent stages. We detail our platform design and demonstrate its usefulness on a number of examples.
Keywords: Camera processing pipeline · Computational photography ·
Color processing

1

Introduction

Digital cameras are the cornerstone for virtually all computer vision applications
as they provide the image input to our algorithms. While camera images are
often modeled as simple light-measuring devices that directly convert incoming
radiance to numerical values, the reality is that there are a number of processing routines onboard digital cameras that are applied to obtain the ﬁnal RGB
output. These processing steps are generally performed in sequence and collectively make up the camera imaging pipeline. Examples of these processing
steps include Bayer pattern demosaicing, white-balance, color space mapping,
noise reduction, tone-mapping and color manipulation. Many of these processing
steps are well-known research topics in their own right, e.g. white-balance, color
space mapping (colorimetry), and noise reduction.
Although cameras are the most prominent hardware tools in computer vision,
it is surprisingly diﬃcult to get access to the underlying imaging pipeline. This is
because these routines are embedded in the camera’s hardware and may involve
proprietary image manipulation that is unique to individual camera manufacturers. This is a signiﬁcant drawback to the research community. In particular,
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 429–444, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 26

