Learning to Refine Object Segments
Pedro O. Pinheiro1,2(B) , Tsung-Yi Lin1,3 , Ronan Collobert1 , and Piotr Dollár1
1

Facebook AI Research, Menlo Park, USA
pedro@opinheiro.com
2
Idiap Research Institute and Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland
3
Cornell Tech, Cornell University, New York, USA

Abstract. Object segmentation requires both object-level information
and low-level pixel data. This presents a challenge for feedforward networks: lower layers in convolutional nets capture rich spatial information, while upper layers encode object-level knowledge but are invariant
to factors such as pose and appearance. In this work we propose to augment feedforward nets for object segmentation with a novel top-down
reﬁnement approach. The resulting bottom-up/top-down architecture is
capable of eﬃciently generating high-ﬁdelity object masks. Similarly to
skip connections, our approach leverages features at all layers of the net.
Unlike skip connections, our approach does not attempt to output independent predictions at each layer. Instead, we ﬁrst output a coarse ‘mask
encoding’ in a feedforward pass, then reﬁne this mask encoding in a topdown pass utilizing features at successively lower layers. The approach
is simple, fast, and eﬀective. Building on the recent DeepMask network
for generating object proposals, we show accuracy improvements of 10–
20% in average recall for various setups. Additionally, by optimizing the
overall network architecture, our approach, which we call SharpMask, is
50 % faster than the original DeepMask network (under .8 s per image).

1

Introduction

As object detection [1–8] has rapidly progressed, there has been a renewed interest in object instance segmentation [9]. As the name implies, the goal is to both
detect and segment each individual object. The task is related to both object
detection with bounding boxes [9–11] and semantic segmentation [10,12–19].
It involves challenges from both domains, requiring accurate pixel-level object
segmentation coupled with identiﬁcation of each individual object instance.
A number of recent papers have explored the use convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [20] for object instance segmentation [21–24]. Standard feedforward CNNs [25–28] interleave convolutional layers (with pointwise nonlinearities)
and pooling layers. Pooling controls model capacity and increases receptive ﬁeld
size, resulting in a coarse, highly-semantic feature representation. While eﬀective
P.O. Pinheiro and T.-Y. Lin—Authors contributed equally to this work while doing
internships at FAIR.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 75–91, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 5

