An Occlusion-Resistant Ellipse Detection
Method by Joining Coelliptic Arcs
Halil Ibrahim Cakir1(B) , Cihan Topal2,3 , and Cuneyt Akinlar2
1

Dumlupinar University, Kutahya, Turkey
cakirhal@dumlupinar.edu.tr
2
Anadolu University, Eskisehir, Turkey
{cihant,cakinlar}@anadolu.edu.tr
3
Visea Innovative, Eskisehir, Turkey

Abstract. In this study, we propose an ellipse detection method which
gives prospering results on occlusive cases. The method starts with detection of edge segments. Then we extract elliptical arcs by computing corners and ﬁtting ellipse to the pixels between two consecutive corners.
Once the elliptical arcs are extracted, we aim to test all possible arc subsets. However, this requires exponential complexity and runtime diverges
as the number of arcs increases. To accelerate the process, arc pairing
strategy is deployed by using conic properties of arcs. If any pair found
to be non-coelliptic, then arc combinations including that pair are eliminated. Therefore the number of possible arcs subsets is reduced and
computation time is improved. In the end, ellipse ﬁtting is applied to
remaining arc combinations to decide on ﬁnal ellipses. Performance of
the proposed algorithm is tested on real datasets, and better results
have been obtained compare to state-of-the-art algorithms.
Keywords: Ellipse detection · Arc detection · Feature extraction ·
Hough transform

1

Introduction

Extracting ellipses from images is an important problem in computer vision and
has a diverse area of applications from object detection to pose estimation [3,10,
11,15–17,26]. Since the projections of circular objects appear as ellipse on the
camera image plane, ellipse detection is employed in many real life applications.
However, ellipse detection is much more diﬃcult than circle detection because
an ellipse has 5 degrees of freedom (the center coordinates x & y, semi-major
and semi-minor axes a & b, and rotation angle α) whereas a circle has 3. Due
to the same reason, many diﬀerent shapes (i.e., a rectangular or a line) can be
represented by an ellipse with a reasonable amount of accuracy.
This work is supported by The Scientiﬁc and Technological Research Council of
Turkey (TUBITAK) and Anadolu University Commission of Scientiﬁc Research
Projects (BAP) under the grant numbers 115E928 and 1505F319, respectively.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 492–507, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 31

