Learning Models for Actions
and Person-Object Interactions
with Transfer to Question Answering
Arun Mallya(B) and Svetlana Lazebnik
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, USA
{amallya2,slazebni}@illinois.edu

Abstract. This paper proposes deep convolutional network models that
utilize local and global context to make human activity label predictions in still images, achieving state-of-the-art performance on two recent
datasets with hundreds of labels each. We use multiple instance learning to handle the lack of supervision on the level of individual person
instances, and weighted loss to handle unbalanced training data. Further, we show how specialized features trained on these datasets can
be used to improve accuracy on the Visual Question Answering (VQA)
task, in the form of multiple choice ﬁll-in-the-blank questions (Visual
Madlibs). Speciﬁcally, we tackle two types of questions on person activity and person-object relationship and show improvements over generic
features trained on the ImageNet classiﬁcation task
Keywords: Activity prediction · Deep networks · Visual Question
Answering

1

Introduction

The task of Visual Question Answering (VQA) has recently garnered a lot of
interest with multiple datasets [1–3] and systems [4–10] being proposed. Many of
these systems rely on features extracted from deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) pre-trained on the ImageNet classiﬁcation task [11], with or without ﬁnetuning on the VQA dataset at hand. However, questions in VQA datasets tend
to cover a wide variety of concepts such as the presence or absence of objects,
counting, brand name recognition, emotion, activity, scene recognition and more.
Generic ImageNet-trained networks are insuﬃciently well tailored for such openended tasks, and the VQA datasets themselves are currently too small to provide
adequate training data for all types of visual content that are covered in their
questions.
Fortunately, we are also seeing the release of valuable datasets targeting
speciﬁc tasks such as scene recognition [12], age, gender, and emotion classiﬁcation [13,14], human action recognition [15–17], etc. To better understand and
answer questions about an image, we should draw on the knowledge from these
specialized datasets. Given a speciﬁc question type, we should be able to choose
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 414–428, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 25

