Matching Handwritten Document Images
Praveen Krishnan(B) and C.V. Jawahar
CVIT, IIIT, Hyderabad, India
praveen.krishnan@research.iiit.ac.in, jawahar@iiit.ac.in

Abstract. We address the problem of predicting similarity between a
pair of handwritten document images written by potentially diﬀerent
individuals. This has applications related to matching and mining in
image collections containing handwritten content. A similarity score is
computed by detecting patterns of text re-usages between document
images irrespective of the minor variations in word morphology, word
ordering, layout and paraphrasing of the content. Our method does not
depend on an accurate segmentation of words and lines. We formulate
the document matching problem as a structured comparison of the word
distributions across two document images. To match two word images,
we propose a convolutional neural network (cnn) based feature descriptor. Performance of this representation surpasses the state-of-the-art on
handwritten word spotting. Finally, we demonstrate the applicability of
our method on a practical problem of matching handwritten assignments.
Keywords: Handwritten word spotting · cnn features, plagiarism
detection

1

Introduction

Matching two document images has several applications related to information
retrieval like spotting keywords in historical documents [8], accessing personal
notes [22], camera based interface for querying [45], retrieving from video databases [27], automatic scoring of answer sheets [40], and mining and recommending in health care documents [25]. Since ocrs do not reliably work for all types of
documents, one resorts to image based methods for comparing textual content.
This problem is even more complex when considering unconstrained handwritten documents due to the high variations across the writers. Moreover, variable
placement of the words across the documents makes a rigid geometric matching ineﬀective. In this work, we design a scheme for matching two handwritten
document images. The problem is illustrated in Fig. 1(a). We validate the eﬀectiveness of our method on an application, named as measure of document similarity (mods).1 mods compares two handwritten document images and provides
a normalized score as a measure of similarity between two images.
1

In parallel to measure of software similarity (moss) [36], which has emerged as the de
facto standard across the universities to compare software solutions from students.

c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 766–782, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 46

