Single Image Dehazing via Multi-scale
Convolutional Neural Networks
Wenqi Ren1,3 , Si Liu2 , Hua Zhang2 , Jinshan Pan3 , Xiaochun Cao1(B) ,
and Ming-Hsuan Yang3
1

Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
rwq.renwenqi@gmail.com, caoxiaochun@iie.ac.cn
2
IIE, CAS, Beijing, China
{liusi,zhanghua}@iie.ac.cn
3
University of California, Merced, Merced, USA
{jpan24,mhyang}@ucmerced.edu
Abstract. The performance of existing image dehazing methods is limited by hand-designed features, such as the dark channel, color disparity
and maximum contrast, with complex fusion schemes. In this paper,
we propose a multi-scale deep neural network for single-image dehazing
by learning the mapping between hazy images and their corresponding
transmission maps. The proposed algorithm consists of a coarse-scale net
which predicts a holistic transmission map based on the entire image,
and a ﬁne-scale net which reﬁnes results locally. To train the multiscale deep network, we synthesize a dataset comprised of hazy images
and corresponding transmission maps based on the NYU Depth dataset.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed algorithm performs favorably against the state-of-the-art methods on both synthetic
and real-world images in terms of quality and speed.
Keywords: Image dehazing · Defogging · Convolutional neural network

1

Introduction

Image dehazing, which aims to recover a clear image from one single noisy frame
caused by haze, fog or smoke, as shown in Fig. 1, is a classical problem in computer vision. The formulation of a hazy image can be modeled as
I(x) = J (x)t(x) + A(1 − t(x)),

(1)

where I(x) and J (x) are the observed hazy image and the clear scene radiance, A
is the global atmospheric light, and t(x) is the scene transmission describing the
portion of light that is not scattered and reaches the camera sensors. Assuming
that the haze is homogenous, we can express t(x) = e−βd(x) , where β is the
medium extinction coeﬃcient and d(x) is the scene depth. As multiple solutions
exist for a given hazy image, this problem is highly ill-posed.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46475-6 10) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part II, LNCS 9906, pp. 154–169, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46475-6 10

