Contextual Priming and Feedback
for Faster R-CNN
Abhinav Shrivastava(B) and Abhinav Gupta
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
ashrivas@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract. The ﬁeld of object detection has seen dramatic performance
improvements in the last few years. Most of these gains are attributed
to bottom-up, feedforward ConvNet frameworks. However, in case of
humans, top-down information, context and feedback play an important role in doing object detection. This paper investigates how we can
incorporate top-down information and feedback in the state-of-the-art
Faster R-CNN framework. Speciﬁcally, we propose to: (a) augment Faster
R-CNN with a semantic segmentation network; (b) use segmentation for
top-down contextual priming; (c) use segmentation to provide top-down
iterative feedback using two stage training. Our results indicate that all
three contributions improve the performance on object detection, semantic segmentation and region proposal generation.

1

Introduction

The ﬁeld of object detection has changed drastically over the past few years.
We have moved from manually designed features [13,22] to learned ConvNet
features [29,37,44,68]; from the original sliding window approaches [22,77] to
region proposals [28,29,32,63,78]; and from pipeline based frameworks such as
Region-based CNN (R-CNN) [29] to more end-to-end learning frameworks such
as Fast [28] and Faster R-CNN [63]. The performance has continued to soar
higher, and things have never looked better. There seems to be a growing consensus – powerful representations learned by ConvNets are well suited for this
task, and designing and learning deeper networks lead to better performance.
Most recent gains in the ﬁeld have come from bottom-up, feedforward framework of ConvNets. On the other hand, in the case of human visual system, the
number of feedback connections signiﬁcantly outnumber the feedforward connections. In fact, many behavioral studies have shown the importance of context
and top-down information for the task of object detection. This raises a few
important questions – Are we on the right path as we try to develop deeper and
deeper, but only feedforward networks? Is there a way we can bridge the gap
between empirical results and theory, when it comes to incorporating top-down
information, feedback and/or contextual reasoning in object detection?
This paper investigates how we can break the feedforward mold in current
detection pipelines and incorporate context, feedback and top-down information. Current detection frameworks have two components: the ﬁrst component
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 330–348, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 20

