Segmentation from Natural Language
Expressions
Ronghang Hu1(B) , Marcus Rohrbach1,2 , and Trevor Darrell1
1

UC Berkeley EECS, Berkeley, CA, USA
{ronghang,rohrbach,trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu
2
ICSI, Berkeley, CA, USA

Abstract. In this paper we approach the novel problem of segmenting an image based on a natural language expression. This is diﬀerent
from traditional semantic segmentation over a predeﬁned set of semantic
classes, as e.g., the phrase “two men sitting on the right bench” requires
segmenting only the two people on the right bench and no one standing
or sitting on another bench. Previous approaches suitable for this task
were limited to a ﬁxed set of categories and/or rectangular regions. To
produce pixelwise segmentation for the language expression, we propose
an end-to-end trainable recurrent and convolutional network model that
jointly learns to process visual and linguistic information. In our model,
a recurrent neural network is used to encode the referential expression
into a vector representation, and a fully convolutional network is used
to a extract a spatial feature map from the image and output a spatial
response map for the target object. We demonstrate on a benchmark
dataset that our model can produce quality segmentation output from
the natural language expression, and outperforms baseline methods by
a large margin.

· Segmentation
Keywords: Natural
language
neural network · Fully convolutional network
1

·

Recurrent

Introduction

Semantic image segmentation is a core problem in computer vision and signiﬁcant progress has been made using large visual datasets and rich representations
based on convolution neural networks [4,6,17,21,32,33]. Although these existing
segmentation methods can predict precise pixelwise masks for query categories
like “train” or “cat”, they are not capable of predicting segmentation for more
complicated queries such as the natural language expression “the two people on
the right side of the car wearing black shirts”.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-46448-0 7) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.
c
 Springer International Publishing AG 2016
B. Leibe et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2016, Part I, LNCS 9905, pp. 108–124, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0 7

