GAIN: Missing Data Imputation using Generative Adversarial Nets

Jinsung Yoon 1 * James Jordon 2 * Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2 3

Abstract
We propose a novel method for imputing missing
data by adapting the well-known Generative Adversarial Nets (GAN) framework. Accordingly,
we call our method Generative Adversarial Imputation Nets (GAIN). The generator (G) observes
some components of a real data vector, imputes
the missing components conditioned on what is
actually observed, and outputs a completed vector.
The discriminator (D) then takes a completed vector and attempts to determine which components
were actually observed and which were imputed.
To ensure that D forces G to learn the desired
distribution, we provide D with some additional
information in the form of a hint vector. The hint
reveals to D partial information about the missingness of the original sample, which is used by
D to focus its attention on the imputation quality
of particular components. This hint ensures that G
does in fact learn to generate according to the true
data distribution. We tested our method on various datasets and found that GAIN significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art imputation methods.

1. Introduction
Missing data is a pervasive problem. Data may be missing
because it was never collected, records were lost or for many
other reasons. In the medical domain, the respiratory rate of
a patient may not have been measured (perhaps because it
was deemed unnecessary/unimportant) or accidentally not
recorded (Yoon et al., 2017; Alaa et al., 2018). It may also
be the case that certain pieces of information are difficult
or even dangerous to acquire (such as information gathered
from a biopsy), and so these were not gathered for those
reasons (Yoon et al., 2018b). An imputation algorithm can
be used to estimate missing values based on data that was
observed/measured, such as the systolic blood pressure and
*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Los Angeles,
CA, USA 2 University of Oxford, UK 3 Alan Turing Institute, UK.
Correspondence to: Jinsung Yoon <jsyoon0823@gmail.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

heart rate of the patient (Yoon et al., 2018c). A substantial
amount of research has been dedicated to developing imputation algorithms for medical data (Barnard & Meng, 1999;
Mackinnon, 2010; Sterne et al., 2009; Purwar & Singh,
2015). Imputation algorithms are also used in many other
applications such as image concealment, data compression,
and counterfactual estimation (Rubin, 2004; Kreindler &
Lumsden, 2012; Yoon et al., 2018a).
Missing data can be categorized into three types: (1) the data
is missing completely at random (MCAR) if the missingness
occurs entirely at random (there is no dependency on any of
the variables), (2) the data is missing at random (MAR) if the
missingness depends only on the observed variables1 , (3) the
data is missing not at random (MNAR) if the missingness
is neither MCAR nor MAR (more specifically, the data
is MNAR if the missingness depends on both observed
variables and the unobserved variables; thus, missingness
cannot be fully accounted for by the observed variables). In
this paper we provide theoretical results for our algorithm
under the MCAR assumption, and compare to other stateof-the-art methods in this setting2 .
State-of-the-art imputation methods can be categorized as
either discriminative or generative. Discriminative methods include MICE (Buuren & Oudshoorn, 2000; Buuren
& Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 2011), MissForest (Stekhoven &
Bühlmann, 2011), and matrix completion (Mazumder et al.,
2010a; Yu et al., 2016; Schnabel et al., 2016; Mazumder
et al., 2010b); generative methods include algorithms based
on Expectation Maximization (Garcı́a-Laencina et al., 2010)
and algorithms based on deep learning (e.g. denoising autoencoders (DAE) and generative adversarial nets (GAN))
(Vincent et al., 2008; Gondara & Wang, 2017; Allen & Li,
2016). However, current generative methods for imputation
have various drawbacks. For instance, the approach for data
imputation based on (Garcı́a-Laencina et al., 2010) makes
assumptions about the underlying distribution and fails to
generalize well when datasets contain mixed categorical and
continuous variables. In contrast, the approaches based on
DAE (Vincent et al., 2008) have been shown to work well
in practice but require complete data during training. In
1

A formal definition of MAR can be found in the Supplementary Materials.
2
Empirical results for the MAR and MNAR settings are shown
in the Supplementary Materials.

