Minimal I-MAP MCMC
for Scalable Structure Discovery in Causal DAG Models
Raj Agrawal 1 2 3 Tamara Broderick 1 2 Caroline Uhler 2 3

Abstract
Learning a Bayesian network (BN) from data
can be useful for decision-making or discovering
causal relationships. However, traditional methods often fail in modern applications, which exhibit a larger number of observed variables than
data points. The resulting uncertainty about the
underlying network as well as the desire to incorporate prior information recommend a Bayesian
approach to learning the BN, but the highly combinatorial structure of BNs poses a striking challenge for inference. The current state-of-the-art
methods such as order MCMC are faster than
previous methods but prevent the use of many
natural structural priors and still have running
time exponential in the maximum indegree of the
true directed acyclic graph (DAG) of the BN. We
here propose an alternative posterior approximation based on the observation that, if we incorporate empirical conditional independence tests,
we can focus on a high-probability DAG associated with each order of the vertices. We show
that our method allows the desired flexibility in
prior specification, removes timing dependence
on the maximum indegree, and yields provably
good posterior approximations; in addition, we
show that it achieves superior accuracy, scalability, and sampler mixing on several datasets.

1. Introduction
Bayesian networks (BNs)—or probabilistic graphical models based on directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)—form a powerful framework for representing complex dependencies
1

Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Institute for Data, Systems and Society 3 Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Raj Agrawal <r.agrawal@csail.mit.edu,
r.agrawal.raj@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

among random variables. Learning BNs among observed
variables from data has proven useful in decision tasks—
such as credit assessment or automated medical diagnosis—
as well as discovery tasks—such as learning gene regulatory
networks (Spirtes et al., 2000; Friedman et al., 2000; Pearl,
2009; Robins et al., 2000; Khashei & Mirahmadi, 2015).
When the number of data points is much larger than the
number of observed variables, a point estimate of the BN
can be found using constraint-based or greedy search methods (Spirtes et al., 2000; Chickering, 2002; Tsamardinos
et al., 2006). However, in many applications, the number of
observed variables is larger than the number of data points.
In this case, many BNs may agree with the observed data.
A Bayesian approach offers a natural weighting scheme
across BNs via the Bayesian posterior distribution. This
weighting propagates coherently to point estimates and uncertainty quantification for structural features of the BN
(such as the presence of certain directed edges). Moreover, a Bayesian approach allows the incorporation of prior
information, which is common in applications of interest
(Mukherjee & Speed, 2008).
Unfortunately, due to the combinatorial explosion of the
number of DAGs, exact posterior computation is intractable
for graphs with more than thirty nodes (Koivisto & Sood,
2004; Tian & He, 2009). This motivated Madigan & York
(1995) to propose structure MCMC, an approximate method
using Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). To overcome
the slow mixing of structure MCMC and its variants (Grzegorczyk & Husmeier, 2008), Friedman & Koller (2003)
introduced order MCMC. This algorithm achieves significantly faster mixing by running a Markov chain not over
DAGs, but in the reduced space of permutations (i.e., orders) of the vertices of the DAG. However, order MCMC
requires a particular (often undesirable) form for the prior
on DAGs, and its iterations suffer from exponential time
and memory complexity in the maximum indegree of the
true DAG. Heuristic fixes for scalability exist (Friedman &
Koller, 2003), but their statistical costs are unclear.
In this paper, we propose a new method to leverage the improved mixing of MCMC moves in the permutation space;
in addition, our approach comes with theoretical guarantees
on approximation quality and allows more realistic DAG

