Hyperbolic Entailment Cones for Learning Hierarchical Embeddings

Octavian-Eugen Ganea 1 Gary Bécigneul 1 Thomas Hofmann 1

Abstract
Learning graph representations via lowdimensional embeddings that preserve relevant
network properties is an important class of
problems in machine learning. We here present
a novel method to embed directed acyclic
graphs. Following prior work, we first advocate
for using hyperbolic spaces which provably
model tree-like structures better than Euclidean
geometry. Second, we view hierarchical relations
as partial orders defined using a family of nested
geodesically convex cones. We prove that these
entailment cones admit an optimal shape with a
closed form expression both in the Euclidean and
hyperbolic spaces, and they canonically define
the embedding learning process. Experiments
show significant improvements of our method
over strong recent baselines both in terms of
representational capacity and generalization.

1. Introduction
Producing high quality feature representations of data such
as text or images is a central point of interest in artificial
intelligence. A large line of research focuses on embedding
discrete data such as graphs (Grover & Leskovec, 2016;
Goyal & Ferrara, 2017) or linguistic instances (Mikolov
et al., 2013; Pennington et al., 2014; Kiros et al., 2015) into
continuous spaces that exhibit certain desirable geometric
properties. This class of models has reached state-of-theart results for various tasks and applications, such as link
prediction in knowledge bases (Nickel et al., 2011; Bordes et al., 2013) or in social networks (Hoff et al., 2002),
text disambiguation (Ganea & Hofmann, 2017), word hypernymy (Shwartz et al., 2016), textual entailment (Rocktäschel
et al., 2015) or taxonomy induction (Fu et al., 2014).
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich,
Switzerland.
Correspondence to:
Octavian-Eugen
Ganea <octavian.ganea@inf.ethz.ch>,
Gary Bécigneul
<gary.becigneul@inf.ethz.ch>,
Thomas
Hofmann
<thomas.hofmann@inf.ethz.ch>.

Popular methods typically embed symbolic objects in low
dimensional Euclidean vector spaces using a strategy that
aims to capture semantic information such as functional
similarity. Symmetric distance functions are usually minimized between representations of correlated items during
the learning process. Popular examples are word embedding
algorithms trained on corpora co-occurrence statistics which
have shown to strongly relate semantically close words and
their topics (Mikolov et al., 2013; Pennington et al., 2014).
However, in many fields (e.g. Recommender Systems, Genomics (Billera et al., 2001), Social Networks), one has to
deal with data whose latent anatomy is best defined by nonEuclidean spaces such as Riemannian manifolds (Bronstein
et al., 2017). Here, the Euclidean symmetric models suffer from not properly reflecting complex data patterns such
as the latent hierarchical structure inherent in taxonomic
data. To address this issue, the emerging trend of geometric
deep learning1 is concerned with non-Euclidean manifold
representation learning.
In this work, we are interested in geometrical modeling
of hierarchical structures, directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)
and entailment relations via low dimensional embeddings.
Starting from the same motivation, the order embeddings
method (Vendrov et al., 2015) explicitly models the partial
order induced by entailment relations between embedded
objects. Formally, a vector x ∈ Rn represents a more general concept than any other embedding from the Euclidean
entailment region Ox := {y | yi ≥ xi , ∀1 ≤ i ≤ n}. A first
concern is that the capacity of order embeddings grows only
linearly with the embedding space dimension. Moreover,
the regions Ox suffer from heavy intersections, implying
that their disjoint volumes rapidly become bounded2 . As a
consequence, representing wide (with high branching factor) and deep hierarchical structures in a bounded region
of the Euclidean space would cause many points to end up
undesirably close to each other. This also implies that Euclidean distances would no longer be capable of reflecting
the original tree metric.
Fortunately, the hyperbolic space does not suffer from the
aforementioned capacity problem because the volume of
1

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

http://geometricdeeplearning.com/
For example, in n dimensions, no n + 1 distinct regions Ox
can simultaneously have unbounded disjoint sub-volumes.
2

