Differentially Private Database Release via Kernel Mean Embeddings

Matej Balog 1 2 Ilya Tolstikhin 1 Bernhard Schölkopf 1

Abstract
We lay theoretical foundations for new database
release mechanisms that allow third-parties to construct consistent estimators of population statistics, while ensuring that the privacy of each individual contributing to the database is protected.
The proposed framework rests on two main ideas.
First, releasing (an estimate of) the kernel mean
embedding of the data generating random variable instead of the database itself still allows thirdparties to construct consistent estimators of a wide
class of population statistics. Second, the algorithm can satisfy the definition of differential privacy by basing the released kernel mean embedding on entirely synthetic data points, while controlling accuracy through the metric available in a
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space. We describe
two instantiations of the proposed framework,
suitable under different scenarios, and prove theoretical results guaranteeing differential privacy
of the resulting algorithms and the consistency of
estimators constructed from their outputs.

1. Introduction
We aim to contribute to the body of research on the trade-off
between releasing datasets from which publicly beneficial
statistical inferences can be drawn, and between protecting
the privacy of individuals who contribute to such datasets.
Currently the most successful formalisation of protecting
user privacy is provided by differential privacy (Dwork &
Roth, 2014), which is a definition that any algorithm operating on a database may or may not satisfy. An algorithm that
does satisfy the definition ensures that a particular individual does not lose too much privacy by deciding to contribute
to the database on which the algorithm operates.
While differentially private algorithms for releasing entire
1

MPI-IS, Tübingen, Germany 2 University of Cambridge, UK.
Correspondence to: Matej Balog <first.surname@gmail.com>.
Code: https://github.com/matejbalog/RKHS-private-database/.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

databases have been studied previously (Blum et al., 2008;
Wasserman & Zhou, 2010; Zhou et al., 2009), most algorithms focus on releasing a privacy-protected version of a
particular summary statistic, or of a statistical model trained
on the private dataset. In this work we revisit the more difficult non-interactive, or offline setting, where the database
owner aims to release a privacy-protected version of the
entire database without knowing what statistics third-parties
may wish to compute in the future.
In our new framework we propose to use the kernel mean
embedding (Smola et al., 2007) as an intermediate representation of a database. It is (1) sufficiently rich in the sense that
it captures a wide class of statistical properties of the data,
while at the same time (2) it lives in a Reproducing Kernel
Hilbert Space (RKHS), where it can be handled mathematically in a principled way and privacy-protected in a unified
manner, independently of the type of data appearing in the
database. Although kernel mean embeddings are functions
in an abstract Hilbert space, in practice they can be (at least
approximately) represented using a possibly weighted set of
data points in input space (i.e. a set of database rows). The
privacy-protected kernel mean embedding is released to the
public in this representation, however, using synthetic datapoints instead of the private ones. As a result, our framework
can be seen as leading to synthetic database algorithms.
We validate our approach by instantiating two concrete algorithms and proving that they output consistent estimators of
the true kernel mean embedding of the data generating process, while satisfying the definition of differential privacy.
The consistency results ensure that third-parties can carry
out a wide variety of statistically founded computation on
the released data, such as constructing consistent estimators
of population statistics, estimating the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) between distributions, and two-sample
testing (Gretton et al., 2012), or using the data in the kernel
probabilistic programming framework for random variable
arithmetics (Schölkopf et al., 2015; Simon-Gabriel et al.,
2016, Section 3), repeatedly and unlimitedly without being
able to, or having to worry about, violating user privacy.
One of our algorithms is especially suited to the interesting
scenario where a (small) subset of a database has already
been published. This situation can arise in a wide variety of
settings, for example, due to weaker privacy protections in

