A Unified Framework for Structured Low-rank Matrix Learning

Pratik Jawanpuria 1 Bamdev Mishra 1

Abstract

learning (Amit et al., 2007; Argyriou et al., 2008; Zhang
and Yeung, 2010; Jawanpuria and Nath, 2012), multivariate regression (Yuan et al., 2007; Journée et al., 2010),
to name a few. In addition to the low-rank constraint,
other structural constraints may exist, e.g., entry-wise nonnegative/bounded constraints (Kannan et al., 2012; Marecek et al., 2017; Fang et al., 2017). Several linear dynamical system models require learning a low-rank Hankel matrix (Fazel et al., 2013; Markovsky and Usevich, 2013). A
Hankel matrix has the structural constraint that all its antidiagonal entries are the same. In robust matrix completion
and robust PCA problems (Wright et al., 2009), the matrix is learned as a superimposition of a low-rank matrix
and a sparse matrix. This sparse structure is modeled effectively by choosing a robust loss function (Cambier and
Absil, 2016), such as the `1 -loss.

We consider the problem of learning a low-rank
matrix, constrained to lie in a linear subspace, and
introduce a novel factorization for modeling such
matrices. A salient feature of the proposed factorization scheme is it decouples the low-rank and
the structural constraints onto separate factors.
We formulate the optimization problem on the
Riemannian spectrahedron manifold, where the
Riemannian framework allows to develop computationally efficient conjugate gradient and trustregion algorithms. Experiments on problems such
as standard/robust/non-negative matrix completion, Hankel matrix learning and multi-task learning demonstrate the efficacy of our approach.

1. Introduction
Our focus in this paper is on learning structured low-rank
matrices and we consider the following problem:
min

W∈Rd×T

2

CL(Y, W) + kWk∗ ,

subject to W ∈ D,

(1)

where Y ∈ Rd×T is a given matrix, L : Rd×T ×Rd×T → R
is a convex loss function, k · k∗ denotes the nuclear norm
regularizer, C > 0 is the cost parameter, and D is the linear
subspace corresponding to structural constraints. It is well
known the nuclear norm regularization promotes low rank
solutions since kWk∗ is equal to the `1 -norm on the singular
values of W (Fazel et al., 2001). The linear subspace D
in problem (1) is represented as D := {W : A(W)♦0},
where A : Rd×T → Rn is a linear map and ♦ represents
equality (=) or greater than equal to (≥) constraint.
Low-rank matrices are commonly learned in several machine learning applications such as matrix completion (Abernethy et al., 2009; Boumal and Absil, 2011), multi-task
1

Microsoft, India. Correspondence to: Pratik Jawanpuria <pratik.jawanpuria@microsoft.com>, Bamdev Mishra
<bamdevm@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

We propose a generic framework to the structured low-rank
matrix learning problem (1) that is well suited for handling
a range of smooth/non-smooth loss functions L, structural
constraints W ∈ D, and is scalable for large-scale problem
instances. Using the duality theory, we introduce a novel
modeling of structured low-rank matrix W of rank r as
W = UU> (Z + A), where U ∈ Rd×r and Z, A ∈ Rd×T .
It can be observed that our factorization naturally decouples
the low-rank and structural constraints on W. The low-rank
of W is enforced by U, the structural constraint is modeled
by A, and the loss function specific structure is modeled by
Z. The decoupling of low-rank and structural constraints
onto separate factors makes the resulting optimization conceptually simpler. To the best of our knowledge, such a
decoupling of constraints has not been studied in the existing structured low-rank matrix learning literature (Fazel
et al., 2013; Markovsky and Usevich, 2013; Yu et al., 2014;
Cambier and Absil, 2016; Fang et al., 2017).
Our approach leads to an optimization problem on the Riemannian spectrahedron manifold. We exploit the Riemannian framework to develop computationally efficient conjugate gradient and trust-region algorithms. The proposed
algorithms perform well in several applications such as
standard/robust/non-negative matrix completion, Hankel
matrix learning application, and multi-task learning. Our
algorithms readily scale to the Netflix data set, even with
the non-smooth `1 -loss and -SVR (-insensitive support
vector regression) loss functions.

