BOHB: Robust and Efficient Hyperparameter Optimization at Scale

Stefan Falkner 1 Aaron Klein 1 Frank Hutter 1

Abstract
Modern deep learning methods are very sensitive
to many hyperparameters, and, due to the long
training times of state-of-the-art models, vanilla
Bayesian hyperparameter optimization is typically computationally infeasible. On the other
hand, bandit-based configuration evaluation approaches based on random search lack guidance
and do not converge to the best configurations as
quickly. Here, we propose to combine the benefits of both Bayesian optimization and banditbased methods, in order to achieve the best of
both worlds: strong anytime performance and
fast convergence to optimal configurations. We
propose a new practical state-of-the-art hyperparameter optimization method, which consistently
outperforms both Bayesian optimization and Hyperband on a wide range of problem types, including high-dimensional toy functions, support
vector machines, feed-forward neural networks,
Bayesian neural networks, deep reinforcement
learning, and convolutional neural networks. Our
method is robust and versatile, while at the same
time being conceptually simple and easy to implement.

for a practical solution to the hyperparameter optimization
(HPO) problem that fulfills many desiderata:

Department of Computer Science, University of Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany.
Correspondence to: Stefan Falkner
<sfalkner@informatik.uni-freiburg.de>.

1. Strong Anytime Performance. Since large contemporary neural networks often require days or even weeks to
train, HPO methods that view performance as a black box
function to be optimized require extreme resources. The
overall budget that most researchers and practitioners can
afford during development is often not much larger than that
of fully training a handful of models, and hence practical
HPO methods must go beyond this blackbox view to already
yield good configurations with such a small budget.
2. Strong Final Performance. On the other hand, what
matters most at deployment time is the performance of the
best configuration a HPO method can find given a larger
budget. Since finding the best configurations in a large space
requires guidance, this is where methods based on random
search struggle.
3. Effective Use of Parallel Resources. With the rise of
parallel computing, large parallel resources are often available (e.g., compute clusters or cloud computing), and practical HPO methods need to be able to use these effectively.
4. Scalability. Modern deep neural networks require the
setting of a multitude of hyperparameters, including architectural choices (e.g., the number and width of layers), optimization hyperparameters (e.g., learning rate schedules,
momentum, and batch size), and regularization hyperparameters (e.g., weight decay and dropout rates). Practical
modern HPO methods therefore must be able to easily handle problems ranging from just a few to many dozens of
hyperparameters.
5. Robustness & Flexibility. The challenges for hyperparameter optimization vary substantially across subfields of
machine learning; e.g., deep reinforcement learning systems are known to be very noisy (Henderson et al., 2017),
while probabilistic deep learning is often very sensitive
to a few key hyperparameters. Different hyperparameter
optimization problems also give rise to different types of
hyperparameters (such as binary, categorical, integer, and
continuous), each of which needs to be handled effectively
by a practical HPO method.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

As we will discuss in Section 2, while there has been a lot of
recent progress in the field of hyperparameter optimization,

1. Introduction
Machine learning has recently achieved great successes in
a wide range of practical applications, but the performance
of the most prominent methods depends more strongly than
ever on the correct setting of many internal hyperparameters
(see, e.g., Henderson et al. (2017); Melis et al. (2017)). The
best-performing models for many modern applications of
deep learning are getting ever larger and thus more computationally expensive to train, but at the same time both
researchers and practitioners desire to set as many hyperparameters automatically as possible. These constraints call
1

