QMIX: Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for
Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Tabish Rashid * 1 Mikayel Samvelyan * 2 Christian Schroeder de Witt 1
Gregory Farquhar 1 Jakob Foerster 1 Shimon Whiteson 1

Abstract
In many real-world settings, a team of agents must
coordinate their behaviour while acting in a decentralised way. At the same time, it is often
possible to train the agents in a centralised fashion in a simulated or laboratory setting, where
global state information is available and communication constraints are lifted. Learning joint actionvalues conditioned on extra state information is
an attractive way to exploit centralised learning,
but the best strategy for then extracting decentralised policies is unclear. Our solution is QMIX,
a novel value-based method that can train decentralised policies in a centralised end-to-end fashion. QMIX employs a network that estimates joint
action-values as a complex non-linear combination of per-agent values that condition only on local observations. We structurally enforce that the
joint-action value is monotonic in the per-agent
values, which allows tractable maximisation of
the joint action-value in off-policy learning, and
guarantees consistency between the centralised
and decentralised policies. We evaluate QMIX
on a challenging set of StarCraft II micromanagement tasks, and show that QMIX significantly
outperforms existing value-based multi-agent reinforcement learning methods.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) holds considerable promise to
help address a variety of cooperative multi-agent problems,
such as coordination of robot swarms (Hüttenrauch et al.,
2017) and autonomous cars (Cao et al., 2012).
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom 2 Russian-Armenian University, Yerevan, Armenia. Correspondence to: Tabish Rashid <tabish.rashid@cs.ox.ac.uk>,
Mikayel Samvelyan <mikayel@samvelyan.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

(a) 5 Marines map

(b) 2 Stalkers & 3 Zealots map

Figure 1. Decentralised unit micromanagement in StarCraft II,
where each learning agent controls an individual unit. The goal is
to coordinate behaviour across agents to defeat all enemy units.

In many such settings, partial observability and/or communication constraints necessitate the learning of decentralised policies, which condition only on the local actionobservation history of each agent. Decentralised policies
also naturally attenuate the problem that joint action spaces
grow exponentially with the number of agents, often rendering the application of traditional single-agent RL methods
impractical.
Fortunately, decentralised policies can often be learned in a
centralised fashion in a simulated or laboratory setting. This
often grants access to additional state information, otherwise
hidden from agents, and removes inter-agent communication constraints. The paradigm of centralised training with
decentralised execution (Oliehoek et al., 2008; Kraemer
& Banerjee, 2016) has recently attracted attention in the
RL community (Jorge et al., 2016; Foerster et al., 2018).
However, many challenges surrounding how to best exploit
centralised training remain open.
One of these challenges is how to represent and use the
action-value function that most RL methods learn. On the
one hand, properly capturing the effects of the agents’ actions requires a centralised action-value function Qtot that
conditions on the global state and the joint action. On the
other hand, such a function is difficult to learn when there
are many agents and, even if it can be learned, offers no
obvious way to extract decentralised policies that allow each
agent to select only an individual action based on an individual observation.

