Probably Approximately Metric-Fair Learning

Guy N. Rothblum * 1 Gal Yona * 1

Abstract
The seminal work of Dwork et al. [ITCS 2012]
introduced a metric-based notion of individual
fairness: given a task-specific similarity metric,
their notion required that every pair of similar
individuals should be treated similarly. In the
context of machine learning, however, individual
fairness does not generalize from a training set
to the underlying population. We show that this
can lead to computational intractability even for
simple fair-learning tasks. With this motivation
in mind, we introduce and study a relaxed notion of approximate metric-fairness: for a random
pair of individuals sampled from the population,
with all but a small probability of error, if they
are similar then they should be treated similarly.
We formalize the goal of achieving approximate
metric-fairness simultaneously with best-possible
accuracy as Probably Approximately Correct and
Fair (PACF) Learning. We show that approximate metric-fairness does generalize, and leverage these generalization guarantees to construct
polynomial-time PACF learning algorithms for
the classes of linear and logistic predictors.

1. Introduction
Machine learning is increasingly used to make consequential
classification decisions about individuals. Examples range
from predicting whether a user will enjoy a particular article, to estimating a felon’s recidivism risk, to determining
whether a patient is a good candidate for a medical treatment. Automated classification comes with great benefits,
but it also raises substantial societal concerns (cf. (O’Neil,
2016) for a recent perspective). One prominent concern is
that these algorithms might discriminate against individuals
or groups in a way that violates laws or social and ethical
norms. This might happen due to biases in the training data
*

Equal contribution 1 Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. Correspondence to: Guy N. Rothblum <rothblum@alum.mit.edu>, Gal Yona <gal.yona@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

or due to biases introduced by the algorithm. To address
these concerns, and to truly unleash the full potential of automated classification, there is a growing need for frameworks
and tools to mitigate the risks of algorithmic discrimination.
A growing literature attempts to tackle these challenges by
exploring different fairness criteria.
Discrimination can take many guises. It can be difficult to
spot and difficult to define. Imagine a protected minority
population P (defined by race, gender identity, etc). A
natural approach for protecting the members of P from
discrimination is to make sure that they are not mistreated
on average. For example, that on average members of P and
individuals outside of P are classified in any particular way
with roughly the same probability. This is a “group-level”
fairness notion, sometimes referred to as statistical parity.
Pointing out several weakness of group-level notions of fairness, the seminal work of (Dwork et al., 2012) introduced
a notion of individual fairness. Their notion relies on a
task-specific similarity metric that specifies, for every two
individuals, how similar they are with respect to the specific
classification task at hand. Given such a metric, similar
individuals should be treated similarly, i.e. assigned similar
classification distributions (their focus was on probabilistic
classifiers, as will be ours). In this work, we refer to their
fairness notion as perfect metric-fairness.
Given a good metric, perfect metric-fairness provides powerful protections from discrimination. Furthermore, the metric provides a vehicle for specifying social norms, cultural
awareness, and task-specific knowledge. While coming up
with a good metric can be challenging, metrics arise naturally in prominent existing examples (such as credit scores
and insurance risk scores), and in natural scenarios (a metric
specified by an external regulator). Dwork et al. studied
the goal of finding a (probabilistic) classifier that minimizes
utility loss (or maximizes accuracy), subject to satisfying
the perfect metric-fairness constraint. They showed how
to phrase and solve this optimization problem for a given
collection of individuals.
1.1. This Work
Building on these foundations, we study metric-fair machine learning. Consider a learner that is given a similarity
metric and a training set of labeled examples, drawn from

