A Theoretical Explanation for Perplexing Behaviors of Backpropagation-based
Visualizations
Weili Nie 1 Yang Zhang 2 Ankit B. Patel 1 3

Abstract
Backpropagation-based visualizations have been
proposed to interpret convolutional neural networks (CNNs), however a theory is missing to
justify their behaviors: Guided backpropagation
(GBP) and deconvolutional network (DeconvNet)
generate more human-interpretable but less classsensitive visualizations than saliency map. Motivated by this, we develop a theoretical explanation
revealing that GBP and DeconvNet are essentially
doing (partial) image recovery which is unrelated
to the network decisions. Specifically, our analysis shows that the backward ReLU introduced by
GBP and DeconvNet, and the local connections in
CNNs are the two main causes of compelling visualizations. Extensive experiments are provided
that support the theoretical analysis.

1. Introduction
Driven by massive data and computational resources, modern convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and other network architectures have achieved many outstanding results,
such as image recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), neural
machine translation (Sutskever et al., 2014), and playing
Go games (Silver et al., 2016), etc. Despite their extensive applications, these neural networks are always considered as black boxes. Interpretability used to be for its
own sake; now, due to safety-critical applications such as
self-driving cars and tumor diagnosis, it is no longer satisfying to have a black box that is unaccountable for its
decisions. The demand for explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI) (Gunning, 2017) – human interpretable explanations
of model decisions – has driven the development of visualization techniques, including image synthesis via activation
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice
University, Houston, USA. 2 Department of Computer Science,
Rice University, Houston, USA. 3 Department of Neuroscience,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, USA. Correspondence to:
Weili Nie <wn8@rice.edu>, Ankit B. Patel <abp4@rice.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

maximization (Simonyan et al., 2013; Johnson et al., 2016;
Nguyen et al., 2016) and backpropagation-based visualizations (Simonyan et al., 2013; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014; Springenberg et al., 2014; Shrikumar et al., 2017; Kindermans
et al., 2017).
The basic idea of backpropagation-based visualizations is to
highlight class-relevant pixels by propagating the network
output back to the input image space. The intensity changes
of these pixels have the most significant impact on network
decisions. Specifically, (Simonyan et al., 2013) visualizes
the spatial support of a given class in a given image, i.e.
saliency map, by using the true gradient which masks out
negative entries of bottom data via the forward ReLU. Despite its simplicity, the results of saliency map are normally
very noisy which makes the interpretation difficult. (Zeiler
& Fergus, 2014) visualize the reverse mapping from feature
activities back to the input pixel space with the deconvolutional network (DeconvNet) method. The basic idea of
DeconvNet is to mask out negative entries of the top gradients by resorting to the backward ReLU. (Springenberg
et al., 2014) proposed the Guided Backpropagation (GBP)
method which combines the above two methods: by considering both the forward and backward ReLUs, it masks out
the values for which either top gradients or bottom data are
negative and produces sharper visualizations. More recently,
DeepLift (Shrikumar et al., 2017) and PatternNet (Kindermans et al., 2017) have been proposed to further improve
the visual quality of backpropagation-based methods.
This class of backpropagation-based visualizations, in particular GBP and DeconvNet, has attracted a lot of attention in
both the deep learning community and other fields (Szegedy
et al., 2013; Dosovitskiy & Brox, 2016; Selvaraju et al.,
2016; Fong & Vedaldi, 2017; Kraus et al., 2016). Despite
their good visual quality, the question of how they are actually related to the decision-making has remained largely
unexplored. Do the pretty visualizations actually tell us reliably about what the network is doing internally? Our experiments have confirmed previous observations (Mahendran
& Vedaldi, 2016; Selvaraju et al., 2016; Samek et al., 2017)
that saliency map is indeed very sensitive to the change of
class labels, while GBP and DeconvNet, though their visualization results are much cleaner than saliency map, remain
almost the same given different class labels. It seems that

