Decoupling Gradient-Like Learning Rules from Representations

Philip S. Thomas 1 Christoph Dann 2 Emma Brunskill 3

Abstract
In machine learning, learning often corresponds
to changing the parameters of a parameterized
function. A learning rule is an algorithm or mathematical expression that specifies precisely how
the parameters should be changed. When creating
a machine learning system, we must make two
decisions: what representation should be used
(i.e., what parameterized function should be used)
and what learning rule should be used to search
through the resulting set of representable functions. In this paper we focus on gradient-like
learning rules, wherein these two decisions are
coupled in a subtle (and often unintentional) way.
That is, using the same learning rule with two different representations that can represent the same
sets of functions can result in two different outcomes. After arguing that this coupling is undesirable, particularly when using neural networks, we
present a method for partially decoupling these
two decisions for a broad class of gradient-like
learning rules that span unsupervised learning,
reinforcement learning, and supervised learning.

1. Introduction
Consider two challenges at the foundation of machine learning (ML) research and practice: representation selection
and learning rule selection. Representation selection is the
decision of how knowledge should be represented within an
ML system. Learning rule selection is the decision of which
algorithm should be used to modify the system’s stored
knowledge. These two challenges are central to most ML
systems, including unsupervised, supervised, and reinforcement learning systems.
Representation and learning rule selection are intertwined—
a learning rule can work well with some representations and
1

University of Massachusetts Amherst 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Stanford University. Correspondence to: Philip S. Thomas
<pthomas@cs.umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

work poorly with, or be incompatible with, others. Although
this intertwining is unavoidable and is likely desirable, it
can have unintended and undesirable effects. To see this, we
split representation selection into two components: deciding
what the system should be able to represent (e.g., normal
distributions) and how the system will represent it (e.g., by
storing the mean and standard deviation or variance). The
intertwining of the learning rule with the decision of what
the system should be able to represent is often considered
by the designer of an ML system. However, the intertwining
of the learning rule with the decision of how the system will
represent knowledge is not necessarily desirable, is often
overlooked, and can have significant ramifications.
Consider an example, which we adapt from an example
presented by Amari (1985), where part of an ML system approximates an unknown distribution that generated
some observed data, X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn , where each Xi ∈ R.
We might decide that the system will estimate the distribution using a normal distribution (what the system can
represent) and that the normal distribution will be represented by storing its mean, µ, and standard deviation, σ
(how the system represents it). We might then decide to
find the model, (µ, σ), that maximizes the log-likelihood:
L(µ, σ|X1 , . . . , Xn ) = ln (Pr (X1 , . . . , Xn |µ, σ)) . To
maximize the log-likelihood, we might decide to use the
gradient ascent learning rule with step size
Pnα := .001/n,
resulting in the updates: µi+1 = µi + σα2 j=1 (Xj − µi ),
i
Pn
α
2
and σi+1 = σi − αn
j=1 (Xj − µi ) .
σi + σ 3
i

Clearly in this setting the decision to model the distribution
that generated the data using a normal distribution will impact the behavior of the resulting system, and this decision
would likely be carefully considered. Less obviously, our
decision to parameterize normal distributions using µ and
σ will also impact the behavior of the system. If we chose
to parameterize normal distributions using the variance, σ 2
rather than the standard deviation, σ, our same learning
rule would produce a different sequence of normal distributions. In general, if we represent normal distributions
with two parameters, µ and σ k , the resulting
gradient ascent
2 Pn
updates are: µi+1 = µi + α/(σik ) k j=1 (Xj − µi ), and
Pn
αn
α
k
k − k+2
2
k
σi+1
= σik − kσ
k + k (σi )
j=1 (Xj − µi ) . Figure
i
1 shows the results of applying this algorithm to a fixed data
set using various k. Notice that different choices of how

