Discovering Interpretable Representations for Both
Deep Generative and Discriminative Models

Tameem Adel 1 2 Zoubin Ghahramani 1 2 3 Adrian Weller 1 2 4

Abstract
Interpretability of representations in both deep
generative and discriminative models is highly
desirable. Current methods jointly optimize an
objective combining accuracy and interpretability. However, this may reduce accuracy, and is
not applicable to already trained models. We
propose two interpretability frameworks. First,
we provide an interpretable lens for an existing
model. We use a generative model which takes
as input the representation in an existing (generative or discriminative) model, weakly supervised
by limited side information. Applying a flexible
and invertible transformation to the input leads
to an interpretable representation with no loss
in accuracy. We extend the approach using an
active learning strategy to choose the most useful side information to obtain, allowing a human
to guide what “interpretable” means. Our second framework relies on joint optimization for
a representation which is both maximally informative about the side information and maximally
compressive about the non-interpretable data factors. This leads to a novel perspective on the relationship between compression and regularization. We also propose a new interpretability evaluation metric based on our framework. Empirically, we achieve state-of-the-art results on three
datasets using the two proposed algorithms.

1. Introduction
Learning interpretable data representations is becoming
ever more important as machine learning models grow in
size and complexity, and as applications reach critical social, economic and public health domains. In addition to
1

University of Cambridge, UK 2 Leverhulme CFI, Cambridge,
UK Uber AI Labs, USA 4 The Alan Turing Institute, UK. Correspondence to: Tameem Adel <tah47@cam.ac.uk>.
3

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

understanding the model and gaining insights about the
corresponding application, learning interpretable data representations can improve the model’s generalization power.
As such, representations that can efficiently be used across
a variety of tasks are those comprising disentangled latent
variables such that each variable corresponds to a salient
or meaningful data attribute (Bengio et al., 2013; Bengio,
2009).
Generative modeling constitutes one of the most influential
approaches to representation learning. Generative models
seek to infer the data-generating latent space, which implies capturing to some extent the salient characteristics of
such data. This motivates the current consensus in the field
that generative models can potentially provide interpretable
and disentangled data representations (Kingma et al., 2014;
Chen et al., 2016; Desjardins et al., 2012; Higgins et al.,
2017; Kulkarni et al., 2015). Deep generative models grant
further flexibility to the learning and inference procedures
via utilizing neural networks for parameter estimation.
Variational autoencoders (VAEs, Kingma & Welling, 2014;
Kingma et al., 2014) and generative adversarial networks
(GANs, Goodfellow et al., 2014; Goodfellow, 2016) are
considered two important models. The original versions of
these two algorithms solely optimize for data reconstruction fidelity. Several works that followed (Kulkarni et al.,
2015; Hsu et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2016; Siddharth et al.,
2017; Higgins et al., 2017) instead jointly optimize the latent representation for both reconstruction fidelity and interpretability. Further elaboration on related works is provided in Section 9 of the Appendix.
Optimizing for interpretability can be costly. It is evident
that a latent representation optimized solely for reconstruction fidelity can typically be better at fitting the data than
one optimized for both data reconstruction fidelity and interpretability. We propose an algorithm that aims at providing an interpretable representation without losing ground
on reconstruction fidelity. The first introduced algorithm
can be seen as a generalization of variational autoencoders
that can be applied as an interpretable lens on top of an existing model of many types. Such an existing model is the
input to the algorithm, along with a limited amount of side
information denoting salient data attributes. The resulting

