Learning the Reward Function for a Misspecified Model

Erik Talvitie 1

Abstract
In model-based reinforcement learning it is typical to decouple the problems of learning the dynamics model and learning the reward function.
However, when the dynamics model is flawed, it
may generate erroneous states that would never
occur in the true environment. It is not clear a
priori what value the reward function should assign to such states. This paper presents a novel
error bound that accounts for the reward model’s
behavior in states sampled from the model. This
bound is used to extend the existing Hallucinated
DAgger-MC algorithm, which offers theoretical
performance guarantees in deterministic MDPs
that do not assume a perfect model can be learned.
Empirically, this approach to reward learning can
yield dramatic improvements in control performance when the dynamics model is flawed.

1. Introduction
In the reinforcement learning problem, an agent interacts
with an environment, receiving rewards along the way that
indicate the quality of its decisions. The agent’s task is to
learn to behave in a way that maximizes reward. Modelbased reinforcement learning (MBRL) techniques approach
this problem by learning a predictive model of the environment and applying a planning algorithm to the model
to make decisions. Intuitively and theoretically (Szita &
Szepesvári, 2010), there are many advantages to learning
a model of the environment, but MBRL is challenging in
practice, since even seemingly minor flaws in the model or
the planner can result in catastrophic failure. As a result,
model-based methods have generally not been successful
in large-scale problems, with only a few notable exceptions
(e.g. Abbeel et al., 2007).
This paper addresses an important but understudied problem
1

Department of Computer Science, Franklin & Marshall College, Lancaster, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Erik
Talvitie <erik.talvitie@fandm.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Figure 1. The Shooter domain.

in MBRL: learning a reward function. It is common for
work in model learning to ignore the reward function (e.g.
Bellemare et al., 2014; Oh et al., 2015; Chiappa et al., 2017)
or, if the model will be used for planning, to assume the
reward function is given (e.g. Ross & Bagnell, 2012; Talvitie,
2017; Ebert et al., 2017). Indeed, it is true that if an accurate
model of the environment’s dynamics can be learned, reward
learning is relatively straightforward – the two problems can
be productively decoupled. However, in this paper we will
see that when the model class is misspecified (i.e. that the
representation does not admit a perfectly accurate model),
as is inevitable in problems of genuine interest, the two
learning problems are inherently entangled.
1.1. An Example
To better understand how the limitations of the dynamics
model impact reward learning, consider Shooter, a simplified video game example introduced by Talvitie (2015),
pictured in Figure 1. At the bottom of the screen is a spaceship which can move left and right and fire bullets, which
fly upward. When the ship fires a bullet the agent receives
-1 reward. Near the top of the screen are three targets. When
a bullet hits a target in the middle (bullseye), the target explodes and the agent receives 20 reward; otherwise a hit
is worth 10 reward. Figure 1 shows the explosions that
indicate how much reward the agent receives.
It is typical to decompose the model learning problem into
two objectives: dynamics learning and reward learning. In
the former the agent must learn to map an input state and
action to the next state. In the latter the agent must learn
to map a state and action to reward. In this example the
agent might learn to associate the presence of explosions
with reward. However, this decomposed approach can fail
when the dynamics model is imperfect.

