Robust and Scalable Models of Microbiome Dynamics

Travis E. Gibson 1 Georg K. Gerber 1

Abstract
Microbes are everywhere, including in and on our
bodies, and have been shown to play key roles
in a variety of prevalent human diseases. Consequently, there has been intense interest in the
design of bacteriotherapies or “bugs as drugs,”
which are communities of bacteria administered
to patients for specific therapeutic applications.
Central to the design of such therapeutics is an
understanding of the causal microbial interaction
network and the population dynamics of the organisms. In this work we present a Bayesian nonparametric model and associated efficient inference algorithm that addresses the key conceptual
and practical challenges of learning microbial dynamics from time series microbe abundance data.
These challenges include high-dimensional (300+
strains of bacteria in the gut) but temporally sparse
and non-uniformly sampled data; high measurement noise; and, nonlinear and physically nonnegative dynamics. Our contributions include a
new type of dynamical systems model for microbial dynamics based on what we term interaction
modules, or learned clusters of latent variables
with redundant interaction structure (reducing the
expected number of interaction coefficients from
O(n2 ) to O((log n)2 )); a fully Bayesian formulation of the stochastic dynamical systems model
that propagates measurement and latent state uncertainty throughout the model; and introduction
of a temporally varying auxiliary variable technique to enable efficient inference by relaxing the
hard non-negativity constraint on states. We apply
our method to simulated and real data, and demonstrate the utility of our technique for system identification from limited data, and for gaining new
biological insights into bacteriotherapy design.
1
Massachusetts Host-Microbiome Center, Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
Correspondence to: TE Gibson <tgibson@mit.edu>, GK Gerber
<ggerber@bwh.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The human microbiome constitutes all the microorganisms
that live in and on our bodies (The Human Microbiome
Project Consortium, 2012). There is strong evidence that
the microbiome plays an important role in a variety of human diseases, including: infections, arthritis, food allergy,
cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, neurological diseases,
and obesity/diabetes (Hall et al., 2017; Youngster et al.,
2014; Stefka et al., 2014; Schwabe & Jobin, 2013; Kostic
et al., 2015; Wlodarska et al., 2015). Given the microbiome’s profound role, there is now a concerted effort to
design bacteriotherapies, which are cocktails of multiple
bacteria working in concert to achieve specific therapeutic
effects. Multiple strains are often needed in bacteriotherpies both because multiple host pathways must be targeted,
and because additional bacteria may provide stability or
robustness to the community as a whole. An important step
toward designing bacteriotherapies is mapping out microbial interactions and predicting population dynamics of this
ecosystem. One approach toward this goal, and arguably
the most popular, is to learn dynamical systems models
from time series measurements of microbiome abundance
data. That is, one takes as input time series of microbiome
abundances as depicted in Figure 1A and infers a dynamical
systems model of microbial interactions as in Figure 1B.
These data typically consist of two separate measurements:
(1) high-throughput next generation sequencing counts of
a marker gene (16S rRNA) mapped back to different microbial species or other taxonomic units (often 300+), to
determine relative abundances of each unit, and (2) quantitative PCR (qPCR) measurements to determine the total
concentration of bacteria in the ecosystem.
Inferring dynamical systems models from microbiome time
series data presents several challenges. The biggest challenge arises from the fact that the data is high-dimensional,
yet temporally sparse and non-uniformly sampled. With
300 or more bacterial species in the gut, the resulting differential equation models can have more than 90,000 possible
interaction parameters. However, unlike other biomedical
domains where almost continuous temporal sampling is feasible (e.g., electrical recordings of cardiac activity), this is
not currently possible for the gut microbiome. Instead, we
must rely on fecal samples (or even more invasive processes,
such as colonoscopy), which means that we are quite lim-

