Autoregressive Quantile Networks for Generative Modeling

Georg Ostrovski * 1 Will Dabney * 1 Rémi Munos 1

Abstract
We introduce autoregressive implicit quantile
networks (AIQN), a fundamentally different approach to generative modeling than those commonly used, that implicitly captures the distribution using quantile regression. AIQN is able to
achieve superior perceptual quality and improvements in evaluation metrics, without incurring a
loss of sample diversity. The method can be applied to many existing models and architectures.
In this work we extend the PixelCNN model with
AIQN and demonstrate results on CIFAR-10 and
ImageNet using Inception score, FID, non-cherrypicked samples, and inpainting results. We consistently observe that AIQN yields a highly stable
algorithm that improves perceptual quality while
maintaining a highly diverse distribution.

1. Introduction
There has been a staggering increase in progress on generative modeling in recent years, built largely upon fundamental
advances such as generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014), variational inference (Kingma & Welling,
2013), and autoregressive density estimation (van den Oord
et al., 2016c). These have led to breakthroughs in state-ofthe-art generation of natural images (Karras et al., 2017) and
audio (van den Oord et al., 2016a), and even been used for
unsupervised learning of disentangled representations (Higgins et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2016). These domains often
have real-valued distributions with underlying metrics; that
is, there is a domain-specific notion of similarity between
data points. This similarity is ignored by the predominant
work-horse of generative modeling, the Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence. Progress is now being made towards algorithms that optimize with respect to these underlying metrics
(Arjovsky et al., 2017; Bousquet et al., 2017).
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence
to: Georg Ostrovski <ostrovski@google.com>, Will Dabney
<wdabney@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

In this paper, we present a novel approach to generative modeling, that, while strikingly different from existing methods,
is grounded in the well-understood statistical methods of
quantile regression. Unlike the majority of recent work, we
approach generative modeling without the use of the KL divergence, and without explicitly approximating a likelihood
model. Like GANs, in this way we produce an implicitly
defined model, but unlike GANs our optimization procedure
is inherently stable and lacks degenerate solutions which
cause loss of diversity and mode collapse.
Much of the recent research on GANs has been focused on
improving stability (Radford et al., 2015; Arjovsky et al.,
2017; Daskalakis et al., 2017) and sample diversity (Gulrajani et al., 2017; Salimans et al., 2016; 2018). By stark
contrast, methods such as PixelCNN (van den Oord et al.,
2016b) readily produce high diversity, but due to their use
of KL divergence are unable to make reasonable trade-offs
between likelihood and perceptual similarity (Theis et al.,
2015; Bellemare et al., 2017; Bousquet et al., 2017).
Our proposed method, autoregressive implicit quantile networks (AIQN), combines the benefits of both: a loss function that respects the underlying metric of the data leading
to improved perceptual quality, and a stable optimization
process leading to highly diverse samples. While there has
been an increasing tendency towards complex architectures
(Chen et al., 2017; Salimans et al., 2017) and multiple objective loss functions to overcome these challenges, AIQN is
conceptually simple and does not rely on any special architecture or optimization techniques. Empirically it proves to
be robust to hyperparameter variations and easy to optimize.
Our work is motivated by the recent advances achieved by
reframing GANs in terms of optimal transport, leading to the
Wasserstein GAN algorithm (Arjovsky et al., 2017), as well
as work towards understanding the relationship between optimal transport and both GANs and VAEs (Bousquet et al.,
2017). In agreement with these results, we focus on loss
functions grounded in perceptually meaningful metrics. We
build upon recent work in distributional reinforcement learning (Dabney et al., 2018a), which has begun to bridge the
gap between approaches in reinforcement learning and unsupervised learning. Towards a practical algorithm we base
our experimental results on Gated PixelCNN (van den Oord
et al., 2016b), and show that using AIQN significantly im-

