Trainable Calibration Measures For Neural Networks From
Kernel Mean Embeddings

Aviral Kumar 1 Sunita Sarawagi 1 Ujjwal Jain 1

Abstract
Modern neural networks have recently been found
to be poorly calibrated, primarily in the direction
of over-confidence. Methods like entropy penalty
and temperature smoothing improve calibration
by clamping confidence, but in doing so compromise the many legitimately confident predictions.
We propose a more principled fix that minimizes
an explicit calibration error during training. We
present MMCE, a RKHS kernel based measure of
calibration that is efficiently trainable alongside
the negative likelihood loss without careful hyperparameter tuning. Theoretically too, MMCE is a
sound measure of calibration that is minimized at
perfect calibration, and whose finite sample estimates are consistent and enjoy fast convergence
rates. Extensive experiments on several network
architectures demonstrate that MMCE is a fast,
stable, and accurate method to minimize calibration error metrics while maximally preserving the
number of high confidence predictions.

1. Introduction
Recently, (Guo et al., 2017) made the surprising observation that highly accurate, negative log likelihood trained,
deep neural networks predict poorly calibrated confidence
probabilities unlike traditional models trained with the same
objective (Niculescu-Mizil & Caruana, 2005). Poor calibration implies that if the network makes a prediction with
more than 0.99 confidence (which it often does!), the predicted label may be correct much less than 99% of the time.
Such lack of calibration is a serious problem in applications
like medical diagnosis (Caruana et al., 2015; Crowson et al.,
2016; Jiang et al., 2012), obstacle detection in self-driving
vehicles (Bojarski et al., 2016), and other applications where
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India. Correspondence to: Aviral Kumar <aviralkumar2907@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

learned models feed into decision systems or are human interpreted. Also calibration is useful for detecting out of
sample examples (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017; Lee et al.,
2018; Liang et al., 2018) and in fairness (Pleiss et al., 2017).
A primary reason for poor calibration of modern neural networks is that due to their high capacity, the negative log likelihood (NLL) overfits without overfitting 0/1 error (Zhang
et al., 2017). This manifests as overly confident predictions. Recently (Guo et al., 2017) experimented with several
known calibration fixes applied post training, and found a
simple temperature scaling of logits to be most effective.
A second option is to plan for calibration during training.
Pereyra et al. (2017) proposes to add a entropy regularizer to
the NLL objective to clamp over-confidence. We show that
both temperature scaling and entropy regularization manage
to reduce aggregate calibration error but in the process needlessly clamp down legitimate high confidence predictions. A
third set of approaches model full prediction uncertainty via
variational Bayesian networks (Louizos & Welling, 2017),
or their committee counterparts (Lakshminarayanan et al.,
2017). But their training is too resource-intensive.
We propose a practical and principled fix by minimizing calibration error during training along with classification error.
We depend on the power of RKHS functions induced by a
universal kernel to express calibration error as a tractable integral probability measure, which we call Maximum Mean
Calibration Error (MMCE). This is analogous to the way
MMD over RKHS kernels expresses the distance between
two probability distributions (Muandet et al., 2017; Li et al.,
2015). We show that MMCE is a consistent
estimator of cal√
ibration and converges at rate 1/ m to its expected value.
Furthermore, MMCE is easy to optimize in the existing
mini-batch gradient descent framework.
Our experiments spanning seven datasets show that training with MMCE achieves significant reduction in calibration error while also providing a modest accuracy increase.
MMCE achieves this without throttling high confidence
predictions. For example on CIFAR-10, MMCE makes
72% predictions at 99.7% confidence, whereas temperature
scaling predicts only 40% at 99.6% and entropy scaling
only 7% at 96.9%. This is important in applications like
medical diagnosis where only highly confident predictions

