Fully Decentralized Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning with Networked Agents

Kaiqing Zhang 1 Zhuoran Yang 2 Han Liu 3 Tong Zhang 4 Tamer Başar 1

Abstract
We consider the fully decentralized multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) problem, where
the agents are connected via a time-varying and
possibly sparse communication network. Specifically, we assume that the reward functions of the
agents might correspond to different tasks, and
are only known to the corresponding agent. Moreover, each agent makes individual decisions based
on both the information observed locally and the
messages received from its neighbors over the network. To maximize the globally averaged return
over the network, we propose two fully decentralized actor-critic algorithms, which are applicable
to large-scale MARL problems in an online fashion. Convergence guarantees are provided when
the value functions are approximated within the
class of linear functions. Our work appears to be
the first theoretical study of fully decentralized
MARL algorithms for networked agents that use
function approximation.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto, 1998), the agent
aims to behave optimally in the presence of uncertainty by
interacting with the environment, which is usually modeled
as a Markov Decision Process (MDP). In this work, we study
the problem of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL),
where a common environment is influenced by the joint
actions of multiple agents. Specifically, at each state, each
agent takes an action, and these actions together determine
the next state of the environment and the reward of each
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering & Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, USA 2 Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, USA 3 Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and Statistics, Northwestern University, USA 4 Tencent AI Lab, China. Correspondence
to: Kaiqing Zhang <kzhang66@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

agent. In addition, the agents are allowed to observe only
its own reward, which may vary for different agents. We are
interested in the collaborative setting, where the agents have
a common goal of jointly maximizing the globally averaged
return of all agents in the environment.
For collaborative MARL problems, it is pivotal to specify
the protocol of collaboration among the agents. One tempting choice is to have a central controller which receives the
rewards of all agents, and determines the action for each
agent. With information of all the agents available to the controller, the problem reduces to an MDP and can be readily
solved by single-agent reinforcement learning algorithms.
However, in many real-world scenarios, a central controller
simply does not exist or may be costly to install. Moreover,
the central controller needs to communicate with each agent
to exchange the information, which incessantly increases
the communication overhead at the single controller. This
may degrade the scalability of the multi-agent system as
well as its robustness to malicious attacks.
In contrast, we consider a decentralized protocol where the
agents are connected by a possibly time-varying and sparse
communication network, which serves as the channel for
the agents to exchange information in absence of any central controller. At each time step, each agent executes an
individual action based on both the local information and
the message sent from its neighbors, with the joint goal
of maximizing the average rewards of all agents over the
network. We refer to this protocol as fully decentralized
MARL with networked agents. By saying fully decentralized, we primarily emphasize that: i) no central controller
exists; ii) the information available to each agent is local;
iii) the control execution is local. Moreover, the networked
architecture finds broad applications in practical multi-agent
systems, such as unmanned vehicles (Fax & Murray, 2004),
robotics (Corke et al., 2005), power grid (Dall’Anese et al.,
2013), and mobile sensor networks (Cortes et al., 2004).
With only local reward and action, classical reinforcement
learning algorithms can hardly maximize the networkedwide averaged return determined by the joint actions of all
agents. Thus, we propose two decentralized actor-critic algorithms based on a novel policy gradient theorem for MARL.
Specifically, the actor step is performed individually by each

