Learning Policy Representations in Multiagent Systems

Aditya Grover 1 Maruan Al-Shedivat 2 Jayesh K. Gupta 1 Yura Burda 3 Harrison Edwards 3

Abstract
Modeling agent behavior is central to understanding the emergence of complex phenomena in multiagent systems. Prior work in agent modeling
has largely been task-specific and driven by handengineering domain-specific prior knowledge. We
propose a general learning framework for modeling agent behavior in any multiagent system using
only a handful of interaction data. Our framework
casts agent modeling as a representation learning
problem. Consequently, we construct a novel objective inspired by imitation learning and agent
identification and design an algorithm for unsupervised learning of representations of agent policies. We demonstrate empirically the utility of
the proposed framework in (i) a challenging highdimensional competitive environment for continuous control and (ii) a cooperative environment for
communication, on supervised predictive tasks,
unsupervised clustering, and policy optimization
using deep reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
Intelligent agents rarely act in isolation in the real world and
often seek to achieve their goals through interaction with
other agents. Such interactions give rise to rich, complex
behaviors formalized as per-agent policies in a multiagent
system (Ferber, 1999; Wooldridge, 2009). Depending on the
underlying motivations of the agents, interactions could be
directed towards achieving a shared goal in a collaborative
setting, opposing another agent in a competitive setting, or
be a mixture of these in a setting where agents collaborate
in teams to compete against other teams. Learning useful
representations of the policies of agents based on their interactions is an important step towards characterization of the
agent behavior and more generally inference and reasoning
in multiagent systems.
1
Stanford University 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 OpenAI.
Correspondence to: Aditya Grover <adityag@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

In this work, we propose an unsupervised encoder-decoder
framework for learning continuous representations of agent
policies given access to only a few episodes of interaction.
For any given agent, the representation function is an encoder that learns a mapping from an interaction (i.e., one or
more episodes of observation and action pairs involving the
agent) to a continuous embedding vector. Using such embeddings, we condition a policy network (decoder) and train
it simultaneously with the encoder to imitate other interactions involving the same (or a coupled) agent. Additionally,
we can explicitly discriminate between the embeddings corresponding to different agents using triplet losses.
For the embeddings to be useful, the representation function
should generalize to both unseen interactions and unseen
agents for novel downstream tasks. Generalization is wellunderstood in the context of supervised learning where a
good model is expected to attain similar train and test performance. For multiagent systems, we consider a notion of
generalization based on agent-interaction graphs. An agentinteraction graph provides an abstraction for distinguishing
the agents (nodes) and interactions (edges) observed during
training, validation, and testing.
Our framework is agnostic to the nature of interactions in
multiagent systems, and hence broadly applicable to competitive and cooperative environments. In particular, we
consider two multiagent environments: (i) a competitive
continuous control environment, RoboSumo (Al-Shedivat
et al., 2018), and (ii) a ParticleWorld environment
of cooperative communication where agents collaborate to
achieve a common goal (Mordatch & Abbeel, 2018). For
evaluation, we show how representations learned by our
framework are effective for downstream tasks that include
clustering of agent policies (unsupervised), classification
such as win or loss outcomes in competitive systems (supervised), and policy optimization (reinforcement). In the case
of policy optimization, we show how these representations
can serve as privileged information for better training of
agent policies. In RoboSumo, we train agent policies that
can condition on the opponent’s representation and achieve
superior win rates much more quickly as compared to an
equally expressive baseline policy with the same number of
parameters. In ParticleWorld, we train speakers that
can communicate more effectively with a much wider range
of listeners given knowledge of their representations.

