Discovering and Removing Exogenous State Variables and Rewards for
Reinforcement Learning

Thomas Dietterich 1 George Trimponias 2 Zhitang Chen 2

Abstract
Exogenous state variables and rewards can slow
down reinforcement learning by injecting uncontrolled variation into the reward signal. We formalize exogenous state variables and rewards and
identify conditions under which an MDP with
exogenous state can be decomposed into an exogenous Markov Reward Process involving only
the exogenous state+reward and an endogenous
Markov Decision Process defined with respect to
only the endogenous rewards. We also derive a
variance-covariance condition under which Monte
Carlo policy evaluation on the endogenous MDP
is accelerated compared to using the full MDP.
Similar speedups are likely to carry over to all
RL algorithms. We develop two algorithms for
discovering the exogenous variables and test them
on several MDPs. Results show that the algorithms are practical and can significantly speed up
reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
In many practical settings, the actions of an agent have only
a limited effect on the environment. For example, in a wireless cellular network, system performance is determined
by a number of parameters that must be dynamically controlled to optimize performance. We can formulate this as a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) in which the reward function is the negative of the number of users who are suffering
from low bandwidth. However, the reward is heavily influenced by exogenous factors such as the number, location,
and behavior of the cellular network customers. Customer
demand varies stochastically as a function of latent factors
(news, special events, traffic accidents). In addition, atmospheric conditions can affect the capacity of each wireless

channel. This high degree of stochasticity can confuse reinforcement learning algorithms, because during exploration,
the expected benefit of trying action a in state s is hard to
determine. Many trials are required to average away the
exogenous component of the reward so that the effect of
the action can be measured. For temporal difference algorithms, such as Q Learning, the learning rate will need to
be very small. For policy gradient algorithms, the number
of Monte Carlo trials required to estimate the gradient will
be very large (or equivalently, the step size will need to be
very small). In this paper, we analyze this setting and develop algorithms for automatically detecting and removing
the effects of exogenous state variables. This accelerates
reinforcement learning (RL).
This paper begins by defining exogenous variables
and rewards and presenting the exogenous-endogenous
(Exo/Endo) MDP decomposition. We show that, under
the assumption that the reward function decomposes additively into exogenous and endogenous components, the Bellman equation for the original MDP decomposes into two
equations: one for the exogenous Markov reward process
(Exo-MRP) and the other for the endogenous MDP (EndoMDP). Importantly, every optimal policy for the Endo-MDP
is an optimal policy for the full MDP. Next we study conditions under which solving the Endo-MDP is faster (in
sample complexity) than solving the full MDP. To do this,
we derive dynamic programming updates for the covariance
between the H-horizon returns of the Exo-MRP and the
Endo-MDP, which may be of independent interest. The
third part of the paper presents an abstract algorithm for
automatically identifying the Exo/Endo decomposition. We
develop two approximations to this general algorithm. One
is a global scheme that computes the entire decomposition
at once; the second is a faster stepwise method that can scale
to large problems. Finally, we present experimental results
to illustrate cases where the Exo/Endo decomposition yields
large speedups and other cases where it does not.

1

School of EECS, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR,
USA 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Hong Kong. Correspondence to:
Thomas Dietterich <tgd@cs.orst.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

2. MDPs with Exogenous Variables and
Rewards
We study discrete time MDPs with stochastic rewards (Puterman, 1994; Sutton & Barto, 1998); the state and ac-

