Measuring abstract reasoning in neural networks

David G.T. Barrett * 1 Felix Hill * 1 Adam Santoro * 1 Ari S. Morcos 1 Timothy Lillicrap 1
XOR(panel 1, panel 2)

Abstract

1. Introduction
Abstract reasoning is a hallmark of human intelligence. A
famous example is Einstein’s elevator thought experiment,
in which Einstein reasoned that an equivalence relation
exists between an observer falling in uniform acceleration
and an observer in a uniform gravitational field. It was the
ability to relate these two abstract concepts that allowed
him to derive the surprising predictions of general relativity,
such as the curvature of space-time.
A human’s capacity for abstract reasoning can be estimated
*Equal contribution, ordered by surname. 1 DeepMind, London,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: <{barrettdavid; felixhill;
adamsantoro}@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

+1

Context Panels
Answer Panels

Whether neural networks can learn abstract reasoning or whether they merely rely on superficial
statistics is a topic of recent debate. Here, we
propose a dataset and challenge designed to probe
abstract reasoning, inspired by a well-known human IQ test. To succeed at this challenge, models
must cope with various generalisation ‘regimes’
in which the training and test data differ in clearlydefined ways. We show that popular models such
as ResNets perform poorly, even when the training and test sets differ only minimally, and we
present a novel architecture, with a structure designed to encourage reasoning, that does significantly better. When we vary the way in which the
test questions and training data differ, we find that
our model is notably proficient at certain forms
of generalisation, but notably weak at others. We
further show that the model’s ability to generalise
improves markedly if it is trained to predict symbolic explanations for its answers. Altogether,
we introduce and explore ways to both measure
and induce stronger abstract reasoning in neural
networks. Our freely-available dataset should motivate further progress in this direction.

+1

A

B

E

F

(a)

C

D

A

B

G

H

E

F

C

D

G

H

(b)

Figure 1. Raven-style Progressive Matrices. In (a) the underlying abstract rule is an arithmetic progression on the number of
shapes along the columns. In (b) there is an XOR relation on the
shape positions along the rows (panel 3 = XOR(panel 1, panel 2)).
Other features such as shape type do not factor in. A is the correct
choice for both.

surprisingly effectively using simple visual IQ tests, such
as Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPMs) (Figure 1) (Raven
et al., 1938). The premise behind RPMs is simple: one must
reason about the relationships between perceptually obvious
visual features – such as shape positions or line colors – to
choose an image that completes the matrix. For example,
perhaps the size of squares increases along the rows, and
the correct image is that which adheres to this size relation.
RPMs are strongly diagnostic of abstract verbal, spatial and
mathematical reasoning ability, discriminating even among
populations of highly educated subjects (Snow et al., 1984).
Since one of the goals of AI is to develop machines with
similar abstract reasoning capabilities to humans, to aid scientific discovery for instance, it makes sense to ask whether
visual IQ tests can help to understand learning machines.
Unfortunately, even in the case of humans such tests can be
invalidated if subjects prepare too much, since test-specific
heuristics can be learned that shortcut the need for generallyapplicable reasoning (Te Nijenhuis et al., 2001; Flynn, 1987).
This potential pitfall is even more acute in the case of neural
networks, given their striking capacity for memorization

