The Generalization Error of Dictionary Learning with Moreau Envelopes

Alexandros Georgogiannis 1

Abstract
This is a theoretical study on the sample complexity of dictionary learning with general type
of reconstruction losses. The goal is to estimate
a m × d matrix D of unit-norm columns when
the only available information is a set of training samples. Points x in Rm are subsequently
approximated by the linear combination Da after
solving the problem mina∈Rd Φ(x − Da) + g(a)
with function g being either an indicator function or a sparsity promoting regularizer. Here is
considered the case where
Φ(x) = infm ||x − z||22 + h(||z||2 )
z∈R

and h is an even and univariate function on the
real line. Connections are drawn between Φ and
the Moreau envelope of h. A new sample complexity result concerning the k-sparse dictionary
problem removes the spurious condition regarding
the coherence of D appearing in previous works.
Finally comments are made on the approximation
error of certain families of losses. The
p derived
generalization bounds are of order O( log n/n).

1. Introduction
The dictionary learning problem, also known as sparse coding, was initially studied in the context of Neuroscience (Olshausen & Field, 1997); the relevant literature has grown
enormously since; see (Zhang et al., 2015) and references
therein. The problem is described as follows: given set
{Xi }ni=1 ⊂ Rm with n points sampled from an unknown
fixed probability measure µ, a dictionary matrix D ∈ Rm×d
is to be constructed so that any sample from µ can be approximated well by linear combinations of columns of D.
The quality of approximation, for a given dictionary D, is
measured by some function fD while D usually belongs

to some predefined family of matrices. From the statistical learning theory perspective, the aim is to minimize the
population risk
Z
Z
R(D) := fD (X)dµ = fD dµ,
(1)
when the only accessible information is a set of n training
samples, say {Xi }ni=1 , usually independent and identically
distributed. Notation X is used for random vectors sampled
from µ and notation x for real vectors in Rm .
The empirical risk minimization principle (ERM) is a natural
approach in search of the best dictionary (Vapnik, 1998). It
suggests that since the only availiable information is the set
of training samples, one should search for the matrix D̂n
that minimizes the empirical risk
n

Rn (D) :=

1X
fD (Xi ).
n i=1

(2)

The empirical estimate D̂n is not of much use unless
|Rn (D̂n ) − R(D̂n )| decreases as the number of samples
n increases. Subsuming all computational difficulties on
computing the global minimizing argument of (2), the problem addressed here is a “generalization problem”. Given
the family D of all m × d matrices with unit-norm columns,
we design a loss function fD that measures the quality of
approximation x ≃ Da and ask: Does the difference
Z
Z
|R(D̂n ) − inf R(D)| =
fD̂n dµ − inf
fD dµ
D∈D

D∈D

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technical
University of Crete, Greece. Correspondence to: Alexandros
Georgogiannis <alexandrosgeorgogiannis@gmail.com>.

(3)
decrease as the number of samples n increases, and if
so, at what rate? Or even further, if R(D̂n ) is close to
inf D∈D R(D), is D̂n close to the global minimizing argument of R(D)? Intuitively, the decrement of the absolute
difference in expression (3) guarantees that by increasing
the amount of data the population risk, with high probability,
is within a very small distance of the optimal achievable
gets arbitrarily close to one. The answers to the previous
questions of course depend on the number of samples, the
predefined family of dictionaries and the loss function.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

The proposed loss functions in the literature of dictionary
learning vary according to the application but it would not
be an exaggeration to say that almost all of them may be

1

