Kernel Recursive ABC: Point Estimation with Intractable Likelihood
Takafumi Kajihara 1 2 Motonobu Kanagawa 3 Keisuke Yamazaki 2 Kenji Fukumizu 4

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to parameter estimation for simulator-based statistical models with
intractable likelihood. Our proposed method involves recursive application of kernel ABC and
kernel herding to the same observed data. We
provide a theoretical explanation regarding why
the approach works, showing (for the population
setting) that, under a certain assumption, point
estimates obtained with this method converge to
the true parameter, as recursion proceeds. We
have conducted a variety of numerical experiments, including parameter estimation for a realworld pedestrian flow simulator, and show that
in most cases our method outperforms existing
approaches.

1. Introduction
Inference of parameters in a probabilistic model is an essential ingredient in model-based statistical approaches, both
in the frequentist and Bayesian paradigms. Given a probabilistic model P (y|θ), which is a conditional distribution
of observations y given a parameter θ, the aim is to make
inference about the parameter θ∗ that generated an observed
data y ∗ . When the model P (y|θ) admits a conditional density `(y|θ), such an inference can be made on the basis
of evaluations of `(y ∗ |θ); this is the likelihood of y ∗ as a
function of θ. However, in modern scientific and engineering problems in which the model P (y|θ) is required to be
sophisticated and complex, the likelihood function `(y ∗ |θ)
might no longer be available. This may be because the
density form of P (y|θ) is elusive, or the evaluation of the
likelihood `(y ∗ |θ) is computationally very expensive. Such
situations, in which `(y|θ) (or P (y|θ)) are referred to as
intractable likelihood, make the inference problem quite
challenging and are commonly found in the literature on
1
NEC Corporation 2 National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology 3 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 4 The Institute of Statistical Mathematics. Correspondence to:
Takafumi Kajihara <t-kajihara@ct.jp.nec.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

population genetics (Pritchard et al., 1999) and dynamical
systems (Toni et al., 2009), to name just two.
Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) is a class of
computational methods for Bayesian inference with intractable likelihood (Tavaré et al., 1997; Pritchard et al.,
1999; Beaumont et al., 2002) that is applicable as long as
sampling from the model P (y|θ) is possible. Given a prior
π(θ) on the parameter space, the basic ABC constructs
a Monte Carlo approximation to the posterior Py∗ (θ) ∝
P (y ∗ |θ)π(θ) in the following way: i) sample pairs (yi , θi )
of pseudo data yi and parameter θi from the joint distribution P (y|θ)π(θ), where i = 1, . . . , n for some n ∈ N,
ii) maintain only those parameters θi associated with yi
that are “close enough” to the observed data y ∗ , and iii)
regard them as samples from the posterior Py∗ (θ). ABC has
been extensively studied in statistics and machine learning;
see, e.g., Del Moral et al. (2012); Fukumizu et al. (2013);
Meeds and Welling (2014); Park et al. (2016); Mitrovic et al.
(2016).
In this paper, we rather take the frequentist perspective, and
deal with the problem of maximum likelihood estimation
(MLE) with intractable likelihood. That is, we consider situations in which one believes that there is a “true” parameter
θ∗ that generated the data y ∗ and wishes to obtain a point
estimate for it. This problem is also motivated by the following situations encountered in practice: 1) Consider a
situation in which the model is computationally expensive
(e.g., a state-space model) and one wants to perform prediction based on it. In this case fully Bayesian prediction
would require simulation from each of sampled parameters,
which might be quite costly. If one has a point estimate of
the true parameter θ∗ , then the computational cost can be
drastically reduced. 2) Consider a situation in which one
only has limited knowledge w.r.t. model parameters. In
this case, it is generally difficult to specify an appropriate
prior distribution over the parameter space, and thus the
resulting posterior may not be reliable.1 Methods for point
estimation with intractable likelihood have been reported in
the literature, including the method of simulated-moments
(McFadden, 1989), indirect inference (Gourieroux et al.,
1

For point estimation, one may think of using the maximum a
posterior (MAP) estimate, but it may again be unreliable (as for
the posterior distribution itself), if the prior distribution cannot be
specified appropriately.

