Signal and Noise Statistics Oblivious Orthogonal Matching Pursuit

Sreejith Kallummil * 1 Sheetal Kalyani * 2

Abstract
Orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) is a widely
used algorithm for recovering sparse high dimensional vectors in linear regression models. The
optimal performance of OMP requires a priori
knowledge of either the sparsity of regression vector or noise statistics. Both these statistics are
rarely known a priori and are very difficult to estimate. In this paper, we present a novel technique
called residual ratio thresholding (RRT) to operate
OMP without any a priori knowledge of sparsity
and noise statistics and establish finite sample and
large sample support recovery guarantees for the
same. Both analytical results and numerical simulations in real and synthetic data sets indicate that
RRT has a performance comparable to OMP with
a priori knowledge of sparsity and noise statistics.

1. Introduction
This article deals with the estimation of the regression vector β ∈ Rp in the linear regression model y = Xβ + w,
where X ∈ Rn×p is a known design matrix with unit Euclidean norm columns, w is the noise vector and y is the
observation vector. Throughout this article, we assume that
the entries of the noise w are independent, zero mean and
Gaussian distributed with variance σ 2 . We consider the high
dimensional and sample starved scenario of n < p or n  p
where classical techniques like ordinary least squares (OLS)
are no longer applicable. This problem of estimating high
dimensional vectors in sample starved scenarios is ill-posed
even in the absence of noise unless strong structural assumptions are made on X and β. A widely used and practically
valid assumption is sparsity. The vector β ∈ Rp is sparse
if the support of β given by S = supp(β) = {k : βk 6= 0}
has cardinality k0 = card(S)  p.
*

1

Equal contribution Department of Electrical Engineering,
IIT Madras, India 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT
Madras, India. Correspondence to: Sreejith Kallummil <sreejith.k.venugopal@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

A number of algorithms like least absolute shrinkage and
selection operator (LASSO)(Tropp, 2006; Tibshirani, 1996),
Dantzig selector (DS)(Candes & Tao, 2007), subspace pursuit (SP)(Dai & Milenkovic, 2009), OMP (Pati et al., 1993;
Mallat & Zhang, 1993; Tropp, 2004; Cai & Wang, 2011),
elastic net (Zou & Hastie, 2005) etc. are proposed to efficiently estimate β. Tuning the hyper parameters of aforementioned algorithms to achieve optimal performance require a priori knowledge of signal parameters like sparsity
k0 or noise statistics like σ 2 etc. Unfortunately, these parameters are rarely known a priori. To the best of our
knowledge, no computationally efficient technique to estimate k0 is reported in open literature. However, limited
success on the estimation of σ 2 has been reported in literature (Dicker, 2014; Fan et al., 2012; Dicker & Erdogdu,
2016; Bayati et al., 2013). However, the performance of
these σ 2 estimates when used for tuning hyper parameters
in LASSO, DS, OMP etc. are largely unknown. Generalised
techniques for hyper parameter selection like cross validation (CV)(Arlot et al., 2010), re-sampling (Meinshausen
& Bühlmann, 2010) etc. are computationally challenging.
Further, CV is reported to have poor variable selection behaviour(Chichignoud et al., 2016; Arlot et al., 2010). Indeed,
algorithms that are oblivious to signal and noise statistics are
also proposed in literature. This include algorithms inspired
or related to LASSO like square root LASSO(Belloni et al.,
2011), AV∞ (Chichignoud et al., 2016), approximate message passing (Mousavi et al., 2013; Bayati et al., 2013) etc.
and ridge regression inspired techniques like least squares
adaptive thresholding (LAT), ridge adaptive thresholding
(RAT)(Wang et al., 2016) etc. However, most of existing signal and noise statistics oblivious sparse recovery techniques
have only large sample performance guarantees. Further,
many of these techniques assume that design matrix X is
sampled from a random ensemble, a condition which is
rarely satisfied in practice.
1.1. Contributions of this paper
This article present a novel technique called residual ratio
thresholding (RRT) for finding a “good” estimate of support
S from the data dependent/adaptive sequence of supports
generated by OMP. RRT is analytically shown to accomplish exact support recovery, (i.e., identifying S) under the
same finite sample and deterministic constraints on X like

