Non-convex Conditional Gradient Sliding

Chao Qu 1 Yan Li 2 Huan Xu 2

Abstract
We investigate a projection free optimization
method, namely non-convex conditional gradient sliding (NCGS) for non-convex optimization problems on the batch, stochastic and finitesum settings. Conditional gradient sliding (CGS)
method, by integrating Nesterov’s accelerated gradient method with Frank-Wolfe (FW) method in
a smart way, outperforms FW for convex optimization, by reducing the amount of gradient
computations. However, the study of CGS in
the non-convex setting is limited. In this paper,
we propose the non-convex conditional gradient
sliding (NCGS) methods and analyze their convergence properties. We also leverage the idea of
variance reduction from the recent progress in convex optimization to obtain a new algorithm termed
variance reduced NCGS (NCGS-VR), and obtain
faster convergence rate than the batch NCGS in
the finite-sum setting. We show that NCGS algorithms outperform their Frank-Wolfe counterparts
both in theory and in practice, for all three settings, namely the batch, stochastic and finite-sum
setting. This significantly improves our understanding of optimizing non-convex functions with
complicated feasible sets (where projection is prohibitively expensive).

1. Introduction
This paper studies non-convex optimization problems with
complicated feasible sets. Specifically, we consider the
following problem
min F (θ),
(1)

Besides this general form, we also consider a stochastic
setting and a finite-sum setting. In the stochastic setting,
we assume F (θ) = Eξ f (θ, ξ), where f (θ, ξ) is smooth and
non-convex. In the finite-sum case, we study the following
problem
n
1X
min F (θ) :=
fi (θ),
θ∈Ω
n i=1
where each fi (θ) is non-convex and L smooth, Ω is a convex
compact set. Here, we are interested in the case where n,
i.e., the number of training examples, is very large.
We focus on the case where the feasible set Ω is complicated, in the sense that projection onto Ω is expensive (for
instance, the projection on the trace norm ball), or even
computationally intractable (Collins et al., 2008). To alleviate such difficulty, the Frank-Wolfe method (Frank &
Wolfe, 1956) (a.k.a. conditional gradient method ), which
was initially developed for the convex problem in 1950s,
has attracted much attention again in machine learning community recently, due to its projection free property (Jaggi,
2013). In each iteration, the Frank-Wolfe algorithm calls a
first-order oracle to get ∇F (θ), and then calls a linear oracle
in the form arg minθ∈Ω hθ, gi, which avoids the projection
operation.
This setup is motivated by several popular problems in machine learning, wherein the above linear optimization is easy
but the projection is much more computationally demanding.
The example par excellence is the nuclear norm constraint
which is widely used in multi-task learning, mutli-class classification, recommendation systems and matrix learning.
We briefly explain some of them: Suppose there are m tasks
and each column i of a matrix Θ represents a task i, one
popular multi-task learning formulation proposed by Pong
et al. (2010) has the following form.

θ∈Ω

where the objective function F (θ) is non-convex and L
smooth, and Ω is a convex compact set.
*

1

2

Equal contribution EE faculty, Technion, Israel H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA. Correspondence to: Chao Qu
<chaoqu.technion@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

min
Θ,b

ni
m X
X

`(yji , θiT xij + bi )

i=1 j=1

(2)

subject to kΘk∗ ≤ R,
where `(·, ·) is the loss function which can be potentially
non-convex, ni is the number of samples in each task,
Θ = [θ1 , ..., θm ], and k · k∗ is the nuclear norm constraint
to encourage the low rank property. In the multiclass classification problem, suppose there are n training examples

