Style Tokens: Unsupervised Style Modeling, Control and Transfer in
End-to-End Speech Synthesis

Yuxuan Wang 1 Daisy Stanton 1 Yu Zhang 1 RJ Skerry-Ryan 1 Eric Battenberg 1 Joel Shor 1 Ying Xiao 1
Fei Ren 1 Ye Jia 1 Rif A. Saurous 1

Abstract
In this work, we propose “global style tokens”
(GSTs), a bank of embeddings that are jointly
trained within Tacotron, a state-of-the-art end-toend speech synthesis system. The embeddings
are trained with no explicit labels, yet learn to
model a large range of acoustic expressiveness.
GSTs lead to a rich set of significant results. The
soft interpretable “labels” they generate can be
used to control synthesis in novel ways, such as
varying speed and speaking style – independently
of the text content. They can also be used for
style transfer, replicating the speaking style of a
single audio clip across an entire long-form text
corpus. When trained on noisy, unlabeled found
data, GSTs learn to factorize noise and speaker
identity, providing a path towards highly scalable
but robust speech synthesis.

1. Introduction
The past few years have seen exciting developments in the
use of deep neural networks to synthesize natural-sounding
human speech (Zen et al., 2016; van den Oord et al., 2016;
Wang et al., 2017a; Arik et al., 2017; Taigman et al., 2017;
Shen et al., 2017). As text-to-speech (TTS) models have
rapidly improved, there is a growing opportunity for a number of applications, such as audiobook narration, news readers, and conversational assistants. Neural models show the
potential to robustly synthesize expressive long-form speech,
and yet research in this area is still in its infancy.
To deliver true human-like speech, a TTS system must learn
to model prosody. Prosody is the confluence of a number
of phenomena in speech, such as paralinguistic information, intonation, stress, and style. In this work we focus
1
Google, Inc..
Correspondence to:
<yxwang@google.com>.

Yuxuan Wang

on style modeling, the goal of which is to provide models
the capability to choose a speaking style appropriate for
the given context. While difficult to define precisely, style
contains rich information, such as intention and emotion,
and influences the speaker’s choice of intonation and flow.
Proper stylistic rendering affects overall perception (see e.g.
“affective prosody” in (Taylor, 2009)), which is important
for applications such as audiobooks and newsreaders.
Style modeling presents several challenges. First, there is no
objective measure of “correct” prosodic style, making both
modeling and evaluation difficult. Acquiring annotations for
large datasets can be costly and similarly problematic, since
human raters often disagree. Second, the high dynamic
range in expressive voices is difficult to model. Many TTS
models, including recent end-to-end systems, only learn an
averaged prosodic distribution over their input data, generating less expressive speech – especially for long-form
phrases. Furthermore, they often lack the ability to control
the expression with which speech is synthesized.
This work1 attempts to address the above issues by introducing “global style tokens” (GSTs) to Tacotron (Wang et al.,
2017a; Shen et al., 2017), a state-of-the-art end-to-end TTS
model. GSTs are trained without any prosodic labels, and
yet uncover a large range of expressive styles. The internal
architecture itself produces soft interpretable “labels” that
can be used to perform various style control and transfer
tasks, leading to significant improvements for expressive
long-form synthesis. GSTs can be directly applied to noisy,
unlabeled found data, providing a path towards highly scalable but robust speech synthesis.

2. Model Architecture
Our model is based on Tacotron (Wang et al., 2017a;
Shen et al., 2017), a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) model
that predicts mel spectrograms directly from grapheme or
phoneme inputs. These mel spectrograms are converted
to waveforms either by a low-resource inversion algorithm
1

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Sound demos can be found at https://google.
github.io/tacotron/publications/global_
style_tokens/

