Explicit Inductive Bias for Transfer Learning with Convolutional Networks

Xuhong LI 1 Yves GRANDVALET 1 Franck DAVOINE 1

Abstract
In inductive transfer learning, fine-tuning pretrained convolutional networks substantially outperforms training from scratch. When using finetuning, the underlying assumption is that the pretrained model extracts generic features, which
are at least partially relevant for solving the target task, but would be difficult to extract from
the limited amount of data available on the target
task. However, besides the initialization with the
pre-trained model and the early stopping, there
is no mechanism in fine-tuning for retaining the
features learned on the source task. In this paper, we investigate several regularization schemes
that explicitly promote the similarity of the final
solution with the initial model. We show the benefit of having an explicit inductive bias towards
the initial model, and we eventually recommend
a simple L2 penalty with the pre-trained model
being a reference as the baseline of penalty for
transfer learning tasks.

1. Introduction
It is now well known that modern convolutional neural networks (e.g. Krizhevsky et al. 2012, Simonyan & Zisserman
2015, He et al. 2016, Szegedy et al. 2016) can achieve remarkable performance on large-scale image databases, e.g.
ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) and Places 365 (Zhou et al.
2017), but it is really dissatisfying to see the vast amounts
of data, computing time and power consumption that are
necessary to train deep networks. Fortunately, such convolutional networks, once trained on a large database, can be
refined to solve related but different visual tasks by means
of transfer learning, using fine-tuning (Yosinski et al. 2014,
Simonyan & Zisserman 2015).
Some form of knowledge is believed to be extracted by
1

Sorbonne universités, Université de technologie de
Compiègne, CNRS, Heudiasyc, UMR 7253, Compiègne, France.
Correspondence to: Xuhong LI <xuhong.li@hds.utc.fr>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

learning from the large-scale database of the source task
and this knowledge is then transferred to the target task
by initializing the network with the pre-trained parameters.
However, we will show in the experimental section that
some parameters may be driven far away from their initial
values during fine-tuning. This leads to important losses of
the initial knowledge that is assumed to be relevant for the
targeted problem.
In order to help preserve the knowledge embedded in the
initial network, we consider a series of other parameter regularization methods during fine-tuning. We argue that the
standard L2 regularization, which drives the parameters towards the origin, is not adequate in the framework of transfer
learning, where the initial values provide a more sensible
reference point than the origin. This simple modification
keeps the original control of overfitting, by constraining the
effective search space around the initial solution, while encouraging committing to the acquired knowledge. We show
that it has noticeable effects in inductive transfer learning
scenarios.
This paper copes with the inconsistency that still prevails in
transfer learning scenarios, where the model is initialized
with some parameters, while the abuse of L2 regularization
encourages departing from these initial values. We thus
advocate for a coherent parameter regularization approach,
where the pre-trained model is both used as the starting
point of the optimization process and as the reference in the
penalty that encodes an explicit inductive bias. This type
of penalty will be designated with SP to recall that they encourage similarity with the starting point of the fine-tuning
process. We evaluate regularizers based on the L2 , Lasso
and Group-Lasso penalties, which can freeze some individual parameters, or groups of parameters, to the pre-trained
parameters. Fisher information is also taken into account
when we test L2 -SP and Group-Lasso-SP approaches. Our
experiments indicate that all tested parameter regularization
methods using the pre-trained parameters as a reference get
an edge over the standard L2 weight decay approach. We
eventually recommend using L2 -SP as the standard baseline
for solving transfer learning tasks and benchmarking new
algorithms.

