Feedback-Based Tree Search for Reinforcement Learning

Daniel R. Jiang 1 Emmanuel Ekwedike 2 3 Han Liu 2 4

Abstract
Inspired by recent successes of Monte-Carlo tree
search (MCTS) in a number of artificial intelligence (AI) application domains, we propose a
reinforcement learning (RL) technique that iteratively applies MCTS on batches of small, finitehorizon versions of the original infinite-horizon
Markov decision process. The terminal condition
of the finite-horizon problems, or the leaf-node
evaluator of the decision tree generated by MCTS,
is specified using a combination of an estimated
value function and an estimated policy function.
The recommendations generated by the MCTS
procedure are then provided as feedback in order
to refine, through classification and regression,
the leaf-node evaluator for the next iteration. We
provide the first sample complexity bounds for a
tree search-based RL algorithm. In addition, we
show that a deep neural network implementation
of the technique can create a competitive AI agent
for the popular multi-player online battle arena
(MOBA) game King of Glory.

1. Introduction
Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS), introduced in Coulom
(2006) and surveyed in detail by Browne et al. (2012), has received attention in recent years for its successes in gameplay
artificial intelligence (AI), culminating in the Go-playing
AI AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016). MCTS seeks to iteratively
build the decision tree associated with a given Markov decision process (MDP) so that attention is focused on “important” areas of the state space, assuming a given initial state
(or root node of the decision tree). The intuition behind
MCTS is that if rough estimates of state or action values are
given, then it is only necessary to expand the decision tree
in the direction of states and actions with high estimated
value. To accomplish this, MCTS utilizes the guidance of
1

University of Pittsburgh 2 Tencent AI Lab 3 Princeton University Northwestern University. Correspondence to: Daniel R. Jiang
<drjiang@pitt.edu>.
4

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

leaf-node evaluators (either a policy function (Chaslot et al.,
2006) rollout, a value function evaluation (Campbell et al.,
2002; Enzenberger, 2004), or a mixture of both (Silver et al.,
2016)) to produce estimates of downstream values once the
tree has reached a certain depth (Browne et al., 2012). The
information from the leaf-nodes are then backpropagated
up the tree. The performance of MCTS depends heavily
on the quality of the policy/value approximations (Gelly &
Silver, 2007), and at the same time, the successes of MCTS
in Go show that MCTS improves upon a given policy when
the policy is used for leaf evaluation, and in fact, it can
be viewed as a policy improvement operator (Silver et al.,
2017). In this paper, we study a new feedback-based framework, wherein MCTS updates its own leaf-node evaluators
using observations generated at the root node.
MCTS is typically viewed as an online planner, where a
decision tree is built starting from the current state as the
root node (Chaslot et al., 2006; 2008; Hingston & Masek,
2007; Maı̂trepierre et al., 2008; Cazenave, 2009; Méhat &
Cazenave, 2010; Gelly & Silver, 2011; Gelly et al., 2012;
Silver et al., 2016). The standard goal of MCTS is to recommend an action for the root node only. After the action is
taken, the system moves forward and a new tree is created
from the next state (statistics from the old tree may be partially saved or completely discarded). MCTS is thus a “local”
procedure (in that it only returns an action for a given state)
and is inherently different from value function approximation or policy function approximation approaches where a
“global” policy (one that contains policy information about
all states) is built. In real-time decision-making applications,
it is more difficult to build an adequate “on-the-fly” local
approximation than it is to use pre-trained global policy
in the short amount of time available for decision-making.
For games like Chess or Go, online planning using MCTS
may be appropriate, but in games where fast decisions are
necessary (e.g., Atari or MOBA video games), tree search
methods are too slow (Guo et al., 2014). The proposed
algorithm is intended to be used in an off-policy fashion during the reinforcement learning (RL) training phase. Once
the training is complete, the policies associated with leafnode evaluation can be implemented to make fast, real-time
decisions without any further need for tree search.
Main Contributions. These characteristics of MCTS motivate our proposed method, which attempts to leverage the

