Design of Experiments for Model Discrimination
Hybridising Analytical and Data-Driven Approaches

Simon Olofsson 1 Marc Peter Deisenroth 1 2 Ruth Misener 1

Abstract
Healthcare companies must submit pharmaceutical drugs or medical devices to regulatory bodies
before marketing new technology. Regulatory
bodies frequently require transparent and interpretable computational modelling to justify a new
healthcare technology, but researchers may have
several competing models for a biological system and too little data to discriminate between
the models. In design of experiments for model
discrimination, the goal is to design maximally
informative physical experiments in order to discriminate between rival predictive models. Prior
work has focused either on analytical approaches,
which cannot manage all functions, or on datadriven approaches, which may have computational difficulties or lack interpretable marginal
predictive distributions. We develop a methodology introducing Gaussian process surrogates
in lieu of the original mechanistic models. We
thereby extend existing design and model discrimination methods developed for analytical models
to cases of non-analytical models in a computationally efficient manner.

1. Introduction
A patient’s health and safety is an important concern, and
healthcare is a heavily regulated industry. In the USA and
the EU, private and public regulatory bodies exist on federal/union and state levels (Field, 2008; Hervey, 2010).
Healthcare companies applying to market a new drug or
medical device must submit extensive technical information
to the regulatory bodies. In the USA and the EU, the Food
& Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicines
1

Dept. of Computing, Imperial College London, United Kingdom. 2 PROWLER.io, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Simon Olofsson <simon.olofsson15@imperial.ac.uk>,
Marc Peter Deisenroth <m.deisenroth@imperial.ac.uk>,
Ruth Misener <r.misener@imperial.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Agency (EMA) handle these applications, respectively. The
FDA require that the technical information contains e.g. the
chemical composition of the drug, how the drug affects the
human body (pharmacodynamics), how the body affects the
drug (pharmacokinetics), and methods for drug manufacturing, packaging and quality control (U.S. Food & Drug
Administration, 2018). Likewise, applying to market a new
medical device requires submitting extensive technical information. A medical device can be any appliance, software
or material used for non-pharmacological diagnosis, monitoring or treatment of a disease or condition (European
Union, 2017). An important part of proving the efficacy and
safety of a new drug or medical device is showing that its
effects on the patient can be predicted and interpreted, e.g.
via mathematical and computational models.
These transparency and interpretability requirements, combined with limited amounts of available experimental data,
make models learnt solely from observed data unsuitable for
proving the efficacy and safety of a new drug or medical device to the regulatory bodies. Hence researchers use explicit
parametric models. For drugs, the pharmacokinetics (how
the human body affects the drug) is often modelled using
systems of ordinary differential equations. These models
elucidate how the drug is absorbed and distributed through
the body (e.g. brain, kidneys and liver) under different dosing profiles and methods of drug administration (e.g. orally
or intravenously) (see Figure 1). The EMA pharmacokinetic
model guidelines state that regulatory submissions should
include detailed descriptions of the models, i.e. justification
of model assumptions, parameters and their biochemical
plausibility, as well as parameter sensitivity analyses (European Medicines Agency, 2011, p. 16; 2016, p. 3).
A key problem is to identify a mathematical model that
usefully explains and predicts the behaviour of the pharmacokinetic process (Heller et al., 2018). Researchers will
often have several models (i.e. hypotheses) about an underlying mechanism of the process, but insufficient experimental
data to discriminate between the models (Heller et al., 2018).
Additional experiments are generally expensive and timeconsuming. Pharmacokinetic experiments typically take
8–24 hours for mice and rats, and 12–100 hours for simians
and humans (Ogungbenro & Aarons, 2008; Tuntland et al.,

