Iterative Amortized Inference
Joseph Marino 1 Yisong Yue 1 Stephan Mandt 2

Abstract
Inference models are a key component in scaling variational inference to deep latent variable
models, most notably as encoder networks in
variational auto-encoders (VAEs). By replacing
conventional optimization-based inference with a
learned model, inference is amortized over data
examples and therefore more computationally efficient. However, standard inference models are
restricted to direct mappings from data to approximate posterior estimates. The failure of these
models to reach fully optimized approximate posterior estimates results in an amortization gap.
We aim toward closing this gap by proposing
iterative inference models, which learn to perform inference optimization through repeatedly
encoding gradients. Our approach generalizes
standard inference models in VAEs and provides
insight into several empirical findings, including
top-down inference techniques. We demonstrate
the inference optimization capabilities of iterative
inference models and show that they outperform
standard inference models on several benchmark
data sets of images and text.

1. Introduction
Variational inference (Jordan et al., 1998) has been essential in learning deep directed latent variable models on
high-dimensional data, enabling extraction of complex, nonlinear relationships, such as object identities (Higgins et al.,
2016) and dynamics (Xue et al., 2016; Karl et al., 2017) directly from observations. Variational inference reformulates
inference as optimization (Neal & Hinton, 1998; Hoffman
et al., 2013). However, the current trend has moved toward
employing inference models (Dayan et al., 1995; Gregor
et al., 2014; Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014),
mappings from data to approximate posterior estimates that
1

are amortized across examples. Intuitively, the inference
model encodes observations into latent representations, and
the generative model decodes these representations into reconstructions. Yet, this approach has notable limitations.
For instance, in models with empirical priors, such as hierarchical latent variable models, “bottom-up” data-encoding
inference models cannot account for “top-down” priors (Section 4.1). This has prompted the use of top-down inference
techniques (Sønderby et al., 2016), which currently lack a
rigorous theoretical justification. More generally, the inability of inference models to reach fully optimized approximate
posterior estimates results in decreased modeling performance, referred to as an amortization gap (Krishnan et al.,
2018; Cremer et al., 2017).
To combat this problem, our work offers a departure from
previous approaches by re-examining inference from an
optimization perspective. We utilize approximate posterior gradients to perform inference optimization. Yet, we
improve computational efficiency over conventional optimizers by encoding these gradients with an inference model
that learns how to iteratively update approximate posterior
estimates. The resulting iterative inference models resemble
learning to learn (Andrychowicz et al., 2016) applied to
variational inference optimization. However, we refine and
extend this method along several novel directions. Namely,
(1) we show that learned optimization models can be applied to inference optimization of latent variables; (2) we
show that non-recurrent optimization models work well in
practice, breaking assumptions about the necessity of nonlocal curvature for outperforming conventional optimizers
(Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Putzky & Welling, 2017); and
(3) we provide a new form of optimization model that encodes errors rather than gradients to approximate higher order derivatives, empirically resulting in faster convergence.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
1. we introduce a family of iterative inference models,
which generalize standard inference models,

California Institute of Technology (Caltech), Pasadena, CA,
USA 2 Disney Research, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Correspondence
to: Joseph Marino <jmarino@caltech.edu>.

2. we provide the first theoretical justification for topdown inference techniques,

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

3. we empirically evaluate iterative inference models,
demonstrating that they outperform standard inference
models on several data sets of images and text.

