Self-Consistent Trajectory Autoencoder: Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning
with Trajectory Embeddings

John D. Co-Reyes * 1 YuXuan Liu * 1 Abhishek Gupta * 1 Benjamin Eysenbach 2 Pieter Abbeel 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
In this work, we take a representation learning perspective on hierarchical reinforcement learning,
where the problem of learning lower layers in a
hierarchy is transformed into the problem of learning trajectory-level generative models. We show
that we can learn continuous latent representations of trajectories, which are effective in solving
temporally extended and multi-stage problems.
Our proposed model, SeCTAR, draws inspiration
from variational autoencoders, and learns latent
representations of trajectories. A key component
of this method is to learn both a latent-conditioned
policy and a latent-conditioned model which are
consistent with each other. Given the same latent,
the policy generates a trajectory which should
match the trajectory predicted by the model. This
model provides a built-in prediction mechanism,
by predicting the outcome of closed loop policy
behavior. We propose a novel algorithm for performing hierarchical RL with this model, combining model-based planning in the learned latent
space with an unsupervised exploration objective.
We show that our model is effective at reasoning
over long horizons with sparse rewards for several simulated tasks, outperforming standard reinforcement learning methods and prior methods
for hierarchical reasoning, model-based planning,
and exploration.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms can learn complex skills from raw observations (Mnih et al., 2015; Levine
et al., 2016; Silver et al., 2016). However, domains that
*
1
Equal contribution
University of California, Berkeley 2 Google Brain.
Correspondence to: John D CoReyes <jcoreyes@eecs.berkeley.edu>, YuXuan Liu <yuxuanliu@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

involve temporally extended tasks and extremely delayed
or sparse rewards can pose a tremendous challenge for standard methods. A longtime goal in RL has been to develop
effective hierarchy induction methods that can acquire temporally extended lower-level primitives, which can then be
built upon by a higher level policy that operates at a coarser
level of temporal abstraction (Sutton et al., 1999; Dayan
& Hinton, 1992; Dietterich, 1998; Parr & Russell, 1997).
A higher-level policy that is provided with temporally extended and intelligent behaviors can reason at a higher level
of abstraction and solve more temporally-extended tasks.
Furthermore, the same lower-level skills could be reused to
accomplish multiple tasks efficiently.
Prior work has proposed to acquire discrete sets of lowerlevel skills through hand-specification of objectives or bottlenecks (Florensa et al., 2017; Frans et al., 2017; Sutton et al.,
1999) and top-down training of hierarchically-organized
policies (Dayan & Hinton, 1992; Vezhnevets et al., 2017).
Requiring prior knowledge and hand-specification restricts
the generality of the method, while purely top-down training
suffers from challenging optimization and exploration and
limits the reusability of lower-level skills, providing a solution to just one task. Furthermore, the top-level meta-policy
must still be trained with reinforcement learning for each
task, and while this tends to be more efficient than learning
from scratch if the skills are useful, it still requires considerable time and experience collection. Several works have also
proposed “bottom up” training of lower-level skills using
unsupervised objectives (Bacon et al., 2017; Gregor et al.,
2016), but such methods either also require hand-specifying
some prior knowledge, or learn discrete skills that may not
necessarily be sufficient to solve the higher level task.
In this work, we propose a novel hierarchical reinforcement learning algorithm (SeCTAR) that uses a bottom up
approach to learn continuous representations for trajectories,
without the explicit need for hand-specification or subgoal
information. Our work builds on two main ideas: first, we
propose to build a continuous latent space of skills, rather
than a discrete set of behaviors or options, and second, we
propose to use a probabilistic latent variable model that
simultaneously learns to produce skills in the world and predict their outcomes. By providing a higher-level controller

