Hierarchical Multi-Label Classification Networks
Jônatas Wehrmann 1 Ricardo Cerri 2 Rodrigo C. Barros 1

Abstract
One of the most challenging machine learning
problems is a particular case of data classification in which classes are hierarchically structured
and objects can be assigned to multiple paths of
the class hierarchy at the same time. This task is
known as hierarchical multi-label classification
(HMC), with applications in text classification,
image annotation, and in bioinformatics problems
such as protein function prediction. In this paper,
we propose novel neural network architectures for
HMC called HMCN, capable of simultaneously
optimizing local and global loss functions for discovering local hierarchical class-relationships and
global information from the entire class hierarchy while penalizing hierarchical violations. We
evaluate its performance in 21 datasets from four
distinct domains, and we compare it against the
current HMC state-of-the-art approaches. Results
show that HMCN substantially outperforms all
baselines with statistical significance, arising as
the novel state-of-the-art for HMC.

1. Introduction
The main focus of research in machine learning has been
towards the induction of models for typical classification
problems, where an object is associated with a single class
from a set of disjoint classes. There is, however, a niche
of tasks in which classes are not disjoint but organized into
a hierarchical structure, namely hierarchical classification
(HC). In HC, objects are associated with a given superclass
and its corresponding subclasses. Depending on the task,
the correspondence may be with all subclasses or with only
a subset of them. The hierarchical structure that formalizes
the relationship among classes can assume the form of a
tree or of a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG).
1

School of Technology, Pontifícia Universidade Católica do
Rio Grande do Sul 2 Universidade Federal de São Carlos. Correspondence to: Rodrigo C. Barros <rodrigo.barros@pucrs.br>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

In a more challenging scenario, there are HC problems in
which each object can be associated to several different
paths of the class hierarchy, namely hierarchical multi-label
classification (HMC). Typical HMC problems are text classification (Rousu et al., 2006; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2006;
Mayne & Perry, 2009; Lewis et al., 2004; Klimt & Yang,
2004), image annotation (Dimitrovski et al., 2011), and
bioinformatics tasks such as protein function prediction
(Otero et al., 2010; Valentini, 2011; Bi & Kwok, 2011; Barros et al., 2013; Cerri et al., 2015; Triguero & Vens, 2016),
which are the application domains we focus in this paper.
Algorithms that perform HMC must be capable of labeling
objects as belonging to one or multiple paths in the class hierarchy. For such, they must optimize a loss function either
locally or globally (Silla & Freitas, 2010). Algorithms that
perform local learning attempt to discover the specificities
that dictate the class relationships in particular regions of
the class hierarchy, later combining the local predictions in
order to generate the final classification. The idea is to generate a hierarchy of classifiers following a top-down strategy
(Costa et al., 2007), in which each classifier is responsible
for the prediction of either particular nodes (Kiritchenko
et al., 2004) or particular hierarchical levels. Global approaches for HMC, on the other hand, usually consist of
a single classifier capable of associating objects with their
corresponding classes in the hierarchy as a whole (Cerri
et al., 2012; 2013b). There are advantages and disadvantages of using either global or local approaches. Global
approaches are usually cheaper than local approaches, and
they do not suffer from the well-known error-propagation
problem, though they are less likely to capture local information from the hierarchy, eventually underfitting. Local
approaches are much more computationally expensive since
they rely on a cascade of classifiers, but they are much more
suitable for extracting information from regions of the class
hierarchy, eventually overfitting.
In order to combine the advantages of both HMC approaches
and to careful avoid their downfalls, we propose a paradigm
shift: instead of choosing a particular strategy, we argue
in favor of a hybrid method capable of simultaneously optimizing both local and global loss functions. Our novel
approach, namely HMCN, implements recurrent and nonrecurrent neural network architectures. In both versions it
comprises multiple outputs, with one output layer per hi-

