End-to-End Learning for the Deep Multivariate Probit Model

Di Chen 1 Yexiang Xue 1 Carla Gomes 1

Abstract
The multivariate probit model (MVP) is a popular classic model for studying binary responses
of multiple entities. Nevertheless, the computational challenge of learning the MVP model,
given that its likelihood involves integrating over a
multidimensional constrained space of latent variables, significantly limits its application in practice. We propose a flexible deep generalization
of the classic MVP, the Deep Multivariate Probit
Model (DMVP), which is an end-to-end learning
scheme that uses an efficient parallel sampling
process of the multivariate probit model to exploit
GPU-boosted deep neural networks. We present
both theoretical and empirical analysis of the convergence behavior of DMVP’s sampling process
with respect to the resolution of the correlation
structure. We provide convergence guarantees for
DMVP and our empirical analysis demonstrates
the advantages of DMVP’s sampling compared
with standard MCMC-based methods. We also
show that when applied to multi-entity modelling
problems, which are natural DMVP applications,
DMVP trains faster than classical MVP, by at
least an order of magnitude, captures rich correlations among entities, and further improves the
joint likelihood of entities compared with several
competitive models.

1. Introduction
Understanding multi-entity interactions is a central question in many real-world applications. For example, in computational sustainability (Gomes, 2009; MacKenzie et al.,
2004), it is important to understand the spatial distribution
of species and how species interact with each other and
their environment, for developing conservation plans. In
computer vision, the detections of multiple objects are often
1
Computer Science Department, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY,
US 14850. Correspondence to: Di Chen <di@cs.cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

correlated because of the shared background and scenario
(Wang et al., 2016). In natural language processing, a text
often has several correlated labels in terms of its topic, emotion, and semantic meaning (Nam et al., 2014). The multivariate probit model (MVP) (Ashford & Sowden, 1970) is
a popular classic model for studying interactions of multiple entities. Nevertheless, learning the multivariate probit
model is challenging because it involves the integration of a
multivariate normal distribution over a constrained space.
A classic approach for optimizing the MVP model is
Bayesian Inference (Chib & Greenberg, 1998; Tabet,
2007), where the posterior distribution is simulated by
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods (Jeliazkov
& Hee Lee, 2010) and the maximum likelihood estimates
are obtained by a Monte Carlo version of the Expectation
Maximization (EM) algorithm. These approaches require
the simulation of observations from a multivariate truncated
normal distribution involving an arbitrary covariance matrix.
Although observations from a multivariate truncated normal
distribution can be sampled from a sequence of univariate
truncated normal distributions (Genz, 1992), the computational effort is rather heavy for high dimensional problems.
Extensions of the classic MVP in specific domains have
been proposed under specific assumptions of the covariance
matrix (see e.g, (Song & Lee, 2005; Young et al., 2009)).
Recent approaches for computing the maximum likelihood
of MVP have been proposed using the first-order gradients
and the second-order information (Chen et al., 2017; Mandt
et al., 2017). Those approaches integrate MCMC methods and the numerical estimation of the multivariate probit
(Genz, 1992), which is based on an importance sampling
using the truncated normal distribution.
The accessibility of massive contextual data, as well as the
success of deep learning, provide additional opportunities
and challenges for boosting MVP. On the one hand, massive
contextual data, such as millions of high-resolution images,
create the possibility of improving predictive performance,
particularly when integrated with deep neural networks,
which are remarkably powerful for extracting high-level features from raw data. On the other hand, a scalable learning
scheme, which integrates well with parallelized infrastructure such as GPUs, is needed to take advantage of various
deep neural networks as well as the massive contextual data.
Unfortunately, the classical approaches such as Bayesian

