Differentially Private Identity and Equivalence Testing of Discrete Distributions
Maryam Aliakbarpour 1 Ilias Diakonikolas 2 Ronitt Rubinfeld 1 3

Abstract
We study the fundamental problems of identity
and equivalence testing over a discrete population from random samples. Our goal is to develop
efficient testers while guaranteeing differential privacy to the individuals of the population. We provide sample-efficient differentially private testers
for these problems. Our theoretical results significantly improve over the best known algorithms
for identity testing, and are the first results for private equivalence testing. The conceptual message
of our work is that there exist private hypothesis
testers that are nearly as sample-efficient as their
non-private counterparts. We perform an experimental evaluation of our algorithms on synthetic
data. Our experiments illustrate that our private
testers achieve small type I and type II errors with
sample size sublinear in the domain size of the
underlying distributions.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of designing sample-efficient algorithms to understand properties of distributions over large
discrete domains. Such statistical tests have been traditionally studied in statistics because of their importance in
virtually every scientific endeavor that involves data. Recent work in the theoretical computer science community
has investigated the setting where the discrete domains are
large and no a priori assumptions can be made about the
underlying data distribution (for example, when it cannot be
assumed that the distribution is normal, Gaussian, or even
smooth). In the last few years, optimal methods with sublinear sample complexity have been obtained for testing a range
of properties, including whether a distribution is uniform,
identical to a known distribution (testing “goodness-of-fit”),
*

Equal contribution 1 CSAIL, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139,
USA 2 Department of Computer Science, USC, Los Angeles, CA
90089, USA 3 TAU, Tel Aviv-Yafo, Israel. Correspondence to:
Maryam Aliakbarpour <maryama@mit.edu>, Ilias Diakonikolas
<diakonik@usc.edu>, Ronitt Rubinfeld <ronitt@csail.mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

equivalence of two distributions (two sample testing), and
independence.
While statistical tests are very important for advancing science, when they are performed on sensitive data representing specific individuals, such as data describing medical or
other behavioral phenomena, it may be that the outcomes
of the tests reveal private information that should not be
divulged. Techniques from differential privacy give us hope
that one may obtain the scientific benefit of statistical tests
without compromising the privacy of the individuals in the
study. Concretely, differential privacy requires that similar
datasets have statistically close outputs – once this property
is achieved, then provable privacy guarantees can be made.
Differential privacy is a rich and active area of study, in
which techniques have been developed and applied to obtain
private algorithms for a range of data analysis tasks.
Our Contributions We study the general problem of hypothesis testing in the setting of differential privacy (Dwork
& Roth, 2014). Our emphasis is on the sublinear regime,
i.e., when the number of samples available is sublinear in
the domain size of the underlying distribution(s). We obtain sample-efficient private algorithms for the problems of
testing the identity and equivalence of discrete distributions.
The main conceptual message of our work is that we can
achieve differential privacy with only a small increase in the
sample complexity compared to the non-private case. Our
theoretical results significantly improve over the best known
algorithms for identity testing, and are the first results for
private equivalence testing. Our experimental evaluation
illustrates that our testers achieve small type I and type II
errors with a sublinear number of samples when the domain
size is large. The sample complexity of our private identity tester significantly outperforms the sample complexity
of recently proposed methods for this problem. For both
identity and equivalence testing, our experiments show that
differential privacy can be achieved essentially for free, i.e.,
with a very mild increase in sample complexity.
Technical Overview We now provide a brief overview of
our techniques. We start by observing that there is a simple
generic method to convert a non-private tester into a private
tester with a multiplicative overhead in the sample complexity. This method is known in differential privacy, but for the
sake of completeness we describe it in Appendix B. It will

