Optimization, Fast and Slow: Optimally Switching between Local and Bayesian
Optimization

Mark McLeod 1 Michael A. Osborne 1 2 Stephen J. Roberts 1 2

Abstract
We develop the first Bayesian Optimization algorithm, BLOSSOM, which selects between multiple alternative acquisition functions and traditional local optimization at each step. This is combined with a novel stopping condition based on expected regret. This pairing allows us to obtain the
best characteristics of both local and Bayesian optimization, making efficient use of function evaluations while yielding superior convergence to the
global minimum on a selection of optimization
problems, and also halting optimization once a
principled and intuitive stopping condition has
been fulfilled.

1. Introduction
1.1. Bayesian Optimization with Gaussian Processes
In Bayesian Optimization we are concerned with the global
optimization of a black box function. This function is considered to be expensive to evaluate, and we are therefore
willing to undertake considerable additional computation
in order to achieve efficient use of evaluations. Bayesian
Optimization has been applied to may problems in machine
learning, including hyperparameter tuning (Snoek et al.,
2012; Hernndez-Lobato et al., 2014), sensor set selection
(Garnett et al., 2010) and tuning robot gait parameters (Calandra et al., 2016; Lizotte et al., 2007; Tesch et al., 2011).
A recent review of the field is Shahriari et al. (2016).
To achieve this aim at each iteration we first train a model of
the objective conditioned on the data observed so far. This
model is usually a Gaussian Process, a kernel-based model
with particularly useful properties. A full introduction to the
Gaussian Process is given by Rasmussen & Williams (2006).
However, the relevant properties to this work are: that all
1

Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
Oxford-Man Institute of Quantitative Finance. Correspondence
to: Mark McLeod <markm@robots.ox.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

posteriors produced by the GP are multivariate Gaussian, so
provide both the estimated value and the uncertainty of that
estimate; and that this joint Gaussian property also extends
to derivatives of the function being modelled.
We next define an acquisition function over the optimization
domain which states how useful we expect an evaluation at
that location to be. This function is optimized to find the
location predicted to be most useful. The true objective is
then evaluated at this location. There are a large number
of acquisition functions available. Two that are relevant to
this work are Expected Improvement (Jones et al., 1998), in
which we choose the point with the greatest improvement in
expectation on the best value observed so far, and Predictive
Entropy Search (PES) (Hernndez-Lobato et al., 2014), in
which we choose the location expected to yield the greatest
change in the information content of the distribution over
our belief about the location of the global minimum.
We contribute a novel algorithm, Bayesian and Local Optimisation Sample-wise Switching Optimisation Method,
BLOSSOM, which combines the desirable properties of
both local and Bayesian optimization by selecting from multiple acquisition functions at each iteration. We retain the
evaluation-efficient characteristics of Bayesian optimization,
while also obtaining the superior convergence of local optimization. This is combined with a Bayesian stopping criterion allowing optimization to be terminated once a specified
tolerance on expected regret has been achieved, removing
the need to pre-specify a fixed budget.
1.2. Requirement for a Stopping Criterion
In the majority of work on Bayesian optimization the problems considered either fix the number of iterations or, less
often, fix a computational budget. While this is clearly desirable for averaging over and comparing multiple repetitions
of the same optimization, it is not desirable in practice: the
number of steps to take (or budget to allow) is now an additional parameter that must be selected manually. This
choice requires expert knowledge of Bayesian Optimization
to select a number that hopefully will neither be too small,
resulting in easy improvement being neglected, or too large,
costing additional expensive evaluations for minimal gain.
We are therefore motivated to seek an automatic stopping

