Model-Level Dual Learning

Yingce Xia 1 2 Xu Tan 2 Fei Tian 2 Tao Qin 2 Nenghai Yu 1 Tie-Yan Liu 2

Abstract
Many artificial intelligence tasks appear in
dual forms like English↔French translation and
speech↔text transformation. Existing dual learning schemes, which are proposed to solve a pair
of such dual tasks, explore how to leverage such
dualities from data level. In this work, we propose a new learning framework, model-level dual
learning, which takes duality of tasks into consideration while designing the architectures for
the primal/dual models, and ties the model parameters that playing similar roles in the two tasks.
We study both symmetric and asymmetric modellevel dual learning. Our algorithms achieve significant improvements on neural machine translation
and sentiment analysis.

1. Introduction
Joint learning of multiple tasks has attracted much attention in machine learning community, and several learning
paradigms have been studied to explore the task correlations
from different perspective. Multi-task learning (Luong et al.,
2016; Zhang & Yang, 2017) is a paradigm that learns a problem together with other related problems at the same time,
using a shared representation. This often leads to a better
model for the main task, because it allows the learner to use
the commonality among the tasks. Transfer learning (Pan
& Yang, 2010) focuses on storing knowledge gained while
solving one problem and applying it to a different but related
problem. Recently, a new paradigm, dual learning (He et al.,
2016a; Xia et al., 2017b; Yi et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2018),
is proposed to leverage the symmetric structure of some
learning problems, such as English↔French translation,
image↔text transformation, and speech↔text transformation, and achieves promising results in various AI tasks (He
et al., 2016a; Yi et al., 2017; Tang et al., 2017).
1
School of Information Science and Technology, University
of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China 2 Microsoft
Research, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Tao Qin <taoqin@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Dual learning algorithms have been proposed for different
learning settings. (He et al., 2016a; Yi et al., 2017) focus on the unsupervised setting and learn from unlabeled
data: given an unlabeled sample x ∈ X , the primal model
f : X 7→ Y first maps it to a sample y ∈ Y, the dual
model g : Y 7→ X maps y to a new sample x̂ ∈ X , and
then the distortion between x and x̂ is used as the feedback
signal to optimize f and g. (Xia et al., 2017b) focuses on
the supervised setting and conducts joint learning from labeled data by adding an additional probabilistic constraint
P (x)P (y|x; f ) = P (y)P (x|y; g) on any (x, y) data pair
implied by structure duality. This probabilistic constraint
is also utilized in inference process (Xia et al., 2017a). Inspired by the law of total probability, (Wang et al., 2018)
studies dual transfer learning, in which one model in a pair
of dual tasks is used to enhance the training of the other
model. Although those algorithms consider different settings, they all consider duality at data level, characterized
by either the reconstruction error of unlabeled samples (He
et al., 2016a; Yi et al., 2017), the joint probability of data
pairs (Xia et al., 2017b; Wang et al., 2018), or the marginal
probability of data samples (Wang et al., 2018).
We find that many tasks are of structural duality/symmetry
not only in data level, but also in model level. Take neural
machine translation (briefly, NMT) (Xia et al., 2017c;d),
which attacks the problem of translating a source-language
sentence x ∈ X to a target-language sentence y ∈ Y, as an
example here. Such kinds of tasks are usually handled by an
encoder-decoder framework. We summarize an one-layer
LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) based model in
Figure 1 and the other model structures like CNN (Gehring
et al., 2017), self-attention (Vaswani et al., 2017) can be similarly formulated. The encoder ϕcp,X takes a source sentence
x as an input and outputs a set of hidden representations
hX
i ∈ H ∀i ∈ [Tx ], where H is the space of hidden representations, and Tx is the length of sentence x. Next, the
decoder ϕp,Y computes the hidden state hYj by taking the
previous hYj−1 , yj−1 and the hX
i ∀i ∈ [Tx ] from the encoder
as inputs. ϕp,Y consists of three parts: ϕzp,Y is the attention
model used to generate ZjX (e.g., the contextual information); ϕcp,Y is used to compute hYj ; and ϕhp,Y is used to map
hYj to space Y, which is usually a softmax operator.
The aforementioned processes can be mathematically for-

