Been There, Done That: Meta-Learning with Episodic Recall

Samuel Ritter 1 2 Jane X. Wang 1 Zeb Kurth-Nelson 1 3 Siddhant M. Jayakumar 1
Charles Blundell 1 Razvan Pascanu 1 Matthew Botvinick 1 4

Abstract
Meta-learning agents excel at rapidly learning
new tasks from open-ended task distributions;
yet, they forget what they learn about each task
as soon as the next begins. When tasks reoccur – as they do in natural environments – metalearning agents must explore again instead of immediately exploiting previously discovered solutions. We propose a formalism for generating
open-ended yet repetitious environments, then
develop a meta-learning architecture for solving
these environments. This architecture melds the
standard LSTM working memory with a differentiable neural episodic memory. We explore the
capabilities of agents with this episodic LSTM
in five meta-learning environments with reoccurring tasks, ranging from bandits to navigation and
stochastic sequential decision problems.

1. Introduction
Meta-learning refers to a process through which a learning
agent improves the efficiency and effectiveness of its own
learning processes through experience. First introduced as
a core topic in AI research in the 1990s (Thrun & Pratt,
1998; Schmidhuber et al., 1996), meta-learning has recently
resurged as a front-line agenda item (Santoro et al., 2016;
Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2016). In addition
to reviving the original topic, recent work has also added
a new dimension by importing the theme of meta-learning
into the realm of reinforcement learning (Wang et al., 2016;
Finn et al., 2017; Duan et al., 2016).
Meta-learning addresses a fundamental problem for realworld agents: How to cope with open-ended environments,
which present the agent with an unbounded series of tasks.
1

DeepMind, London, UK 2 Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton, NJ 3 MPS-UCL Centre for Computational Psychiatry, London, UK 4 Gatsby Computational Neuroscience
Unit, UCL, London, UK. Correspondence to: Sam Ritter <ritters@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

As such, meta-learning research has typically focused on
the problem of efficient learning on new tasks, neglecting a
second, equally important problem: What happens when a
previously mastered task reoccurs? Ideally, in this case the
learner should recognize the reoccurrence, retrieve the results of previous learning, and “pick up where it left off.” Remarkably, as we shall review, state-of-the-art meta-learning
systems contain no mechanism to support this kind of recall.
The problem of task reoccurrence is taken for granted in
other areas of AI research, in particular work on life-long
learning and continual learning (Ring, 1995; Kirkpatrick
et al., 2017; Thrun, 1996). Here, it is assumed that the
environment rotates through a series of tasks, and one of the
key challenges is to learn each task without forgetting what
was learned about the others. However, work focusing on
this problem has generally considered scenarios involving
small sets of tasks, avoiding the more open-ended scenarios
and the demand for few-shot learning that provide the focus
in meta-learning research.
Naturalistic environments concurrently pose both of the
learning challenges we have touched on, confronting learners with (1) an open-ended series of related yet novel
tasks, within which (2) previously encountered tasks identifiably reoccur (for related observations, see Anderson, 1990;
O’Donnell et al., 2009). In the present work, we formalize this dual learning problem, and propose an architecture
which deals with both parts of it.

2. Problem Formulation
Meta-learning research formalized the notion of an unbounded series of tasks by defining task distributions D
over Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), then repeatedly
sampling MDPs as m ∼ D (Thrun & Pratt, 1998). To create
open-ended sequences of novel and identifiably reoccuring
tasks, we propose to instead sample MDPs m along with
contexts c from stochastic task processes as follows
(mn+1 , cn+1 )|(m1 , c1 ), ..., (mn , cn ) ∼ Ω(θ, D),

(1)

where Ω is a stochastic process with base distribution D and
parameters θ. n indexes the tasks’ positions in the sequence.
From here on we will refer to these MDPs and their contexts,
(mn , cn ), as the tasks tn .

