On the Power of Over-parametrization in
Neural Networks with Quadratic Activation

Simon S. Du 1 Jason D. Lee 2

Abstract
We provide new theoretical insights on why overparametrization is effective in learning neural networks. For a k hidden node shallow network with
quadratic activation and
√ n training data points, we
show as long as k ≥ 2n, over-parametrization
enables local search algorithms to find a globally
optimal solution for general smooth and convex
loss functions. Further, despite that the number
of parameters may exceed the sample size, using
theory of Rademacher complexity, we show with
weight decay, the solution also generalizes well
if the data is sampled from a regular distribution
√
such as Gaussian. To prove when k ≥ 2n, the
loss function has benign landscape properties, we
adopt an idea from smoothed analysis, which may
have other applications in studying loss surfaces
of neural networks.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have achieved a remarkable impact on
many applications such computer vision, reinforcement
learning and natural language processing. Though neural
networks are successful in practice, their theoretical properties are not yet well understood. Specifically, there are
two intriguing empirical observations that existing theories
cannot explain.
• Optimization: Despite the highly non-convex nature
of the objective function, simple first-order algorithms
like stochastic gradient descent are able to minimize
the training loss of neural networks. Researchers have
conjectured that the use of over-parametrization (Livni
et al., 2014; Safran and Shamir, 2017) is the primary
1
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Department of Data Sciences and Operations, University
of Southern California. Correspondence to: Simon S. Du
<ssdu@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

reason why local search algorithms can achieve low
training error. The intuition is over-parametrization
alters the loss function to have a large manifold of
globally optimal solutions, which in turn allows local
search algorithms to more easily find a global optimal
solution.
• Generalization: From the statistical point of view,
over-parametrization may hinder effective generalization, since it greatly increases the number of parameters
to the point of having number of parameters exceed
the sample size. To address this, practitioners often use
explicit forms of regularization such as weight decay,
dropout, or early stopping to improve generalization.
However in the non-convex setting, theoretically, we
do not have a good quantitative understanding on how
these regularizations help generalization for neural network models.
In this paper, we provide new theoretical insights into the
optimization landscape and generalization ability of overparametrized neural networks. Specifically we consider the
neural network of the following form:
f (x, W) =

k
X

ai σ (hwj , xi) .

(1)

j=1

In the above x ∈ Rd is the input vector, W ∈ Rd×k with
wj ∈ Rd denotes the j-th row of W and ai ’s are the weights
in the second layer. Finally σ (·) : R → R denotes the
activation function applied to each hidden node. When the
neural network is over-parameterized, the number of hidden
notes k can be very large compared with input dimension d
or the number of training samples.
In our setting, we fix the second layer to be a = (1, . . . , 1).
Although it is simpler than the case where the second layer is
not fixed, the effect of over-parameterization can be studied
in this setting as well because we do not have any restriction
on the number of hidden nodes.
We focus on quadratic activation function σ (z) = z 2 .
Though quadratic activations are rarely used in practice,
stacking multiple such two-layer blocks can be used to simulate higher-order polynomial neural networks and sigmodial

