Adversarial Time-to-Event Modeling

Paidamoyo Chapfuwa 1 Chenyang Tao 1 Chunyuan Li 1 Courtney Page 1 Benjamin Goldstein 1
Lawrence Carin 1 Ricardo Henao 1

Abstract
Modern health data science applications leverage
abundant molecular and electronic health data,
providing opportunities for machine learning to
build statistical models to support clinical practice. Time-to-event analysis, also called survival
analysis, stands as one of the most representative
examples of such statistical models. We present a
deep-network-based approach that leverages adversarial learning to address a key challenge in
modern time-to-event modeling: nonparametric
estimation of event-time distributions. We also
introduce a principled cost function to exploit information from censored events (events that occur
subsequent to the observation window). Unlike
most time-to-event models, we focus on the estimation of time-to-event distributions, rather than
time ordering. We validate our model on both
benchmark and real datasets, demonstrating that
the proposed formulation yields significant performance gains relative to a parametric alternative,
which we also propose.

1. Introduction
Time-to-event modeling is one of the most widely used
statistical analysis tools in biostatistics and, more broadly,
health data science applications. For a given subject, these
models estimate either a risk score or the time-to-event distribution, from a pre-specified point in time at which a set
of covariates (predictors) are observed. In practice, the
model is parameterized as a weighted, often linear, combination of covariates. Time is estimated parametrically or
nonparametrically, the former by assuming an underlying
time distribution and the latter as proportional to observed
event times. These models have been widely used in risk
profiling (Hippisley-Cox & Coupland, 2013; Cheng et al.,
2013), treatment planning, and drug development (Fischl
1
Duke University. Correspondence to: Paidamoyo Chapfuwa
<paidamoyo.chapfuwa@duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

et al., 1987). Time-to-event modeling, and in a larger context, point processes, constitute the fundamental analytical
tools in applications for which the future behavior of a system or individual is to be characterized statistically.
The principal time-to-event modeling tool is the Cox Proportional Hazards (Cox-PH) model (Cox, 1992). Cox-PH is
a semi-parametric model that assumes the effect of covariates is a fixed, time-independent, multiplicative factor on
the hazard rate, which characterizes the instantaneous death
rate of the surviving population. By optimizing a partial
likelihood formulation, Cox-PH circumvents the difficulty
of specifying the unknown, time-dependent, baseline hazard
function. Consequently, Cox-PH results in point-estimates
proportional to the event times. Further, estimation of CoxPH models depends heavily on event ordering and not the
time-to-event itself, which is known to compromise the scalability of the estimation procedure to large datasets. This
poor scaling behavior is manifested because the formulation
is not amenable to stochastic training with minibatches.
It is well accepted that the fixed-covariate-effects assumption made in Cox-PH is strong, and unlikely to hold in reality
(Aalen, 1994). For instance, individual heterogeneity and
other sources of variation, often likely to be dependent on
time, are rarely measured or totally unobservable. This unobservable variation has been gradually recognized as a major
concern in survival analysis and cannot be safely ignored
(Collett, 2015; Aalen et al., 2001). When these sources
of variation are independent of time, they can be modeled
via fixed or random effects (Aalen, 1994; Hougaard, 1995).
However, in cases for which they render the hazard rate timedependent, such variation is difficult to control, diagnose, or
model parametrically. Cox-PH is known to be sensitive to
such assumption violations (Aalen et al., 2001; Kleinbaum
& Klein, 2010). Moreover, Cox-PH focuses on the estimation of the covariate effects rather than the survival time
distribution, i.e., time-to-event prediction. The motivation
behind Cox-PH and its shortcomings make it less appealing
in applications where prediction is of highest importance.
An alternative to the Cox-PH model is the Accelerated Failure Time (AFT) model (Wei, 1992). AFT makes the simplifying assumption that the effect of covariates either accelerates or delays the event progression, relative to a parametric

