Binary Classification with Karmic, Threshold-Quasi-Concave Metrics

Bowei Yan 1 Oluwasanmi Koyejo 2 Kai Zhong 1 Pradeep Ravikumar 3

Abstract
Complex performance measures, beyond the popular measure of accuracy, are increasingly being
used in the context of binary classification. These
complex performance measures are typically not
even decomposable, that is, the loss evaluated on a
batch of samples cannot typically be expressed as
a sum or average of losses evaluated at individual
samples, which in turn requires new theoretical
and methodological developments beyond standard treatments of supervised learning. In this paper, we advance this understanding of binary classification for complex performance measures by
identifying two key properties: a so-called Karmic
property, and a more technical threshold-quasiconcavity property, which we show is milder than
existing structural assumptions imposed on performance measures. Under these properties, we
show that the Bayes optimal classifier is a threshold function of the conditional probability of positive class. We then leverage this result to come
up with a computationally practical plug-in classifier, via a novel threshold estimator, and further,
provide a novel statistical analysis of classification error with respect to complex performance
measures.

1. Introduction
Binary classification, with the goal of predicting a binary
response given input features, is perhaps the classical problem in machine learning, with wide ranging applications.
A key ingredient in binary classification is a performance
measure, that quantifies how well a given classifier fits the
data. While the performance measure of accuracy has been
the predominant focus of both theory and practice, it has
severe limitations in many practical settings, such as imbal1
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA 2 University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois, USA
3
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Bowei Yan <boweiy@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

anced classes, and where different types of errors made by
the classifier have different costs (Gu et al., 2009; Wallace
et al., 2011). Accordingly, practitioners in applied machine
learning settings such as information retrieval and medical
diagnosis have developed complex performance metrics that
capture important trade-offs between different types of errors; we have collated a few instances in Table 1. A key
complication with many complex classification performance
metrics, such as the F-measure (Manning et al., 2008) and
Harmonic Mean (Kennedy et al., 2009), is that they cannot
be decomposed into the sum or average of individual losses
on each sample. Even the simple performance measure
of precision — the fraction of correct positive predictions,
among the set of positive predictions — is not a sum of
individual losses on each sample. Thus, the standard theoretical and practical treatments of supervised learning, such
as standard empirical risk minimization that minimizes the
empirical expectation of a loss evaluated on a single random
example, are not applicable.
This practical reality has motivated research into effective and efficient algorithms tailored to complex nondecomposable performance measures. One class of approaches extend standard empirical risk minimization to this
non-decomposable setting, which often relies on strong assumptions on either the form of the classifiers, such as requiring linear classifiers (Narasimhan et al., 2015a), or restricted
to specific performance measures such as F-measure (Parambath et al., 2015). An alternative approach is the plug-in estimator, where we first derive the form of the Bayes optimal
classifier, estimate the statistical quantities associated with
the Bayes optimal classifier, and finally “plug-in” the sample estimates of the population quantities to then obtain the
overall estimate of the Bayes optimal classifier. In particular,
for many complex performance metrics, the Bayes optimal
classifier is simply a thresholding of the conditional probability of the positive class (Koyejo et al., 2014; Narasimhan
et al., 2014), so that the plug-in estimator requires (a) an estimate of the conditional probability, and (b) the associated
threshold. Plug-in methods have been of particular interest
in non-parametric functional estimation as they typically
require weaker assumptions on the function class and are
often easy to implement.
In this paper, we seek to advance our understanding
and practice of binary classification under complex non-

