Nonconvex Optimization for Regression with Fairness Constraints

Junpei Komiyama 1 Akiko Takeda 1 2 Junya Honda 1 2 Hajime Shimao 3

Abstract
The unfairness of a regressor is evaluated by measuring the correlation between the estimator and
the sensitive attribute (e.g., race, gender, age),
and the coefficient of determination (CoD) is a
natural extension of the correlation coefficient
when more than one sensitive attribute exists. As
is well known, there is a trade-off between fairness and accuracy of a regressor, which implies
that a perfectly fair optimizer does not always
yield a useful prediction. Taking this into consideration, we optimize the accuracy of the estimation subject to a user-defined level of fairness. However, a fairness level as a constraint
induces a nonconvexity of the feasible region,
which disables the use of an off-the-shelf convex
optimizer. Despite such nonconvexity, we show
that an exact solution is available by using tools
of global optimization theory. Unlike most of existing fairness-aware machine learning methods,
our method allows us to deal with numeric and
multiple sensitive attributes.

1. Introduction
Algorithmic decision-making process now affects many aspects of our lives. Emails are spam-filtered by classifiers,
images are automatically tagged and sorted, and news articles are clustered and ranked. These days, even decisions
regarding individual people are being made algorithmically.
For example, computer-generated credit scores are popular
in many countries, and job interviewees are sometimes evaluated by assessment algorithms. However, a potential loss
of transparency, accountability, and fairness arises when decision making is conducted on the basis of past data. If a
dataset indicates that specific groups based on sensitive attributes (e.g., gender, race, and religion) are of higher risk
1

The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. 2 RIKEN AIP, Tokyo,
Japan. 3 Santa Fe Institute, New Mexico, United States. Correspondence to: Junpei Komiyama <junpei@komiyama.info>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

in defaulting on loans, direct application of machine learning algorithm would highly likely result in loan applicants
on those groups being rejected.
This could be viewed as an algorithmic version of disparate
treatment1 , where decisions are made on the basis of these
sensitive attributes. However, removing sensitive attributes
from the dataset is not a sufficient solution as it has a disparate impact: In 1970s, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that
the hiring decision at the center of the Griggs v. Duke
Power Co. case2 was illegal because it disadvantaged an
application of an applicant of certain race, even though the
decision was not explicitly determined on the basis of race.
Duke Power Co. was subsequently forced to stop using
test scores and diplomas, which are highly correlated with
race, in its hiring decisions. In this paper, we consider fair
machine learning algorithms that remove disparate impact
that arises from the correlation between the sensitive and
non-sensitive attributes.
Most of existing fairness-aware machine learning algorithms are for classification. While such classifiers are
naturally applied in decision making, regressors provide
more useful information in some of the human-related
tasks. For example, in the case of criminal records (Calders
et al., 2013; Angwin et al., 2016), assessing the risk of reoffending of each criminal is reasonable. In hiring decisions, an employer would naturally consider the productivity of a job applicant. Moreover, in recommendation tasks,
the preference of items are usually represented as numeric
values.
Taking above into consideration, we study a fair regressor.
By definition, a fair algorithm tries to treat several groups
equally, and thus it sacrifices some accuracy that could be
achieved if it had treated these groups unequally. Therefore,
the challenge lies in balancing the regression accuracy and
fairness. As discussed in Zafar et al. (2017a), depending on
each business necessity, a user of an algorithm can justify
some degree of disparate impact to increase the predictive
power of the algorithm. Such a degree of unfair impact
should be strictly controlled.
A natural interest is how to define fairness of algorithm. In
1
2

The U.S. Civil Rights Act, July 2, 1964.
Case: 401 U.S. 424, March 8, 1971.

