Residual Unfairness in Fair Machine Learning from Prejudiced Data
Nathan Kallus 1 Angela Zhou 2

Abstract
Recent work in fairness in machine learning has
proposed adjusting for fairness by equalizing accuracy metrics across groups and has also studied
how datasets affected by historical prejudices may
lead to unfair decision policies. We connect these
lines of work and study the residual unfairness
that arises when a fairness-adjusted predictor is
not actually fair on the target population due to
systematic censoring of training data by existing
biased policies. This scenario is particularly common in the same applications where fairness is
a concern. We characterize theoretically the impact of such censoring on standard fairness metrics for binary classifiers and provide criteria for
when residual unfairness may or may not appear.
We prove that, under certain conditions, fairnessadjusted classifiers will in fact induce residual
unfairness that perpetuates the same injustices,
against the same groups, that biased the data to
begin with, thus showing that even state-of-theart fair machine learning can have a “bias in, bias
out” property. When certain benchmark data is
available, we show how sample reweighting can
estimate and adjust fairness metrics while accounting for censoring. We use this to study the case of
Stop, Question, and Frisk (SQF) and demonstrate
that attempting to adjust for fairness perpetuates
the same injustices that the policy is infamous for.

1. Introduction
The spread of data-driven decision making to civic institutions, spurred by the empirical success of machine learning
and the growing availability of individual-level data, raises
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. 1656996. Angela Zhou is
supported through the National Defense Science & Engineering
Graduate Fellowship Program. 1 Cornell University, and Cornell
Tech, New York 2 Cornell University, Ithaca, New York. Correspondence to: Angela Zhou <az434@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

new questions about the possible harms of learning from
data which is subject to historical bias. Unlike clean-cut prediction problems in other domains, datasets of individuals
and their historical outcomes may reflect systematic bias due
to previously prejudiced decisions (Barocas & Selbst, 2014).
Recent work on fairness in machine learning proposes and
analyzes competing criteria for assessing the fairness of machine learning algorithms, where some adjustments attempt
to equalize accuracy metrics across groups (Corbett-Davies
et al., 2017; Kleinberg et al., 2017; Hardt et al., 2016). Other
work studies how historical prejudices may be reflected in
training data such that algorithmic systems might replicate
historical biases (Angwin et al., 2016; Lum & Isaac, 2016;
Kilbertus et al., 2017). We consider a model of biased data
where systematic censoring affects whether or not entire
observations appear in the training dataset. In such cases,
the available data are not representative of the eventual realworld “test” population to which any resulting learned policy
will be applied. Our paper formalizes and characterizes how
systematic under- or over-representation of groups in the
dataset can hamper attempts to correct for fairness, leading
to residual unfairness on the target population of interest.
This important issue arises in almost all settings where fair
machine learning has been studied:
(1) Data on loan default can only be collected on those loan
applicants who were historically approved but is used
to learn approval policies applied to all applicants.
(2) Arrest data help build predictive policing models but
these data are disproportionately collected on individuals in highly patrolled areas and may be subject to
further prejudice at the individual level, including racial
(Lum & Isaac, 2016).
(3) Risk assessment and intervention tools in child welfare
agencies are trained on cases which have been “screened
in” by caseworkers based on external reports (Chouldechova et al., 2018).
(4) Defendants may only flee and fail to appear if not detained, so any flight risk score used for setting bail can
only be learned from data on defendants who were not
detained.
(5) Convict recidivism is impacted by sentence applied but
learned risk scores are applied to all convicts.
In these applications, systematic censoring screens out ob-

