Bilevel Programming for Hyperparameter Optimization and Meta-Learning

Luca Franceschi 1 2 Paolo Frasconi 3 Saverio Salzo 1 Riccardo Grazzi 1 Massimiliano Pontil 1 2

Abstract
We introduce a framework based on bilevel programming that unifies gradient-based hyperparameter optimization and meta-learning. We show
that an approximate version of the bilevel problem can be solved by taking into explicit account
the optimization dynamics for the inner objective.
Depending on the specific setting, the outer variables take either the meaning of hyperparameters
in a supervised learning problem or parameters of
a meta-learner. We provide sufficient conditions
under which solutions of the approximate problem converge to those of the exact problem. We
instantiate our approach for meta-learning in the
case of deep learning where representation layers are treated as hyperparameters shared across
a set of training episodes. In experiments, we
confirm our theoretical findings, present encouraging results for few-shot learning and contrast
the bilevel approach against classical approaches
for learning-to-learn.

1. Introduction
While in standard supervised learning problems we seek the
best hypothesis in a given space and with a given learning
algorithm, in hyperparameter optimization (HO) and metalearning (ML) we seek a configuration so that the optimized
learning algorithm will produce a model that generalizes
well to new data. The search space in ML often incorporates choices associated with the hypothesis space and the
features of the learning algorithm itself (e.g., how optimization of the training loss is performed). Under this common
perspective, both HO and ML essentially boil down to nesting two search problems: at the inner level we seek a good
1
Computational Statistics and Machine Learning, Istituto
Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy 2 Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, UK
3
Department of Information Engineering, Università degli Studi
di Firenze, Florence, Italy. Correspondence to: Luca Franceschi
<luca.franceschi@iit.it>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

hypothesis (as in standard supervised learning) while at
the outer level we seek a good configuration (including a
good hypothesis space) where the inner search takes place.
Surprisingly, the literature on ML has little overlap with
the literature on HO and in this paper we present a unified
framework encompassing both of them.
Classic approaches to HO (see e.g. Hutter et al., 2015,
for a survey) have been only able to manage a relatively
small number of hyperparameters, from a few dozens using
random search (Bergstra and Bengio, 2012) to a few hundreds using Bayesian or model-based approaches (Bergstra
et al., 2013; Snoek et al., 2012). Recent gradient-based techniques for HO, however, have significantly increased the
number of hyperparameters that can be optimized (Domke,
2012; Maclaurin et al., 2015; Pedregosa, 2016; Franceschi
et al., 2017) and it is now possible to tune as hyperparameters entire weight vectors associated with a neural network
layer. In this way, it becomes feasible to design models
that possibly have more hyperparameters than parameters.
Such an approach is well suited for ML, since parameters
are learned from a small dataset, whereas hyperparameters
leverage multiple available datasets.
HO and ML only differ substantially in terms of the experimental settings in which they are evaluated. While in HO the
available data is associated with a single task and split into a
training set (used to tune the parameters) and a validation set
(used to tune the hyperparameters), in ML we are often interested in the so-called few-shot learning setting where data
comes in the form of short episodes (small datasets with few
examples per class) sampled from a common probability
distribution over supervised tasks.
Early work on ML dates back at least to the 1990’s (Schmidhuber, 1992; Baxter, 1995; Thrun and Pratt, 1998) but this
research area has received considerable attention in the last
few years, mainly driven by the need in real-life and industrial scenarios for learning quickly a vast multitude of tasks.
These tasks, or episodes, may appear and evolve continuously over time and may only contain few examples (Lake
et al., 2017). Different strategies have emerged to tackle ML.
Although they do overlap in some aspects, it is possible to
identify at least four of them. The metric strategy attempts
to use training episodes to construct embeddings such that
examples of the same class are mapped into similar repre-

