Theoretical Analysis of Sparse Subspace Clustering with Missing Entries

Manolis C. Tsakiris * 1 René Vidal * 2

Abstract
Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSC) is a popular unsupervised machine learning method for
clustering data lying close to an unknown union
of low-dimensional linear subspaces; a problem
with numerous applications in pattern recognition and computer vision. Even though the behavior of SSC for complete data is by now wellunderstood, little is known about its theoretical properties when applied to data with missing entries. In this paper we give theoretical
guarantees for SSC with incomplete data, and
provide theoretical evidence that projecting the
zero-filled data onto the observation pattern of
the point being expressed can lead to substantial
improvement in performance; a phenomenon already known experimentally. The main insight of
our analysis is that even though this projection induces additional missing entries, this is counterbalanced by the fact that the projected and zerofilled data are in effect incomplete points associated with the union of the corresponding projected subspaces, with respect to which the point
being expressed is complete. The significance of
this phenomenon potentially extends to the entire
class of self-expressive methods.

1. INTRODUCTION
Clustering data lying close to an unknown union of lowdimensional linear subspaces is a fundamental problem in
unsupervised machine learning, known as Subspace Clustering or Generalized Principal Component Analysis (Vidal et al., 2016). Indeed, this problem is intimately related
to the extension of the classical Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to multiple subspaces, and in recent years has
1

School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China. 2 Mathematical Institute for
Data Science and Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA. Correspondence to: Manolis C. Tsakiris <mtsakiris@shanghaitech.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

found numerous applications in machine learning, computer vision, pattern recognition, bioinformatics and systems theory. Moreover, recent work is beginning to explore
connections between subspace clustering and deep learning, with the goal of learning unions of low-dimensional
non-linear manifolds (Peng et al., 2016).
Among a variety of subspace clustering methods (Vidal
et al., 2016) including algebraic (Vidal et al., 2005; Tsakiris
& Vidal, 2017b; 2018a), iterative (Bradley & Mangasarian,
2000), recursive (Fischler & Bolles, 1981; Tsakiris & Vidal, 2017a), and spectral (Aldroubi et al., 2017; Heckel &
Bölcskei, 2015; Lu et al., 2012; Chen & Lerman, 2009)
techniques, Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSC) (Elhamifar
& Vidal, 2009; 2013) is one of the most popular methods.
The reason is that it exhibits a very competitive performance in real-world datasets, it admits efficient algorithmic
implementations, and is supported by a rich body of theory (Elhamifar & Vidal, 2013; Soltanolkotabi & Candès,
2012; Wang & Xu, 2016; Soltanolkotabi et al., 2014). In
addition, SSC is able to cluster data from incomplete observations reasonably well (Yang et al., 2015), which is an
important problem (Ongie et al., 2017; Pimentel-Alarcon &
Nowak, 2016; Elhamifar, 2016; Yang et al., 2015; Heckel
& Bölcskei, 2015; Pimentel-Alarcon et al., 2015; Eriksson
et al., 2012; Recht, 2011; Balzano et al., 2010), since in
many applications not all features are available for every
data point: Users of recommendation systems only rate a
few items, medical patients undergo a few tests and treatments, images are corrupted by occlusions, dynamic processes are observed across short time intervals and so on.
Even though the theoretical foundations of SSC are by now
mature, there are many lingering open questions. For example, it is still unclear whether better conditions exist for
the performance of SSC even for uncorrupted data; contrast
this to the recent study of You & Vidal (2015), who establish a hierarchy of such conditions for sparse subspace recovery. More importantly, even though a satisfactory theory for SSC with general noise does exist (Wang & Xu,
2016), the theoretical properties of SSC for data with missing entries remain elusive. The works of Wang et al. (2016)
and Charles et al. (2018) are important recent efforts towards understanding SSC with missing entries. However,
the conditions of Wang et al. (2016) are hard to interpret
and they refer to the formulation of SSC with exact self-

