Projection-Free Online Optimization with Stochastic Gradient: From
Convexity to Submodularity

Lin Chen 1 2 Christopher Harshaw 1 3 Hamed Hassani 4 Amin Karbasi 1 2

Abstract
Online optimization has been a successful framework for solving large-scale problems under computational constraints and partial information.
Current methods for online convex optimization
require either a projection or exact gradient computation at each step, both of which can be prohibitively expensive for large-scale applications.
At the same time, there is a growing trend of nonconvex optimization in machine learning community and a need for online methods. Continuous
DR-submodular functions, which exhibit a natural
diminishing returns condition, have recently been
proposed as a broad class of non-convex functions
which may be efficiently optimized. Although online methods have been introduced, they suffer
from similar problems. In this work, we propose
Meta-Frank-Wolfe, the first online projectionfree algorithm that uses stochastic gradient estimates. The algorithm relies on a careful sampling
of gradients
√ in each round and achieves the optimal O( T ) adversarial regret bounds for convex and continuous submodular optimization. We
also propose One-Shot Frank-Wolfe, a simpler
algorithm which requires only a single stochastic
gradient estimate in each round and achieves an
O(T 2/3 ) stochastic regret bound for convex and
continuous submodular optimization. We apply
our methods to develop a novel “lifting” framework for the online discrete submodular maximization and also see that they outperform current state-of-the-art techniques on various experiments.
1
Yale Institute for Network Science, Yale University, New
Haven, CT, USA 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, Yale
University 3 Department of Computer Science, Yale University
4
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Lin
Chen <lin.chen@yale.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
As the amount of collected data becomes massive in both
size and complexity, algorithm designers are faced with
unprecedented challenges in statistics, machine learning,
and control. In the past decade, online optimization has
provided a successful computational framework for tackling a wide variety of challenging problems, ranging from
non-parametric regression to portfolio management (Calandriello et al., 2017; Agarwal et al., 2006). In online
optimization, a large or complex optimization problem is
broken down into a sequence of smaller optimization problems, each of which must be solved with limited information. This framework captures many real-world scenarios
in which standard optimization theory does not apply. For
instance, a machine learning application cannot feasibly process terabytes of data at a single time; rather, subsets of data
may be handled in a sequential fashion. Another example is
when the true objective function is the expectation of an unknown distribution of functions, and may only be accessible
via samples, as is the case for problems in online learning
and control theory (Xiao, 2010; Wang & Boyd, 2008).
Online convex optimization, a branch of online optimization that considers sequentially minimizing convex functions, has proved particularly useful for statistical and machine learning applications. Online convex optimization
has enjoyed much success in these areas because most offline machine learning techniques utilize the existing theory
of convex optimization. As in the offline setting, gradient methods are a popular class of algorithms for online
convex optimization due to their simplicity; however, they
require projections onto the constraint set, which involve
solving a quadratic program in the general case. These
projections are infeasible for large scale applications with
complicated constraints such as matrix completion, network routing problems, and maximum matchings. Online
projection-free methods have been proposed and are much
more efficient , replacing a projection onto the constraint
set with a linear optimization over the constraint set at each
iteration (Hazan & Kale, 2012; Garber & Hazan, 2013).
However, these projection-free methods require exact gradient computations, which may be prohibitively expensive
for even moderately sized data sets and intractable when a

