Deep Reinforcement Learning in Continuous Action Spaces:
a Case Study in the Game of Simulated Curling

Kyowoon Lee * 1 Sol-A Kim * 1 Jaesik Choi 1 Seong-Whan Lee 2

Abstract
Many real-world applications of reinforcement
learning require an agent to select optimal actions
from continuous spaces. Recently, deep neural
networks have successfully been applied to games
with discrete actions spaces. However, deep neural networks for discrete actions are not suitable
for devising strategies for games where a very
small change in an action can dramatically affect
the outcome. In this paper, we present a new selfplay reinforcement learning framework which
equips a continuous search algorithm which enables to search in continuous action spaces with
a kernel regression method. Without any handcrafted features, our network is trained by supervised learning followed by self-play reinforcement learning with a high-fidelity simulator for
the Olympic sport of curling. The program trained
under our framework outperforms existing programs equipped with several hand-crafted features
and won an international digital curling competition.

1. Introduction
Learning good strategies from large continuous action
spaces is important for many real-world problems including learning robotic manipulations and playing games with
physical objects. In particular, when an autonomous agent
interacts with physical objects, it is often necessary to handle large continuous action spaces.
Reinforcement learning methods have been extensively applied to build intelligent agents that can play games such
as chess (Campbell et al., 2002), checkers (Schaeffer et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology,
Ulsan, Republic of Korea 2 Department of Brain and Cognitive
Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Jaesik Choi <jaesik@unist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1992), and othello (Buro, 1999). Recently, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun & Bengio, 1998)
have achieved super-human performance in deterministic
games with perfect information, such as Atari games (Mnih
et al., 2015) and Go (Silver et al., 2016; 2017). In the latter
game, board positions are passed through the convolutional
layers as a 19-by-19-square image. These CNNs effectively
reduce the depth and breadth of the search tree by evaluating the positions using a value network and by sampling
actions using a policy network. However, in a continuous
action space, the space needs to be discretized. Deterministic discretization would cause a strong bias in the policy
evaluation and the policy improvement. Thus, such deep
CNNs for large, non-convex continuous action spaces are
not directly applicable.
To solve this issue, we conduct a policy search with an efficient stochastic continuous action search on top of policy
samples generated from a deep CNN. Our deep CNN still
discretizes the state space and the action space. However, in
the stochastic continuous action search, we lift the restriction of the deterministic discretization and conduct a local
search procedure in a physical simulator with continuous
action samples. In this way, the benefits of both deep neural
networks (i.e., learning the global structure) and physical
simulators (i.e., finding precise continuous actions) can be
realized.
More specifically, we design a deep CNN called the policyvalue network, which gives the probability distribution of
actions and expected reward given an input state. The policyvalue network is jointly trained to find an optimal policy
and to estimate the reward given an input instance. During
the supervised training, the policy subnetwork is directly
learned from the moves of a reference program in each simulated run of games. The value subnetwork is learned using
d-depth simulation and the bootstrapping of the prediction
to handle a high variance of a reward obtained from a sequence of stochastic moves. The network is then trained
further from the games of self-play using kernel regression
to precisely handle continuous spaces and actions. This
process allows actions in the continuous domain to be explored and adjusts the policy and the value in consideration
of uncertainty of the execution.

