QuantTree: Histograms for Change Detection in Multivariate Data Streams

Giacomo Boracchi 1 Diego Carrera 1 Cristiano Cervellera 2 Danilo Macciò 2

Abstract
We address the problem of detecting distribution
changes in multivariate data streams by means
of histograms. Histograms are very general and
flexible models, which have been relatively ignored in the change-detection literature as they
often require a number of bins that grows unfeasibly with the data dimension. We present
QuantTree, a recursive binary splitting scheme
that adaptively defines the histogram bins to ease
the detection of any distribution change. Our design scheme implies that i) we can easily control the overall number of bins and ii) the bin
probabilities do not depend on the distribution
of stationary data. This latter is a very relevant
aspect in change detection, since thresholds of
tests statistics based on these histograms (e.g.,
the Pearson statistic or the total variation) can
be numerically computed from univariate and
synthetically generated data, yet guaranteeing a
controlled false positive rate. Our experiments
show that the proposed histograms are very effective in detecting changes in high dimensional
data streams, and that the resulting thresholds can
effectively control the false positive rate, even
when the number of training samples is relatively
small.

1. Introduction
Change detection, namely the problem of analyzing a data
stream to detect changes in the data-generating distribution,
is very relevant in machine-learning and is typically addressed in an unsupervised manner. This approach is generally dictated by many practical aspects, which include the
unpredictability of the change and the fact that the training
set often contains only stationary data. As a matter of fact,
1
Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria,
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. 2 Institute of Intelligent Systems for Automation, National Research Council, Genova, Italy.
Correspondence to: Diego Carrera <diego.carrera@polimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

most change-detection tests in the literature (Basseville &
Nikiforov, 1993; Lung-Yut-Fong et al., 2011; Ross et al.,
2011; Kuncheva, 2013) consist of three major ingredients:
i) a model describing the distribution of stationary data, φ0 ,
that is typically learned from a training set, ii) a test statistic T used to assess the conformance of test data with the
learned model, and iii) a decision rule that monitors T to
detect changes in φ0 . Needless to say, all these have to be
wisely designed and combined to yield a sound test that
can provide prompt detections as well as a controlled False
Positive Rate (FPR), which is one of the primary concerns
in change detection. Unfortunately, when it comes to monitoring multivariate data, it is difficult to find good density
models and test statistics that do not depend on φ0 : this represents a severe limitation for real-world monitoring problems, where the stream distribution is unknown. Our work
presents an efficient change-detection test for multivariate
data that overcomes this limitation.
The first change-detection tests were developed to monitor univariate data streams in the statistical process control
literature (Basseville & Nikiforov, 1993). In classification
problems, changes in the data stream are known as concept drift (Gama et al., 2014) and are detected by monitoring the sequence of classification errors on supervised data
(Harel et al., 2014; Alippi et al., 2013; Bifet & Gavalda,
2007). Many change-detection tests are parametric, i.e.,
they assume that φ0 belongs to a known family, e.g., (Page,
1954), or are based on ad-hoc statistics that detect specific
changes, e.g., the Hotelling statistic (Lehmann & Romano,
2006). Most nonparametric statistics are instead based on
ranking, e.g., the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (Ross & Adams,
2012) and Lepage (Ross et al., 2011) statistics, and can be
applied exclusively to univariate data.
There exist a few multivariate tests able to detect any distribution change (Lung-Yut-Fong et al., 2011; Justel et al.,
1997). Two popular approaches consists either in reducing
the data dimension by PCA (Kuncheva, 2013; Qahtan et al.,
2015) or computing the likelihood with respect to a model
fitted on a training set, e.g., a Gaussian mixture (Kuncheva,
2013; Alippi et al., 2016), a Gaussian process (Saatçi et al.,
2010) or a kernel density estimator (Krempl, 2011). In
the latter case the change-detection problem boils down
to monitoring a univariate stream. Unfortunately, in these
cases, T often depends on φ0 , and detection rules be-

