Time Limits in Reinforcement Learning

Fabio Pardo 1 Arash Tavakoli 1 Vitaly Levdik 1 Petar Kormushev 1

Abstract
In reinforcement learning, it is common to let an
agent interact for a fixed amount of time with its
environment before resetting it and repeating the
process in a series of episodes. The task that the
agent has to learn can either be to maximize its
performance over (i) that fixed period, or (ii) an
indefinite period where time limits are only used
during training to diversify experience. In this
paper, we provide a formal account for how time
limits could effectively be handled in each of the
two cases and explain why not doing so can cause
state-aliasing and invalidation of experience replay, leading to suboptimal policies and training
instability. In case (i), we argue that the terminations due to time limits are in fact part of the
environment, and thus a notion of the remaining
time should be included as part of the agent’s input to avoid violation of the Markov property. In
case (ii), the time limits are not part of the environment and are only used to facilitate learning.
We argue that this insight should be incorporated
by bootstrapping from the value of the state at
the end of each partial episode. For both cases,
we illustrate empirically the significance of our
considerations in improving the performance and
stability of existing reinforcement learning algorithms, showing state-of-the-art results on several
control tasks.

1. Introduction
The reinforcement learning framework (Kaelbling et al.,
1996; Sutton & Barto, 1998; Szepesvari, 2010) considers a
sequential interaction between an agent and its environment.
At every time step t, the agent receives a representation St of
the environment’s state, selects an action At that is executed
1
Robot Intelligence Lab, Imperial College London, UK.
Correspondence to: Fabio Pardo, Arash Tavakoli, Vitaly Levdik,
Petar Kormushev <f.pardo, a.tavakoli, v.levdik, p.kormushev
@imperial.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

in the environment which in turn provides a representation St+1 of the successor state and a reward signal Rt+1 .
An individual reward received by the agent does not directly
indicate the quality of its latest action as some rewards may
be the consequence of a series of actions taken in the past.
Thus, the goal of the agent is to maximize the discounted
sum of future rewards, also known as the return:
Gt = Rt+1 +γRt+2 +γ 2 Rt+3 +... =

∞
X

γ k−1 Rt+k (1)

k=1

A discount factor 0 ≤ γ < 1 is necessary to exponentially
decay the future rewards ensuring bounded returns. While
the series is infinite, it is common to use this expression
even in the case of possible terminations, such as timeouts,
by considering them to be the entering of an absorbing
state that transitions only to itself and generates zero rewards thereafter. However, when the maximum length of an
episode is fixed, it is easier to rewrite the expression above
by explicitly including the time limit T :
Gt:T = Rt+1 + ... + γ T −t−1 RT =

T
−t
X

γ k−1 Rt+k (2)

k=1

Optimizing for the expectation of the return specified in
Equation 2 is suitable for naturally time-limited tasks where
the agent has to maximize its expected return only over
a fixed episode length. In this case, since the return is
bounded, a discount factor of γ = 1 can be used. However,
in practice it is still common to keep γ smaller than 1 in
order to give more priority to short-term rewards. Under
this optimality model, the objective of the agent does not go
beyond the time limit. Therefore, such an agent could for
example learn to take more risky actions leading to higher
expected returns as approaching the time limit. In Section 2,
we study this case and illustrate that due to the time limit
terminations, the remaining time is an inherent part of the
environment’s state and is essential to its Markov property
(Sutton & Barto, 1998). Therefore, we argue for the inclusion of a notion of the remaining time in the agent’s input,
an approach that we refer to as time-awareness (TA). We
describe various scenarios where lacking a notion of the remaining time can lead to suboptimal policies and instability,
and demonstrate significant performance improvements for
agents with time-awareness.

