Active Testing: An Efficient and Robust Framework for Estimating Accuracy.

Phuc Nguyen 1 Deva Ramanan 2 Charless Fowlkes 1

Abstract
Much recent work on visual recognition aims to
scale up learning to massive, noisily-annotated
datasets. We address the problem of scalingup the evaluation of such models to large-scale
datasets with noisy labels. Current protocols for
doing so require a human user to either vet (reannotate) a small fraction of the test set and ignore the rest, or else correct errors in annotation
as they are found through manual inspection of
results. In this work, we re-formulate the problem
as one of active testing, and examine strategies for
efficiently querying a user so as to obtain an accurate performance estimate with minimal vetting.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
active testing framework on estimating two performance metrics, Precision@K and mean Average
Precision, for two popular computer vision tasks,
multi-label classification and instance segmentation. We further show that our approach is able
to save significant human annotation effort and is
more robust than alternative evaluation protocols.

1. Introduction
Visual recognition is undergoing a period of transformative
progress, due in large part to the success of deep architectures trained on massive datasets with supervision. While
visual data is in ready supply, high-quality supervised labels are not. One attractive solution is the exploration of
unsupervised learning. However, regardless how they are
trained, one still needs to evaluate accuracy of the resulting systems. Given the importance of rigorous, empirical
benchmarking, it appears impossible to avoid the costs of
assembling high-quality, human-annotated test data for test
evaluation.
Unfortunately, manually annotating ground-truth for largescale test datasets is often prohibitively expensive, particu1
University of California, Irvine 2 Carnegie Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Phuc Nguyen <nguyenpx@uci.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

noisy

vetted

Sample
Selection

Oracle

database
Metric
Estimator
Mean Average Precision
Precision@K

System A

System B

System C

Figure 1. Classic methods for benchmarking algorithm performance require a test-set with high-quality labels. While it is often
easy to obtain large-scale data with noisy labels, test evaluation
is typically carried out on only a small fraction of the data that
has been manually cleaned-up (or “vetted”). We show that one
can obtain dramatically more accurate estimates of performance
by using the vetted-set to train a statistical estimator that both (1)
reports improved estimates and (2) actively selects the next batch
of test data to vet. We demonstrate that such an “active-testing”
process can efficiently benchmark performance and and rank visual
recognition algorithms.

larly for rich annotations required to evaluate object detection and segmentation. Even simple image tag annotations
pose an incredible cost at scale 1 . In contrast, obtaining
noisy or partial annotations is often far cheaper or even
free. For example, numerous social media platforms produce image and video data that are dynamically annotated
with user-provided tags (Flickr, Vine, Snapchat, Facebook,
YouTube). While much work has explored the use of such
massively-large “webly-supervised” data sources for learning (Wu et al., 2015; Yu et al., 2014; Li et al., 2017; Veit
et al., 2017), we instead focus on them for evaluation.
How can we exploit such partial or noisy labels during
testing? With a limited budget for vetting noisy groundtruth labels, one may be tempted to simply evaluate performance on a small set of clean data, or alternately just trust
the cheap-but-noisy labels on the whole dataset. However,
such approaches can easily give an inaccurate impression
of system performance. We show in our experiments that
these naive approaches can produce alarmingly-incorrect
estimates of comparative model performance. Even with a
significant fraction of vetted data, naive performance esti1

For example, NUS-WIDE, (Chua et al., 2009) estimated 3000
man-hours to semi-manually annotate a relatively small set of 81
concepts across 270K images

