Representation Learning on Graphs with Jumping Knowledge Networks

Keyulu Xu 1 Chengtao Li 1 Yonglong Tian 1 Tomohiro Sonobe 2
Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi 2 Stefanie Jegelka 1

Abstract
Recent deep learning approaches for representation learning on graphs follow a neighborhood aggregation procedure. We analyze some important
properties of these models, and propose a strategy to overcome those. In particular, the range of
“neighboring” nodes that a node’s representation
draws from strongly depends on the graph structure, analogous to the spread of a random walk. To
adapt to local neighborhood properties and tasks,
we explore an architecture – jumping knowledge
(JK) networks – that flexibly leverages, for each
node, different neighborhood ranges to enable better structure-aware representation. In a number of
experiments on social, bioinformatics and citation
networks, we demonstrate that our model achieves
state-of-the-art performance. Furthermore, combining the JK framework with models like Graph
Convolutional Networks, GraphSAGE and Graph
Attention Networks consistently improves those
models’ performance.

1. Introduction
Graphs are a ubiquitous structure that widely occurs in data
analysis problems. Real-world graphs such as social networks, financial networks, biological networks and citation
networks represent important rich information which is not
seen from the individual entities alone, for example, the communities a person is in, the functional role of a molecule,
and the sensitivity of the assets of an enterprise to external shocks. Therefore, representation learning of nodes in
graphs aims to extract high-level features from a node as
well as its neighborhood, and has proved extremely useful
for many applications, such as node classification, clustering, and link prediction (Perozzi et al., 2014; Monti et al.,
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 2 National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo. Correspondence to: Keyulu Xu
<keyulu@mit.edu>, Stefanie Jegelka <stefje@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

2017; Grover & Leskovec, 2016; Tang et al., 2015).
Recent works focus on deep learning approaches to node
representation. Many of these approaches broadly follow a
neighborhood aggregation (or “message passing” scheme),
and those have been very promising (Kipf & Welling, 2017;
Hamilton et al., 2017; Gilmer et al., 2017; Veličković et al.,
2018; Kearnes et al., 2016). These models learn to iteratively aggregate the hidden features of every node in the
graph with its adjacent nodes’ as its new hidden features,
where an iteration is parametrized by a layer of the neural network. Theoretically, an aggregation process of k
iterations makes use of the subtree structures of height k
rooted at every node. Such schemes have been shown to
generalize the Weisfeiler-Lehman graph isomorphism test
(Weisfeiler & Lehman, 1968) enabling to simultaneously
learn the topology as well as the distribution of node features in the neighborhood (Shervashidze et al., 2011; Kipf
& Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017).
Yet, such aggregation schemes sometimes lead to surprises.
For example, it has been observed that the best performance
with one of the state-of-the-art models, Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCN), is achieved with a 2-layer model. Deeper
versions of the model that, in principle, have access to more
information, perform worse (Kipf & Welling, 2017). A similar degradation of learning for computer vision problems
is resolved by residual connections (He et al., 2016a) that
greatly aid the training of deep models. But, even with residual connections, GCNs with more layers do not perform
as well as the 2-layer GCN on many datasets, e.g. citation
networks.
Motivated by observations like the above, in this paper, we
address two questions. First, we study properties and resulting limitations of neighborhood aggregation schemes.
Second, based on this analysis, we propose an architecture that, as opposed to existing models, enables adaptive,
structure-aware representations. Such representations are
particularly interesting for representation learning on large
complex graphs with diverse subgraph structures.
Model analysis. To better understand the behavior of different neighborhood aggregation schemes, we analyze the
effective range of nodes that any given node’s representation
draws from. We summarize this sensitivity analysis by what

