PDE-Net: Learning PDEs from Data

Zichao Long∗ 1 Yiping Lu∗ 1 Xianzhong Ma∗ 1 2 Bin Dong 3 4 5

Abstract
Partial differential equations (PDEs) play a prominent role in many disciplines of science and engineering. PDEs are commonly derived based
on empirical observations. However, with the
rapid development of sensors, computational power, and data storage in the past decade, huge quantities of data can be easily collected and efficiently
stored. Such vast quantity of data offers new opportunities for data-driven discovery of physical
laws. Inspired by the latest development of neural network designs in deep learning, we propose
a new feed-forward deep network, called PDENet, to fulfill two objectives at the same time:
to accurately predict dynamics of complex systems and to uncover the underlying hidden PDE
models. Comparing with existing approaches, our
approach has the most flexibility by learning both
differential operators and the nonlinear response
function of the underlying PDE model. A special
feature of the proposed PDE-Net is that all filters
are properly constrained, which enables us to easily identify the governing PDE models while still
maintaining the expressive and predictive power
of the network. These constrains are carefully designed by fully exploiting the relation between the
orders of differential operators and the orders of
sum rules of filters (an important concept originated from wavelet theory). Numerical experiments
show that the PDE-Net has the potential to uncover the hidden PDE of the observed dynamics,
and predict the dynamical behavior for a relatively
long time, even in a noisy environment.
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking
University, Beijing, China 2 Beijing Computational Science Research Center, Beijing, China 3 Beijing International Center for
Mathematical Research, Peking University, Beijing, China 4 Center
for Data Science, Peking University 5 Laboratory for Biomedical
Image Analysis, Beijing Institute of Big Data Research. Correspondence to: Bin Dong <dongbin@math.pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Differential equations, especially partial differential equations(PDEs), play a prominent role in many disciplines to
describe the governing physical laws underlying a given
system of interest. Traditionally, PDEs are derived based on
simple physical principles such as conservation laws, minimum energy principles, or based on empirical observations.
Important examples include the Navier-Stokes equations in
fluid dynamics, the Maxwell’s equations for electromagnetic propagation, and the Schrödinger’s equations in quantum
mechanics. However, many complex systems in modern
applications (such as many problems in climate science,
neuroscience, finance, etc.) still have eluded mechanisms, and the governing equations of these systems are only
partially known. With the rapid development of sensors,
computational power, and data storage in the last decade,
huge quantities of data can be easily collected and efficiently
stored . Such vast quantity of data offers new opportunities
for data-driven discovery of potentially new physical laws.
Then, one may ask the following interesting and intriguing
question: can we learn a PDE model (if there exists one)
from a given data set and perform accurate and efficient
predictions using the learned model?
1.1. Related Work
Earlier attempts on data-driven discovery of hidden physical
laws include (Bongard & Lipson, 2007; Schmidt & Lipson,
2009). Their main idea is to compare numerical differentiations of the experimental data with analytic derivatives
of candidate functions, and apply the symbolic regression
and the evolutionary algorithm to determining the nonlinear
dynamical system. Recently, (Brunton et al., 2016), (Schaeffer, 2017), (Rudy et al., 2017) and (Wu & Zhang, 2017)
proposed an alternative approach using sparse regression.
They constructed a dictionary of simple functions and partial derivatives that were likely to appear in the unknown
governing equations. Then, they took advantage of sparsity
promoting techniques to select candidates that most accurately represent the data. When the form of the nonlinear
response of a PDE is known, except for some scalar parameters, (Raissi & Karniadakis, 2017) presented a framework to
learn these unknown parameters by introducing regularity
between two consecutive time step using Gaussian process.
(de Bezenac et al., 2017) studied the problem of sea surface

