End-to-end Active Object Tracking via Reinforcement Learning

Wenhan Luo * 1 Peng Sun * 1 Fangwei Zhong 2 Wei Liu 1 Tong Zhang 1 Yizhou Wang 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Object tracking has gained much attention in recent decades
(Bertinetto et al., 2016a; Danelljan et al., 2017; Zhu et al.,
2016; Cui et al., 2016). The aim of object tracking is to
localize an object in continuous video frames given an initial
annotation in the first frame. Much of the existing work
is, however, on the passive tracker, where it is presumed
that the object of interest is always in the image scene so
*

Equal contribution 1 Tencent AI Lab 2 Peking University.
Correspondence to: Wenhan Luo <whluo.china@gmail.com>,
Peng Sun <pengsun000@gmail.com>, Fangwei Zhong
<zfw@pku.edu.cn>, Wei Liu <wl2223@columbia.edu>,
Tong Zhang <tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org>, Yizhou Wang
<yizhou.Wang@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Action

Action

Active Tracker

Tracking Result

Update

Camera Control

Update

We study active object tracking, where a tracker
takes as input the visual observation (i.e., frame
sequence) and produces the camera control signal (e.g., move forward, turn left, etc.). Conventional methods tackle the tracking and the camera
control separately, which is challenging to tune
jointly. It also incurs many human efforts for labeling and many expensive trial-and-errors in realworld. To address these issues, we propose, in this
paper, an end-to-end solution via deep reinforcement learning, where a ConvNet-LSTM function
approximator is adopted for the direct frame-toaction prediction. We further propose an environment augmentation technique and a customized
reward function, which are crucial for a successful
training. The tracker trained in simulators (ViZDoom, Unreal Engine) shows good generalization
in the case of unseen object moving path, unseen
object appearance, unseen background, and distracting object. It can restore tracking when occasionally losing the target. With the experiments
over the VOT dataset, we also find that the tracking ability, obtained solely from simulators, can
potentially transfer to real-world scenarios.

Passive Tracker

Screen

Screen

Figure 1. The pipeline of active tracking. Left: end-to-end approach. Right: passive tracking plus other modules.

that there is no need to handle the camera control during
tracking. This fashion is inapplicable to some use-cases, e.g.,
the tracking performed by a mobile robot with a camera
mounted or by a drone. To this end, one should seek a
solution of active tracking, which composes two sub-tasks,
i.e., the object tracking and the camera control (Fig. 1,
Right).
Unfortunately, it is hard to jointly tune the pipeline with the
two separate sub-tasks. The tracking task may also involve
many human efforts for bounding box labeling. Moreover,
the implementation of camera control is non-trivial and can
incur many expensive trial-and-errors happening in realworld. To address these issues, we propose an end-to-end
active tracking solution via deep reinforcement learning. To
be specific, we adopt a ConvNet-LSTM network, taking as
input raw video frames and outputting camera movement
actions (e.g., move forward, turn left, etc.).
We leverage virtual environments to conveniently simulate
active tracking, saving the expensive human labeling or realworld trial-and-error. In a virtual environment, an agent
(i.e., the tracker) observes a state (a visual frame) from a
first-person perspective and takes an action, and then the
environment returns the updated state (next visual frame).
We adopt the modern Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithm A3C (Mnih et al., 2016) to train the agent, where a
customized reward function is designed to encourage the

