Stronger Generalization Bounds for Deep Nets via a Compression Approach

Sanjeev Arora 1 Rong Ge 2 Behnam Neyshabur 3 Yi Zhang 1

Abstract
Deep nets generalize well despite having more
parameters than the number of training samples.
Recent works try to give an explanation using
PAC-Bayes and Margin-based analyses, but do
not as yet result in sample complexity bounds
better than naive parameter counting. The current paper shows generalization bounds that are
orders of magnitude better in practice. These
rely upon new succinct reparametrizations of the
trained net — a compression that is explicit and
efficient. These yield generalization bounds via a
simple compression-based framework introduced
here. Our results also provide some theoretical
justification for widespread empirical success in
compressing deep nets. Analysis of correctness
of our compression relies upon some newly identified “noise stability”properties of trained deep
nets, which are also experimentally verified. The
study of these properties and resulting generalization bounds are also extended to convolutional
nets, which had eluded earlier attempts on proving
generalization.

1. Introduction
A mystery about deep nets is that they generalize (i.e., predict well on unseen data) despite having far more parameters
than the number of training samples. One commonly voiced
explanation is that regularization during training –whether
implicit via use of SGD (Neyshabur et al., 2015c; Hardt
et al., 2016) or explicit via weight decay, dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014), batch normalization (Ioffe and Szegedy,
2015), etc. –reduces the effective capacity of the net. But
Zhang et al. (2017) questioned this received wisdom and
Authors listed in alphabetical order 1 Princeton University, Computer Science Department 2 Duke University, Computer Science
Department 3 Institute for Advanced Study, School of Mathematics. Correspondence to: Rong Ge <rongge@cs.duke.edu>,
Behnam Neyshabur <bneyshabur@ias.edu>, Yi Zhang
<y.zhang@cs.princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

fueled research in this area by showing experimentally that
standard architectures using SGD and regularization can
still reach low training error on randomly labeled examples
(which clearly won’t generalize).
Clearly, deep nets trained on real-life data have some properties that reduce effective capacity, but identifying them has
proved difficult —at least in a quantitative way that yields
sample size upper bounds similar to classical analyses in
simpler models such as SVMs (Bartlett and Mendelson,
2002; Evgeniou et al., 2000; Smola et al., 1998) or matrix
factorization (Fazel et al., 2001; Srebro et al., 2005).
Qualitatively (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997; Hinton
and Van Camp, 1993) suggested that nets that generalize
well are flat minima in the optimization landscape of the
training loss. Recently Keskar et al. (2016) show using
experiments with different batch-sizes that sharp minima
do correlate with higher generalization error. A quantitative version of “flatness” was suggested in (Langford
and Caruana, 2001): the net’s output is stable to noise
added to the net’s trainable parameters. Using PAC-Bayes
bound (McAllester, 1998; 1999) this noise stability yielded
generalization bounds for fully connected nets of depth 2.
The theory has been extended to multilayer fully connected
nets (Neyshabur et al., 2017b), although thus far yields sample complexity bounds much worse than naive parameter
counting. (Same holds for the earlier Bartlett and Mendelson (2002); Neyshabur et al. (2015b); Bartlett et al. (2017);
Neyshabur et al. (2017a); Golowich et al. (2017); see Figure 3). Another notion of noise stability —closely related to
dropout and batch normalization—is stability of the output
with respect to the noise injected at the nodes of the network,
which was recently shown experimentally (Morcos et al.,
2018) to improve in tandem with generalization ability during training, and to be absent in nets trained on random data.
Chaudhari et al. (2016) suggest adding noise to gradient
descent to bias it towards finding flat minima.
While study of generalization may appear a bit academic —
held-out data easily establishes generalization in practice—
the ultimate hope is that it will help identify simple, measurable and intuitive properties of well-trained deep nets, which
in turn may fuel superior architectures and faster training.
We hope the detailed study —theoretical and empirical—in
the current paper advances this goal.

