Deep Asymmetric Multi-task Feature Learning

Hae Beom Lee 1 2 Eunho Yang 3 2 Sung Ju Hwang 3 2

Abstract
We propose Deep Asymmetric Multitask Feature
Learning (Deep-AMTFL) which can learn deep
representations shared across multiple tasks while
effectively preventing negative transfer that may
happen in the feature sharing process. Specifically, we introduce an asymmetric autoencoder
term that allows reliable predictors for the easy
tasks to have high contribution to the feature learning while suppressing the influences of unreliable
predictors for more difficult tasks. This allows
the learning of less noisy representations, and
enables unreliable predictors to exploit knowledge from the reliable predictors via the shared
latent features. Such asymmetric knowledge transfer through shared features is also more scalable
and efficient than inter-task asymmetric transfer.
We validate our Deep-AMTFL model on multiple benchmark datasets for multitask learning and
image classification, on which it significantly outperforms existing symmetric and asymmetric multitask learning models, by effectively preventing
negative transfer in deep feature learning.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (Caruana, 1997) aims to improve the
generalization performance of the multiple task predictors
by jointly training them, while allowing some kinds of
knowledge transfer between them. One of the crucial challenges in multi-task learning is tackling the problem of
negative transfer, which describes the situation where accurate predictors for easier tasks are negatively affected
by inaccurate predictors for more difficult tasks. A recently introduced method, Asymmetric Multi-task Learning
(AMTL) (Lee et al., 2016), proposes to solve this nega*

Equal contribution 1 UNIST, Ulsan, South Korea 2 AItrics,
Seoul, South Korea 3 KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to:
Hae Beom Lee <hblee@unist.ac.kr>,
Eunho Yang <eunhoy@kaist.ac.kr>, Sung Ju Hwang <sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

tive transfer problem by allowing asymmetric knowledge
transfer between tasks through inter-task parameter regularization. Specifically, AMTL enforces the task parameters
for each task to be also represented as a sparse combination
of the parameters for other tasks, which results in learning a directed graph that decides the amount of knowledge
transfer between tasks.
However, such inter-task transfer model based on parameter regularization is limited in several aspects. First of
all, in most cases, the tasks exhibit relatedness to certain
degree, but the model parameter for a task might not be
reconstructed as a combination of the parameter for other
tasks, because the tasks are only partly related. Consider the
example in Fig. 1(b), where the task is to predict whether
the given image has any of the three animal classes. Here,
the three animal classes are obviously related as they share
a common visual attribute, stripe. Yet, we will not be able
to reconstruct the model parameter for class hyena by combining the model parameters for class tiger and zebra, as
there are other important attributes that define the hyena
class, and the stripe is merely a single attribute among them
that is also shared by other classes. Thus, it is more natural to presume that the related tasks leverage a common
set of latent representations, rather than considering that a
task parameter is generated from the parameters for a set of
relevant tasks, as assume in inter-task transfer models.
Moreover, AMTL does not scale well with the increasing
number of tasks since the inter-task knowledge transfer
graph grows quadratically, and thus will become both inefficient and prone to overfitting when there are large number
of tasks, such as in large-scale classification. While sparsity
can help reduce the number of parameters, it does not reduce
the intrinsic complexity of the problem.
Finally, the inter-task transfer models only store the knowledge in the means of learned model parameters and their
relationship graph. However, at times, it might be beneficial
to store what has been learned, in the form of explicit representations which can be used later for other tasks, such as
transfer learning.
Thus, we resort to the multi-task feature learning approach
that aims to learn latent features, which is one of the most
popular ways of sharing knowledge between tasks in the
multi-task learning framework (Argyriou et al., 2008; Ku-

