Obfuscated Gradients Give a False Sense of Security:
Circumventing Defenses to Adversarial Examples

Anish Athalye * 1 Nicholas Carlini * 2 David Wagner 2

Abstract
We identify obfuscated gradients, a kind of gradient masking, as a phenomenon that leads to a false
sense of security in defenses against adversarial
examples. While defenses that cause obfuscated
gradients appear to defeat iterative optimizationbased attacks, we find defenses relying on this
effect can be circumvented. We describe characteristic behaviors of defenses exhibiting the effect,
and for each of the three types of obfuscated gradients we discover, we develop attack techniques
to overcome it. In a case study, examining noncertified white-box-secure defenses at ICLR 2018,
we find obfuscated gradients are a common occurrence, with 7 of 9 defenses relying on obfuscated
gradients. Our new attacks successfully circumvent 6 completely, and 1 partially, in the original
threat model each paper considers.

1. Introduction
In response to the susceptibility of neural networks to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013; Biggio et al., 2013),
there has been significant interest recently in constructing defenses to increase the robustness of neural networks. While
progress has been made in understanding and defending
against adversarial examples in the white-box setting, where
the adversary has full access to the network, a complete
solution has not yet been found.
As benchmarking against iterative optimization-based attacks (e.g., Kurakin et al. (2016a); Madry et al. (2018);
Carlini & Wagner (2017c)) has become standard practice in
evaluating defenses, new defenses have arisen that appear to
be robust against these powerful optimization-based attacks.
We identify one common reason why many defenses provide
*
Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 University of California, Berkeley.
Correspondence
to: Anish Athalye <aathalye@mit.edu>, Nicholas Carlini
<npc@cs.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

apparent robustness against iterative optimization attacks:
obfuscated gradients, a term we define as a special case of
gradient masking (Papernot et al., 2017). Without a good
gradient, where following the gradient does not successfully
optimize the loss, iterative optimization-based methods cannot succeed. We identify three types of obfuscated gradients:
shattered gradients are nonexistent or incorrect gradients
caused either intentionally through non-differentiable operations or unintentionally through numerical instability;
stochastic gradients depend on test-time randomness; and
vanishing/exploding gradients in very deep computation
result in an unusable gradient.
We propose new techniques to overcome obfuscated gradients caused by these three phenomena. We address gradient
shattering with a new attack technique we call Backward
Pass Differentiable Approximation, where we approximate
derivatives by computing the forward pass normally and
computing the backward pass using a differentiable approximation of the function. We compute gradients of randomized defenses by applying Expectation Over Transformation (Athalye et al., 2017). We solve vanishing/exploding
gradients through reparameterization and optimize over a
space where gradients do not explode/vanish.
To investigate the prevalence of obfuscated gradients and
understand the applicability of these attack techniques, we
use as a case study the ICLR 2018 non-certified defenses
that claim white-box robustness. We find that obfuscated
gradients are a common occurrence, with 7 of 9 defenses
relying on this phenomenon. Applying the new attack techniques we develop, we overcome obfuscated gradients and
circumvent 6 of them completely, and 1 partially, under the
original threat model of each paper. Along with this, we
offer an analysis of the evaluations performed in the papers.
Additionally, we hope to provide researchers with a common
baseline of knowledge, description of attack techniques,
and common evaluation pitfalls, so that future defenses can
avoid falling vulnerable to these same attack approaches.
To promote reproducible research, we release our reimplementation of each of these defenses, along with implementations of our attacks for each. 1
1

https://github.com/anishathalye/obfuscated-gradients

