An Alternative View: When Does SGD Escape Local Minima?

Robert Kleinberg 1 Yuanzhi Li 2 Yang Yuan 1

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is widely used
in machine learning. Although being commonly
viewed as a fast but not accurate version of gradient descent (GD), it always finds better solutions
than GD for modern neural networks. In order to
understand this phenomenon, we take an alternative view that SGD is working on the convolved
(thus smoothed) version of the loss function. We
show that, even if the function f has many bad
local minima or saddle points, as long as for every
point x, the weighted average of the gradients of
its neighborhoods is one point convex with respect
to the desired solution x∗ , SGD will get close to,
and then stay around x∗ with constant probability.
Our result identifies a set of functions that SGD
provably works, which is much larger than the set
of convex functions. Empirically, we observe that
the loss surface of neural networks enjoys nice
one point convexity properties locally, therefore
our theorem helps explain why SGD works so
well for neural networks.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, stochastic gradient descent (SGD), as well as
its variants (Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014), Momentum
(Sutskever et al., 2013), Adagrad (Duchi et al., 2011), etc.)
have become the de facto algorithms for training neural
networks. SGD runs iterative updates for the weights xt :
xt+1 = xt −ηvt , where η is the step size 1 . vt is the stochastic gradient that satisfies E[vt ] = ∇f (xt ), and is usually
computed using a mini-batch of the dataset.
In the regime of convex optimization, SGD is proved to be
a nice tradeoff between accuracy and efficiency: it requires
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University. Correspondence to: Yang Yuan <yangyuan@cs.cornell.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).
1
In this paper, we use step size and learning rate interchangeably.

more iterations to converge, but fewer gradient evaluations
per iteration. Therefore, for the standard empirical risk minimizing problems with n points and smoothness L, to get to
-close to x∗ , GD needs O(Ln/) gradient evaluations (Nesterov, 2014), but SGD with reduced variance only needs
O(n log 1 + L ) gradient evaluations (Johnson & Zhang,
2013; Defazio et al., 2014; Schmidt et al., 2016; Allen-Zhu
& Yuan, 2016). In these scenarios, noise is a by-product of
cheap gradient computation, and does not help training.
By contrast, for non-convex optimization problems like
training neural networks, noise seems crucial. It is observed
that with the help of noisy gradients, SGD does not only
converge faster, but also converge to a better solution compared with GD (Keskar et al., 2017). To formally understand
this phenomenon, people have analyzed the role of noise in
various settings. For example, it is proved that noise helps
to escape saddle points (Ge et al., 2015; Jin et al., 2017),
gives better generalization (Hardt et al., 2015; Mou et al.,
2017), and also guarantees polynomial hitting time of good
local minima under some assumptions (Zhang et al., 2017).
However, it is still unclear why SGD could converge to
better local minima than GD. Empirically, in additional to
the gradient noise, the step size is observed to be a key factor
in optimization. More specifically, small step size helps
refine the network and converge to a local minimum, while
large step size helps escape the current local minimum and
go towards a better one (Huang et al., 2017; Loshchilov &
Hutter, 2017). Thus, standard training schedule for modern
networks uses large step size first, and shrinks it later (He
et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2016). While using large step
sizes to escape local minima matches with intuition, the
existing analysis on SGD for non-convex objectives always
considers the small-step-size settings (Ge et al., 2015; Jin
et al., 2017; Hardt et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2017).
See Figure 1 for an illustration. Consider the scenario that
for some xt , instead of pointing to the solution (not shown),
its negative gradient points to a bad local minimum x◦ , so
following the full gradient we will arrive yt , xt −η∇f (xt ).
Fortunately, since we are running SGD, the actual direction
we take is −ηvt = −η(∇f (xt ) + ωt ), where ωt is the noise
with E[ωt ] = 0, ωt ∼ W (xt )2 . As we show in Figure 1, if
we take a large η, we may get out of the basin region with
2

W (xt ) is data dependent.

