Variational Bayesian dropout: pitfalls and fixes

Jiri Hron 1 Alexander G. de G. Matthews 1 Zoubin Ghahramani 1 2

Abstract
Dropout, a stochastic regularisation technique for
training of neural networks, has recently been
reinterpreted as a specific type of approximate
inference algorithm for Bayesian neural networks.
The main contribution of the reinterpretation is
in providing a theoretical framework useful for
analysing and extending the algorithm. We show
that the proposed framework suffers from several
issues; from undefined or pathological behaviour
of the true posterior related to use of improper
priors, to an ill-defined variational objective due
to singularity of the approximating distribution
relative to the true posterior. Our analysis of
the improper log uniform prior used in variational
Gaussian dropout suggests the pathologies are
generally irredeemable, and that the algorithm
still works only because the variational formulation annuls some of the pathologies. To address the singularity issue, we proffer Quasi-KL
(QKL) divergence, a new approximate inference
objective for approximation of high-dimensional
distributions. We show that motivations for variational Bernoulli dropout based on discretisation
and noise have QKL as a limit. Properties of
QKL are studied both theoretically and on a simple practical example which shows that the QKLoptimal approximation of a full rank Gaussian
with a degenerate one naturally leads to the Principal Component Analysis solution.

1. Introduction
Srivastava et al. (2014) proposed dropout as a cheap way
of preventing Neural Networks (NN) from overfitting.
This work was rather impactful and sparked large interest in studying and extending the algorithm. One strand of
this research lead to reinterpretation of dropout as a form of
1

Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 2 Uber AI Labs, San Francisco, California,
USA. Correspondence to: Jiri Hron <jh2084@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

approximate Bayesian variational inference (Kingma et al.,
2015; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Gal, 2016).
There are two main reasons for attempting reinterpretation
of an existing method: 1) providing a principled interpretation of the empirical behaviour; 2) extending the method
based on the acquired insights. Variational Bayesian dropout
has been arguably successful in meeting the latter criterion
(Kingma et al., 2015; Gal, 2016; Molchanov et al., 2017).
This paper thus focuses on the former by studying the theoretical soundness of variational Bayesian dropout and the implications for interpretation of the empirical results.
The first main contribution of our work is identification of two main sources of issues in current variational
Bayesian dropout theory:
(a) use of improper or pathological prior distributions;
(b) singularity of the approximate posterior distribution.
As we describe in Section 3, the log uniform prior introduced in (Kingma et al., 2015) generally does not induce a proper posterior, and thus the reported sparsification (Molchanov et al., 2017) cannot be explained by
the standard Bayesian and the related minimum description length (MDL) arguments. In this sense, sparsification
via variational inference with log uniform prior falls into
the same category of non-Bayesian approaches as, for example, Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996). Specifically, the approximate
uncertainty estimates do not have the usual interpretation,
and the model may exhibit overfitting. Consequently, we
study the objective from a non-Bayesian perspective, proving that the optimised objective is impervious to some of
the described pathologies due to the properties of the variational formulation itself, which might explain why the algorithm can still provide good empirical results.1
Section 4 shows how mismatch between support of the approximate and the true posterior renders application of
the standard Variational Inference (VI) impossible by making the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence undefined. As
the second main contribution, we address this issue by proving that the remedies to this problem proposed in (Gal &
Ghahramani, 2016; Gal, 2016) are special cases of a broader
1
An earlier version of this work was published in (Hron et al.,
2017).

