Addressing Function Approximation Error in Actor-Critic Methods

Scott Fujimoto 1 Herke van Hoof 2 David Meger 1

Abstract
In value-based reinforcement learning methods
such as deep Q-learning, function approximation
errors are known to lead to overestimated value
estimates and suboptimal policies. We show that
this problem persists in an actor-critic setting and
propose novel mechanisms to minimize its effects
on both the actor and the critic. Our algorithm
builds on Double Q-learning, by taking the minimum value between a pair of critics to limit overestimation. We draw the connection between target networks and overestimation bias, and suggest
delaying policy updates to reduce per-update error
and further improve performance. We evaluate
our method on the suite of OpenAI gym tasks,
outperforming the state of the art in every environment tested.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning problems with discrete action
spaces, the issue of value overestimation as a result of function approximation errors is well-studied. However, similar
issues with actor-critic methods in continuous control domains have been largely left untouched. In this paper, we
show overestimation bias and the accumulation of error in
temporal difference methods are present in an actor-critic
setting. Our proposed method addresses these issues, and
greatly outperforms the current state of the art.
Overestimation bias is a property of Q-learning in which the
maximization of a noisy value estimate induces a consistent
overestimation (Thrun & Schwartz, 1993). In a function
approximation setting, this noise is unavoidable given the
imprecision of the estimator. This inaccuracy is further
exaggerated by the nature of temporal difference learning
(Sutton, 1988), in which an estimate of the value function
is updated using the estimate of a subsequent state. This
1

McGill University, Montreal, Canada 2 University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Correspondence to: Scott Fujimoto
<scott.fujimoto@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

means using an imprecise estimate within each update will
lead to an accumulation of error. Due to overestimation bias,
this accumulated error can cause arbitrarily bad states to
be estimated as high value, resulting in suboptimal policy
updates and divergent behavior.
This paper begins by establishing this overestimation property is also present for deterministic policy gradients (Silver
et al., 2014), in the continuous control setting. Furthermore,
we find the ubiquitous solution in the discrete action setting,
Double DQN (Van Hasselt et al., 2016), to be ineffective
in an actor-critic setting. During training, Double DQN
estimates the value of the current policy with a separate target value function, allowing actions to be evaluated without
maximization bias. Unfortunately, due to the slow-changing
policy in an actor-critic setting, the current and target value
estimates remain too similar to avoid maximization bias.
This can be dealt with by adapting an older variant, Double
Q-learning (Van Hasselt, 2010), to an actor-critic format
by using a pair of independently trained critics. While this
allows for a less biased value estimation, even an unbiased
estimate with high variance can still lead to future overestimations in local regions of state space, which in turn can
negatively affect the global policy. To address this concern,
we propose a clipped Double Q-learning variant which leverages the notion that a value estimate suffering from overestimation bias can be used as an approximate upper-bound to
the true value estimate. This favors underestimations, which
do not tend to be propagated during learning, as actions with
low value estimates are avoided by the policy.
Given the connection of noise to overestimation bias, this
paper contains a number of components that address variance reduction. First, we show that target networks, a common approach in deep Q-learning methods, are critical for
variance reduction by reducing the accumulation of errors.
Second, to address the coupling of value and policy, we
propose delaying policy updates until the value estimate
has converged. Finally, we introduce a novel regularization
strategy, where a SARSA-style update bootstraps similar
action estimates to further reduce variance.
Our modifications are applied to the state of the art actorcritic method for continuous control, Deep Deterministic
Policy Gradient algorithm (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al., 2015), to
form the Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient

