Fairness Without Demographics in Repeated Loss Minimization

Tatsunori B. Hashimoto 1 2 Megha Srivastava 1 Hongseok Namkoong 3 Percy Liang 1

Abstract
Machine learning models (e.g., speech recognizers) are usually trained to minimize average
loss, which results in representation disparity—
minority groups (e.g., non-native speakers) contribute less to the training objective and thus tend
to suffer higher loss. Worse, as model accuracy
affects user retention, a minority group can shrink
over time. In this paper, we first show that the status quo of empirical risk minimization (ERM) amplifies representation disparity over time, which
can even make initially fair models unfair. To mitigate this, we develop an approach based on distributionally robust optimization (DRO), which
minimizes the worst case risk over all distributions close to the empirical distribution. We prove
that this approach controls the risk of the minority
group at each time step, in the spirit of Rawlsian
distributive justice, while remaining oblivious to
the identity of the groups. We demonstrate that
DRO prevents disparity amplification on examples where ERM fails, and show improvements
in minority group user satisfaction in a real-world
text autocomplete task.

1. Introduction
Consider a speech recognizer that is deployed to millions
of users. State-of-the art speech recognizers achieve high
overall accuracy, yet it is well known that such systems have
systematically high errors on minority accents (Amodei
et al., 2016). We refer to this phenomenon of high overall
accuracy but low minority accuracy as a representation disparity, which is the result of optimizing for average loss.
This representation disparity forms our definition of unfairness, and has been observed in face recognition (Grother
et al., 2011), language identification (Blodgett et al., 2016;
1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford, USA 2 Department
of Statistics, Stanford, USA 3 Management Science & Engineering, Stanford, USA. Correspondence to: Tatsunori Hashimoto
<thashim@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Jurgens et al., 2017), dependency parsing (Blodgett et al.,
2016), part-of-speech tagging (Hovy & Sgaard, 2015), academic recommender systems (Sapiezynski et al., 2017), and
automatic video captioning (Tatman, 2017).
Moreover, a minority user suffering from a higher error rate
will become discouraged and more likely to stop using the
system, thus no longer providing data to the system. As
a result, the minority group will shrink and might suffer
even higher error rates from a retrained model in a future
time step. Machine learning driven feedback loops have
been observed in predictive policing (Fuster et al., 2017)
and credit markets (Fuster et al., 2017), and this problem
of disparity amplification is a possibility in any deployed
machine learning system that is retrained on user data.
In this paper, we aim to mitigate the representation disparity
problem and its amplification through time. We focus on the
following setting: at each time step, each user interacts with
the current model and incurs some loss, based on which
she decides to keep or quit using the service. A model is
trained on the resulting user data which is used at the next
time step. We assume that each user comes from one of K
groups, and our goal is to minimize the worst case risk of
any group across time. However, the group membership and
number of groups K are both unknown, as full demographic
information is likely missing in real online services.
We first show that empirical risk minimization (ERM) does
not control the worst-case risk over the disparate K groups
and show examples where ERM turns initially fair models
unfair (Section 3). To remedy this issue, we propose the use
of distributionally robust optimization (DRO) (Section 4).
Given a lower bound on the smallest group proportion, we
show that optimizing the worst-case risk over an appropriate
chi-square divergence ball bounds the worst-case risk over
groups. Our approach is computationally efficient, and can
be applied as a small modification to a wide class machine
learning models trained by stochastic gradient descent methods. We show that DRO succeeds on the examples where
ERM becomes unfair, and demonstrate higher average minority user satisfaction and lower disparity amplification on
a Amazon Mechanical Turk based autocomplete task.

