Weakly Submodular Maximization Beyond Cardinality Constraints: Does
Randomization Help Greedy?

Lin Chen 1 2 Moran Feldman 3 Amin Karbasi 1 2

Abstract
Submodular functions are a broad class of set
functions that naturally arise in many machine
learning applications. Due to their combinatorial
structures, there has been a myriad of algorithms
for maximizing such functions under various constraints. Unfortunately, once a function deviates
from submodularity (even slightly), the known algorithms may perform arbitrarily poorly. Amending this issue, by obtaining approximation results
for functions obeying properties that generalize
submodularity, has been the focus of several recent works. One such class, known as weakly
submodular functions, has received a lot of recent
attention from the machine learning community
due to its strong connections to restricted strong
convexity and sparse reconstruction. In this paper, we prove that a randomized version of the
greedy algorithm achieves an approximation ratio of (1 + 1/γ)−2 for weakly submodular maximization subject to a general matroid constraint,
where γ is a parameter measuring the distance
from submodularity. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first algorithm with a non-trivial
approximation guarantee for this constrained optimization problem. Moreover, our experimental
results show that our proposed algorithm performs
well in a variety of real-world problems, including regression, video summarization, splice site
detection, and black-box interpretation.

1. Introduction
Motivated by the frequent appearances of submodular functions in both theoretical and practical settings, the last
Authors are listed in alphabetical order. 1 Yale Institute for Network Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA 2 Department
of Electrical Engineering, Yale University 3 Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Open University of Israel, Ra’anana,
Israel. Correspondence to: Lin Chen <lin.chen@yale.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

decade has seen a proliferation of works on maximization
of submodular functions. In particular, algorithms for maximizing a submodular function subject to various constraints
have found many applications in machine learning and data
mining, including data summarization (Mirzasoleiman et al.,
2016a; Wei et al., 2013), document summarization (Lin &
Bilmes, 2010; 2011), sensor placement (Krause et al., 2008;
Krause & Guestrin, 2005), network reconstruction (Chen
et al., 2016; Gomez Rodriguez et al., 2010), crowd teaching (Singla et al., 2014), spread of influence (Kempe et al.,
2003) and article recommendation (El-Arini & Guestrin,
2011; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2016b).
Despite the above mentioned abundance of settings which
give raise to submodular functions, it has been observed
that there are also many settings inducing functions that
are close to submodular (in some sense), but not strictly
submodular. Unfortunately, algorithms that have been developed for maximization of true submodular functions often
fail miserably when given a function which is only close
to submodular (Hassidim & Singer, 2017). This hurdle has
motivated the development of algorithms whose guarantee
degrades gracefully with the distance of the function from
submodularity. In particular, such algorithms have been developed for functions that are: close to submodular under a
distance measure known as the supermodular degree (Feige
& Izsak, 2013; Feldman & Izsak, 2014; 2017), close to a
submodular function up to a multiplicative factor (Horel &
Singer, 2016), noisy versions of submodular functions under
various noise models (Hassidim & Singer, 2017), almost
submodular in the sense that they satisfy the submodularity
inequality f (A) + f (B) ≥ f (A ∪ B) + f (A ∩ B) up to a
fixed constant (Bateni et al., 2013) or belong to a class of
functions known as hypergraph-r valuations which restricts
the kinds of interplay between elements that can affect a
function’s values (Abraham et al., 2012).
A particularly important class of close to submodular functions, known as γ-weakly submodular functions (where γ
is a parameter measuring the distance of the function from
being submodular), has received a lot of attention from the
machine learning community. Weakly submodular functions were originally introduced by Das & Kempe (2011),
who showed that the standard greedy algorithm achieves a

