Orthogonal Machine Learning: Power and Limitations

Lester Mackey 1 Vasilis Syrgkanis 1 Ilias Zadik 1 2

Abstract

√

Double machine learning provides n-consistent
estimates of parameters of interest even when
high-dimensional or nonparametric nuisance parameters are estimated at an n−1/4 rate. The key
is to employ Neyman-orthogonal moment equations which are first-order insensitive to perturbations in the nuisance parameters. We show
that the n−1/4 requirement can be improved to
n−1/(2k+2) by employing a k-th order notion of
orthogonality that grants robustness to more complex or higher-dimensional nuisance parameters.
In the partially linear regression setting, popular
in causal inference, we show that we can construct second-order orthogonal moments if and
only if the treatment residual is not normally distributed. Our proof relies on Stein’s lemma and
may be of independent interest. We conclude by
demonstrating the robustness benefits of an explicit doubly-orthogonal estimation procedure for
treatment effect.

1. Introduction
The increased availability of large and complex observational datasets is driving an increasing demand to conduct
accurate causal inference of treatment effects in the presence of high-dimensional confounding factors. We take as
our running example demand estimation from pricing and
purchase data in the digital economy where many features
of the world that simultaneously affect pricing decisions
and demand are available in large data stores. One often
appeals to modern statistical machine learning (ML) techniques to model and fit the high-dimensional or nonparametric nuisance parameters introduced by these confounders.
However, most such techniques introduce bias into their
estimates (e.g., via regularization) and hence yield invalid or
1

2

Microsoft Research New England, USA Operations
Research Center, MIT, USA. Correspondence to: Lester
Mackey <lmackey@microsoft.com>, Vasilis Syrgkanis
<vasy@microsoft.com>, Ilias Zadik <izadik@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

inaccurate inferences concerning the parameters of interest
(the treatment effects).
Several recent lines of have begun address the problem of
debiasing ML estimators to perform accurate inference on a
low dimensional component of model parameters. Prominent examples include Lasso debiasing (Zhang & Zhang;
van de Geer et al., 2014; Javanmard & Montanari, 2015) and
post-selection inference (Belloni et al.; Berk et al., 2013;
Tibshirani et al., 2016). The recent double / debiased ML
work of Chernozhukov et al. (2017) describes a generalpurpose strategy for extracting valid inferences for target
parameters from somewhat arbitrary and relatively inaccurate estimates of nuisance parameters.
Specifically, Chernozhukov et al. (2017) analyze a twostage process where in the first stage one estimates nuisance
parameters using arbitrary statistical ML techniques on a
first stage data sample and in the second stage estimates the
low dimensional parameters of interest via the generalized
method of moments (GMM). Crucially, the moments in the
second stage are required to satisfy a Neyman orthogonality
condition, granting them first-order robustness to errors
in the nuisance parameter estimation. A
√ main conclusion
is that the second stage estimates are n-consistent and
asymptotically normal whenever the first stage estimates are
consistently estimated at a o(n−1/4 ) rate.
To illustrate this result, let us consider the partially linear
regression (PLR) model, popular in causal inference. In the
PLR model we observe data triplets Z = (T, Y, X), where
T ∈ R represents a treatment or policy applied, Y ∈ R
represents an outcome of interest, and X ∈ Rp is a vector
of associated covariates. These observations are related via
the equations
Y = θ0 T + f0 (X) + ,
T = g0 (X) + η,

E[ | X, T ] = 0

a.s.

E[η | X] = 0 a.s.

where η and  represent unobserved disturbances with distributions independent of (θ0 , f0 , g0 ). The first equation
features the treatment effect θ0 , our object of inference. The
second equation describes the relation between the treatment T and the associated covariates X. The covariates X
affect the outcome Y through the nuisance function f0 and
the treatment T through the nuisance function g0 . Using
the Neyman-orthogonal moment of (Chernozhukov et al.,

