Transformation Autoregressive Networks

1. Introduction
Density estimation is at the core of a multitude of machine
learning applications. However, this fundamental task is difficult in the general setting due to issues like the curse of
dimensionality. Furthermore, for general data, unlike spatial/temporal data, we do not have known correlations a
priori among covariates that may be exploited. For example, image data has known correlations among neighboring
pixels that may be hard-coded into a model through convolutions, whereas one must find such correlations in a
data-driven fashion with general data.
1
Computer Science Department, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 (Work completed while at
CMU.) 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. Correspondence to: Junier Oliva
<joliva@cs.unc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

10-7

music
(d=90)

satimage2
(d=36)

hepmass
(d=28)

higgs
(d = 28)

10-21

NADE
NICE
ARC
NLT
TAN

susy
(d = 18)

10-14

pendigits
(d = 16)

The fundamental task of general density estimation p(x) has been of keen interest to machine
learning. In this work, we attempt to systematically characterize methods for density estimation.
Broadly speaking, most of the existing methods
can be categorized into either using: a) autoregressive models to estimate the conditional factors of
the chain rule, p(xi ∣ xi−1 , . . .); or b) non-linear
transformations of variables of a simple base distribution. Based on the study of the characteristics of these categories, we propose multiple
novel methods for each category. For example
we propose RNN based transformations to model
non-Markovian dependencies. Further, through
a comprehensive study over both real world and
synthetic data, we show that jointly leveraging
transformations of variables and autoregressive
conditional models, results in a considerable improvement in performance. We illustrate the use
of our models in outlier detection and image modeling. Finally we introduce a novel data driven
framework for learning a family of distributions.

100

forrest
(d = 10)

Abstract

Relative Test Likelihood

Junier B Oliva 1 2 Avinava Dubey 2 Manzil Zaheer 2
Barnabás Póczos 2 Ruslan Salakhutdinov 2 Eric P Xing 2 Jeff Schneider 2

Datasets
Figure 1. The proposed TAN models
for density estimation, which
jointly leverages non-linear transformation and autoregressive conditionals, shows considerable improvement over other methods
across datasets of varying dimensions. The scatter plots shows that
only utilizing autoregressive conditionals (ARC) without transformations (e.g. existing works like NADE (Uria et al., 2014) and
other variants) or only using non-linear transformation (NLT) with
simple restricted conditionals (e.g. existing works like NICE (Dinh
et al., 2014) and other variants) is not sufficient for all datasets.

In order to model high dimensional data, the main challenge
lies in constructing models that are flexible enough while
having tractable learning algorithms. A variety of diverse
solutions exploiting different aspects of the problems have
been proposed in the literature. A large number of methods
have considered auto-regressive models to estimate the conditional factors p(xi ∣xi−1 , . . . , x1 ), for i ∈ {1, . . . , d} in the
chain rule (Larochelle & Murray, 2011; Uria et al., 2013;
2016; Germain et al., 2015; Gregor et al., 2014). While some
methods directly model the conditionals p(xi ∣xi−1 , . . .) using sophisticated semiparametric density estimates, other
methods apply sophisticated transformations of variables
x ↦ z and take the conditionals over z to be a restricted,
often independent base distribution p(zi ∣zi−1 , . . .) ≈ f (zi )
(Dinh et al., 2014; 2016). Further related works are discussed in Sec. 3. However, looking across a diverse set of
dataset, as in Fig. 1, neither of these approaches have the
flexibility required to accurately model real world data.
In this paper we take a step back and start from the basics.
If we only model the conditionals, the conditional factors
p(xi ∣xi−1 , . . .), may become increasingly complicated as
i increases to d. On the other hand if we use a complex

