On the Generalization of Equivariance and Convolution in Neural Networks
to the Action of Compact Groups

Risi Kondor 1 Shubhendu Trivedi 2

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks have been extremely successful in the image recognition domain because they ensure equivariance to translations. There have been many recent attempts
to generalize this framework to other domains,
including graphs and data lying on manifolds. In
this paper we give a rigorous, theoretical treatment of convolution and equivariance in neural
networks with respect to not just translations, but
the action of any compact group. Our main result
is to prove that (given some natural constraints)
convolutional structure is not just a sufficient, but
also a necessary condition for equivariance to the
action of a compact group. Our exposition makes
use of concepts from representation theory and
noncommutative harmonic analysis and derives
new generalized convolution formulae.

1. Introduction
One of the most successful neural network architectures
is convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al.,
1989). In the image recognition domain, where CNNs were
originally conceived, convolution plays two crucial roles.
First, it ensures that in any given layer, exactly the same
filters are applied to each part of the image. Consequently, if
the input image is translated, the activations of the network
in each layer will translate the same way. This property
is called equivariance (Cohen & Welling, 2016). Second,
in conjunction with pooling, convolution ensures that each
neuron’s effective receptive field is a spatially contiguous
domain. As we move higher in the network, these domains
generally get larger, allowing the CNN to capture structure
in images at multiple different scales.
1
Departments of Statistics and Computer Science, The University of Chicago 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago.
Correspondence to: Risi Kondor <risi@cs.uchicago.edu>, Shubhendu Trivedi <shubhendu@ttic.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Recently, there has been considerable interest in extending
neural networks to more exotic types of data, such as graphs
or functions on manifolds (Niepert et al., 2016; Defferrard
et al., 2016; Duvenaud et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016; Cohen
et al., 2018; Monti et al., 2017; Masci et al., 2015). In
these domains, equivariance and multiscale structure are
just as important as for images, but finding the right notion
of convolution is not obvious.
On the other hand, mathematics does offer a sweeping generalization of convolution tied in deeply with some fundamental ideas of abstract algebra: if G is a compact group
and f and g are two functions G → C, then the convolution
of f with g is defined
Z
(f ∗ g)(u) =
f (uv −1 ) g(v) dµ(v).
(1)
G

Note the striking similarity of this formula to the ordinary
notion of convolution, except that in the argument of f ,
u − v has been replaced by the group operation uv −1 , and
integration is with respect to the Haar measure, µ.
The goal of this paper is to relate (1) to the various looser
notions of convolution used in the neural networks literature,
and show that several practical neural networks implicitly
already take advantange of the above group theoretic concept of convolution. In particular, we prove the following
theorem (paraphrased here for simplicity).
Theorem 1. A feed forward neural network N is equivariant to the action of a compact group G on its inputs if and
only if each layer of N implements a generalized form of
convolution derived from (1).
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that the
connection between equivariance and convolution in neural
networks has been stated at this level of generality. One
of the technical challenges in proving our theorem is that
the activations in each layer of a neural net correspond to
functions on a sequence of spaces acted on by G (called homogeneous spaces or quotient spaces) rather than functions
on G itself. This necessitates a discussion of group convolution that is rather more thoroughgoing than is customary in
pure algebra.
This paper does not present any new algorithms or neural

