Tighter Variational Bounds are Not Necessarily Better

Tom Rainforth 1 Adam R. Kosiorek 1 2 Tuan Anh Le 2 Chris J. Maddison 1 Maximilian Igl 2 Frank Wood 3
Yee Whye Teh 1

Abstract
We provide theoretical and empirical evidence
that using tighter evidence lower bounds (ELBOs)
can be detrimental to the process of learning an
inference network by reducing the signal-to-noise
ratio of the gradient estimator. Our results call
into question common implicit assumptions that
tighter ELBOs are better variational objectives for
simultaneous model learning and inference amortization schemes. Based on our insights, we introduce three new algorithms: the partially importance weighted auto-encoder (PIWAE), the multiply importance weighted auto-encoder (MIWAE),
and the combination importance weighted autoencoder (CIWAE), each of which includes the standard importance weighted auto-encoder (IWAE) as
a special case. We show that each can deliver improvements over IWAE, even when performance is
measured by the IWAE target itself. Furthermore,
our results suggest that PIWAE may be able to deliver simultaneous improvements in the training
of both the inference and generative networks.

1

Introduction

Variational bounds provide tractable and state-of-the-art objectives for training deep generative models (Kingma &
Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014). Typically taking the
form of a lower bound on the intractable model evidence,
they provide surrogate targets that are more amenable to
optimization. In general, this optimization requires the generation of approximate posterior samples during the model
training and so a number of methods simultaneously learn an
inference network alongside the target generative network.
As well as assisting the training process, this inference network is often also of direct interest itself. For example, variational bounds are often used to train auto-encoders (Bourlard
1
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford 2 Department
of Engineering, University of Oxford 3 Department of Computer
Science, University of British Columbia. Correspondence to: Tom
Rainforth <rainforth@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

& Kamp, 1988; Hinton & Zemel, 1994; Gregor et al., 2016;
Chen et al., 2017), for which the inference network forms
the encoder. Variational bounds are also used in amortized
and traditional Bayesian inference contexts (Hoffman et al.,
2013; Ranganath et al., 2014; Paige & Wood, 2016; Le
et al., 2017), for which the generative model is fixed and the
inference network is the primary target for the training.
The performance of variational approaches depends upon
the choice of evidence lower bound (ELBO) and the formulation of the inference network, with the two often intricately
linked to one another; if the inference network formulation
is not sufficiently expressive, this can have a knock-on effect
on the generative network (Burda et al., 2016). In choosing
the ELBO, it is often implicitly assumed that using tighter
ELBOs is universally beneficial, at least whenever this does
not in turn lead to higher variance gradient estimates.
In this work we question this implicit assumption by demonstrating that, although using a tighter ELBO is typically beneficial to gradient updates of the generative network, it can
be detrimental to updates of the inference network. Remarkably, we find that it is possible to simultaneously tighten
the bound, reduce the variance of the gradient updates, and
arbitrarily deteriorate the training of the inference network.
Specifically, we present theoretical and empirical evidence
that increasing the number of importance sampling particles,
K, to tighten the bound in the importance-weighted autoencoder (IWAE) (Burda et al., 2016), degrades the signal-tonoise ratio (SNR) of the gradient estimates for the inference
network, inevitably deteriorating the overall learning process. In short, this behavior manifests because even though
increasing K decreases the standard deviation of the gradient estimates, it decreases the magnitude of the true gradient
faster, such that the relative variance increases.
Our results suggest that it may be best to use distinct objectives for learning the generative and inference networks,
or that when using the same target, it should take into account the needs of both networks. Namely, while tighter
bounds are typically better for training the generative network, looser bounds are often preferable for training the
inference network. Based on these insights, we introduce
three new algorithms: the partially importance-weighted
auto-encoder (PIWAE), the multiply importance-weighted
auto-encoder (MIWAE), and the combination importance-

