Active Learning with Logged Data

Songbai Yan 1 Kamalika Chaudhuri 1 Tara Javidi 1

Abstract
We consider active learning with logged data,
where labeled examples are drawn conditioned
on a predetermined logging policy, and the goal is
to learn a classifier on the entire population, not
just conditioned on the logging policy. Prior work
addresses this problem either when only logged
data is available, or purely in a controlled random experimentation setting where the logged
data is ignored. In this work, we combine both approaches to provide an algorithm that uses logged
data to bootstrap and inform experimentation,
thus achieving the best of both worlds. Our work
is inspired by a connection between controlled
random experimentation and active learning, and
modifies existing disagreement-based active learning algorithms to exploit logged data.

1. Introduction
We consider learning a classifier from logged data. Here,
the learner has access to a logged labeled dataset that has
been collected according to a known pre-determined policy,
and his goal is to learn a classifier that predicts the labels
accurately over the entire population, not just conditioned
on the logging policy.
This problem arises frequently in many natural settings.
An example is predicting the efficacy of a treatment as a
function of patient characteristics based on observed data.
Doctors may assign the treatment to patients based on some
predetermined rule; recording these patient outcomes produces a logged dataset where outcomes are observed conditioned on the doctors’ assignment. A second example is
recidivism prediction, where the goal is to predict whether
a convict will re-offend. Judges use their own predefined
policy to grant parole, and if parole is granted, then an outcome (reoffense or not) is observed. Thus the observed data
records outcomes conditioned on the judges’ parole policy,
1
University of California, San Diego. Correspondence to: Songbai Yan <yansongbai@eng.ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

while the learner’s goal is to learn a predictor over the entire
population.
A major challenge in learning from logged data is that the
logging policy may leave large areas of the data distribution
under-explored. Consequently, empirical risk minimization
(ERM) on the logged data leads to classifiers that may be
highly suboptimal on the population. When the logging
policy is known, a second option is to use a weighted ERM,
that reweighs each observed labeled data point to ensure
that it reflects the underlying population. However, this may
lead to sample inefficiency if the logging policy does not
adequately explore essential regions of the population. A
final approach, typically used in clinical trials, is controlled
random experimentation – essentially, ignore the logged
data, and record outcomes for fresh examples drawn from
the population. This approach is expensive due to the high
cost of trials, and wasteful since it ignores the observed data.
Motivated by these challenges, we propose active learning
to combine logged data with a small amount of strategically
chosen labeled data that can be used to correct the bias in the
logging policy. This solution has the potential to achieve the
best of both worlds by limiting experimentation to achieve
higher sample efficiency, and by making the most of the
logged data. Specifically, we assume that in addition to
the logged data, the learner has some additional unlabeled
data that he can selectively ask an annotator to label. The
learner’s goal is to learn a highly accurate classifier over the
entire population by using a combination of the logged data
and with as few label queries to the annotator as possible.
How can we utilize logged data for better active learning?
This problem has not been studied to the best of our knowledge. A naive approach is to use the logged data to come up
with a warm start and then do standard active learning. In
this work, we show that we can do even better. In addition
to the warm start, we show how to use multiple importance
sampling estimators to utilize the logged data more efficiently. Additionally, we introduce a novel debiasing policy
that selectively avoids label queries for those examples that
are highly represented in the logged data.
Combining these three approaches, we provide a new algorithm. We prove that our algorithm is statistically consistent,
and has a lower label requirement than simple active learning that uses the logged data as a warm start. Finally, we

