Orthogonal Recurrent Neural Networks with Scaled Cayley Transform

Kyle E. Helfrich * 1 Devin Willmott * 1 Qiang Ye 1
Abstract
oversteps the local minimum. This issue significantly diminishes RNNs’ ability to learn time-based dependencies,
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are designed
particularly in problems with long input sequences.
to handle sequential data but suffer from vanishA variety of architectures have been introduced to overcome
ing or exploding gradients. Recent work on Unithis difficulty. The current preferred RNN architectures are
tary Recurrent Neural Networks (uRNNs) have
those that introduce gating mechanisms to control when inbeen used to address this issue and in some cases,
formation is retained or discarded, such as LSTMs (Hochreexceed the capabilities of Long Short-Term Memiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and GRUs (Cho et al., 2014),
ory networks (LSTMs). We propose a simpler
at the cost of additional trainable parameters. More reand novel update scheme to maintain orthogonal
cently, the unitary evolution RNN (uRNN) (Arjovsky et al.,
recurrent weight matrices without using complex
2016) uses a parametrization that forces the recurrent weight
valued matrices. This is done by parametrizing
matrix to remain unitary throughout training, and exhibits
with a skew-symmetric matrix using the Cayley
superior performance to LSTMs on a variety of testing probtransform; such a parametrization is unable to replems. For clarity, we follow the convention of Wisdom et al.
resent matrices with negative one eigenvalues, but
(2016) and refer to this network as the restricted-capacity
this limitation is overcome by scaling the recuruRNN.
rent weight matrix by a diagonal matrix consisting
of ones and negative ones. The proposed training
Since the introduction of uRNNs, orthogonal and unitary
scheme involves a straightforward gradient calcuRNN schemes have increased in both popularity and comlation and update step. In several experiments, the
plexity. Wisdom et al. (2016) use a multiplicative update
proposed scaled Cayley orthogonal recurrent neumethod detailed in Tagare (2011) and Wen & Yin (2013)
ral network (scoRNN) achieves superior results
to expand uRNNs’ capacity to include all unitary matrices.
with fewer trainable parameters than other unitary
These networks are referred to as full-capacity uRNNs. Jing
RNNs.
et al. (2016) and Mhammedi et al. (2017) parametrize the

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been used to solve numerical
problems of varying complexity. RNNs have parameters
that are reused at each time step of a sequential data point
and have achieved state of the art performance on many sequential learning tasks. Nearly all optimization algorithms
for neural networks involve some variant of gradient descent.
One major obstacle to training RNNs with gradient descent
is due to vanishing or exploding gradients, as described in
Bengio et al. (1993) and Pascanu et al. (2013). This problem refers to the tendency of gradients to grow or decay
exponentially in size, resulting in gradient descent steps that
are too small to be effective or so large that the network
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA. Correspondence
to: Kyle Helfrich <kyle.helfrich@uky.edu>, Devin Willmott
<devin.willmott@uky.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

space of unitary/orthogonal matrices with Givens rotations
and Householder reflections, respectively, but typically optimize over a subset of this space by restricting the number of
parameters. Another complex parametrization has also been
explored in Hyland & Gunnar (2017). There is also work
using unitary matrices in GRUs (i.e. in GORU of Jing et al.
(2017)) or near-unitary matrices in RNNs by restricting the
singular values of the recurrent matrix to an interval around
1 (see Vorontsov et al. (2017)). For other work in addressing
the vanishing and exploding gradient problem, see Henaff
et al. (2017) and Le et al. (2015).
In this paper, we consider RNNs with a recurrent weight
matrix taken from the set of all orthogonal matrices. To
construct the orthogonal weight matrix, we parametrize
it with a skew-symmetric matrix through a scaled Cayley
transform. This scaling allows us to avoid the singularity
issue occurring for −1 eigenvalues that may arise in the
standard Cayley transform. By tuning this scaling matrix,
the network can reach an appropriate orthogonal matrix
using a relatively simple gradient descent update step. The
resulting method achieves superior performance on various
sequential data tasks.

