Learning Semantic Representations for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation

Shaoan Xie 1 2 Zibin Zheng 1 2 Liang Chen 1 2 Chuan Chen 1 2

Abstract
It is important to transfer the knowledge from
label-rich source domain to unlabeled target domain due to the expensive cost of manual labeling efforts. Prior domain adaptation methods
address this problem through aligning the global distribution statistics between source domain
and target domain, but a drawback of prior methods is that they ignore the semantic information
contained in samples, e.g., features of backpacks in target domain might be mapped near features of cars in source domain. In this paper, we
present moving semantic transfer network, which
learn semantic representations for unlabeled target samples by aligning labeled source centroid
and pseudo-labeled target centroid. Features in
same class but different domains are expected to
be mapped nearby, resulting in an improved target classification accuracy. Moving average centroid alignment is cautiously designed to compensate the insufficient categorical information
within each mini batch. Experiments testify that
our model yields state of the art results on standard datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep learning approaches have gained prominence in various machine learning problems and applications. However,
the recent success of deep learning depends on massive labeled data. Manual large scale labeled data on the target
domain are too expensive or impossible to collect in practice. Therefore, there is a strong motivation to build an
effective classification model using available labeled data
from other domains. But, this learning paradigms suffers
from the domain shift problem, which is an huge obstacle
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China 2 National Engineering Research Center of
Digital Life, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Zibin Zheng <zhzibin@mail.sysu.edu.cn>, Liang
Chen <chenliang6@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

for adapting predictive models to the target domain (Pan &
Yang, 2010).
Learning a discriminative predictor in the presence of the
shift between source domain and target domain is known
as domain adaptation (Pan & Yang, 2010). In recent years,
deep learning has shown its potential to produce transferable features for domain adaptation. Fruitful line of works
have been done in deep domain adaptation (Motiian et al.,
2017b; Tzeng et al., 2014; Long et al., 2015). These methods aim at matching the marginal distributions across domains while (Zhang et al., 2013; Gong et al., 2016) considers the conditional distribution shift problem. Recently
adversarial adaptation methods (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015;
Tzeng et al., 2017; Motiian et al., 2017a; Bousmalis et al.,
2016) have shown promising results in domain adaptation.
Adversarial adaptation methods is analogous to generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
A domain classifier is trained to tell whether the sample
comes from source domain or target domain. The feature
extractor is trained to minimize the classification loss and
maximize the domain confusion loss. Domain-invariant yet
discriminative features are seemingly obtainable through
the principled lens of adversarial training.
Prior adversarial adaptation methods suffer a main limitation: as the discriminator only enforces the alignment of
global domain statistics, crucial semantic information for
each category might be lost. Even with perfect confusion
alignment, there is no guarantee that samples from different domains but with the same class label will map nearby
in the feature space, e.g, features of backpacks in the target
domain may be mapped near features of cars in the source
domain. This lack of semantic alignment is an important source of performance reduction (Motiian et al., 2017a;
Hoffman et al., 2017; Luo et al., 2017). Recently, semantic transfer for supervised domain adaptation has received
wide attention (Motiian et al., 2017a; Luo et al., 2017). To
date, semantic alignment has not been addressed in unsupervised domain adaptation due to the lack of target label
information.
In this paper, we propose a novel moving semantic transfer network (MSTN) for unsupervised domain adaptation,
where our feature extractor learns to align the distributions
semantically without any labeled target samples. We large-

