Fast and Scalable Bayesian Deep Learning by Weight-Perturbation in Adam

Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan * 1 Didrik Nielsen * 1 Voot Tangkaratt * 1 Wu Lin 2 Yarin Gal 3 Akash Srivastava 4

Abstract
Uncertainty computation in deep learning is essential to design robust and reliable systems. Variational inference (VI) is a promising approach
for such computation, but requires more effort to
implement and execute compared to maximumlikelihood methods. In this paper, we propose
new natural-gradient algorithms to reduce such efforts for Gaussian mean-field VI. Our algorithms
can be implemented within the Adam optimizer
by perturbing the network weights during gradient evaluations, and uncertainty estimates can be
cheaply obtained by using the vector that adapts
the learning rate. This requires lower memory,
computation, and implementation effort than existing VI methods, while obtaining uncertainty
estimates of comparable quality. Our empirical
results confirm this and further suggest that the
weight-perturbation in our algorithm could be useful for exploration in reinforcement learning and
stochastic optimization.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have had enormous recent success in
fields where prediction accuracy is important, e.g., computer
vision and speech recognition. However, for these methods
to be useful in fields such as robotics and medical diagnostics, we need to know the uncertainty of our predictions. For
example, physicians might need such uncertainty estimates
to choose a safe but effective treatment for their patients.
Lack of such estimates might result in unreliable decisions
which can sometime have disastrous consequences.
One of the goals of Bayesian inference is to provide uncertainty estimates by using the posterior distribution obtained
*

Equal contribution 1 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence
project, Tokyo, Japan 2 University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada 3 University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 4 University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. Correspondence to: Mohammad Emtiyaz
Khan <emtiyaz.khan@riken.jp>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

using Bayes’ rule. Unfortunately, this is infeasible in large
models such as Bayesian neural networks. Traditional methods such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods
converge slowly and might require a large memory (Balan
et al., 2015). In contrast, variational inference (VI) methods can scale to large models by using stochastic-gradient
(SG) methods, as recent work has shown (Graves, 2011;
Blundell et al., 2015; Ranganath et al., 2014; Salimans et al.,
2013). These works employ adaptive learning-rate methods, such as RMSprop (Tieleman & Hinton, 2012), Adam
(Kingma & Ba, 2015) and AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011), for
which easy-to-use implementations are available in existing
codebases.
Despite their simplicity, these VI methods require more
computation, memory, and implementation effort compared
to maximum-likelihood estimation (MLE). One reason for
this is that the number of parameters in VI is usually much
larger than in MLE, which increases the memory and computation costs. Another reason is that existing codebases are
designed and optimized for tasks such as MLE, and their application to VI involves significant amount of modifications
in the code. We ask the following question: is it possible to
avoid these issues and make VI as easy as MLE?
In this paper, we propose to use natural-gradient methods to address these issues for Gaussian mean-field VI. By
proposing a natural-momentum method along with a series
of approximations, we obtain algorithms that can be implemented with minimal changes to the existing codebases of
adaptive learning-rate methods. The main change involves
perturbing the network weights during the gradient computation (see Fig. 1). An uncertainty estimate can be cheaply
obtained by using the vector that adapts the learning rate.
This requires lower memory, computation, and implementation efforts than existing methods for VI while obtaining
uncertainty estimates of comparable quality. Our experimental results confirm this, and suggest that the estimated
uncertainty could improve exploration in problems such as
reinforcement learning and stochastic optimization.
1.1. Related Work
Bayesian inference in models such as neural networks
has a long history in machine learning (MacKay, 2003;
Bishop, 2006). Earlier work proposed a variety of algo-

