Towards Binary-Valued Gates for Robust LSTM Training

Zhuohan Li 1 Di He 1 Fei Tian 2 Wei Chen 2 Tao Qin 2 Liwei Wang 1 3 Tie-Yan Liu 2

Abstract
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) is one of the
most widely used recurrent structures in sequence
modeling. It aims to use gates to control information flow (e.g., whether to skip some information
or not) in the recurrent computations, although its
practical implementation based on soft gates only
partially achieves this goal. In this paper, we propose a new way for LSTM training, which pushes
the output values of the gates towards 0 or 1. By
doing so, we can better control the information
flow: the gates are mostly open or closed, instead
of in a middle state, which makes the results more
interpretable. Empirical studies show that (1) Although it seems that we restrict the model capacity,
there is no performance drop: we achieve better
or comparable performances due to its better generalization ability; (2) The outputs of gates are not
sensitive to their inputs: we can easily compress
the LSTM unit in multiple ways, e.g., low-rank
approximation and low-precision approximation.
The compressed models are even better than the
baseline models without compression.

1. Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Hochreiter, 1998) are
widely used in sequence modeling tasks, such as language
modeling (Kim et al., 2016; Jozefowicz et al., 2016), speech
recognition (Zhang et al., 2016), time series prediction
(Xingjian et al., 2015), machine translation (Wu et al., 2016;
Britz et al., 2017; He et al., 2016), image captioning (Vinyals
et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2015), and image generation (Villegas
et al., 2017).
To address the long-term dependency and gradient vanishThe work was done while the first author was visiting Microsoft
Research Asia. 1 Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE,
School of EECS, Peking University 2 Microsoft Research 3 Center
for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing Institute of Big Data
Research. Correspondence to: Tao Qin <taoqin@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

ing problem of conventional RNNs, long short-term memory (LSTM) (Gers et al., 1999; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997b) networks were proposed, which introduce gate functions to control the information flow in a recurrent unit: a
forget gate function to determine how much previous information should be excluded for the current step, an input
gate function to find relevant signals to be absorbed into the
hidden context, and an output gate function for prediction
and decision making. For ease of optimization, in practical
implementation, one usually uses the element-wise sigmoid
function to mimic the gates, whose outputs are soft values
between 0 and 1.
By using such gates with many more parameters, LSTM usually performs much better than conventional RNNs. However, when looking deep into the unit, we empirically find
that the values of the gates are not that meaningful as the
design logic. For example, in Figure 1, the distributions of
the forget gate values and input gate values are not sharp and
most of the values are in the middle state (around 0.5), meaning that most of the gate values are ambiguous in LSTM.
This phenomenon contradicts the design of both gates: to
control whether or not to take the information from the
previous timesteps or the new inputs. At the same time,
several works (Murdoch & Szlam, 2017; Karpathy et al.,
2015) show that most cell coordinates of LSTM are hard to
find particular meanings.
In this paper, we propose to push the values of the gates to
the boundary of their ranges (0, 1).1 Pushing the values of
the gates to 0/1 has certain advantages. First, it well aligns
with the original purpose of the development of gates: to
get the information in or skip by “opening” or “closing” the
gates during the recurrent computation, which reflects more
accurate and clear linguistic and structural information. Second, similar to BitNet in image classification (Courbariaux
et al., 2016), by pushing the activation function to be binarized, we can learn a model that is ready for further compression. Third, training LSTM towards binary-valued gates
enables better generation of the learned model. According
1

The output of a gate function is usually a vector. For simplicity,
in the paper, we say “pushing the output of the gate function to 0/1”
when meaning “pushing each dimension of the output vector of
the gate function to either 0 or 1”. We also say that each dimension
of the output vector of the gate function is a gate, and say a gate is
open/closed if its value is close to 1/0.

