Parallel WaveNet: Fast High-Fidelity Speech Synthesis

Aaron van den Oord 1 Yazhe Li 1 Igor Babuschkin 1 Karen Simonyan 1 Oriol Vinyals 1 Koray Kavukcuoglu 1
George van den Driessche 1 Edward Lockhart 1 Luis C. Cobo 1 Florian Stimberg 1 Norman Casagrande 1
Dominik Grewe 1 Seb Noury 1 Sander Dieleman 1 Erich Elsen 1 Nal Kalchbrenner 1 Heiga Zen 1 Alex Graves 1
Helen King 1 Tom Walters 1 Dan Belov 1 Demis Hassabis 1

Abstract
The recently-developed WaveNet architecture (van den Oord et al., 2016a) is the current
state of the art in realistic speech synthesis,
consistently rated as more natural sounding for
many different languages than any previous
system. However, because WaveNet relies on
sequential generation of one audio sample at
a time, it is poorly suited to today’s massively
parallel computers, and therefore hard to deploy
in a real-time production setting. This paper
introduces Probability Density Distillation, a
new method for training a parallel feed-forward
network from a trained WaveNet with no
significant difference in quality. The resulting
system is capable of generating high-fidelity
speech samples at more than 20 times faster than
real-time, a 1000x speed up relative to the original
WaveNet, and capable of serving multiple English
and Japanese voices in a production setting.

1. Introduction
Recent successes of deep learning go beyond achieving
state-of-the-art results in research benchmarks, and push the
frontiers in some of the most challenging real world applications such as speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012), image
recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2015),
and machine translation (Wu et al., 2016). The recently published WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2016a) model achieves
state-of-the-art results in speech synthesis, and significantly
closes the gap with natural human speech. However, it is
not well suited for real world deployment due to its prohibitive generation speed. In this paper, we present a new
algorithm for distilling WaveNet into a feed-forward neural
1
DeepMind Technologies, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Aaron van den Oord <avdnoord@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

network which can synthesise equally high quality speech
much more efficiently, and is deployed to millions of users.
WaveNet is one of a family of autoregressive deep generative models that have been applied with great success to data
as diverse as text (Mikolov et al., 2010), images (Larochelle
& Murray, 2011; Theis & Bethge, 2015; van den Oord
et al., 2016c;b), video (Kalchbrenner et al., 2016), handwriting (Graves, 2013) as well as human speech and music.
Modelling raw audio signals, as WaveNet does, represents
a particularly extreme form of autoregression, with up to
24,000 samples predicted per second. Operating at such a
high temporal resolution is not problematic during network
training, where the complete sequence of input samples is
already available and—thanks to the convolutional structure of the network—can be processed in parallel. When
generating samples, however, each input sample must be
drawn from the output distribution before it can be passed
in as input at the next time step, making parallel processing
impossible.
Inverse autoregressive flows (IAFs) (Kingma et al., 2016)
represent a kind of dual formulation of deep autoregressive
modelling, in which sampling can be performed in parallel,
while the inference procedure required for likelihood estimation is sequential and slow. The goal of this paper is to
marry the best features of both models: the efficient training
of WaveNet and the efficient sampling of IAF networks.
The bridge between them is a new form of neural network
distillation (Hinton et al., 2015), which we refer to as Probability Density Distillation, where a trained WaveNet model
is used as a teacher for a feedforward IAF model.
The next section describes the original WaveNet model,
while Sections 3 and 4 define in detail the new, parallel
version of WaveNet and the distillation process used to
transfer knowledge between them. Section 5 then presents
experimental results showing no loss in perceived quality for
parallel versus original WaveNet, and continued superiority
over previous benchmarks. We also present timings for
sample generation, demonstrating more than 1000× speedup relative to original WaveNet.

