Approximate message passing for amplitude based optimization

Junjie Ma * 1 Ji Xu * 2 Arian Maleki 3

Abstract
We consider an `2 -regularized non-convex optimization problem for recovering signals from
their noisy phaseless observations. We design
and study the performance of a message passing algorithm that aims to solve this optimization problem. We consider the asymptotic setting m, n → ∞, m/n → δ and obtain sharp
performance bounds, where m is the number
of measurements and n is the signal dimension.
We show that for complex signals the algorithm
can perform
accurate recovery with only m =

64
−
4
n
≈
2.5n measurements. Also, we
2
π
provide sharp analysis on the sensitivity of the
algorithm to noise. We highlight the following
facts about our message passing algorithm: (i)
Adding `2 regularization to the non-convex loss
function can be beneficial even in the noiseless
setting; (ii) spectral initialization has marginal
impact on the performance of the algorithm.

1. Motivation
Phase retrieval refers to the task of recovering a signal x∗ ∈
Cn×1 from its m phaseless linear measurements:
ya =

n
X

Aai x∗,i + wa ,

a = 1, 2, . . . , m,

(1)

i=1
i.i.d

1
where x∗,i is the ith component of x∗ , Aai ∼ CN (0, m
)
2
and wa ∼ N (0, σw ) a Gaussian noise. The recent surge
of interest has led to a better understanding of the theoretical aspects of this problem. Early theoretical results on
phase retrieval, such as PhaseLift (Candès et al., 2013) and
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, Columbia University, New York, USA 2 Department of Computer Science,
Columbia University, New York, USA 3 Department of Statistics,
Columbia University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Junjie
Ma <jm4520@columbia.edu>, Ji Xu <jixu@cs.columbia.edu>,
Arian Maleki <arian@stat.columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

PhaseCut (Waldspurger et al., 2015), are based on semidefinite relaxations. For random Gaussian measurements, a
variant of PhaseLift can recover the signal exactly (up to
global phase) in the noiseless setting using O(n) measurements (Candès & Li, 2014). A different convex optimization approach for phase retrieval was proposed in Goldstein & Studer (2016) and Bahmani & Romberg (2016).
This method does not involve lifting and is computationally more attractive than its SDP-based counterparts. Apart
from these convex relaxation approaches, non-convex optimization approaches have recently raised intensive research interests. These algorithms typically consist of a
carefully designed initialization step (usually accomplished
via a spectral method (Netrapalli et al., 2013)) followed by
low-cost iterations such as alternating minimization algorithm (Netrapalli et al., 2013) or gradient descent variants
like Wirtinger flow (Candès et al., 2015; Ma et al., 2017),
truncated Wirtinger flow (Chen & Candès, 2017), amplitude flow (Wang et al., 2016; Zhang & Liang, 2016), incremental reshaped Wirtinger flow (Zhang et al., 2017) and
reweighted amplitude flow (Wang et al., 2017a). Other approaches include Kaczmarz method (Wei, 2015; Chi & Lu,
2016; Tan & Vershynin, 2017; Jeong & Güntürk, 2017),
trust region method (Sun et al., 2016), coordinate decent
(Zeng & So, 2017), prox-linear (Duchi & Ruan, 2017),
Polyak subgradient (Davis et al., 2017), block coordinate
decent (Barmherzig & Sun, 2017).
Thanks to such research we now have access to several algorithms, inspired by different ideas, that are theoretically
guaranteed to recover x∗ exactly in the noiseless setting.
Despite all these progresses, there is still a gap between the
theoretical understanding of the recovery algorithms and
what practitioners would like to know. For instance, for
many algorithms, including Wirtinger flow and amplitude
flow, the exact recovery is guaranteed with either cn log n
or cn measurements, where c is often a fixed but large constant that does not depend on n. In both cases, it is often
claimed that the large value of c or the existence of log n
is an artifact of the proving technique and the algorithm is
expected to work with cn for a reasonably small value of c.
Such claims have left many users wondering
Q.1 Which algorithm should we use? The theoretical analyses may not be sharp and many factors may have im-

