Neural Relational Inference for Interacting Systems

Thomas Kipf * 1 Ethan Fetaya * 2 3 Kuan-Chieh Wang 2 3 Max Welling 1 4 Richard Zemel 2 3 4

Abstract
Interacting systems are prevalent in nature, from
dynamical systems in physics to complex societal
dynamics. The interplay of components can give
rise to complex behavior, which can often be explained using a simple model of the system’s constituent parts. In this work, we introduce the neural relational inference (NRI) model: an unsupervised model that learns to infer interactions while
simultaneously learning the dynamics purely from
observational data. Our model takes the form of
a variational auto-encoder, in which the latent
code represents the underlying interaction graph
and the reconstruction is based on graph neural
networks. In experiments on simulated physical
systems, we show that our NRI model can accurately recover ground-truth interactions in an
unsupervised manner. We further demonstrate
that we can find an interpretable structure and predict complex dynamics in real motion capture and
sports tracking data.

1. Introduction
A wide range of dynamical systems in physics, biology,
sports, and other areas can be seen as groups of interacting
components, giving rise to complex dynamics at the level of
individual constituents and in the system as a whole. Modeling these type of dynamics is challenging: often, we only
have access to individual trajectories, without knowledge of
the underlying interactions or dynamical model.
As a motivating example, let us take the movement of basketball players on the court. It is clear that the dynamics
of a single basketball player are influenced by the other
players, and observing these dynamics as a human, we are
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands 2 University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada 3 Vector
Institute, Toronto, Canada 4 Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Thomas Kipf
<t.n.kipf@uva.nl>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Observed dynamics

Interaction graph

Figure 1. Physical simulation of 2D particles coupled by invisible
springs (left) according to a latent interaction graph (right). In this
example, solid lines between two particle nodes denote connections
via springs whereas dashed lines denote the absence of a coupling.
In general, multiple, directed edge types – each with a different
associated relation – are possible.

able to reason about the different types of interactions that
might arise, e.g. defending a player or setting a screen for a
teammate. It might be feasible, though tedious, to manually
annotate certain interactions given a task of interest. It is
more promising to learn the underlying interactions, perhaps
shared across many tasks, in an unsupervised fashion.
Recently there has been a considerable amount of work
on learning the dynamical model of interacting systems
using implicit interaction models (Sukhbaatar et al., 2016;
Guttenberg et al., 2016; Santoro et al., 2017; Watters et al.,
2017; Hoshen, 2017; van Steenkiste et al., 2018). These
models can be seen as graph neural networks (GNNs) that
send messages over the fully-connected graph, where the
interactions are modeled implicitly by the message passing
function (Sukhbaatar et al., 2016; Guttenberg et al., 2016;
Santoro et al., 2017; Watters et al., 2017) or with the help
of an attention mechanism (Hoshen, 2017; van Steenkiste
et al., 2018).
In this work, we address the problem of inferring an explicit
interaction structure while simultaneously learning the dynamical model of the interacting system in an unsupervised
way. Our neural relational inference (NRI) model learns the
dynamics with a GNN over a discrete latent graph, and we
perform inference over these latent variables. The inferred
edge types correspond to a clustering of the interactions.
Using a probabilistic model allows us to incorporate prior
beliefs about the graph structure, such as sparsity, in a principled manner.

