Network Global Testing by Counting Graphlets

Jiashun Jin 1 Zheng Tracy Ke 2 Shengming Luo 1

Abstract
Consider a large social network with possibly severe degree heterogeneity and mixedmemberships. We are interested in testing
whether the network has only one community or
there are more than one communities. The problem is known to be non-trivial, partially due to the
presence of severe degree heterogeneity. We construct a class of test statistics using the numbers
of short paths and short cycles, and the key to our
approach is a general framework for canceling the
effects of degree heterogeneity. The tests compare favorably with existing methods. We support
our methods with careful analysis and numerical
study with simulated data and a real data example.

1. Introduction
Given a large symmetrical network, we are interested in the
global testing problem where we use the adjacency matrix
of the network to test whether the network consists of only
one community or that it consists of multiple communities,
where some nodes may have mixed memberships.
Real networks frequently have severe degree heterogeneity.
The Stochastic Block Model (SBM) is well-known, but does
not accommodate severe degree heterogeneity. To tackle the
problem, Karrer and Newman (2011) proposed the DegreeCorrected Block Model (DCBM). DCBM strikes a better
balance between theory and practice than SBM, and has
become increasingly more popular recently.
We adopt a Degree-Corrected Mixed-Membership (DCMM)
model (Jin et al., 2017). DCMM can be viewed as an extension of DCBM, but allows for mixed memberships. Suppose
the network has n nodes and K perceivable communities
C1 , C2 , . . . , CK .
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 2 Department
of Statistics, University of Chicago, Chicago, USA. Correspondence to: Jiashun Jin <jiashun@stat.cmu.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

For each node, we assign a Probability Mass Function
(PMF) πi = (πi (1), πi (2), · · · , πi (K))0 , where πi (k) is the
“weight” that node i puts on community Ck , 1 ≤ k ≤ K. We
call node i “pure” if πi is degenerate and “mixed” otherwise.
Let A ∈ Rn,n be the adjacency matrix, where Aij = 1 if
nodes i and j have an edge, and Aij = 0 otherwise (all
diagonal entries of A are 0 as we don’t treat a node as connecting to itself). In DCMM, we think the upper triangle of
A contains independent Bernoulli random variables. Moreover, for n degree heterogeneity parameters θ1 , θ2 , . . . , θn
and a non-singular, irreducible matrix P ∈ RK,K ,
P(Aij = 1) = θi θj

K X
K
X

πi (k)πj (`)Pk` .

(1)

k=1 `=1

Also, we assume (a) all diagonals of P are 1, and (b) each
of the K communities has at least one pure node. With such
constraints, DCMM is identifiable (Jin et al., 2017).
Let Θ be the n × n diagonal matrix Θ = diag(θ1 , . . . , θn )
and let Π be the n × K matrix Π = [π1 , π2 , . . . , πn ]0 . Let
Ω = ΘΠP Π0 Θ (recall that P ∈ RK,K ):

 0 


θ1
π1
θ1

 .. 


..
..
Ω=
 .  P [π1 , . . . , πn ]
.
.
.
θn

πn0

θn

Let diag(Ω) be the diagonal matrix where the i-th diagonal
entry is Ωii , and let W = A − [Ω − diag(Ω)]. We have
A = [Ω − diag(Ω)] + W = “signal” + “noise”.
Remark 1. Many recent works use the “Random Degree Parameter (RDP)” model (which is narrower than ours): fixing
a scaling parameter αn > 0 and a density function f over
(0, ∞) where the first a few moments of f are finite, and esiid

pecially the second moment is 1, we assume (θi /αn ) ∼ f ,
i = 1, 2, . . . , n. We call the resultant DCMM model the
DCMM-RDP model. In applications where we don’t know
how θi ’s are correlated, it is preferable to treat θ as nonrandom as before, and it is safer to use the original DCMM
than DCMM-RDP.
The testing problem can be cast as testing a null hypothesis
(n)
(n)
H0 against a specific hypothesis H1 in its complement:
(n)

H0

:K=1

vs.

(n)

H1

: K > 1,

(2)

