Cut-Pursuit Algorithm for Regularizing Nonsmooth Functionals
with Graph Total Variation

Hugo Raguet 1 Loïc Landrieu 2

Abstract
We present an extension of the cut-pursuit algorithm, introduced by Landrieu & Obozinski
(2017), to the graph total-variation regularization
of functions with a separable nondifferentiable
part. We propose a modified algorithmic scheme
as well as adapted proofs of convergence. We also
present a heuristic approach for handling the cases
in which the values associated to each vertex of
the graph are multidimensional. The performance
of our algorithm, which we demonstrate on difficult, ill-conditioned large-scale inverse and learning problems, is such that it may in practice extend the scope of application of the total-variation
regularization.

1. Introduction
Landrieu & Obozinski (2017) recently presented a workingset strategy for minimizing differentiable functions regularized by a total-variation seminorm structured on a weighted
graph. We propose a modified scheme extending the scope
of the algorithm to functions with a nondifferentiable part
which is separable along the vertices of the graph. Given a
def
finite graph G = (V, E, w) with edge weights w ∈ RE
+ , the
problem is to minimize F :
X
X
x 7→ f (x) +
gv (xv ) +
w(u,v) |xu − xv | , (P1)
v∈V

(u,v)∈E

where f : RV → R is differentiable, and for all v ∈ V ,
gv : R → ]−∞,+∞]. Our framework allows us to make
only weak assumptions on the regularity of the functions gv .
In order to handle infinite values and nondifferentiability, we
suppose that for all v ∈ V , gv is directionally differentiable;
this is detailed later in definition 2.1, using the notions of
domain and directional derivative. Our algorithm allows
1

LIVE, CNRS, Univ. Strasbourg, France 2 Univ. Paris-Est,
LaSTIG MATIS, IGN, ENSG, F-94160 Saint-Mandé, France.
Correspondence to: Hugo Raguet <hugo.raguet@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

us to find stationary points of F , that is to say points at
which all directional derivatives of F are nonnegative. It can
be noted already that if all the considered functionals are
convex, then the above hypothesis holds, and a stationary
point is equivalent to a global minimum.
Our extension of the cut-pursuit algorithm is motivated by
the presence of nondifferentiable terms besides the graph
total variation in a wide variety of applications. In signal processing for example, the nondifferentiable `1 norm fidelity
is used for outlier removal, or the denoising of images corrupted by a multiplicative noise, as presented in the works
of Nikolova (2004) and Durand et al. (2010), respectively.
Wu et al. (2015) make also use of such fidelity terms for the
3D mesh denoising problem, in which noises of multiple
natures and scales may coexist.
Alternatively, additional separable nondifferentiable regularization terms can also be considerded. On some problems, it
is relevant to constrain the values associated to each vertex
within a convex subset of the reals, yielding box constraints.
Another popular regularization is the fused LASSO, introduced initially by Tibshirani et al. (2005), where a LASSOlike penalty complements the total-variation regularizer for
enforcing solutions which are both sparse and piecewise
constant. Gramfort et al. (2013) propose applications in
functional magnetic resonance imaging, Becker et al. (2014)
in electroencephalography, Omranian et al. (2016) in genetics, and Takayama & Iwasaki (2016) in remote sensing.
In addition, we also consider extending the cut-pursuit algorithm to the cases where the values taken by the vertices
belong to a multidimensional space rather than being scalar.
This extension is motivated by the success of convex relaxations of the combinatorial Potts model to solve labeling
problems, as reported by Nieuwenhuis et al. (2013).
1.1. Related Works
Large-scale problems regularized with the graph total variation are typically solved using proximal splitting algorithms;
see the general review of Combettes & Pesquet (2008), and
the more specific approaches of Couprie et al. (2013) or
ours (Raguet & Landrieu, 2015). These are however firstorder methods, for which convergence is known to be slow,

