Improved Large-Scale Graph Learning through Ridge Spectral Sparsification

Daniele Calandriello 1 2 Ioannis Koutis 3 Alessandro Lazaric 4 Michal Valko 1

Abstract
The representation and learning benefits of methods based on graph Laplacians, such as Laplacian smoothing or harmonic function solution
for semi-supervised learning (SSL), are empirically and theoretically well supported. Nonetheless, the exact versions of these methods scale
poorly with the number of nodes n of the graph.
In this paper, we combine a spectral sparsification routine with Laplacian learning. Given a
graph G as input, our algorithm computes a sparsifier in a distributed way in O(n log3 (n)) time,
O(m log3 (n)) work and O(n log(n)) memory,
using only log(n) rounds of communication. Furthermore, motivated by the regularization often
employed in learning algorithms, we show that
constructing sparsifiers that preserve the spectrum
of the Laplacian only up to the regularization level
may drastically reduce the size of the final graph.
By constructing a spectrally-similar graph, we are
able to bound the error induced by the sparsification for a variety of downstream tasks (e.g., SSL).
We empirically validate the theoretical guarantees
on Amazon co-purchase graph and compare to
the state-of-the-art heuristics.

1. Introduction
Graphs are a very effective data structure to represent relationships between entities (e.g., social and collaboration
networks, influence graphs). Over the years, many machine
learning problems have been defined and solved exploiting
the graph representation, such as graph-regularized least
squares (L AP RLS, Belkin et al. 2005), Laplacian smoothing (L AP S MO, Sadhanala et al. 2016) graph semi-supervised
learning (SSL, Chapelle et al. 2010; Zhu et al. 2003), laplacian embedding (LE, Belkin & Niyogi 2001, and spectral
1
SequeL team, INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, France 2 LCSL,
IIT, Italy, and MIT, USA. 3 New Jersey Institute of Technology,
USA 4 Facebook AI Research, Paris, France. Correspondence to:
Daniele Calandriello <daniele.calandriello@iit.it>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

clustering (SC, Von Luxburg 2007). The intuition behind
graph-based learning is that the information expressed by
the graph helps to capture the underlying structure of the
problem (e.g., a manifold), thus improving the learning.
For instance, L AP S MO and SSL rely on the assumption
that nodes that are close in the graph are more likely to
have similar labels. Similarly, LE and SC try to find a lowdimensional representation of the nodes using the eigenvectors of the Laplacian of the graph. In general, given a graph
G of n nodes and m edges, most of graph-based learning
tasks require computing the minimum of a cost function
based on the associated n × n Laplacian matrix LG , which
contains m non-zero entries. Solving exactly such optimization problems amounts to O(n3 ) time and O(n2 ) space
complexity in the worst case and they become infeasible
even for mildly large/dense graphs.
A complete review of the literature on large-scale graph
learning is beyond the scope of this paper and we only
consider methods that reduce learning space and time complexity starting from a given graph received as input.1 We
identify mainly three possible approaches. We can (1) reduce runtime replacing the pseudo-inverse operator L+
G with
an iterative solver, (2) reduce time and space complexity
replacing the large graph G with a sparser approximation H,
or (3) reduce runtime and increase memory capacity by distributing the computation across multiple machines.
Iterative solvers. Iterative methods can solve a number of
learning problems without explicitly constructing L+
G (e.g.,
gradient descent, GD, for L AP S MO, iterative averaging for
SSL, and the power method for SC). In this case we only
need O(m) time per iteration. Unfortunately, all simple
iterative methods (e.g., GD) converge in a number of iterations proportional to the condition number of the Laplacian,
κ = λmax (LG )/λmin (LG ), which may grow linearly with
the number of nodes n, thus removing the advantage of the
iterative method, whose complexity tends to O(n3 ) in the
worst case. Advanced iterative methods, such as the preconditioned conjugate gradient, use preconditioning to find
an accurate solution in a number of iterations independent
of κ. Koutis et al. (2011) gives a nearly-linear solver for
Laplacians or strongly diagonally dominant (SDD) matri1

Many algorithms reduce the complexity of graph learning at
construction time but they cannot be applied to natural graphs
(e.g., social graphs) and therefore we do not review them.

