DICOD: Distributed Convolutional Coordinate Descent for
Convolutional Sparse Coding

Moreau Thomas 1 Oudre Laurent 2 Vayatis Nicolas 1

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce DICOD, a convolutional sparse coding algorithm which builds shift
invariant representations for long signals. This
algorithm is designed to run in a distributed setting, with local message passing, making it communication efficient. It is based on coordinate
descent and uses locally greedy updates which
accelerate the resolution compared to greedy coordinate selection. We prove the convergence
of this algorithm and highlight its computational
speed-up which is super-linear in the number of
cores used. We also provide empirical evidence
for the acceleration properties of our algorithm
compared to state-of-the-art methods.

1. Convolutional Representation for Long
Signals
Sparse coding aims at building sparse linear representations
of a data set based on a dictionary of basic elements called
atoms. It has proven to be useful in many applications,
ranging from EEG analysis to images and audio processing
(Adler et al., 2013; Kavukcuoglu et al., 2010; Mairal et al.,
2010; Grosse et al., 2007). Convolutional sparse coding is a
specialization of this approach, focused on building sparse,
shift-invariant representations of signals. Such representations present a major interest for applications like segmentation or classification as they separate the shape and the localization of patterns in a signal. This is typically the case
for physiological signals which can be composed of recurrent patterns linked to specific behavior in the human body
such as the characteristic heartbeat pattern in ECG recordings. Depending on the context, the dictionary can either
be fixed analytically (e.g. wavelets, see Mallat 2008), or
1
CMLA, ENS Cachan, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay,
94235 Cachan, France 2 L2TI, Université Paris 13, 93430
Villetaneuse, France. Correspondence to: Moreau Thomas
<thomas.moreau@cmla.ens-cachan.fr>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

learned from the data (Bristow et al., 2013; Mairal et al.,
2010).
Several algorithms have been proposed to solve the
convolutional sparse coding. The Fast Iterative SoftThresholding Algorithm (FISTA) was adapted for convolutional problems in Chalasani et al. (2013) and uses proximal gradient descent to compute the representation. The
Feature Sign Search (FSS), introduced in Grosse et al.
(2007), solves at each step a quadratic subproblem for an
active set of the estimated nonzero coordinates and the
Fast Convolutional Sparse Coding (FCSC) of Bristow et al.
(2013) is based on Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM). Finally, the coordinate descent (CD) has
been extended by Kavukcuoglu et al. (2010) to solve the
convolutional sparse coding. This method greedily optimizes one coordinate at each iteration using fast local updates. We refer the reader to Wohlberg (2016) for a detailed
presentation of these algorithms.
To our knowledge, there is no scalable version of these algorithms for long signals. This is a typical situation, for
instance, in physiological signal processing where sensor
information can be collected for a few hours with sampling
frequencies ranging from 100 to 1000Hz. The existing
algorithms for generic `1 -regularized optimization can be
accelerated by improving the computational complexity of
each iteration. A first approach to improve the complexity
of these algorithms is to estimate the non-zero coordinates
of the optimal solution to reduce the dimension of the optimization space, using either screening (El Ghaoui et al.,
2012; Fercoq et al., 2015) or active-set algorithms (Johnson & Guestrin, 2015). Another possibility is to develop
parallel algorithms which compute multiple updates simultaneously. Recent studies have considered distributing coordinate descent algorithms for general `1 -regularized minimization (Scherrer et al., 2012a;b; Bradley et al., 2011; Yu
et al., 2012). These papers propose synchronous algorithms
using either locks or synchronizing steps to ensure the convergence in general cases. You et al. (2016) derive an asynchronous distributed algorithm for the projected coordinate
descent which uses centralized communication and finely
tuned step size to ensure the convergence of their method.
In the present paper, we design a novel distributed algo-

