Markov Modulated Gaussian Cox Processes for
Semi-Stationary Intensity Modeling of Events Data

Minyoung Kim 1 2

Abstract
The Cox process is a flexible event model that
can account for uncertainty of the intensity function in the Poisson process. However, previous
approaches make strong assumptions in terms of
time stationarity, potentially failing to generalize
when the data do not conform to the assumed stationarity conditions. In this paper we bring up two
most popular Cox models representing two extremes, and propose a novel semi-stationary Cox
process model that can take benefits from both
models. Our model has a set of Gaussian process
latent functions governed by a latent stationary
Markov process where we provide analytic derivations for the variational inference. Empirical evaluations on several synthetic and real-world events
data including the football shot attempts and daily
earthquakes, demonstrate that the proposed model
is promising, can yield improved generalization
performance over existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Accurately modeling the underlying generative process of
complex events is an important problem in statistical machine leaning and many related areas. Although events could
be spatial and/or high-dimensional, in this paper we exclusively focus on event modeling in the temporal setup due to
its dominance in real-world applications. The Poisson process is a de facto standard for its simplicity in mathematical
analysis and flexibility in representing the intensity function
(i.e., the event occurring rate) λ(t). Unlike traditional treatments via adopting a fixed parametric form of λ(t) (e.g.,
piecewise constant or the Weibull), several extensions have
been introduced. The nonparametric modeling of λ(t) (e.g.,
the recent RKHS formulation (Flaxman et al., 2017)) can
1

Seoul National University of Science & Technology, Korea
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA. Correspondence to:
Minyoung Kim <mikim21@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

reduce the burden of deciding an appropriate form of λ(t).
Another is to regard λ(t) as a random process, known as the
Cox process (Cox, 1955), which is useful for accounting for
uncertainty in the intensity function.
In this paper, we are particularly interested in the Cox process where two most popular ones are: the Markov modulated Poisson process (MMPP) and the Gaussian process
modulated Cox process (GPCox). Popular in statistics, the
MMPP considers λ(t) as a random sample (trajectory) from
a continuous-time Markov chain. The model has a finite
set of intensity levels where the latent state at each time
determines which intensity level is used at that moment.
The GPCox is a nonparametric Bayesian model formed by
placing a Gaussian process (GP) prior on λ(t). The GPCox
has received significant attention in the machine learning
community for the last decade for its flexible nonparametric
modeling with principled uncertainty treatment.
The MMPP is good at modeling highly different intensity
phases: bursty events for some intervals and rare events
for others. However, there can be abrupt intensity changes
between these regimes which may be unnatural in certain
situations. Furthermore, for the interval under a given latent state, the model follows a constant intensity (i.e., a
homogeneous process), which may limit its representational
capacity. On the other hand, the GPCox encourages smooth
intensity changes over time. However, the disadvantage is
that the drastic intensity changes are not properly dealt with
unless a highly non-smooth kernel is adopted, which can
usually happen when a large amount of data is available.
So the main idea in this paper is to devise a novel model
that takes benefits from both models. Similar to the MMPP,
we consider an underlying continuous-time Markov chain
(CTMC) that generates a latent state trajectory (taking say,
r different states). We incorporate r latent functions with
their own GP priors, each of which serves as the intensity
responsible for each of the r states. This model is thus able
to model major intensity regime (possibly abrupt) changes
via the CTMC dynamics, and at the same time, it also enjoys
the GP’s smooth intensity modeling, non-constant within
the interval under a given latent state. Our model, referred to
as the Markov modulated Gaussian Cox Process (MMGCP),
has richer representational power than previous two models.

