Does Distributionally Robust Supervised Learning Give Robust Classifiers?
Weihua Hu 1 2 Gang Niu 2 Issei Sato 1 2 Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

Abstract
Distributionally Robust Supervised Learning
(DRSL) is necessary for building reliable machine learning systems. When machine learning is deployed in the real world, its performance
can be significantly degraded because test data
may follow a different distribution from training
data. DRSL with f -divergences explicitly considers the worst-case distribution shift by minimizing the adversarially reweighted training loss.
In this paper, we analyze this DRSL, focusing
on the classification scenario. Since the DRSL is
explicitly formulated for a distribution shift scenario, we naturally expect it to give a robust classifier that can aggressively handle shifted distributions. However, surprisingly, we prove that the
DRSL just ends up giving a classifier that exactly fits the given training distribution, which
is too pessimistic. This pessimism comes from
two sources: the particular losses used in classification and the fact that the variety of distributions to which the DRSL tries to be robust is
too wide. Motivated by our analysis, we propose
simple DRSL that overcomes this pessimism and
empirically demonstrate its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning has been successful in many application fields. The vast majority of supervised learning research falls into the Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM)
framework (Vapnik, 1998) that assumes a test distribution
to be the same as a training distribution. However, such an
assumption can be easily contradicted in real-world applications due to sample selection bias or non-stationarity of
the environment (Quionero-Candela et al., 2009). Once the
distribution shift occurs, the performance of the traditional
machine learning techniques can be significantly degraded.
This makes the traditional techniques unreliable for practitioners to use in the real world.
1

University of Tokyo, Japan 2 RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Weihua Hu <weihua916@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Distributionally Robust Supervised Learning (DRSL) is a
promising paradigm to tackle this problem by obtaining
prediction functions explicitly robust to distribution shift.
More specifically, DRSL considers a minimax game between a learner and an adversary: the adversary first shifts
the test distribution from the training distribution within
a pre-specified uncertainty set so as to maximize the expected loss on the test distribution. The learner then minimizes the adversarial expected loss.
DRSL with f -divergences (Bagnell, 2005; Ben-Tal et al.,
2013; Duchi et al., 2016; Namkoong & Duchi, 2016; 2017)
is particularly well-studied and lets the uncertainty set for
test distributions be an f -divergence ball from a training
distribution (see Section 2 for the detail). This DRSL has
been mainly studied under the assumption that the same
continuous loss is used for training and testing. This is
not the case in the classification scenario, in which we care
about the 0-1 loss (i.e., the mis-classification rate) at test
time, while at training time, we use a surrogate loss for
optimization tractability.
In this paper, we revisit DRSL with f -divergences, providing novel insight for the classification scenario. In particular, we prove rather surprising results (Theorems 1–3),
showing that when the DRSL is applied to classification,
the obtained classifier ends up being optimal for the training distribution. This is too pessimistic for DRSL given
that DRSL is explicitly formulated for a distribution shift
scenario and is naturally expected to give a classifier different from the one that exactly fits the given training distribution. Such pessimism comes from two sources: the particular losses used in classification and the over-flexibility
of the uncertainty set used by DRSL with f -divergences.
Motivated by our analysis, we propose simple DRSL that
overcomes the pessimism of the previous DRSL by incorporating structural assumptions on distribution shift (Section 4). We establish convergence properties of our proposed DRSL (Theorem 4) and derive efficient optimization
algorithms (Section 5). Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our DRSL through experiments (Section 6). All
the appendices of this paper are provided in the supplementary material.
Related work: Besides DRSL with f -divergences, different DRSL considers different classes of uncertainty sets
for test distributions. DRSL by Globerson & Roweis

