An Inference-Based Policy Gradient Method for Learning Options

Matthew J. A. Smith 1 Herke Van Hoof 2 Joelle Pineau 1

Abstract
In the pursuit of increasingly intelligent learning
systems, abstraction plays a vital role in enabling
sophisticated decisions to be made in complex
environments. The options framework provides
formalism for such abstraction over sequences of
decisions. However most models require that options be given a priori, presumably specified by
hand, which is neither efficient, nor scalable. Indeed, it is preferable to learn options directly from
interaction with the environment. Despite several
efforts, this remains a difficult problem. In this
work we develop a novel policy gradient method
for the automatic learning of policies with options.
This algorithm uses inference methods to simultaneously improve all of the options available to an
agent, and thus can be employed in an off-policy
manner, without observing option labels. The differentiable inference procedure employed yields
options that can be easily interpreted. Empirical
results confirm these attributes, and indicate that
our algorithm has an improved sample efficiency
relative to state-of-the-art in learning options endto-end.

1. Introduction
Recent developments in reinforcement learning (RL) methods have enabled agents to solve problems in increasingly
complicated domains (Mnih et al., 2016; Mousavi et al.,
2018). However, as RL agents become increasingly integrated in society, there is an increased need for the behaviour of the agents to be interpretable. Further, in order
for such agents to solve difficult and realistic environments–
potentially involving long sequences of decisions–more sample efficient techniques are needed. One way to improve
on existing agents is to leverage abstraction. By reasoning
1

Department of Computer Science, McGill University, Quebec, Canada 2 Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam,
The Netherlands. Correspondence to: Matthew J. A. Smith
<matthew.smith5@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

at various levels of abstraction, it is possible to infer, learn
and plan much more efficiently. Further, abstraction makes
interpretation easier, by making higher-order properties of
data more explicit. Recent developments outside of RL have
lead to breakthroughs in terms of learning rich representations for perceptual information (Bengio et al., 2013). In RL
domains, however, while efficient methods exist to plan and
learn when abstraction over sequences of actions is provided
a priori, it has proven more difficult to learn this type of
abstract behaviour from interaction data.
Many frameworks for formalizing temporal abstraction
have been proposed; most recent developments build on
the Options framework (Sutton et al., 1999; Precup, 2000),
which can be parameterized in a flexible manner, potentially amenable to learning. The majority of prior work on
learning options has centered around the idea of discovering
subgoals in state space, and constructing a set of options
such that each option represents a policy leading to that
subgoal (McGovern & Barto, 2001; Menache et al., 2002;
Şimşek & Barto, 2009). These methods can lead to useful
abstraction, however, they often require access to a model
of the environment dynamics, which is not always available,
and can be infeasible to learn. Our contribution instead
builds on the work of Bacon et al. (2017), and exploits a
careful parameterization of the policy of the agent, as well
as a differentiable inference step, in order to simultaneously
learn a set of options, while directly optimizing returns. We
relax a few key assumptions of this previous work, including
the expectation that only options that were actually executed
during training can be learned, and the focus on executing
options in an on-policy manner, with option labels available.
By relaxing these, we can improve sample efficiency and
practical applicability, including the possibility to learn control policies from data without knowing which options were
executed at each step, as is the case in the context of expert
demonstration, or otherwise learn interpretable hierarchical
behaviours from behavioural data.
Further to this point, interpretability represents a largely
unexplored use-case for options, which have generally been
employed for exploration or transfer learning. However,
it is often the case that policies learned without options
can be difficult to understand, with agents often performing
complex sequences of high-dimensional actions. With a
discrete set of options, if each represents a distinct, tempo-

