Structured Variationally Auto-encoded Optimization

Xiaoyu Lu 1 Javier González 2 Zhenwen Dai 2 Neil D. Lawrence 2 3

Abstract
We tackle the problem of optimizing a blackbox objective function defined over a highlystructured input space. This problem is ubiquitous
in machine learning. Inferring the structure of a
neural network or the Automatic Statistician (AS),
where the kernel combination for a Gaussian process is optimized, are two of many possible examples. We use the AS as a case study to describe
our approach, that can be easily generalized to
other domains. We propose an Structure Generating Variational Auto-encoder (SG-VAE) to
embed the original space of kernel combinations
into some low-dimensional continuous manifold
where Bayesian optimization (BO) ideas are used.
This is possible when structural knowledge of the
problem is available, which can be given via a simulator or any other form of generating potentially
good solutions. The right exploration-exploitation
balance is imposed by propagating into the search
the uncertainty of the latent space of the SG-VAE,
that is computed using variational inference. The
key aspect of our approach is that the SG-VAE
can be used to bias the search towards relevant
regions, making it suitable for transfer learning
tasks. Several experiments in various application
domains are used to illustrate the utility and generality of the approach described in this work.

which makes the problem specially hard to treat as different
network configurations cannot be represented in an unique
Euclidean space (Jenatton et al., 2017; Swersky et al., 2013).
In kernel-based methods, the Automatic statistician (AS)
is another example. With a Gaussian process (GP) as the
class of models of choice, the goal is to automatically select
the best kernel combination to explain a data set, which is
chosen by enumerating a countably infinite set of arbitrarily
complex kernels composed via additions and multiplication
of simple ones (Duvenaud et al., 2013).
These examples, among others that we will discuss later, can
be formalized as optimization problems in which an expensive black-box objective function, typically assumed ‘well
behaved’, is optimized in a highly structured input space.
By ‘highly structured’ we mean that the solutions cannot
be trivially represented in a Euclidean input space, making
standard optimization approaches impractical. Instead, they
might belong to a tree or to other non-Euclidean input domain. In this paper, we are interested on these problems.
More specifically, we study how knowledge about the problem structure can be leveraged to solve them successfully.
The methods and ideas proposed here are general and can
easily be extended to other domains. As a way of illustrating
them we use the AS as a case-study but the experimental
section of this work contains further experiments in other
domains such is textual images description.
Before we get into further details, we start by formalizing
the AS problem, around which we will provide the details
of our approach.

1. Introduction
1.1. Case Study: the Automatic Statistician
In Science and Engineering, optimization problems with
very structured input domains are ubiquitous. In machine
learning we have a few examples. In deep learning, the
architecture of neural networks is defined by a large number
of parameters, like the number of layers, activation functions, etc. These parameters show conditional dependencies,
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of
Oxford, United Kingdom 2 Amazon, Cambridge, United Kingdom
3
University of Sheffield,United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Javier Gonzalez <gojav@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

In the AS the goal is to solve a supervised learning problem
p
given a dataset D = {xi , yi }N
i=1 where xi ∈ R are the
inputs and yi ∈ R are the outputs. Let M be the class of
models that we will use to explain the data. In particular, we
consider M to be the family of GP S with different kernel
combinations (Rasmussen & Williams, 2005). We denote
by M each model of this set and we denote by PM its
associated parameter space. The models in M represent
different structural assumptions about the data such as trends
or periodicity. The values of β ∈ P, the model hyperparameters, differentiate models within the same family.
The goal of the AS is to select one single model from M

