Stochastic Variance-Reduced Hamilton Monte Carlo Methods
Difan Zou * 1 Pan Xu * 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract
We propose a fast stochastic Hamilton Monte
Carlo (HMC) method, for sampling from a
smooth and strongly log-concave distribution.
At the core of our proposed method is a variance reduction technique inspired by the recent
advance in stochastic optimization. We show
that, to achieve ✏ accuracy in 2-Wasserstein dise n + 2 d1/2 /✏ +
tance, our algorithm achieves O
4/3 1/3 2/3 2/3
 d n /✏
gradient complexity (i.e.,
number of component gradient evaluations),
which outperforms the state-of-the-art HMC and
stochastic gradient HMC methods in a wide
regime. We also extend our algorithm for sampling from smooth and general log-concave distributions, and prove the corresponding gradient
complexity as well. Experiments on both synthetic and real data demonstrate the superior performance of our algorithm.

1. Introduction
Past decades have witnessed increasing attention of Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods in modern machine
learning problems (Andrieu et al., 2003). An important
family of Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithms, called
Langevin Monte Carlo method (Neal et al., 2011), is proposed based on Langevin dynamics (Parisi, 1981). Langevin
dynamics was used for modeling of the dynamics of molecular systems, and can be described by the following Itô’s
stochastic differential equation (SDE) (Øksendal, 2003),
p
dXt = rf (Xt )dt + 2 dBt ,
(1.1)

where Xt is a d-dimensional stochastic process, t 0 denotes the time index, > 0 is the temperature parameter,
and Bt is the standard d-dimensional Brownian motion.
Under certain assumptions on the drift coefficient rf , Chiang et al. (1987) showed that the distribution of Xt in (1.1)
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence
to: Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

converges to its stationary distribution, a.k.a., the Gibbs
measure ⇡ / exp( f (x)). Note that ⇡ is smooth and
log-concave (resp. strongly log-concave) if f is smooth and
convex (resp. strongly convex). A typical way to sample
from density ⇡ is applying Euler-Maruyama discretization
scheme (Kloeden & Platen, 1992) to (1.1), which yields
Xk+1 = Xk

rf (Xk )⌘ +

p

2⌘ · ✏k ,

(1.2)

where ✏k ⇠ N (0, Id⇥d ) is a standard Gaussian random vector, Id⇥d is a d ⇥ d identity matrix, and ⌘ > 0 is the step
size. (1.2) is often referred to as the Langevin Monte Carlo
(LMC) method. In total variation (TV) distance, LMC has
been proved to be able to produce approximate sampling of
density ⇡ / e f / under arbitrary precision requirement
in Dalalyan (2014); Durmus & Moulines (2016b), with properly chosen step size. The non-asymptotic convergence of
LMC has also been studied in Dalalyan (2017); Dalalyan &
Karagulyan (2017); Durmus et al. (2017), which shows that
the LMC algorithm can achieve ✏-precision in 2-Wasserstein
e 2 d/✏2 ) iterations if f is L-smooth and µdistance after O(
strongly convex, where  = L/µ is the condition number.
In order to accelerate the convergence of Langevin dynamics
(1.1) and improve its mixing time to the unique stationary
distribution, Hamiltonian dynamics (Duane et al., 1987;
Neal et al., 2011) was proposed, which is also known as
underdampled Langevin dynamics and is defined by the
following system of SDEs
dVt =

Vt dt

dXt = Vt dt,

urf (Xt )dt +

p

2 udBt ,

(1.3)

where > 0 is the friction parameter, u denotes the inverse mass, Xt , Vt 2 Rd are the position and velocity
of the continuous-time dynamics respectively, and Bt is
the Brownian motion. Let Wt = (Xt> , Vt> )> , under
mild assumptions on the drift coefficient rf (x), the distribution of Wt converges to an unique invariant distribu2
tion ⇡w / e f (x) kvk2 /(2u) (Neal et al., 2011), whose
marginal distribution on Xt , denoted by ⇡, is proportional
to e f (x) . Similar to the numerical approximation of the
Langevin dynamics in (1.2), one can also apply the same
Euler-Maruyama discretization scheme to Hamiltonian dynamics in (1.3), which gives rise to Hamiltonian Monte

