Decentralized Submodular Maximization:
Bridging Discrete and Continuous Settings
Aryan Mokhtari 1 Hamed Hassani 2 Amin Karbasi 3

Abstract
In this paper, we showcase the interplay between discrete and continuous optimization in
network-structured settings. We propose the
first fully decentralized optimization method
for a wide class of non-convex objective functions that possess a diminishing returns property. More specifically, given an arbitrary connected network and a global continuous submodular function, formed by a sum of local functions,
we develop Decentralized Continuous
Greedy (DCG), a message passing algorithm
that converges to the tight (1 1/e) approximation factor of the optimum global solution using
only local computation and communication. We
also provide strong convergence bounds as a function of network size and spectral characteristics
of the underlying topology. Interestingly, DCG
readily provides a simple recipe for decentralized
discrete submodular maximization through the
means of continuous relaxations. Formally, we
demonstrate that by lifting the local discrete functions to continuous domains and using DCG as an
interface we can develop a consensus algorithm
that also achieves the tight (1 1/e) approximation guarantee of the global discrete solution once
a proper rounding scheme is applied.

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have reached unprecedented data volumes that are high dimensional and sit over (clouds of)
networked machines. As a result, decentralized collection
of these data sets along with accompanying distributed op1

Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Department of Electrical and
Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania 3 Department
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Yale University.
Correspondence to: Aryan Mokhtari <aryanm@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

timization methods are not only desirable but very often
necessary (Boyd et al., 2011).
The focus of this paper is on decentralized optimization,
the goal of which is to maximize/minimize a global objective function –distributed over a network of computing units– through local computation and communications
among nodes. A canonical example in machine learning is
fitting models using M-estimators where given a set of data
points the parameters of the model are estimated through
an empirical risk minimization (Vapnik, 1998). Here, the
global objective function is defined as an average of local
loss functions associated with each data point. Such local
loss functions can be convex (e.g., logistic regression, SVM,
etc) or non-convex (e.g., non-linear square loss, robust regression, mixture of Gaussians, deep neural nets, etc) (Mei
et al., 2016). Due to the sheer volume of data points, these
optimization tasks cannot be fulfilled on a single computing cluster node. Instead, we need to opt for decentralized
solutions that can efficiently exploit dispersed (and often
distant) computational resources linked through a tightly
connected network. Furthermore, local computations should
be light so that they can be done on single machines. In
particular, when the data is high dimensional, extra care
should be given to any optimization procedure that relies on
projections over the feasibility domain.
In addition to large scale machine learning applications, decentralized optimization is a method of choice in many other
domains such as Internet of Things (IoT) (Abu-Elkheir et al.,
2013), remote sensing (Ma et al., 2015), multi-robot systems
(Tanner & Kumar, 2005), and sensor networks (Rabbat &
Nowak, 2004). In such scenarios, individual entities can
communicate over a network and interact with the environment by exchanging the data generated through sensing. At
the same time they can react to events and trigger actions to
control the physical world. These applications highlight another important aspect of decentralized optimization where
private data is collected by different sensing units (Yang
et al., 2017). Here again, we aim to optimize a global objective function while avoiding to share the private data among
computing units. Thus, by design, one cannot solve such
private optimization problems in a centralized manner and
should rely on decentralized solutions where local private

