Neural Program Synthesis from Diverse Demonstration Videos

Shao-Hua Sun * 1 Hyeonwoo Noh * 2 Sriram Somasundaram 1 Joseph J. Lim 1

Abstract
Interpreting decision making logic in demonstration videos is key to collaborating with and mimicking humans. To empower machines with this
ability, we propose a neural program synthesizer
that is able to explicitly synthesize underlying
programs from behaviorally diverse and visually
complicated demonstration videos. We introduce
a summarizer module as part of our model to
improve the network’s ability to integrate multiple demonstrations varying in behavior. We also
employ a multi-task objective to encourage the
model to learn meaningful intermediate representations for end-to-end training. We show that our
model is able to reliably synthesize underlying
programs as well as capture diverse behaviors exhibited in demonstrations. The code is available
at https://shaohua0116.github.io/demo2program.

1. Introduction
Imagine you are watching others driving cars. You will
easily notice many common behaviors even if you know
nothing about driving. For example, cars stop when the
traffic light turns to red and move again when the light turns
to green. Cars also slow down when pedestrians are seen
jay-walking. Through observation, humans can abstract
behaviors and understand the reasoning behind behaviors
– especially extracting the structural relationship between
actions (e.g. start, slow down, stop) and perception (e.g.
light, pedestrian).
Can machines also reason decision making logic behind
behaviors? There has been tremendous effort and success
in understanding behaviors such as recognizing actions (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014), describing activities in languages (Venugopalan et al., 2015), and predicting future
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, California, USA 2 Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Pohang, Korea.
Correspondence to: Shao-Hua Sun <shaohuas@usc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

demo 1

demo 2

demo 3

Demonstrations

Synthesized Program
def run():
while frontIsClear():
move()
turnRight()
if thereIsPig():
attack()
else:
if not thereIsWolf():
spawnPig()
else:
giveBone()

Figure 1. An illustration of neural program synthesis from demonstrations. Given multiple demonstration videos exhibiting diverse
behaviors, our neural program synthesizer learn to produce interpretable and executable underlying programs. Divergence above
occurs based on perception in the second frame.

outcomes (Srivastava et al., 2015). Yet, interpreting reasons
behind behaviors is relatively unexplored and is a crucial
skill for machines to collaborate with and mimic humans.
Hence, our goal is to step towards developing a method that
can interpret perception-based decision making logic from
diverse behaviors seen in multiple visual demonstrations.
Our insight is to exploit declarative programs, structured in
a formal language, as representations of decision making
logics. The formal language is composed of action blocks,
perception blocks, and control flow (e.g. if/else). Programs
written in such a language can explicitly model the connection between an observation (e.g. traffic light, biker) and
an action (e.g. stop). An example is shown in Figure 11 .
Described in a formal language, programs are logically interpretable and executable. Thus, the problem of interpreting
decision making logic from visual demonstrations can be
reduced to extracting an underlying program.
In fact, there have been many neural network frameworks
proposed recently for program induction or synthesis. First,
a variety of frameworks (Kaiser & Sutskever, 2016; Reed &
De Freitas, 2016; Xu et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2017a) propose to induce latent representations of underlying programs.
While they can be efficient at mimicking desired behaviors,
they do not explicitly yield interpretable programs, resulting
1

The illustrated environment is not tested in our experiments.

