Inter and Intra Topic Structure Learning with Word Embeddings

He Zhao 1 Lan Du 1 Wray Buntine 1 Mingyaun Zhou 2

Abstract
One important task of topic modeling for text analysis is interpretability. By discovering structured
topics one is able to yield improved interpretability as well as modeling accuracy. In this paper,
we propose a novel topic model with a deep structure that explores both inter-topic and intra-topic
structures informed by word embeddings. Specifically, our model discovers inter topic structures in
the form of topic hierarchies and discovers intra
topic structures in the form of sub-topics, each of
which is informed by word embeddings and captures a fine-grained thematic aspect of a normal
topic. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
model achieves the state-of-the-art performance
in terms of perplexity, document classification,
and topic quality. Moreover, with topic hierarchies and sub-topics, the topics discovered in our
model are more interpretable, providing an illuminating means to understand text data.

1. Introduction
Significant research effort has been devoted to developing
advanced text analysis technologies. Probabilistic topic
models such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), are popular approaches for this task, which discover latent topics
from text collections. One preferred property of probabilistic topic models is interpretability: one can explain
that a document is composed of topics and a topic is described by words. Although widely used, most variations
of standard vanilla topic models (e.g., LDA) assume topics
are independent and there are no structures among them.
This limits those models’ ability to explore any hierarchical
thematic structures. Therefore, it is interesting to develop
a model that is capable of exploring topic structures and
yields not only improved modeling accuracy but also better
1
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia 2 McCombs School of Business, University of Texas at Austin.
Correspondence to: Lan Du <lan.du@monash.edu>, Mingyuan
Zhou <mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1
2
3
4

Table 1. Example local topics with top 10 words
journal science biology research journals
international cell psychology scientific bioinformatics
fitness piano guitar swimming violin
weightlifting lessons training swim weight
taylor prince swift william
jovi bon woman gala pill jon
san auto theft grand andreas
mobile gta game rockstar december

interpretability.
One popular direction to explore topic structure is using
the hierarchical/deep representation of text data, such as the
nested hierarchical Dirichlet process (nHDP) (Paisley et al.,
2015), Deep Poisson Factor Analysis (DPFA) (Gan et al.,
2015), and Gamma Belief Network (GBN) (Zhou et al.,
2016; Cong et al., 2017). In general, these models assume
that topics in the higher layers of a hierarchy are more
general/abstract than those in the lower layers. Therefore,
by revealing hierarchical correlations between topics, topic
hierarchies provide an intuitive way to understand text data.
In addition to topic hierarchies, we are also interested in
analyzing the fine-grained thematic structure within each individual topic. As we know, in conventional models, topics
are discovered locally from the word co-occurrences in a
corpus. So we refer those topics as local topics. Due to the
limitation of the context of a target corpus, some local topics
may be hard to interpret because of the following two effects: (1) They can mix the words which co-occur locally in
the target corpus but are less semantically related in general;
(2) Local topics can be dominated by specialized words,
which are less interpretable without extra knowledge. For
example, we show four example topics of our experiments
in Table 1, where we can see: Topic 1 is composed of the
words from both the “scientific publication” and “biology”
aspects; Topic 2 is a mixture of “sports” and “music”; Topics
3 and 4 are very specific topics about “singer” and “video
game” respectively. We humans are able to understand those
local topics in the above way because we are equipped with
the global semantics of the words, making us go beyond
the local context of the target corpus. Therefore, we are
motivated to propose a model which is able to automatically
analyze the fine-grained thematic structures of local topics,
further improving the interpretability of topic modeling.

