Coordinated Exploration in Concurrent Reinforcement Learning

Maria Dimakopoulou 1 Benjamin Van Roy 1

Abstract
We consider a team of reinforcement learning
agents that concurrently learn to operate in a common environment. We identify three properties
– adaptivity, commitment, and diversity – which
are necessary for efficient coordinated exploration
and demonstrate that straightforward extensions
to single-agent optimistic and posterior sampling
approaches fail to satisfy them. As an alternative, we propose seed sampling, which extends
posterior sampling in a manner that meets these
requirements. Simulation results investigate how
per-agent regret decreases as the number of agents
grows, establishing substantial advantages of seed
sampling over alternative exploration schemes.

1. Introduction
The field of reinforcement learning treats the design of
agents that operate in uncertain environments and learn
over time to make increasingly effective decisions. In such
settings, an agent must balance between accumulating nearterm rewards and probing to gather data from which it can
learn to improve longer-term performance. A substantial
literature, starting with (Kearns & Singh, 2002), has developed reinforcement learning algorithms that address this
trade-off in a provably efficient manner. Until recently, most
provably efficient exploration algorithms (e.g., (Jaksch et al.,
2010)) have been based on UCB (upper confidence bound)
approaches. Over the past few years, new approaches that
build on and extend PSRL (posterior sampling for reinforcement learning) (Strens, 2000) have proved advantageous
in terms of statistical efficiency (Osband et al., 2013; Osband & Van Roy, 2017a;b; 2014a;b). PSRL operates in a
simple and intuitive manner. An agent learns over episodes
of interaction with an uncertain environment, modeled as
a Markov decision process (MDP). The agent is uncertain
about the transition probabilities and rewards of the MDP
1

Stanford University, California, USA. Correspondence to:
Maria Dimakopoulou <madima@stanford.edu>, Benjamin Van
Roy <bvr@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

and refines estimates as data is gathered. At the start of each
episode, the agent samples an MDP from its current posterior distribution. This sample can be thought of as a random
statistically plausible model of the environment given the
agent’s initial beliefs and data gathered up to that time. The
agent then makes decisions over the episode as though the
environment is accurately modeled by the sampled MDP.
In concurrent reinforcement learning (Silver et al., 2013;
Pazis & Parr, 2013; Guo & Brunskill, 2015; Pazis & Parr,
2016), multiple agents interact with different instances of the
same unknown environment, have perfect information sharing with one another, and learn in parallel how to achieve a
common goal. The collection of agents can be viewed alternatively as a single agent with multiple threads. Hence, this
literature is distinct from the multi-agent systems literature,
which is often approached from a game-theoretic perspective with agents having different roles or objectives (e.g.,
(Vlassis, 2007; Chalkiadakis & Boutilier, 2003; Mertikopoulos & Zhou, 2018)) and without exploration considerations.
One might consider two straightforward extensions of PSRL
to the concurrent setting. In one, at the start of each episode,
each agent samples an independent MDP from the current
posterior, which is conditioned on all data accumulated by
all agents. Then, over the course of the episode, each agent
follows the decision policy that optimizes its sampled MDP.
The problem with this approach is that each agent does not
benefit over the duration of the episode from the potentially
vast quantities of data gathered by his peers. An alternative
– which we will refer to as Thompson resampling – would
be to have each agent independently sample a new MDP at
the start of each time period within the episode, as done in
(Kim, 2017). The new sample would be from a posterior
distribution additionally conditioned on data gathered by
all agents so far. However, as discussed in (Russo et al.,
2017), this naive extension is disruptive to the agents’ ability to explore the environment thoroughly. In particular, an
agent may have to apply a coordinated sequence of actions
over multiple time periods in order to adequately probe the
environment. When MDPs are resampled independently
over time periods, agents are taken off course. On the other
hand, Guo & Brunskill (2015), Pazis & Parr (2013), and
Pazis & Parr (2016) have proposed and studied UCB exploration schemes for concurrent reinforcement learning.
Advantages of PSRL over UCB in single-agent contexts by

