Path-Level Network Transformation for Efficient Architecture Search
Han Cai 1 Jiacheng Yang 1 Weinan Zhang 1 Song Han 2 Yong Yu 1

Abstract
We introduce a new function-preserving transformation for efficient neural architecture search.
This network transformation allows reusing previously trained networks and existing successful architectures that improves sample efficiency.
We aim to address the limitation of current network transformation operations that can only perform layer-level architecture modifications, such
as adding (pruning) filters or inserting (removing) a layer, which fails to change the topology of
connection paths. Our proposed path-level transformation operations enable the meta-controller
to modify the path topology of the given network
while keeping the merits of reusing weights, and
thus allow efficiently designing effective structures with complex path topologies like Inception
models. We further propose a bidirectional treestructured reinforcement learning meta-controller
to explore a simple yet highly expressive treestructured architecture space that can be viewed as
a generalization of multi-branch architectures. We
experimented on the image classification datasets
with limited computational resources (about 200
GPU-hours), where we observed improved parameter efficiency and better test results (97.70% test
accuracy on CIFAR-10 with 14.3M parameters
and 74.6% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet in the
mobile setting), demonstrating the effectiveness
and transferability of our designed architectures.

1. Introduction
Designing effective neural network architectures is crucial
for the performance of deep learning. While many impressive results have been achieved through significant manual
architecture engineering (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014;
Szegedy et al., 2015; He et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2017b),
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA.
Correspondence to: Han Cai <hcai@apex.sjtu.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

this process typically requires years of extensive investigation by human experts, which is not only expensive but also
likely to be suboptimal. Therefore, automatic architecture
design has recently drawn much attention (Zoph & Le, 2017;
Zoph et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017; Cai et al., 2018; Real
et al., 2018; Pham et al., 2018; Elsken et al., 2017).
Most of the current techniques focus on finding the optimal architecture in a designated search space starting from
scratch while training each designed architecture on the
real data (from random initialization) to get a validation
performance to guide exploration. Though such methods
have shown the ability to discover network structures that
outperform human-designed architectures when vast computational resources are used, such as Zoph et al. (2017) that
employed 500 P100 GPUs across 4 days, they are also likely
to fail to beat best human-designed architectures (Zoph &
Le, 2017; Real et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018), especially when
the computational resources are restricted. Furthermore,
insufficient training epochs during the architecture search
process (much fewer epochs than normal to save time) may
cause models to underperform (Baker et al., 2017), which
would harm the efficiency of the architecture search process.
Alternatively, some efforts have been made to explore the
architecture space by network transformation, starting from
an existing network trained on the target task and reusing
its weights. For example, Cai et al. (2018) utilized Net2Net
(Chen et al., 2016) operations, a class of function-preserving
transformation operations, to further find high-performance
architectures based on a given network, while Ashok et al.
(2018) used network compression operations to compress
well-trained networks. These methods allow transferring
knowledge from previously trained networks and taking
advantage of existing successful architectures in the target
task, thus have shown improved efficiency and require significantly fewer computational resources (e.g., 5 GPUs in
Cai et al. (2018)) to achieve competitive results.
However, the network transformation operations in Cai
et al. (2018) and Ashok et al. (2018) are still limited to
only performing layer-level architecture modifications such
as adding (pruning) filters or inserting (removing) a layer,
which does not change the topology of connection paths in
a neural network. Hence, they restrict the search space to
having the same path topology as the start network, i.e. they
would always lead to chain-structured networks when given

