Modeling Others using Oneself in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Roberta Raileanu 1 Emily Denton 1 Arthur Szlam 2 Rob Fergus 1 2

Abstract
We consider the multi-agent reinforcement learning setting with imperfect information. The reward function depends on the hidden goals of
both agents, so the agents must infer the other
players’ goals from their observed behavior in
order to maximize their returns. We propose a
new approach for learning in these domains: Self
Other-Modeling (SOM), in which an agent uses
its own policy to predict the other agent’s actions
and update its belief of their hidden goal in an online manner. We evaluate this approach on three
different tasks and show that the agents are able
to learn better policies using their estimate of the
other players’ goals, in both cooperative and competitive settings.

1. Introduction
Reasoning about other agents’ intentions and being able to
predict their behavior is important in multi-agent systems, in
which the agents might have different, and sometimes competing, goals. In this paper, we introduce a new approach for
estimating other agents’ unknown goals from their behavior
and using those estimates to choose actions. We demonstrate that in the proposed tasks, using an explicit model
of the other player leads to better performance than simply
considering the other agent as part of the environment.
We frame the problem as a two-player stochastic game
(Shapley, 1953), in which each agent is randomly assigned
a different goal from a fixed set, which is shared between
the agents. Players have full visibility of the environment,
but no direct knowledge of the other’s goal and no communication channel. The reward obtained by each agent at the
end of an episode depends on the goals of both agents, so
an optimal policy must take into account both of their goals.

of understanding what the other player is trying to achieve,
an agent should ask itself “what would be my goal if I had
acted as the other player had?”. We instantiate this idea by
parametrizing the agent’s action and value functions with
a neural network that takes as input the observation state
and a goal. As the agent plays the game, it uses its own
policy (with the input expressed in the other agent’s frame of
reference) to maximize the likelihood of the other’s observed
actions and optimize directly over the goal representation to
infer the other agent’s unknown goal. In contrast with the
current literature, our approach does not require building
any model of the other agent in order to infer its intention
and predict its behavior.

2. Approach
Background: A two-player Markov game is defined by a
set of states S describing the possible configurations of all
agents, a set of actions A1 , A2 and a set of observations
S 1 , S 2 for each agent, and a transition function T : S ×
A1 × A2 → S which gives the probability distribution on
the next state as a function of current state and actions. Each
agent i chooses actions by sampling from a stochastic policy
π i : S × Ai → [0, 1]. The reward function of each agent
is: ri : S × A1 × A2 → R. Each agent i aims toPmaximize
∞
its discounted return from time t onward: Rti = t=0 γ t rti ,
where rti is the reward obtained by agent i at time t and
γ ∈ (0, 1] is the discount factor. In this work, we consider
both cooperative and adversarial settings. In cooperative
games, the agents have the same reward function: r1 = r2 .

New York University, New York City, USA 2 Facebook AI
Research, New York City, USA. Correspondence to: Roberta
Raileanu <raileanu@cs.nyu.edu>.

We now describe Self Other-Modeling (SOM), a new approach for inferring other agents’ goals in an online fashion
and using these estimates to choose actions. To decide an
action and to estimate the value of a state, we use a neural
network f that takes as input its own goal zself , an estimate
of the other player’s goal z̃other , and the observation state
sself , and outputs a probability distribution over actions π
and a value estimate V , such that for each agent i playing
the game we have:
 i
π
i
i
= f (siself , zself
, z̃other
; θi ) .
Vi

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Here θi are agent i’s parameters for f , which has one softmax output for the policy, one linear output for the value
function, and all the non-output layers shared. The actions

The key idea of this work is that as a first approximation
1

