Local Convergence Properties of SAGA/Prox-SVRG and Acceleration

Clarice Poon * 1 Jingwei Liang * 1 Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb 1

Abstract
In this paper, we present a local convergence analysis for a class of stochastic optimisation methods: the proximal variance reduced stochastic
gradient methods, and mainly focus on SAGA
(Defazio et al., 2014) and Prox-SVRG (Xiao &
Zhang, 2014). Under the assumption that the
non-smooth component of the optimisation problem is partly smooth relative to a smooth manifold, we present a unified framework for the local
convergence analysis of SAGA/Prox-SVRG: (i)
the sequences generated by the methods are able
to identify the smooth manifold in a finite number of iterations; (ii) then the sequence enters a
local linear convergence regime. Furthermore,
we discuss various possibilities for accelerating
these algorithms, including adapting to better local parameters, and applying higher-order deterministic/stochastic optimisation methods which
can achieve super-linear convergence. Several
concrete examples arising from machine learning
are considered to demonstrate the obtained result.

1. Introduction
1.1. Non-smooth Optimisation
Modern optimisation has become a core part of many fields,
such as machine learning and signal/image processing. In a
world of increasing data demands, there are two key driving
forces behind modern optimisation.
• Non-smooth regularisation. We are often faced with
models of high complexity, however, the solutions of
interest often lie on a manifold of low dimension which
is promoted by the non-smooth regularisers. There have
been several recent studies explaining how proximal
methods identify this low dimensional manifold and effi*
Equal contribution 1 DAMTP, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Clarice
Poon <C.M.H.S.Poon@maths.cam.ac.uk>, Jingwei Liang
<jl993@cam.ac.uk>.

ciently output solutions which take a certain structure;
see for instance (Liang et al., 2017) for the case of deterministic proximal gradient methods.
• Stochastic methods. The past decades have seen an
exponential growth in the data sizes that we have to
handle, and stochastic methods have been popular due to
their low computational cost; see for instance (Schmidt
et al., 2017; Defazio et al., 2014; Xiao & Zhang, 2014)
and references therein.
The purpose of this paper is to show that proximal variance
reduced stochastic gradient methods allow to benefit from
both efficient structure enforcement and low computational
cost. In particular, we present a study of manifold identification and local acceleration properties of these methods
when applied to the following minimisation problem:
def

min Φ(x) = R(x) + F (x),

x∈Rn

where R(x) is a non-smooth structure imposing penalty
term, and
Pm
def 1
f (x),
F (x) = m
i=1 i
where each fi is continuously differentiable.
We are interested in the problems where the value of m is
very large. A typical example of (P) is the LASSO problem,
which reads
minn µ||x||1 +

x∈R

1 Pm 1
2
||Ki x − bi || ,
i=1 2
m

where µ > 0 is a positive trade-off parameter, Ki is the ith
row of a matrix K ∈ Rm×n , and bi is the ith element of
the vector b ∈ Rm . Throughout this paper, we consider the
following basic assumptions for problem (P):
(A.1) R : Rn → R ∪ {+∞} is proper, convex and lower
semi-continuous;
(A.2) F : Rn → R is continuously differentiable with
∇F being LF -Lipschitz continuous. For each index i = 1, · · · , m, fi is continuously differentiable
with Li -Lipschitz continuous gradient;
(A.3) Argmin(Φ) 6= ∅, that is the set of minimisers is
non-empty.
def

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

(P)

In addition to (A.2), define L = maxi={1,··· ,m} Li , which
is the uniformPLipschitz continuity of functions fi . Note
1
that LF ≤ m
i Li ≤ L holds.

