DiCE: The Infinitely Differentiable Monte Carlo Estimator

Jakob Foerster 1 Gregory Farquhar * 1 Maruan Al-Shedivat * 2
Tim Rocktäschel 1 Eric P. Xing 2 Shimon Whiteson 1

Abstract
The score function estimator is widely used for
estimating gradients of stochastic objectives in
stochastic computation graphs (SCG), e.g., in reinforcement learning and meta-learning. While
deriving the first order gradient estimators by differentiating a surrogate loss (SL) objective is
computationally and conceptually simple, using
the same approach for higher order derivatives is
more challenging. Firstly, analytically deriving
and implementing such estimators is laborious
and not compliant with automatic differentiation.
Secondly, repeatedly applying SL to construct
new objectives for each order derivative involves
increasingly cumbersome graph manipulations.
Lastly, to match the first order gradient under
differentiation, SL treats part of the cost as a
fixed sample, which we show leads to missing
and wrong terms for estimators of higher order
derivatives. To address all these shortcomings in a
unified way, we introduce D I CE, which provides
a single objective that can be differentiated repeatedly, generating correct estimators of derivatives
of any order in SCGs. Unlike SL, D I CE relies on
automatic differentiation for performing the requisite graph manipulations. We verify the correctness of D I CE both through a proof and numerical
evaluation of the D I CE derivative estimates. We
also use D I CE to propose and evaluate a novel
approach for multi-agent learning. Our code is
available at github.com/alshedivat/lola.

1. Introduction
The score function trick is used to produce Monte Carlo
estimates of gradients in settings with non-differentiable objectives, e.g., in meta-learning and reinforcement learning.
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Oxford 2 Carnegie Mellon
University. Correspondence to:
Jakob Foerster <jakob.foerster@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Estimating the first order gradients is computationally and
conceptually simple. While the gradient estimators can be
directly defined, it is often more convenient to define an
objective whose derivative is the gradient estimator. Then
the automatic-differentiation (auto-diff) toolbox, as implemented in deep learning libraries, can easily compute the
gradient estimates with respect to all upstream parameters.
This is the method used by the surrogate loss (SL) approach (Schulman et al., 2015), which provides a recipe
for building a surrogate objective from a stochastic computation graph (SCG). When differentiated, the SL yields an
estimator for the first order gradient of the original objective.
However, estimating higher order derivatives is more challenging. Such estimators are useful for a number of optimization techniques, accelerating convergence in supervised
settings (Dennis & Moré, 1977) and reinforcement learning (Furmston et al., 2016). Furthermore, they are vital for
gradient-based meta-learning (Finn et al., 2017; Al-Shedivat
et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017), which differentiates an objective after some number of first order learning steps. Estimators of higher order derivatives have also proven useful in
multi-agent learning (Foerster et al., 2018), when one agent
differentiates through the learning process of another agent.
Unfortunately, the first order gradient estimators mentioned
above are fundamentally ill suited to calculating higher order derivatives via auto-diff. Due to the dependency on the
sampling distribution, estimators of higher order derivatives
require repeated application of the score function trick. Simply differentiating the first order estimator again, as was for
example done by Finn et al. (2017), leads to missing terms.
To obtain higher order score function estimators, there are
currently two unsatisfactory options. The first is to analytically derive and implement the estimators. However,
this is laborious, error prone, and does not comply with the
auto-diff paradigm. The second is to repeatedly apply the
SL approach to construct new objectives for each further
derivative estimate. However, each of these new objectives
involves increasingly complex graph manipulations, defeating the purpose of a differentiable surrogate loss.
Moreover, to match the first order gradient after a single
differentiation, the SL treats part of the cost as a fixed sam-

