Junction Tree Variational Autoencoder for Molecular Graph Generation

Wengong Jin 1 Regina Barzilay 1 Tommi Jaakkola 1

Abstract
We seek to automate the design of molecules
based on specific chemical properties. In computational terms, this task involves continuous
embedding and generation of molecular graphs.
Our primary contribution is the direct realization
of molecular graphs, a task previously approached
by generating linear SMILES strings instead of
graphs. Our junction tree variational autoencoder
generates molecular graphs in two phases, by first
generating a tree-structured scaffold over chemical substructures, and then combining them into a
molecule with a graph message passing network.
This approach allows us to incrementally expand
molecules while maintaining chemical validity
at every step. We evaluate our model on multiple tasks ranging from molecular generation to
optimization. Across these tasks, our model outperforms previous state-of-the-art baselines by a
significant margin.

1. Introduction
The key challenge of drug discovery is to find target
molecules with desired chemical properties. Currently, this
task takes years of development and exploration by expert
chemists and pharmacologists. Our ultimate goal is to automate this process. From a computational perspective, we
decompose the challenge into two complementary subtasks:
learning to represent molecules in a continuous manner that
facilitates the prediction and optimization of their properties
(encoding); and learning to map an optimized continuous
representation back into a molecular graph with improved
properties (decoding). While deep learning has been extensively investigated for molecular graph encoding (Duvenaud
et al., 2015; Kearnes et al., 2016; Gilmer et al., 2017), the
harder combinatorial task of molecular graph generation
from latent representation remains under-explored.
1
MIT Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence Lab. Correspondence to: Wengong Jin <wengong@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Figure 1. Two almost identical molecules with markedly different
canonical SMILES in RDKit. The edit distance between two
strings is 22 (50.5% of the whole sequence).

Prior work on drug design formulated the graph generation task as a string generation problem (Gómez-Bombarelli
et al., 2016; Kusner et al., 2017) in an attempt to side-step
direct generation of graphs. Specifically, these models start
by generating SMILES (Weininger, 1988), a linear string
notation used in chemistry to describe molecular structures.
SMILES strings can be translated into graphs via deterministic mappings (e.g., using RDKit (Landrum, 2006)).
However, this design has two critical limitations. First, the
SMILES representation is not designed to capture molecular similarity. For instance, two molecules with similar
chemical structures may be encoded into markedly different
SMILES strings (e.g., Figure 1). This prevents generative
models like variational autoencoders from learning smooth
molecular embeddings. Second, essential chemical properties such as molecule validity are easier to express on graphs
rather than linear SMILES representations. We hypothesize
that operating directly on graphs improves generative modeling of valid chemical structures.
Our primary contribution is a new generative model of
molecular graphs. While one could imagine solving the
problem in a standard manner – generating graphs node
by node – the approach is not ideal for molecules. This is
because creating molecules atom by atom would force the
model to generate chemically invalid intermediaries (see,
e.g., Figure 2), delaying validation until a complete graph
is generated. Instead, we propose to generate molecular
graphs in two phases by exploiting valid subgraphs as components. The overall generative approach, cast as a junction
tree variational autoencoder, first generates a tree structured object (a junction tree) whose role is to represent the
scaffold of subgraph components and their coarse relative
arrangements. The components are valid chemical substructures automatically extracted from the training set using tree
decomposition and are used as building blocks. In the sec-

