Low-Rank Riemannian Optimization on Positive Semidefinite
Stochastic Matrices with Applications to Graph Clustering

Ahmed Douik 1 Babak Hassibi 1
over the set of symmetric positive semidefinite stochastic matrices. Such optimization problems appear in mulThis paper develops a Riemannian optimization
tiple applications such as graph clustering and commuframework for solving optimization problems on
nity detection (Zass & Shashua, 2006; Arora et al., 2011;
the set of symmetric positive semidefinite stochasYang
& Oja, 2012; Vinayak & Hassibi, 2016; Wang et al.,
tic matrices. The paper first reformulates the prob2016). Instead of solving the problem in the original n(n+1)
lem by factorizing the optimization variable as
2
dimensional space, the factorization of the optimization variX = YYT and deriving conditions on p, i.e.,
able X = YYT , with Y being an n × p matrix, allows us
the number of columns of Y, under which the
to reduce the dimension to np which is extremely attractive
factorization yields a satisfactory solution. The
when p  n. However, while the factorization is convereparameterization of the problem allows its fornient, it makes the problem non-convex with non-isolated
mulation as an optimization over either an embedsolutions. Indeed, note that for any solution Y and an orded or quotient Riemannian manifold whose gethogonal p × p matrix O, the matrix YO also represents a
ometries are investigated. In particular, the paper
solution to the problem.
explicitly derives the tangent space, Riemannian
gradients and retraction operator that allow the
Factorizing a low-rank matrix and casting the convex probdesign of efficient optimization methods on the
lem into a non-convex one has been well studied in the
proposed manifolds. The numerical results reliterature, particularly for solving semidefinite programs
veal that, when the optimal solution has a known
(SDPs). For example, the factorization X = YYT is suglow-rank, the resulting algorithms present a clear
gested in (Homer & Peinado, 1997) to solve the maximum
complexity advantage when compared with statecut problem. The authors in (Helmberg & Rendl, 2000)
of-the-art Euclidean and Riemannian approaches
exploit it to solve SDPs with fixed trace. More generally,
for graph clustering applications.
(Burer & Monteiro, 2003) investigates low-rank factoriza-

Abstract

tion for solving SDPs in standard form.

1. Introduction

M

ULTIPLE NP-hard and combinatorial optimization

problems can be approximated using convex relaxation, e.g., non-negative matrix factorization (Ding
et al., 2010; Yang & Oja, 2011), compressive sensing
(Chandrasekaran et al., 2012), low-rank matrix completion
(Boumal & Absil, 2011; Vandereycken, 2013; Cambier &
Absil, 2015). A theoretical analysis of these problems allows one to obtain conditions under which the solution to
the relaxed problem coincides with that of the original one.
Nonetheless, despite their convexity, solving the relaxed
problems can often be a computation bottleneck in largescale applications.
In this paper, we consider solving optimization problems
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, California Institute
of Technology, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Ahmed Douik
<ahmed.douik@caltech.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Taking advantage of both the low-rank factorization and
the optimization over Riemannian manifolds, the authors in
(Grubišić & Pietersz, 2007) propose a first-order Riemannian algorithm for solving optimization problems on the
elliptope, i.e., positive semidefinite matrices with ones on
the diagonal. The quotient manifold is deeply investigated
in (Bonnabel & Sepulchre, 2009) and an invariant metric
that makes the manifold geodesically complete is derived.
A simpler quotient structure is introduced in (Journée et al.,
2010) to solve optimization problems with general trace
constraints, including the elliptope and the spectahedron,
by proposing a second-order algorithm with guaranteed
quadratic convergence. This manuscript follows a similar
approach to the aforementioned works in the sense that a
new quotient structure is proposed to solve optimization
problems in which the optimization variable is a low-rank
positive semidefinite stochastic matrix.
Earlier work (Douik & Hassibi, 2018) studied the doubly stochastic and symmetric multinomial manifolds to
represent doubly stochastic and symmetric stochastic matrices. This work extends the aforementioned results to

