ContextNet: Deep learning for Star Galaxy Classification

Noble Kennamer 1 David Kirkby 2 Alex Ihler 1 Javier Sánchez 2

Abstract
We present a framework to compose artificial neural networks in cases where the data cannot be
treated as independent events, our particular motivation is star galaxy classification for ground
based optical surveys. Due to a turbulent atmosphere and imperfect instruments, a single image
of an astronomical object is not enough to definitively classify it as a star or galaxy. Instead the
context of the surrounding objects imaged at the
same time need to be considered in order to make
an optimal classification. The model we present
is divided into three distinct ANNs: one designed
to capture local features about each object, the
second to compare these features across all objects in an image, and the third to make a final
prediction for each object based on the local and
compared features. By exploiting the ability to
replicate the weights of an ANN, the model can
handle an arbitrary and variable number of individual objects embedded in a larger exposure. We
train and test our model on simulations of a large
up and coming ground based survey, the Large
Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) and compare
to the state of the art approach, showing improved
overall performance as well as better performance
for a specific class of objects that are important
for the LSST.

1. Introduction
The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) is a ground
based photometric survey that will commence in early 2022
and will observe for 10 years. It will image the entire available sky every three nights and produce over one petabyte of
data a year. The science goals of the survey are vast, ranging
from the detection of dark energy and dark matter signa1
Department of Computer Sciences, University of California, Irvine 2 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University
of California, Irvine. Correspondence to: Noble Kennamer <nkenname@uci.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

tures to mapping small objects in the Solar System such
as near-Earth asteroids (LSST Science Collaboration et al.,
2009). The scale of the data and the types of measurements
require sophisticated data analysis methods and present a
great opportunity for machine learning scientists to work
with domain scientists on fundamental science questions.
Conversely, the astronomical data that is collected creates
new challenges for the machine learning community and
promotes the development of new methods. Collaborations
between machine learning scientists and astronomers have
been steadily growing and diverse in methods and applications, including a deep learning approach for analyzing
strongly lensed systems (Hezaveh et al., 2017), a probabilistic graphical model for processing astronomical images
(Regier et al., 2015), an ensemble approach for classification
of supernova (Lochner et al., 2016), and many others. These
projects have contributed to both fields, which is also the
aim for our work. In this paper we present the specific application of star galaxy classification, for which we develop
a novel framework for composing neural network models in
order to make advances in the field of astronomy.
Star galaxy classification is one of the first processing steps
in the data analysis pipeline of any astronomical survey;
its foundational nature means that it affects almost every
subsequent step of the pipeline (Jurić et al., 2015). The
inputs to star galaxy classification are a collection of small,
cutout images of detected sources in a single exposure, and
the outputs are the predictions for each detected source in
that exposure. A single exposure records the photon counts
of each pixel of a CCD exposed for a short period of time.
For LSST, each exposure is a 16 megapixel grid with an
exposure time of 15 seconds. The entire telescope is made
up of 189 of these CCD detectors (Kahn et al., 2010). It is
expected that approximately 1200 sources will be detected
and thus need to be classified for each exposure. Figure 1
shows a single exposure on a log scale with 16 representative
cutouts to the right. Note that this exposure contains 1273
detected objects.
In an ideal world for astronomers (one without an atmosphere), this is a rather simple problem. Stars can be thought
of as point sources of light, while galaxies have some spatial
distribution. Thus in order to make an accurate prediction
all one has to do is measure the size of a source and, if it
is greater than a certain threshold, it can be safely classi-

