State Space Gaussian Processes with Non-Gaussian Likelihood

Hannes Nickisch 1 Arno Solin 2 Alexander Grigorievskiy 2 3

Abstract
We provide a comprehensive overview and tooling for GP modeling with non-Gaussian likelihoods using state space methods. The state space
formulation allows to solve one-dimensional GP
models in O(n) time and memory complexity.
While existing literature has focused on the connection between GP regression and state space
methods, the computational primitives allowing
for inference using general likelihoods in combination with the Laplace approximation (LA), variational Bayes (VB), and assumed density filtering
(ADF, a.k.a. single-sweep expectation propagation, EP) schemes has been largely overlooked.
We present means of combining the efficient O(n)
state space methodology with existing inference
methods. We extend existing methods, and provide unifying code implementing all approaches.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006)
form a versatile class of probabilistic machine learning models with applications in regression, classification as well as
robust and ordinal regression. In practice, there are computational challenges arising from (i) non-conjugate (nonGaussian) likelihoods and (ii) large datasets.
The former (i) can be addressed by approximating the nonGaussian posterior by an effective Gaussian giving rise to
a number of algorithms such as the Laplace approximation
(LA, Williams & Barber, 1998), variational Bayes (VB,
Gibbs & MacKay, 2000), direct Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence minimization (Opper & Archambeau, 2009) and
expectation propagation (EP, Minka, 2001) with different
tradeoffs in terms of accuracy and required computations
(Kuss & Rasmussen, 2005; Nickisch & Rasmussen, 2008;
Naish-Guzman & Holden, 2008). The latter (ii) can be
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018 by the author(s). 1 Digital Imaging, Philips Research,
Hamburg, Germany 2 Department of Computer Science, Aalto
University, Espoo, Finland 3 Silo.AI, Helsinki, Finland. Correspondence to: Hannes Nickisch <hannes@nickisch.org>, Arno Solin
<arno.solin@aalto.fi>.

addressed by approximate covariance computations using
sparse inducing point methods (Quiñonero-Candela & Rasmussen, 2005) based on variational free energy (VFE, Titsias, 2009), fully independent training conditionals (FITC,
Snelson & Ghahramani, 2006), hybrids (Bui et al., 2017),
or stochastic approximations (Hensman et al., 2013; Krauth
et al., 2017) applicable to any data dimension D. A second
class of covariance interpolation methods, KISS-GP (Wilson
& Nickisch, 2015; Wilson et al., 2015), are based on grids
of inducing points. For 1 < D < 5, product covariance, and
rectilinear grids, the covariance matrix has Kronecker structure. For D = 1, stationary covariance, and a regular grid,
the covariance matrix has Toeplitz structure (a special case
of block-Toeplitz with Toeplitz blocks (BTTB) obtained for
1 < D < 5), which can be exploited for fast matrix-vector
multiplications (MVMs). A third covariance approximation
methodology is based on basis function expansions such as
sparse spectrum GPs (Lázaro-Gredilla et al., 2010), variational Fourier features (Hensman et al., 2018), or Hilbert
space GPs (Solin & Särkkä, 2014b) for stationary covariance functions. Higher input dimensions D > 4 either tend
to get computationally heavy or prone to overfitting.
In time-series data, with D = 1, the data sets tend to become long (or unbounded) when observations accumulate
over time. For these time-series models, leveraging sequential state space methods from signal processing makes it
possible to solve GP inference problems in linear time complexity O(n) if the underlying GP has Markovian structure
(Reece & Roberts, 2010; Hartikainen & Särkkä, 2010). This
reformulation is exact for Markovian covariance functions
(see, e.g., Solin, 2016) such as the exponential, half-integer
Matérn, noise, constant, linear, polynomial, Wiener, etc.
(and their sums and products). Covariance functions such
as the squared exponential (Hartikainen & Särkkä, 2010),
rational quadratic (Solin & Särkkä, 2014a), and periodic
(Solin & Särkkä, 2014) can be approximated by their Markovian counterparts. Grigorievskiy & Karhunen (2016); Grigorievskiy et al. (2017) bridge the state space connection
further by leveraging sparse matrices (SpInGP) in connection with the Markovian state space models. Another issue
is that if time gaps between data points are very uneven then
the computational power is spend on computing required
matrix exponentials. This still makes the method slow for
the large datasets with uneven sampling despite the linear

