K-Beam Minimax: Efficient Optimization for Deep Adversarial Learning

Jihun Hamm 1 Yung-Kyun Noh 2

Abstract
Minimax optimization plays a key role in adversarial training of machine learning algorithms, such as learning generative models, domain adaptation, privacy preservation, and robust
learning. In this paper, we demonstrate the failure of alternating gradient descent in minimax
optimization problems due to the discontinuity of
solutions of the inner maximization. To address
this, we propose a new -subgradient descent algorithm that addresses this problem by simultaneously tracking K candidate solutions. Practically, the algorithm can find solutions that previous saddle-point algorithms cannot find, with
only a sublinear increase of complexity in K.
We analyze the conditions under which the algorithm converges to the true solution in detail. A
significant improvement in stability and convergence speed of the algorithm is observed in simple representative problems, GAN training, and
domain-adaptation problems.

1. Introduction
There is a wide range of problems in machine learning
which can be formulated as continuous minimax optimization problems. Examples include generative adversarial
nets (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), privacy preservation (Hamm, 2015; Edwards & Storkey, 2015), domain
adaption (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015), and robust learning
(Globerson & Roweis, 2006) to list a few. More broadly,
the problem of finding a worst-case solution or an equilibrium of a leader-follower game (Brückner & Scheffer,
2011) can be formulated as a minimax problem. Furthermore, the KKT condition for a convex problem can be considered a minimax point of the Lagrangian (Arrow et al.,
1958). Efficient solvers for minimax problems can have
positive impacts on all these fronts.
1

The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. 2 Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Jihun Hamm
<hammj@cse.ohio-state.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

To define the problem, consider a real-valued function
f (u, v) on a subset U ×V ⊆ Rd ×RD . A (continuous) minimax optimization problem is minu∈U maxv∈V f (u, v)1 . It
is called a discrete minimax problem if the maximization
domain V is finite. A related notion is the (global) saddle
point (u∗ , v ∗ ) which is a point that satisfies
f (u∗ , v) ≤ f (u∗ , v ∗ ) ≤ f (u, v ∗ ), ∀(u, v) ∈ U × V.
When f (u, v) is convex in u and concave in v, saddle points
coincide with minimax points, due to the Von Neumann’s
theorem (v. Neumann, 1928): maxv minu f (u, v) =
f (u∗ , v ∗ ) = minu maxv f (u, v). The problem of finding
saddle points has been studied intensively since the seminal work of Arrow et al. (1958), and a gradient descent
method was proposed by Uzawa (1958). Much theoretical work has ensued, in particular on the stability of saddle points and convergence (see Sec. 2). However, the
cost function f in realistic machine learning applications
is seldom convex-concave and may not have a global saddle point. Fig. 1 shows motivating examples of surfaces
on [−0.5, 0.5]2 ⊆ R2 . Examples (a),(b), and (c) are saddle point problems: all three have a critical point at the
origin (u, v) = (0, 0), which is also a saddle point and
a minimax point. However, examples (d),(e), and (f) do
not have global saddle points: example (d) has minimax
points (u, v) ∈ {(±0.25, −0.25), (±0.25, 0.5)} and examples (e) and (f) have minimax points (u, v) = (0, ±0.5).
These facts are not obvious until one analyzes each surface. (See Supplementary Material for more information.)
Furthermore, the non-existence of saddle points also happens with unconstrained problems: consider the function
f (u, v) = −0.5u2 + 2uv − v 2 defined on R2 . The inner
maximum has the closed-form solution φ(u) = 0.5u2 , and
the outer minimum minu φ(u) is 0 at u = 0. Therefore,
(u, v) = (0, 0) is the global minimax point (and also a critical point). However, f cannot have a saddle point, local or
global, since f is strictly concave in u and v respectively.
Despite the fact that saddle points and minimax points are
conceptually different, many machine learning applications
in the literature do not distinguish the two. This is a mistake, because a local saddle point is only an equilibrium
1

A more general problem is inf u∈U supv∈V f (u, v), but we
will assume that the min and the max exist and are achievable,
which are explained further in Sec. 3.

