Video Prediction with Appearance and Motion Conditions

Yunseok Jang 1 2 Gunhee Kim 2 Yale Song 3

Abstract
Video prediction aims to generate realistic future
frames by learning dynamic visual patterns. One
fundamental challenge is to deal with future uncertainty: How should a model behave when there
are multiple correct, equally probable future? We
propose an Appearance-Motion Conditional GAN
to address this challenge. We provide appearance
and motion information as conditions that specify
how the future may look like, reducing the level
of uncertainty. Our model consists of a generator,
two discriminators taking charge of appearance
and motion pathways, and a perceptual ranking
module that encourages videos of similar conditions to look similar. To train our model, we develop a novel conditioning scheme that consists of
different combinations of appearance and motion
conditions. We evaluate our model using facial
expression and human action datasets and report
favorable results compared to existing methods.

1. Introduction
Video prediction is concerned with generating high-fidelity
future frames given past observations by learning dynamic
visual patterns from videos. It is a promising direction for
video representation learning because the model will have
to learn to disentangle factors of variation based on complex visual patterns, i.e., how objects move and deform over
time, how scenes change as the camera moves, how background changes as the foreground objects move, etc. While
the recent advances in deep generative models (Kingma
& Welling, 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014) have brought a
rapid progress to image generation (Radford et al., 2016;
Isola et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2017a), relatively little progress
has been made in video prediction. We believe this is due in
This work was done at Yahoo Research during summer internship. 1 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 2 Seoul National University 3 Microsoft AI & Research. Correspondence to: Yunseok Jang
<yunseokj@umich.edu>, Gunhee Kim <gunhee@snu.ac.kr>,
Yale Song <yalesong@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

part to future uncertainty (Walker et al., 2016), making the
problem somewhat ill-posed and evaluation difficult.
Previous work has addressed the uncertainty issue in several
directions. One popular approach is learning to extrapolate
multiple past frames into the future (Srivastava et al., 2015;
Mathieu et al., 2016). This helps reduce uncertainty because
input frames act as conditions that constrain the range of
options for the future. However, when input frames are
not sufficient statistics of the future, which is often the
case with just a few frames (e.g., four in (Mathieu et al.,
2016)), these methods suffer from blurry output caused by
future uncertainty. Recent methods thus leverage auxiliary
information, e.g., motion category labels and human pose,
along with multiple input frames (Finn et al., 2016; Villegas
et al., 2017b; Walker et al., 2017). Unfortunately, these
methods still suffer from motionless and/or blurry output
caused by the lack of clear supervision signals or suboptimal
solutions found by training algorithms.
In this work, we propose an Appearance-Motion Conditional Generative Adversarial Network (AMC-GAN). Unlike most existing methods that learn from multiple input
frames (Srivastava et al., 2015; Mathieu et al., 2016; Finn
et al., 2016; Villegas et al., 2017b; Liang et al., 2017), which
contain both appearance and motion information, we instead
disentangle appearance from motion, and learn from a single input frame (appearance) and auxiliary input (motion).
This allows our model to learn different factors of variation
more precisely. Encoding motion with an auxiliary variable
allows our model to manipulate how the future would look
like; with a simple change of the auxiliary variable, we can
make a neutral face happy or frown, or make a neutral body
pose perform different gestures.
Training GANs is notoriously difficult (Salimans et al.,
2016). We develop a novel conditioning scheme that constructs multiple different combinations of appearance and
motion conditions – including even the ones that are not
part of the training samples – and specify constraints to the
learning objective such that videos generated under different
conditions all look plausible. This makes the model generate videos under conditions beyond what is available in the
training data and thus work much harder to satisfy the constraints during training, improving the generalization ability.
In addition, we incorporate perceptual triplet ranking into

