Investigating Human Priors for Playing Video Games

Rachit Dubey 1 Pulkit Agrawal 1 Deepak Pathak 1 Thomas L. Griffiths 1 Alexei A. Efros 1

Abstract
What makes humans so good at solving seemingly complex video games? Unlike computers,
humans bring in a great deal of prior knowledge
about the world, enabling efficient decision making. This paper investigates the role of human
priors for solving video games. Given a sample
game, we conduct a series of ablation studies to
quantify the importance of various priors on human performance. We do this by modifying the
video game environment to systematically mask
different types of visual information that could
be used by humans as priors. We find that removal of some prior knowledge causes a drastic degradation in the speed with which human
players solve the game, e.g. from 2 minutes to
over 20 minutes. Furthermore, our results indicate that general priors, such as the importance
of objects and visual consistency, are critical for
efficient game-play. Videos and the game manipulations are available at https://rach0012.
github.io/humanRL_website/.

1. Introduction
While deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods have
shown impressive performance on a variety of video
games (Mnih et al., 2015), they remain woefully inefficient
compared to human players, taking millions of action inputs
to solve even the simplest Atari games. Much research is
currently focused on improving sample efficiency of RL
algorithms (Gu et al., 2016; Oh et al., 2017). However, there
is an orthogonal issue that is often overlooked: RL agents
attack each problem tabula rasa, whereas humans come
in with a wealth of prior knowledge about the world, from
physics to semantics to affordances.
Consider the following motivating example: you are tasked
with playing an unfamiliar computer game shown in Fig1

University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Rachit
Dubey <rach0012@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Figure 1. Motivating example. (a) A simple platformer game. (b)
The same game modified by re-rendering the textures. Despite the
two games being structurally the same, humans took twice as long
to finish the second game. In comparison, the performance of an
RL agent was approximately the same for the two games.

ure 1(a). No manual or instructions are provided; you don’t
even know which game sprite is controlled by you. Indeed,
the only feedback you are ever given is “terminal”, i.e. once
you successfully finish the game. Would you be able to
finish this game? How long would it take? We recruited
forty human subjects to play this game and found that subjects finished it quite easily, taking just under 1 minute of
game-play or 3000 action inputs. This is not overly surprising as one could easily guess that the game’s goal is to
move the robot sprite towards the princess by stepping on
the brick-like objects and using ladders to reach the higher
platforms while avoiding the angry pink and the fire objects.
Now consider a second scenario in which this same game is
re-rendered with new textures, getting rid of semantic and
affordance (Gibson, 2014) cues, as shown in Figure 1(b).
How would human performance change? We recruited
another forty subjects to play this game and found that, on
average, it took the players more than twice the time (2
minutes) and action inputs ( 6500) to complete the game.
The second game is clearly much harder for humans, likely
because it is now more difficult to guess the game structure
and goal, as well as to spot obstacles.
For comparison, we can also examine how modern RL algorithms perform on these games. This is not so simple, as
most standard RL approaches expect very dense rewards
(e.g. continuously updated game-score (Mnih et al., 2015)),
whereas we provide only a terminal reward, to mimic how
most humans play video games. In such sparse reward

