Machine Theory of Mind

Neil C. Rabinowitz 1 Frank Perbet 1 H. Francis Song 1 Chiyuan Zhang 2 Matthew Botvinick 1

Abstract
Theory of mind (ToM) broadly refers to humans’
ability to represent the mental states of others,
including their desires, beliefs, and intentions.
We design a Theory of Mind neural network –
a ToMnet – which uses meta-learning to build
such models of the agents it encounters. The
ToMnet learns a strong prior model for agents’
future behaviour, and, using only a small number of behavioural observations, can bootstrap
to richer predictions about agents’ characteristics and mental states. We apply the ToMnet
to agents behaving in simple gridworld environments, showing that it learns to model random,
algorithmic, and deep RL agents from varied
populations, and that it passes classic ToM tasks
such as the “Sally-Anne” test of recognising that
others can hold false beliefs about the world.

1. Introduction
What does it actually mean to “understand” another agent?
As humans, we face this challenge every day, as we engage with other humans whose latent characteristics, latent
states, and computational processes are almost entirely inaccessible. Yet we can make predictions about strangers’
future behaviour, and infer what information they have; we
can plan our interactions with others, and establish efficient
and effective communication.
A salient feature of these “understandings” of other agents
is that they make little to no reference to the agents’ true
underlying structure. A prominent argument from cognitive psychology is that our social reasoning instead relies
on high-level models of other agents (Gopnik & Wellman,
1992). These models engage abstractions which do not
describe the detailed physical mechanisms underlying observed behaviour; instead, we represent the mental states
An extended version is available at arxiv.org/abs/1802.07740.
DeepMind 2 Google Brain. Correspondence to: Neil Rabinowitz
<ncr@google.com>.
1

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

of others, such as their desires and beliefs. This ability
is typically described as our Theory of Mind (Premack
& Woodruff, 1978). While we may also leverage our
own minds to simulate others’ (e.g. Gordon, 1986; Gallese
& Goldman, 1998), our ultimate human understanding of
other agents is not measured by a correspondence between
our models and the mechanistic ground truth, but instead
by how much they enable prediction and planning.
In this paper, we take inspiration from human Theory of
Mind, and seek to build a system which learns to model
other agents. We describe this as a Machine Theory of
Mind. Our goal is not to assert a generative model of
agents’ behaviour and an algorithm to invert it. Rather, we
focus on the problem of how an observer could learn autonomously how to model other agents using limited data
(Botvinick et al., 2017). This distinguishes our work from
previous literature, which has relied on hand-crafted models of agents as noisy-rational planners – e.g. using inverse
RL (Ng et al., 2000; Abbeel & Ng, 2004), Bayesian Theory
of Mind (Baker et al., 2011; Jara-Ettinger et al., 2016) or
game theory (Yoshida et al., 2008; Camerer, 2010). Likewise, other work, such as Foerster et al. (2017) and Everett
(2017), expect other agents to conform to known, strong
parametric models, while concurrent work by Raileanu
et al. (2018) assumes that other agents are functionally
identical to oneself. In contrast, we make very weak assumptions about the generative model driving others’ behaviour. The approach we pursue here learns the agent
models, and how to do inference on them, from scratch,
via meta-learning.
Building a rich, flexible, and performant Machine Theory
of Mind may well be a grand challenge for AI. We are not
trying to solve all of this here. A main message of this
paper is that many of the initial challenges of building a
ToM can be cast as simple learning problems when they
are formulated in the right way.
There are many potential applications for this work. Learning rich models of others will improve decision-making in
complex multi-agent tasks, especially where model-based
planning and imagination are required (Hassabis et al.,
2013; Hula et al., 2015; Oliehoek & Amato, 2016). Our
work thus ties in to a rich history of opponent modelling
(Brown, 1951; Albrecht & Stone, 2017); within this con-

