A Progressive Batching L-BFGS Method for Machine Learning

Raghu Bollapragada 1 Dheevatsa Mudigere 2 Jorge Nocedal 1 Hao-Jun Michael Shi 1 Ping Tak Peter Tang 3

Abstract
The standard L-BFGS method relies on gradient
approximations that are not dominated by noise,
so that search directions are descent directions,
the line search is reliable, and quasi-Newton updating yields useful quadratic models of the objective function. All of this appears to call for a full
batch approach, but since small batch sizes give
rise to faster algorithms with better generalization
properties, L-BFGS is currently not considered
an algorithm of choice for large-scale machine
learning applications. One need not, however,
choose between the two extremes represented by
the full batch or highly stochastic regimes, and
may instead follow a progressive batching approach in which the sample size increases during
the course of the optimization. In this paper, we
present a new version of the L-BFGS algorithm
that combines three basic components — progressive batching, a stochastic line search, and stable
quasi-Newton updating — and that performs well
on training logistic regression and deep neural
networks. We provide supporting convergence
theory for the method.

1. Introduction
The L-BFGS method (Liu & Nocedal, 1989) has traditionally been regarded as a batch method in the machine learning community. This is because quasi-Newton algorithms
need gradients of high quality in order to construct useful
quadratic models and perform reliable line searches. These
algorithmic ingredients can be implemented, it seems, only
by using very large batch sizes, resulting in a costly iteration that makes the overall algorithm slow compared with
1

Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
2
Intel Corporation, Bangalore, India 3 Intel Corporation,
Santa Clara, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Hao-Jun
Michael Shi <hjmshi@u.northwestern.edu>, Raghu Bollapragada
<raghu.bollapragada@u.northwestern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

stochastic gradient methods (Robbins & Monro, 1951).
Even before the resurgence of neural networks, many researchers observed that a well-tuned implementation of the
stochastic gradient (SG) method was far more effective on
large-scale logistic regression applications than the batch
L-BFGS method, even when taking into account the advantages of parallelism offered by the use of large batches. The
preeminence of the SG method (and its variants) became
more pronounced with the advent of deep neural networks,
and some researchers have speculated that SG is endowed
with certain regularization properties that are essential in the
minimization of such complex nonconvex functions (Hardt
et al., 2015; Keskar et al., 2016).
In this paper, we postulate that the most efficient algorithms
for machine learning may not reside entirely in the highly
stochastic or full batch regimes, but should employ a progressive batching approach in which the sample size is initially small, and is increased as the iteration progresses.
This view is consistent with recent numerical experiments
on training various deep neural networks (Smith et al., 2017;
Goyal et al., 2017), where the SG method, with increasing sample sizes, yields similar test loss and accuracy as
the standard (fixed mini-batch) SG method, while offering
significantly greater opportunities for parallelism.
Progressive batching algorithms have received much attention recently from a theoretical perspective. It has been
shown that they enjoy complexity bounds that rival those of
the SG method (Byrd et al., 2012), and that they can achieve
a fast rate of convergence (Friedlander & Schmidt, 2012).
The main appeal of these methods is that they inherit the
efficient initial behavior of the SG method, offer greater
opportunities to exploit parallelism, and allow for the incorporation of second-order information. The latter can be
done efficiently via quasi-Newton updating.
An integral part of quasi-Newton methods is the line search,
which ensures that a convex quadratic model can be constructed at every iteration. One challenge that immediately
arises is how to perform this line search when the objective function is stochastic. This is an issue that has not
received sufficient attention in the literature, where stochastic line searches have been largely dismissed as inappropriate. In this paper, we take a step towards the development
of stochastic line searches for machine learning by study-

