Do Outliers Ruin Collaboration?
Mingda Qiao 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning a binary classifier from n different data sources, among which
at most an η fraction are adversarial. The overhead is defined as the ratio between the sample
complexity of learning in this setting and that
of learning the same hypothesis class on a single data distribution. We present an algorithm
that achieves an O(ηn + ln n) overhead, which
is proved to be worst-case optimal. We also discuss the potential challenges to the design of a
computationally efficient learning algorithm with
a small overhead.

1. Introduction
Consider the following real-world scenario: we would like
to train a speech recognition model based on labeled examples collected from different users. For this particular application, a high average accuracy over all users is far from
satisfactory: a model that is correct on 99.9% of the data
may still go seriously wrong for a small yet non-negligible
0.1% fraction of the users. Instead, a more desirable objective would be finding personalized speech recognition
solutions that are accurate for every single user.
There are two major challenges to achieving this goal, the
first being user heterogeneity: a model trained exclusively
for users with a particular accent may fail miserably for
users from another region. This challenge hints that a successful learning algorithm should be adaptive: more samples
need to be collected from users with atypical data distributions. Equally crucial is that a small fraction of the users are
malicious (e.g., they are controlled by a competing corporation); these users intend to mislead the speech recognition
model into generating inaccurate or even ludicrous outputs.
Motivated by these practical concerns, we propose the Robust Collaborative Learning model and study from a theoret1

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences (IIIS), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Mingda
Qiao <ACMonsterQiao@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

ical perspective the complexity of learning in the presence of
untrusted collaborators. In our model, a learning algorithm
interacts with n different users, each associated with a data
distribution Di . As mentioned above, a successful learning algorithm should, ideally, find personalized classifiers
f1 , f2 , . . . , fn for different distributions, such that

errDi (fi ) , Pr [fi (x) 6= f ∗ (x)] < 
x∼Di

holds for every i ∈ [n], where f ∗ (x) denotes the true label of sample x. Further complicating the situation is that
the algorithm can only interact with the data distributions
via the users, each of which is either truthful or adversarial. A truthful user always provides the learning algorithm
with independent samples drawn from his distribution together with the correct labels, whereas the labeled samples
collected from adversarial users are arbitrary.
In the presence of malicious users, it is clearly impossible
to learn an accurate classifier for every single distribution:
an adversary may choose to provide no information about
his data distribution. Therefore, a more realistic objective
is to satisfy all the truthful users, i.e., to learn n classifiers
f1 , f2 , . . . , fn such that errDi (fi ) <  holds for every truthful user i.
Naı̈vely, one could ignore the prior knowledge that samples
from truthful users are labeled by the same function, and
run n independent copies of the same learning algorithm for
the n users. This straightforward approach clearly needs at
least n times as many samples as that required by learning
on a single data distribution. Following the terminology
of Blum et al. (2017), we say that this naı̈ve algorithm leads
to an Ω(n) sample complexity overhead. The notion of
overhead measures the extent to which learning benefits
from the collaboration and sharing of information among
different parties. Blum et al. (2017) proposed a learning
algorithm that achieves an O(ln n) overhead for the case
that all users are truthful, i.e., η = 0. We are then interested
in answering the following natural question: can we still
achieve a sublinear overhead for the case that η > 0, at least
when η is sufficiently small? In other words, do adversaries
ruin the efficiency of collaboration?

