Adversarial Risk and the Dangers of Evaluating Against Weak Attacks

Jonathan Uesato 1 Brendan O’Donoghue 1 Aaron van den Oord 1 Pushmeet Kohli 1

Abstract
This paper investigates recently proposed approaches for defending against adversarial examples and evaluating adversarial robustness. We
motivate adversarial risk as an objective for
achieving models robust to worst-case inputs. We
then frame commonly used attacks and evaluation
metrics as defining a tractable surrogate objective
to the true adversarial risk. This suggests that
models may optimize this surrogate rather than
the true adversarial risk. We formalize this notion
as obscurity to an adversary, and develop tools
and heuristics for identifying obscured models
and designing transparent models. We demonstrate that this is a significant problem in practice
by repurposing gradient-free optimization techniques into adversarial attacks, which we use to
decrease the accuracy of several recently proposed
defenses to near zero. Our hope is that our formulations and results will help researchers to develop
more powerful defenses.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has revolutionized the field of machine learning and led to substantial improvements in many challenging problems such as image understanding (He et al., 2016),
speech recognition (Graves et al., 2013), and automatic
game playing (Mnih et al., 2015). Despite these remarkable successes, we have seen some intriguing and troubling
properties in the behaviour of these models.
Researchers have demonstrated that certain small perturbations to the input can make neural networks produce extremely bad results (Szegedy et al., 2013; Jia and Liang,
2017) For instance, in the case of image classification, imperceptible perturbations can lead to the resulting images
being misclassified to completely different object categories
with high confidence (Szegedy et al., 2013). These so-called
1
DeepMind. Correspondence to: Jonathan Uesato <juesato@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

adversarial examples can be computed relatively easily by
using optimization methods (referred to as adversarial attacks) to find perturbations that maximize the loss of the network (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Carlini and Wagner, 2017b).
Later work showed that this phenomena is not unique to
image classification, and appears across different model architectures, as well as in other machine learning algorithms
(Papernot et al., 2016; 2017).
The emergence of adversarial examples and the increasing deployment of machine learning models in real world
production systems has motivated extensive research on developing models that can defend against adversarial attacks
(Warde-Farley and Goodfellow, 2016; Yuan et al., 2017).
Using a variety of approaches, these works have shown that
neural models can be developed that are robust against commonly used attacks (Guo et al., 2017; Song et al., 2017; Xie
et al., 2017; Liao et al., 2017). However, a key question
remains unanswered: Are these models free from any adversarial examples or are they simply robust to current attack
methods?
In this paper, we formalize the intuition that in settings with
the potential for catastrophic failures, minimizing expected
risk may produce models with very poor worst-case performance. This motivates the study of the adversarial risk
as a measure of the model’s performance on worst-case inputs. However, the exact adversarial risk is computationally
intractable to evaluate, let alone optimize. We thus frame
commonly used attacks and adversarial evaluation metrics
as defining a tractable surrogate objective to the true adversarial risk. We hypothesize that many defenses achieve
robustness through obscurity, i.e., the defenses work by exploiting weaknesses of certain attacks and do not eliminate
all adversarial inputs.
One of the key contributions of this paper is to experimentally validate the ‘security by obscurity’ nature of recently
proposed defense methods. Specifically, we show that by
using a more powerful attack method (one better able to
maximize the true adversarial risk), we can dramatically
reduce the performance of these defenses.
To summarize, the key contributions of this paper are:
• Formulation of adversarial attacks and defenses as optimizing surrogates of the true adversarial risk

