Coded Sparse Matrix Multiplication

Sinong Wang 1 Jiashang Liu 1 Ness Shroff 2

Abstract
In a large-scale and distributed matrix multiplication problem C = A| B, where C ∈ Rr×t , the
coded computation plays an important role to effectively deal with “stragglers” (distributed computations that may get delayed due to few slow
or faulty processors). However, existing coded
schemes could destroy the significant sparsity that
exists in large-scale machine learning problems,
and could result in much higher computation overhead, i.e., O(rt) decoding time. In this paper, we
develop a new coded computation strategy, we
call sparse code, which achieves near optimal recovery threshold, low computation overhead, and
linear decoding time O(nnz(C)). We implement
our scheme and demonstrate the advantage of the
approach over both uncoded and current fastest
coded strategies.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider a distributed matrix multiplication problem, where we aim to compute C = A| B from
input matrices A ∈ Rs×r and B ∈ Rs×t for some integers
r, s, t. This problem is the key building block in machine
learning and signal processing problems, and has been used
in a large variety of application areas including classification, regression, clustering and feature selection problems.
Many such applications have large-scale datasets and massive computation tasks, which forces practitioners to adopt
distributed computing frameworks such as Hadoop (Dean
& Ghemawat, 2008) and Spark (Zaharia et al., 2010) to
increase the learning speed.
Classical approaches of distributed matrix multiplication
rely on dividing the input matrices equally among all available worker nodes. Each worker computes a partial result,
1
Department of ECE, The Ohio State University, Columbus, USA 2 Departments of ECE and CSE, The Ohio State University, Columbus, USA. Correspondence to: Sinong Wang
<wang.7691@osu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

and the master node has to collect the results from all workers to output matrix C. As a result, a major performance
bottleneck is the latency in waiting for a few slow or faulty
processors – called “stragglers” to finish their tasks (Dean
& Barroso, 2013). To alleviate this problem, current frameworks such as Hadoop deploy various straggler detection
techniques and usually replicate the straggling task on another available node.
Recently, forward error correction or coding techniques provide a more effective way to deal with the “straggler” in
the distributed tasks (Dutta et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2017a;
Tandon et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2017; Li et al., 2018; Wang
et al., 2018). It creates and exploits coding redundancy in
local computation to enable the matrix C recoverable from
the results of partial finished workers, and can therefore alleviate some straggling workers. For example, consider a distributed system with 3 worker nodes, the coding scheme first
splits the matrix A into two submatrices, i.e., A = [A1 , A2 ].
Then each worker computes A|1 B, A|2 B and (A1 + A2 )| B.
The master node can compute A| B as soon as any 2 out of
the 3 workers finish, and can overcome one straggler.
In a general setting with N workers, each input matrix A, B
is divided into m, n submatrices, respectively. The recovery
threshold is defined as the minimum number of workers that
the master needs to wait for in order to compute C. The
above MDS coded scheme is shown to achieve a recovery
threshold Θ(N ). An improved scheme proposed in (Lee
et al., 2017c) referred to as the product code, can offer a
recovery threshold of Θ(mn) with high probability. More
recently, the work (Yu et al., 2017) designs a type of polynomial code. It achieves the recovery threshold of mn, which
exactly matches the information theoretical lower bound.
However, many problems in machine learning exhibit both
extremely large-scale targeting data and a sparse structure,
i.e., nnz(A)  rs, nnz(B)  st and nnz(C)  rt. The
key question that arises in this scenario is: is coding really
an efficient way to mitigate the straggler in the distributed
sparse matrix multiplication problem?
1.1. Motivation: Coding Straggler
To answer the aforementioned question, we first briefly introduce the current coded matrix multiplication schemes. In
these schemes, each local worker calculates a coded version

