Temporal Poisson Square Root Graphical Models

Sinong Geng* 1 Zhaobin Kuang* 1 Peggy Peissig 2 David Page 1

Abstract
We propose temporal Poisson square root graphical models (TPSQRs), a generalization of Poisson
square root graphical models (PSQRs) specifically
designed for modeling longitudinal event data. By
estimating the temporal relationships for all possible pairs of event types, TPSQRs can offer a holistic perspective about whether the occurrences of
any given event type could excite or inhibit any
other type. A TPSQR is learned by estimating
a collection of interrelated PSQRs that share the
same template parameterization. These PSQRs
are estimated jointly in a pseudo-likelihood fashion, where Poisson pseudo-likelihood is used to
approximate the original more computationallyintensive pseudo-likelihood problem stemming
from PSQRs. Theoretically, we demonstrate
that under mild assumptions, the Poisson pseudolikelihood approximation is sparsistent for recovering the underlying PSQR. Empirically, we learn
TPSQRs from Marshfield Clinic electronic health
records (EHRs) with millions of drug prescription and condition diagnosis events, for adverse
drug reaction (ADR) detection. Experimental results demonstrate that the learned TPSQRs can
recover ADR signals from the EHR effectively
and efficiently.

1. Introduction
Longitudinal event data (LED) and the analytics challenges
therein are ubiquitous now. In business analytics, purchasing events of different items from millions of customers
are collected, and retailers are interested in how a distinct
market action or the sales of one particular type of item
could boost or hinder the sales of another type (Han et al.,
2011). In search analytics, web search keywords from bilSinong Geng and Zhaobin Kuang contribute equally. Their
names are listed in alphabetical order. 1 The University of Wisconsin, Madison 2 Marshfield Clinic Research Institute. Correspondence to: Sinong Geng <sgeng2@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

lions of web users are usually mapped into various topics
(e.g. travel, education, weather), and search engine providers
are interested in the interplay among these search topics for
a better understanding of user preferences (Gunawardana
et al., 2011). In health analytics, electronic health records
(EHRs) contain clinical encounter events from millions of
patients collected over decades, including drug prescriptions,
biomarkers, and condition diagnoses, among others. Unraveling the relationships between different drugs and different
conditions is vital to answering some of the most pressing
medical and scientific questions such as drug-drug interaction detection (Tatonetti et al., 2012), comorbidity identification, adverse drug reaction (ADR) discovery (Simpson et al.,
2013; Bao et al., 2017; Kuang et al., 2017b), computational
drug repositioning (Kuang et al., 2016a;b), and precision
medicine (Liu et al., 2013; 2014a).
All these analytics challenges beg the statistical modeling
question: can we offer a comprehensive perspective about
the relationships between the occurrences of all possible
pairs of event types in longitudinal event data? In this paper,
we propose a solution via temporal Poisson square root
graphical models (TPSQRs), a generalization of Poisson
square root graphical models (PSQRs, Inouye et al. 2016)
made in order to represent multivariate distributions among
count variables evolving temporally in LED.
The reason why conventional undirected graphical models
(UGMs) are not readily applicable to LED is the lack of
mechanisms to address the temporality and irregularity in
the data. Conventional UGMs (Liu and Page, 2013; Liu
et al., 2014b; Yang et al., 2015a; Liu et al., 2016; Kuang
et al., 2017a; Geng et al., 2018) focus on estimating the cooccurrence relationships among various variables rather than
their temporal relationships, that is, how the occurrence of
one type of event may affect the future occurrence of another
type. Furthermore, existing temporal variants of UGMs
(Kolar et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2015b) usually assume that
data are regularly sampled, and observations for all variables
are available at each time point. Neither assumption is true,
due to the irregularity of LED.
In contrast to these existing UGM models, a TPSQR models
temporal relationships, by data aggregation; a TPSQR extracts a sequence of time-stamped summary count statistics
of distinct event types that preserves the relative temporal

