Stabilizing Gradients for Deep Neural Networks via Efficient SVD
Parameterization
Jiong Zhang 1 Qi Lei 1 Inderjit S. Dhillon 1 2

Abstract

Vanishing and exploding gradients are two of the
main obstacles in training deep neural networks,
especially in capturing long range dependencies
in recurrent neural networks (RNNs). In this paper, we present an efficient parametrization of
the transition matrix of an RNN that allows us
to stabilize the gradients that arise in its training.
Specifically, we parameterize the transition matrix by its singular value decomposition (SVD),
which allows us to explicitly track and control
its singular values. We attain efficiency by using tools that are common in numerical linear
algebra, namely Householder reflectors for representing the orthogonal matrices that arise in the
SVD. By explicitly controlling the singular values, our proposed Spectral-RNN method allows
us to provably solve the exploding gradient problem and we observe that it empirically solves the
vanishing gradient issue to a large extent. We note
that the SVD parameterization can be used for any
rectangular weight matrix, hence it can be easily
extended to any deep neural network, such as a
multi-layer perceptron. Theoretically, we demonstrate that our parameterization does not lose any
expressive power, and show how it controls generalization of RNN for the classification task. Our
extensive experimental results also demonstrate
that the proposed framework converges faster, and
has good generalization, especially in capturing
long range dependencies, as shown on the synthetic addition and copy tasks, as well as on the
MNIST and Penn Tree Bank data sets.

1
University of Texas at Austin 2 Amazon.com. Correspondence
to: Jiong Zhang <zhangjiong724@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved great success in various fields, including computer vision, speech recognition,
natural language processing, etc. Despite their tremendous capacity to fit complex functions, optimizing deep
neural networks remains a contemporary challenge. Two
main obstacles are vanishing and exploding gradients, that
become particularly problematic in Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) since the transition matrix is identical along
the temporal dimension, and any slight change to it is amplified through recurrent cells (Bengio et al., 1994).
Several methods have been proposed to solve the issue, for
example, Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997) and residual networks (He et al., 2016).
Another recently proposed class of methods is designed
to enforce orthogonality of the square transition matrices,
such as unitary and orthogonal RNNs (oRNN) (Arjovsky
et al., 2016; Mhammedi et al., 2017). However, while these
methods solve the exploding gradient problem, they limit
the expressivity of the network.
In this paper, we present an efficient parametrization of
transition matrices that arise in a deep neural network, thus
allowing us to stabilize the gradients that arise in its training,
while retaining the desired expressive power of the network.
In more detail we make the following contributions:
• We propose a method to parameterize transition matrices through their singular value decomposition (SVD).
Inspired by (Mhammedi et al., 2017), we attain efficiency by using tools that are common in numerical
linear algebra, namely Householder reflectors for representing the orthogonal matrices that arise in the SVD.
The SVD parametrization allows us to retain the desired expressive power of the network, while enabling
us to explicitly track and control singular values.
• We apply our SVD parameterization to recurrent neural networks to exert spectral constraints on the RNN
transition matrix. Our proposed Spectral-RNN method
enjoys similar space and time complexity as the vanilla
RNN. We empirically verify the superiority of SpectralRNN over RNN/oRNN, in some case even LSTMs,
over an exhaustive collection of time series classifica-

