Local Density Estimation in High Dimensions

Xian Wu 1 Moses Charikar 1 Vishnu Natchu 2

Abstract
An important question that arises in the study of
high dimensional vector representations learned
from data is: given a set D of vectors and a query
q, estimate the number of points within a specified distance threshold of q. Our algorithm uses
locality sensitive hashing to preprocess the data to
accurately and efficiently estimate the answers to
such questions via an unbiased estimator that uses
importance sampling. A key innovation is the ability to maintain a small number of hash tables via
preprocessing data structures and algorithms that
sample from multiple buckets in each hash table.
We give bounds on the space requirements and
query complexity of our scheme, and demonstrate
the effectiveness of our algorithm by experiments
on a standard word embedding dataset.

1. Introduction
In this work, we study a basic question that arises in the
study of high dimensional vector representations: given
a dataset D of vectors and a query q, estimate the number of points within a specified distance threshold of q.
Such density estimates are important building blocks in
non-parametric clustering, determining the popularity of
topics, search and recommendation systems, the analysis
of the neighborhoods of nodes in social networks, and in
outlier detection, where geometric representations of data
are frequently used. Yet for high dimensional datasets, we
still lack simple, practical, experimentally verified and theoretically justified solutions to tackle this question.
Our questions have been studied in the context of spherical
range counting. One class of solution methods arising in
the computational geometry literature, such as hierarchical
splitting via trees, (Arya et al., 2010) have performance
guarantees that depend exponentially on dimension. These
are unsuitable for the higher dimensional models that ma1
Stanford University, USA 2 Laserlike Inc, USA. Correspondence to: Xian Wu <xwu20@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

chine learning methods are increasingly shifting towards
e.g. word embeddings (Pennington et al., 2014; Mikolov
et al., 2013) and graph embeddings (Perozzi et al., 2014;
Tang et al., 2015; Cao et al., 2015; Grover & Leskovec,
2016; Yang et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017; Hamilton et al.,
2017). Over-parameterized models are oftentimes easier
to train (Livni et al., 2014), and perform just as well, if
not better (Zhang et al., 2016). Word embeddings is one
example where rigorous evaluation has shown increased
performance with higher dimensionality (Melamud et al.,
2016) (Lai et al., 2016).
In this paper, we develop an estimation scheme for high dimensional datasets to count the number of elements around a
query that are in a given radius of cosine similarity. Angular
distance, which corresponds to Euclidean distance for data
points on the unit sphere is commonly used in applications
related to word and document embeddings, and image and
video search (Jegou et al., 2011) (Huang et al., 2012). Brute
force search requires a linear scan over the entire dataset,
which is prohibitively expensive. Our approach uses indexing and search via locality sensitive hashing (LSH) functions
in order to estimate the size of the neighborhood in a more
efficient manner than retrieving the neighbors within the
given radius of similarity.
Recent work has also explored LSH techniques for spherical
range counting and related questions around density estimation for high-dimensional models. For example (Aumüller
et al., 2017) generalizes nearest neighbor LSH hash functions to be sensitive to custom distance ranges. (Ahle et al.,
2017) builds many different parameterized versions of the
prototypical LSH hash tables and adaptively probes them
for spherical range reporting. The closest works to ours
in terms of solution method that we are aware of is that of
(Spring & Shrivastava, 2017), giving an LSH based estimator to compute the partition function of a log-linear model,
and (Charikar & Siminelakis, 2017), adapting LSH to solve
a class of kernel density estimation problems. Both works
produce an unbiased estimator, using LSH to implement
a biased sampling scheme that lowers the variance of this
estimator. However their technique leverages only one hash
bucket per table, and hence requires a large number of tables for an accurate estimate. The biggest drawback to these
works is the very high storage (hash tables) and query complexities – their techniques, as presented, are impractical for

