Multi-Fidelity Black-Box Optimization with Hierarchical Partitions
Rajat Sen 1 Kirthevasan Kandasamy 2 Sanjay Shakkottai 1

Abstract
Motivated by settings such as hyper-parameter
tuning and physical simulations, we consider the
problem of black-box optimization of a function.
Multi-fidelity techniques have become popular
for applications where exact function evaluations
are expensive, but coarse (biased) approximations
are available at much lower cost. A canonical
example is that of hyper-parameter selection in
a learning algorithm. The learning algorithm
can be trained for fewer iterations – this results
in a lower cost, but its validation error is only
coarsely indicative of the same if the algorithm
had been trained till completion. We incorporate
the multi-fidelity setup into the powerful framework of black-box optimization through hierarchical partitioning. We develop tree-search based
multi-fidelity algorithms with theoretical guarantees on simple regret. We finally demonstrate the
performance gains of our algorithms on both real
and synthetic datasets.

1. Introduction
Optimizing a black-box function f over a Euclidean domain
X is a classical problem studied in several disciplines including computer science, mathematics, and operations research.
It finds applications in many real world scientific and engineering tasks including scientific experimentation, industrial
design, and model selection in statistics and machine learning (Martinez-Cantin et al., 2007; Parkinson et al., 2006;
Snoek et al., 2012). Given a budget of n evaluations, an
optimization algorithm operates sequentially – at time t, it
chooses to evaluate f at xt based on its previous evaluations
{xi , f (xi )}ti=11 . At the end of n evaluations, it makes a recommendation x(n) and its performance is measured by its
1
Univerity of Texas as Austin 2 Carnegie Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Rajat Sen <rajat.sen@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

simple regret Rn ,
Rn = sup f (x)

f (x(n)).

x2X

Our study focuses on applications where exact evaluation
of the function f is expensive. As an example, in the case
of model selection, training and validating large neural networks can take several hours to days. Similarly, the simulation of an astrophysical process typically takes multiple days
even on a cluster of super computers. Traditional methods
for black-box optimization are poorly suited for such applications because we need to invest a considerable number
of evaluations to optimize f . This motivates studying the
multi-fidelity setting where we have cheaper, but potentially
biased approximations to the function (Cutler et al., 2014;
Huang et al., 2006a; Kandasamy et al., 2016c; 2017). As
an illustration, in a hyper-parameter tuning scenario, the
task is to find the best set of hyper-parameters for training
a machine learning model. In this setting, the black-box
function that needs to be optimized is the validation error
after training the learning algorithm to completion (a certain
number of maximum iterations) i.e X represents the allowed
set of hyper-parameters while the function represents the
validation error after training to completion. However, as
training the algorithm till completion is expensive, we may
choose to train the learning algorithm for a few iterations at
chosen hyper-parameters and then test it on the validation
set. These inexpensive validation errors act as the cheap
approximations (fidelities) to the function value and can
indeed provide valuable information regarding the quality
of the hyper-parameters.
The multi-fidelity setup for black-box function optimization has been popularly studied in the Bayesian optimization setting (Huang et al., 2006b; Kandasamy et al., 2016b;
2017). However, in this paper we focus on another powerful framework for sequential black-box optimization that
works with hierarchical partitioning of the function domain
X . These tree-search based methods were initially motivated by an empirically successful heuristic UCT (Kocsis
& Szepesvári, 2006), which subsequently lead to several
theoretically founded algorithms for black-box optimization through hierarchical partitioning (Bubeck et al., 2011;
Kleinberg et al., 2008; Munos, 2011; Valko et al., 2013).
In this work, we incorporate cheap approximations or fideli-

