Blind Justice: Fairness with Encrypted Sensitive Attributes

Niki Kilbertus 1 2 Adrià Gascón 3 4 Matt Kusner 3 4 Michael Veale 5 Krishna P. Gummadi 6 Adrian Weller 2 3

Abstract
Recent work has explored how to train machine
learning models which do not discriminate against
any subgroup of the population as determined
by sensitive attributes such as gender or race.
To avoid disparate treatment, sensitive attributes
should not be considered. On the other hand, in order to avoid disparate impact, sensitive attributes
must be examined—e.g., in order to learn a fair
model, or to check if a given model is fair. We
introduce methods from secure multi-party computation which allow us to avoid both. By encrypting sensitive attributes, we show how an outcomebased fair model may be learned, checked, or have
its outputs verified and held to account, without
users revealing their sensitive attributes.

1. Introduction
Concerns are rising that machine learning systems which
make or support important decisions affecting individuals—
such as car insurance pricing, résumé filtering or recidivism
prediction—might illegally or unfairly discriminate against
certain subgroups of the population (Schreurs et al., 2008;
Calders & Žliobaitė, 2012; Barocas & Selbst, 2016). The
growing field of fair learning seeks to formalize relevant
requirements, and through altering parts of the algorithmic
decision-making pipeline, to detect and mitigate potential
discrimination (Friedler et al., 2016).
Most legally-problematic discrimination centers on differences based on sensitive attributes, such as gender or race
(Barocas & Selbst, 2016). The first type, disparate treatment
(or direct discrimination), occurs if individuals are treated
differently according to their sensitive attributes (with all
others equal). To avoid disparate treatment, one should
not inquire about individuals’ sensitive attributes. While
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 2 University
of Cambridge 3 The Alan Turing Institute 4 University of
Warwick 5 University College London 6 Max Planck Institute
for Software Systems. Correspondence to: Niki Kilbertus
<niki.kilbertus@tuebingen.mpg.de>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

this has some intuitive appeal and justification (Grgić-Hlača
et al., 2018), a significant concern is that sensitive attributes
may often be accurately predicted (“reconstructed”) from
non-sensitive features (Dwork et al., 2012). This motivates
measures to deal with the second type of discrimination.
Disparate impact (or indirect discrimination) occurs when
the outcomes of decisions disproportionately benefit or
hurt individuals from subgroups with particular sensitive
attribute settings without appropriate justification. For example, firms deploying car insurance telematics devices
(Handel et al., 2014) build up high dimensional pictures
of driving behavior which might easily proxy for sensitive
attributes even when they are omitted. Much recent work in
fair learning has focused on approaches to avoiding various
notions of disparate impact (Feldman et al., 2015; Hardt
et al., 2016; Zafar et al., 2017c).
In order to check and enforce such requirements, the modeler must have access to the sensitive attributes for individuals in the training data—however, this may be undesirable
for several reasons (Žliobaitė & Custers, 2016). First, individuals are unlikely to want to entrust sensitive attributes
to modelers in all application domains. Where applications
have clear discriminatory potential, it is understandable that
individuals may be wary of providing sensitive attributes
to modelers who might exploit them to negative effect, especially with no guarantee that a fair model will indeed be
learned and deployed. Even if certain modelers themselves
were trusted, the wide provision of sensitive data creates
heightened privacy risks in the event of a data breach.
Further, legal barriers may limit collection and processing of
sensitive personal data. A timely example is the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), which contains
heightened prerequisites for the collection and processing
of some sensitive attributes. Unlike other data, modelers
cannot justify using sensitive characteristics in fair learning
with their “legitimate interests”—and instead will often need
explicit, freely given consent (Veale & Edwards, 2018).
One way to address these concerns was recently proposed by
Veale & Binns (2017). The idea is to involve a highly trusted
third party, and may work well in some cases. However,
there are significant potential difficulties: individuals must
disclose their sensitive attributes to the third party (even if
an individual trusts the party, she may have concerns that

