Efficient First-Order Algorithms for Adaptive Signal Denoising

Dmitrii Ostrovskii 1 Zaid Harchaoui 2

Abstract

subspaces S of signals whose spectral representation, as
given by the Discrete Fourier or Discrete Wavelet transform,
comes from a linearly transformed `p -ball, see (Tsybakov,
2008; Johnstone, 2011). In all these cases, estimators with
near-optimal statistical performance can be found in explicit
form, and correspond to linear functionals of the observations y – hence the name linear estimators.

We consider the problem of discrete-time signal
denoising, focusing on a specific family of nonlinear convolution-type estimators. Each such
estimator is associated with a time-invariant filter which is obtained adaptively, by solving a
certain convex optimization problem. Adaptive
convolution-type estimators were demonstrated
to have favorable statistical properties, see (Juditsky & Nemirovski, 2009; 2010; Harchaoui et al.,
2015b; Ostrovsky et al., 2016). Our first contribution is an efficient algorithmic implementation of
these estimators via the known first-order proximal algorithms. Our second contribution is a computational complexity analysis of the proposed
procedures, which takes into account their statistical nature and the related notion of statistical
accuracy. The proposed procedures and their analysis are illustrated on a simulated data benchmark.

We focus here on a family of non-linear estimators with
larger applicability and strong theoretical guarantees, in
particular when the structure of the signal is unknown beforehand, as studied in (Nemirovski, 1992; Juditsky & Nemirovski, 2009; 2010; Harchaoui et al., 2015b; Ostrovsky
et al., 2016). Assuming for convenience that one must estimate xt on [0, n] from observations (1), these estimators
can be expressed as
x
bϕ
t = [ϕ ∗ y]t :=

We consider the problem of discrete-time signal denoising.
The goal is to estimate a discrete-time complex signal (xτ )
observed in complex Gaussian noise of level σ on [−n, n]:
τ = −n, ..., n.

ϕτ yt−τ

0 ≤ t ≤ n;

(2)

τ ∈Z

1. Introduction

yτ := xτ + σζτ ,

X

(1)

Here, ζτ are i.i.d. random variables with standard complex
Gaussian distribution CN (0, 1), that is, Re(ζτ ) and Im(ζτ )
are independent standard Gaussian random variables.
Signal denoising is a classical problem in statistical estimation and signal processing; see (Ibragimov & Khasminskii, 1981; Nemirovski, 2000; Tsybakov, 2008; Wasserman,
2006; Haykin, 1991; Kay, 1993). The conventional approach is to assume that x comes from a known set X with a
simple structure that can be exploited to build the estimator.
For example, one might consider signals belonging to linear
1

SIERRA Project-Team, INRIA Paris, Paris, France
Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Seattle, USA.
Correspondence to: <dmitrii.ostrovskii@inria.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

here ϕ is called a filter and is supported on [0, n] which we
write as ϕ ∈ Cn (Z), and ∗ is the (non-circular) discrete
convolution. For estimators in this family, the filter is then
obtained as an optimal solution to some convex optimization problem. For instance, the Penalized Least-Squares
estimator (Ostrovsky et al., 2016) is defined by
ϕ
b ∈ Argmin 12 kFn [y − ϕ ∗ y]k22 + λkFn [ϕ]k1 ,

(3)

ϕ∈Cn (Z)

where Fn is the Discrete Fourier transform (DFT) on Cn+1 ,
and k · kp is the `p -norm on Cn+1 . We shall give a summary
of the various estimators of the family in the end of this
section. Optimization problems associated to all of them
rest upon a common principle – minimization of the residual kFn [y − ϕ ∗ y]kp , with p ∈ {2, ∞}, regularized via the
`1 -norm of the DFT of the filter.
The statistical properties of adaptive convolution-type estimators have been extensively studied. In particular, such
estimators were shown to be nearly minimax-optimal, with
respect to the pointwise loss and `2 -loss, for signals belonging to arbitrary, and unknown, shift-invariant linear
subspaces of C(Z) with bounded dimension, or sufficiently
close to such subspaces as measured by the local `p -norms,
see (Nemirovski, 1992; Juditsky & Nemirovski, 2009; 2010;
Harchaoui et al., 2015b; Ostrovsky et al., 2016). We give a

