On Nesting Monte Carlo Estimators

Tom Rainforth 1 Robert Cornish 1 2 Hongseok Yang 3 Andrew Warrington 2 Frank Wood 4

Abstract
Many problems in machine learning and statistics
involve nested expectations and thus do not permit
conventional Monte Carlo (MC) estimation. For
such problems, one must nest estimators, such
that terms in an outer estimator themselves involve calculation of a separate, nested, estimation.
We investigate the statistical implications of nesting MC estimators, including cases of multiple
levels of nesting, and establish the conditions under which they converge. We derive corresponding rates of convergence and provide empirical
evidence that these rates are observed in practice.
We further establish a number of pitfalls that can
arise from naı̈ve nesting of MC estimators, provide guidelines about how these can be avoided,
and lay out novel methods for reformulating certain classes of nested expectation problems into
single expectations, leading to improved convergence rates. We demonstrate the applicability of
our work by using our results to develop a new estimator for discrete Bayesian experimental design
problems and derive error bounds for a class of
variational objectives.

1

Introduction

Monte Carlo (MC) methods are used throughout the quantitative sciences. For example, they have become a ubiquitous means of carrying out approximate Bayesian inference
(Doucet et al., 2001; Gilks et al., 1995). The convergence of
MC estimation has been considered extensively in the literature (Durrett, 2010). However, the implications arising from
the nesting of MC schemes, where terms in the integrand
depend on the result of separate, nested, MC estimators, is
generally less well known. This paper examines the convergence of such nested Monte Carlo (NMC) methods.
Nested expectations occur in wide variety of problems
1
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford 2 Department of
Engineering, University of Oxford 3 School of Computing, KAIST
4
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia.
Correspondence to: Tom Rainforth <rainforth@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

from portfolio risk management (Gordy & Juneja, 2010)
to stochastic control (Belomestny et al., 2010). In particular, simulations of agents that reason about other agents
often include nested expectations. Tackling such problems
requires some form of nested estimation scheme like NMC.
A common class of nested expectations is doubly-intractable
inference problems (Murray et al., 2006; Liang, 2010),
where the likelihood is only known up to a parameterdependent normalizing constant. Some problems are even
multiply-intractable, such that they require multiple levels of nesting to encode (Stuhlmüller & Goodman, 2014).
This can occur, for example, when nesting probabilistic
programs (Mantadelis & Janssens, 2011; Le et al., 2016).
Our results can be used to show that changes are required
to the approaches currently employed by probabilistic programming systems to ensure consistent estimation for such
problems (Rainforth, 2017; 2018).
The expected information gain used in Bayesian experimental design (Chaloner & Verdinelli, 1995) requires the
calculation of an entropy of a marginal distribution and
therefore the expectation of the logarithm of an expectation. By extension, any Kullback-Leibler divergence where
one of the terms is a marginal distribution also involves
a nested expectation. Hence, our results have important
implications for relaxing mean-field assumptions, or using
different bounds, in variational inference (Hoffman & Blei,
2015; Naesseth et al., 2017; Maddison et al., 2017) and deep
generative models (Burda et al., 2015; Le et al., 2018).
Certain nested estimation problems can be tackled by
pseudo-marginal methods (Beaumont, 2003; Andrieu &
Roberts, 2009; Andrieu et al., 2010). These consider inference problems where the likelihood is intractable, but
can be estimated unbiasedly. From a theoretical perspective,
they reformulate the problem in an extended space with auxiliary variables that are used to represent the stochasticity
in the likelihood computation, enabling the problem to be
expressed as a single expectation.
Our work goes beyond this by considering cases in which
a non-linear mapping is applied to the output of the inner
expectation, (e.g. the logarithm in the experimental design
example), prohibiting such reformulation. We demonstrate
that the construction of consistent NMC algorithms is possible, establish convergence rates, and provide empirical evi-

