Beyond 1/2-Approximation for Submodular Maximization
on Massive Data Streams
Ashkan Norouzi-Fard * 1 Jakub Tarnawski * 1 Slobodan Mitrović * 1 Amir Zandieh * 1 Aidasadat Mousavifar 1
Ola Svensson 1

Abstract
Many tasks in machine learning and data mining, such as data diversification, non-parametric
learning, kernel machines, clustering etc., require
extracting a small but representative summary
from a massive dataset. Often, such problems
can be posed as maximizing a submodular set
function subject to a cardinality constraint. We
consider this question in the streaming setting,
where elements arrive over time at a fast pace
and thus we need to design an efficient, lowmemory algorithm. One such method, proposed
by Badanidiyuru et al. (2014), always finds a 0.5approximate solution. Can this approximation
factor be improved? We answer this question affirmatively by designing a new algorithm S ALSA
for streaming submodular maximization. It is
the first low-memory, single-pass algorithm that
improves the factor 0.5, under the natural assumption that elements arrive in a random order. We
also show that this assumption is necessary, i.e.,
that there is no such algorithm with better than
0.5-approximation when elements arrive in arbitrary order. Our experiments demonstrate that
S ALSA significantly outperforms the state of the
art in applications related to exemplar-based clustering, social graph analysis, and recommender
systems.

1. Introduction
We are experiencing an unprecedented growth in the sizes
of modern datasets. Streams of data of massive volume
are generated every second, coming from many different
sources in industry and science such as: image and video
*

Equal contribution 1 Theory of Computation Laboratory, EPFL,
Lausanne, Vaud, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Ashkan
Norouzi-Fard <ashkan.afn@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

streams, sensor data, social networks, stock markets, and
many others. Sometimes, such data is produced so rapidly
that most of it cannot even be stored in any way. In this
context, a critical task is data summarization: one of extracting a representative subset of manageable size from rich,
large-scale data streams. A central topic in machine learning
and data mining today, its main challenge is to produce such
a concise yet high-value summary while doing so efficiently
and on-the-fly.
In many applications, this challenge can be viewed as optimizing a submodular function subject to a cardinality constraint. Indeed, submodularity – an intuitive notion of diminishing returns, which postulates that an element should
contribute more to a smaller set than to a larger one – plays
a similar role in this setting as convexity does in continuous
optimization. Namely, it is general enough to model a multitude of practical scenarios, such as viral marketing (Kempe
et al., 2003), recommender systems (El-Arini & Guestrin,
2011), search result diversification (Agrawal et al., 2009) or
active learning (Golovin & Krause, 2011), while allowing
for both theoretically and practically sound and efficient algorithms. In particular, a celebrated result by Nemhauser et
al. (1978) shows that the G REEDY algorithm – one that iteratively picks the element with the largest marginal contribution to the current summary – is a (1 − 1/e)-approximation
for maximizing a monotone submodular function subject
to a cardinality constraint. That is, the objective value that
it attains is at least a (1 − 1/e)-fraction of the optimum.
This approximation factor is NP-hard to improve (Feige,
1998). Unfortunately, G REEDY requires repeated access to
the complete dataset, which precludes it from use in largescale applications in terms of both memory and running
time.
The sheer bulk of large datasets and the infeasibility of
G REEDY together imply a growing need for faster and
memory-efficient algorithms, ideally ones that can work
in the streaming setting: one where input arrives one element at a time, rather than being available all at once, and
only a small portion of the data can be kept in memory at any
point. The first such algorithm was given by Chakrabarti and
Kale (2014), yielding a 0.25-approximation while requiring
only a single pass over the data, in arbitrary order, and using

