Lightweight Stochastic Optimization
for Minimizing Finite Sums with Infinite Data

Shuai Zheng 1 James T. Kwok 1

Abstract

`i and g are smooth and convex. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins & Monro, 1951) and its variants
(Nemirovski et al., 2009; Xiao, 2010; Duchi et al., 2011;
Bottou et al., 2016) are flexible, scalable, and widely used
for this problem. However, SGD suffers from large variance due to sampling noise. To alleviate this problem, the
stepsize has to be decreasing, which slows convergence.

Variance reduction has been commonly used in
stochastic optimization. It relies crucially on the
assumption that the data set is finite. However,
when the data are imputed with random noise as
in data augmentation, the perturbed data set becomes essentially infinite. Recently, the stochastic MISO (S-MISO) algorithm is introduced to
address this expected risk minimization problem.
Though it converges faster than SGD, a significant amount of memory is required. In this paper, we propose two SGD-like algorithms for expected risk minimization with random perturbation, namely, stochastic sample average gradient
(SSAG) and stochastic SAGA (S-SAGA). The
memory cost of SSAG does not depend on the
sample size, while that of S-SAGA is the same
as those of variance reduction methods on unperturbed data. Theoretical analysis and experimental results on logistic regression and AUC
maximization show that SSAG has faster convergence rate than SGD with comparable space requirement, while S-SAGA outperforms S-MISO
in terms of both iteration complexity and storage.

By exploiting the finite-sum structure in (1), a class of
variance-reduced stochastic optimization methods have
been proposed recently (Le Roux et al., 2012; Johnson
& Zhang, 2013; Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2013; Mairal,
2013; Defazio et al., 2014a;b). Based on the use of control
variates (Fishman, 1996), they construct different approximations to the true gradient so that its variance decreases
as the optimal solution is approached.

1. Introduction
Machine learning tasks are often cast as optimization problems with some data distributions. In regularized risk minimization with n training samples, one minimizes:
n

min
θ

1X
`i (θ) + g(x),
n i=1

(1)

where θ is the model parameter, `i is the loss due to sample i, and g is a regularizer. In this paper, we assume that
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water
Bay, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Shuai Zheng <szhengac@cse.ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

In order to capture more variations in the data distribution,
it is effective to obtain more training data by injecting random noise to the data samples (Decoste & Schölkopf, 2002;
van der Maaten et al., 2013; Paulin et al., 2014). Theoretically, it has been shown that random noise improves generalization (Wager et al., 2014). In addition, artificially corrupting the training data has a wide range of applications
in machine learning. For example, additive Gaussian noise
can be used in image denoising (Vincent et al., 2010) and
provides a form of `2 -type regularization (Bishop, 1995);
dropout noise serves as adaptive regularization that is useful in stabilizing predictions (van der Maaten et al., 2013)
and selecting discriminative but rare features (Wager et al.,
2013); and Poisson noise is of interest to count features as
in document classification (van der Maaten et al., 2013).
With the addition of noise perturbations, (1) becomes the
following expected risk minimization problem:
n

min
θ

1X
Eξ [`i (θ; ξi )] + g(x),
n i=1 i

(2)

where ξi is the random noise injected to function `i , and Eξ
denotes expectation w.r.t. ξi . Because of the expectation,
the perturbed data can be considered as infinite, and the
finite data set assumption in variance reduction methods is
violated. In this case, each function in problem (2) can only
be accessed via a stochastic first-order oracle, and the main
optimization tool is SGD.

