Quasi-Monte Carlo Variational Inference

Alexander Buchholz * 1 Florian Wenzel * 2 Stephan Mandt 3

Abstract
Many machine learning problems involve Monte
Carlo gradient estimators. As a prominent example, we focus on Monte Carlo variational inference (mcvi) in this paper. The performance
of mcvi crucially depends on the variance of its
stochastic gradients. We propose variance reduction by means of Quasi-Monte Carlo (qmc) sampling. qmc replaces N i.i.d. samples from a uniform probability distribution by a deterministic
sequence of samples of length N. This sequence
covers the underlying random variable space more
evenly than i.i.d. draws, reducing the variance of
the gradient estimator. With our novel approach,
both the score function and the reparameterization gradient estimators lead to much faster convergence. We also propose a new algorithm for
Monte Carlo objectives, where we operate with
a constant learning rate and increase the number
of qmc samples per iteration. We prove that this
way, our algorithm can converge asymptotically
at a faster rate than sgd. We furthermore provide
theoretical guarantees on qmc for Monte Carlo
objectives that go beyond mcvi, and support our
findings by several experiments on large-scale
data sets from various domains.

1. Introduction
In many situations in machine learning and statistics, we
encounter objective functions which are expectations over
continuous distributions. Among other examples, this situation occurs in reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto,
1998) and variational inference (Jordan et al., 1999). If the
expectation cannot be computed in closed form, an approximation can often be obtained via Monte Carlo (mc) sampling
from the underlying distribution. As most optimization pro*
1
Equal contribution
ENSAE-CREST, Paris 2 TU
Kaiserslautern, Germany 3 Disney Research, Los Angeles,
USA. Correspondence to: Alexander Buchholz <alexander.buchholz@ensae.fr>, Florian Wenzel <wenzelfl@huberlin.de>, Stephan Mandt <stephan.mandt@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

cedures rely on the gradient of the objective, a mc gradient
estimator has to be built by sampling from this distribution.
The finite number of mc samples per gradient step introduces noise. When averaging over multiple samples, the
error in approximating the gradient can be decreased, and
thus its variance reduced. This guarantees stability and fast
convergence of stochastic gradient descent (sgd).
Certain objective functions require a large number of mc
samples per stochastic gradient step. As a consequence, the
algorithm gets slow. It is therefore desirable to obtain the
same degree of variance reduction with fewer samples. This
paper proposes the idea of using Quasi-Monte Carlo (qmc)
samples instead of i.i.d. samples to achieve this goal.
A qmc sequence is a deterministic sequence which covers
a hypercube [0, 1]d more regularly than random samples.
When using a qmc sequence for Monte Carlo integration, the
mean squared error (MSE) decreases asymptotically with
the number of samples N as O(N −2 (log N)2d−2 ) (Leobacher
and Pillichshammer, 2014). In contrast, the naive mc integration error decreases as O(N −1 ). Since the cost of generating N qmc samples is O(N log N), this implies that a much
smaller number of operations per gradient step is required in
order to achieve the same precision (provided that N is large
enough). Alternatively, we can achieve a larger variance
reduction with the same number of samples, allowing for
larger gradient steps and therefore also faster convergence.
This paper investigates the benefits of this approach both
experimentally and theoretically.
Our ideas apply in the context of Monte Carlo variational
inference (mcvi), a set of methods which make approximate Bayesian inference scalable and easy to use. Variance
reduction is an active area of research in this field. Our
algorithm has the advantage of being very general; it can
be easily implemented in existing software packages such
as STAN and Edward (Carpenter et al., 2017; Tran et al.,
2016). In Appendix D we show how our approach can be
easily implemented in your existing code.
The main contributions are as follows:
• We investigate the idea of using qmc sequences for
Monte Carlo variational inference. While the usage
of qmc for vi has been suggested in the outlook section of Ranganath et al. (2014), to our knowledge, we
are the first to actually investigate this approach both

