Geometry Score: A Method For Comparing Generative Adversarial Networks

Valentin Khrulkov 1 Ivan Oseledets 1 2

Abstract
One of the biggest challenges in the research of
generative adversarial networks (GANs) is assessing the quality of generated samples and detecting various levels of mode collapse. In this work,
we construct a novel measure of performance of
a GAN by comparing geometrical properties of
the underlying data manifold and the generated
one, which provides both qualitative and quantitative means for evaluation. Our algorithm can
be applied to datasets of an arbitrary nature and
is not limited to visual data. We test the obtained
metric on various real–life models and datasets
and demonstrate that our method provides new
insights into properties of GANs.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) are a class of methods for training generative models,
which have been recently shown to be very successful in producing image samples of excellent quality. They have been
applied in numerous areas (Radford et al., 2015; Salimans
et al., 2016; Ho & Ermon, 2016). Briefly, this framework
can be described as follows. We attempt to mimic a given
target distribution pdata (x) by constructing two networks
G(z; θ (G) ) and D(x; θ (D) ) called the generator and the discriminator. The generator learns to sample from the target
distribution by transforming a random input vector z to a
vector x = G(z; θ (G) ), and the discriminator learns to distinguish the model distribution pmodel (x) from pdata (x). The
training procedure for GANs is typically based on applying
gradient descent in turn to the discriminator and the generator in order to minimize a loss function. Finding a good loss
function is a topic of ongoing research, and several options
were proposed in (Mao et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2017).
One of the main challenges (Lucic et al., 2017; Barratt &
1

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology 2 Institute of Numerical Mathematics RAS. Correspondence to: Valentin Khrulkov
<khrulkov.v@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Sharma, 2018) in the GANs framework is estimating the
quality of the generated samples. In traditional GAN models,
the discriminator loss cannot be used as a metric and does
not necessarily decrease during training. In more involved
architectures such as WGAN (Arjovsky et al., 2017) the
discriminator (critic) loss is argued to be in correlation with
the image quality, however, using this loss as a measure of
quality is nontrivial. Training GANs is known to be difficult
in general and presents such issues as mode collapse when
pmodel (x) fails to capture a multimodal nature of pdata (x) and
in extreme cases all the generated samples might be identical.
Several techniques to improve the training procedure were
proposed in (Salimans et al., 2016; Gulrajani et al., 2017).
In this work, we attack the problem of estimating the quality
and diversity of the generated images by using the machinery of topology. The well-known Manifold Hypothesis
(Goodfellow et al., 2016) states that in many cases such
as the case of natural images the support of the distribution pdata (x) is concentrated on a low dimensional manifold
Mdata in a Euclidean space. This manifold is assumed to
have a very complex non-linear structure and is hard to
define explicitly. It can be argued that interesting features
and patterns of the images from pdata (x) can be analyzed in
terms of topological properties of Mdata , namely in terms
of loops and higher dimensional holes in Mdata . Similarly,
we can assume that pmodel (x) is supported on a manifold
Mmodel (under mild conditions on the architecture of the
generator this statement can be made precise (Shao et al.,
2017)), and for sufficiently good GANs this manifold can
be argued to be quite similar to Mdata (see Fig. 1). This
intuitive claim will be later supported by numerical experiments. Based on this hypothesis we develop an approach
which allows for comparing the topology of the underlying manifolds for two point clouds in a stochastic manner
providing us with a visual way to detect mode collapse and
a score which allows for comparing the quality of various
trained models. Informally, since the task of computing the
precise topological properties of the underlying manifolds
based only on samples is ill-posed by nature, we estimate
them using a certain probability distribution (see Section 4).
We test our approach on several real–life datasets and popular GAN models (DCGAN, WGAN, WGAN-GP) and show
that the obtained results agree well with the intuition and
allow for comparison of various models (see Section 5).

