LaVAN: Localized and Visible Adversarial Noise
Danny Karmon 1 Daniel Zoran 2 Yoav Goldberg 3

Abstract
Most works on adversarial examples for deeplearning based image classifiers use noise that,
while small, covers the entire image. We explore
the case where the noise is allowed to be visible
but confined to a small, localized patch of the image, without covering any of the main object(s) in
the image. We show that it is possible to generate
localized adversarial noises that cover only 2%
of the pixels in the image, none of them over the
main object, and that are transferable across images and locations, and successfully fool a stateof-the-art Inception v3 model with very high success rates.

Padlock (92.7%)

Tiger Cat (94.4%)

Car Mirror (94.5%)

Stingray (90.5%)

1

2
Microsoft, Herzliya, Israel.
DeepMind, London,
UK. 3 Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University,Ramat Gan, Israel..
Correspondence to: Danny
Karmon <danny.karmon@microsoft.com>, Yoav Goldberg <yogo@cs.biu.ac.il>,
Daniel Zoran <danielzoran@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning,Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018.Copyright 2018 by
the author(s).

1. Adversarial Noise
Deep neural-network architectures achieve remarkable results on image classification tasks. However, they are also
susceptible to being fooled by adversarial examples: input
instances which were modified in a particular way, and as a
result, are misclassified by the network. Of course, for the
adversarial example to be interesting, the change should be
such that it does not confuse a human looking at the picture.
Beyond the clear security implications, adversarial examples are also interesting as they may provide insights into the
strengths, weaknesses, and blind-spots of these ubiquitous
state-of-the-art classification models.
Most work on generating adversarial examples (we provide
a more detailed review in section 5) focus either on noise
which—while being imperceptible to humans—covers the
entire image (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Szegedy et al., 2014),
or on visible noise that covers prominent features of the
main object in the image in a “natural” way (i.e., glasses
with a specific pattern around a person’s eyes in a face
identification task (Sharif et al., 2016)). In contrast, we
look at visible noise that is localized to a small area of the
image (a bounded box with up to 2% of the pixels), and
which does not cover the main object in the image. Figure 1
shows examples of such noised images that are misclassified
by a state-of-the-art Inception V3 network with very high
confidence.
A recent work by Brown et al (Brown et al., 2017) introduces
a visible noise similar to ours. The works are complementary to a large extent. Their work focuses on the security implications and attempts to generate universal noise “patches”
that can be physically printed and put on any image, in either a black-box (when the attacked network is unknown) or
white-box (when the attacked network is known) setup. As
a consequence, the resulting adversarial patches in (Brown
et al., 2017) are relatively large (in a white-box setup, the
generated noise has to cover about 10% of the image to
be effective in about 90% of the tested conditions, and a
disguised patch has to cover about 35% of the image for a
similar result) and also visually resemble the target class to
some extent. We do not attempt to produce a physical attack
and are more interested in investigating the blind-spots of
state-of-the-art image classifiers, and the kinds of noise that
can cause them to misclassify.

