Efficient Gradient-Free Variational Inference using Policy Search

Oleg Arenz 1 Mingjun Zhong 2 Gerhard Neumann 1 3

Abstract
Inference from complex distributions is a common problem in machine learning needed for
many Bayesian methods. We propose an efficient,
gradient-free method for learning general GMM
approximations of multimodal distributions based
on recent insights from stochastic search methods.
Our method establishes information-geometric
trust regions to ensure efficient exploration of the
sampling space and stability of the GMM updates,
allowing for efficient estimation of multi-variate
Gaussian variational distributions. For GMMs,
we apply a variational lower bound to decompose
the learning objective into sub-problems given
by learning the individual mixture components
and the coefficients. The number of mixture components is adapted online in order to allow for
arbitrary exact approximations. We demonstrate
on several domains that we can learn significantly
better approximations than competing variational
inference methods and that the quality of samples drawn from our approximations is on par
with samples created by state-of-the-art MCMC
samplers that require significantly more computational resources.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of sampling or inference using
a complex probability distribution p∗ (x) = p̃∗ (x)/Z for
which we can Revaluate p̃∗ (x) but not the normalization
constant Z = x p̃∗ (x)dx. This problem is ubiquitous in
machine leaning. For example, in Bayesian Inference, p̃∗ (x)
corresponds to the product of prior and likelihood.
As we can not sample directly from distribution p∗ (x) or
1

Computational Learning for Autonomous Systems, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany 2 Machine Learning Lab, University of
Lincoln, Lincoln, UK 3 Lincoln Center for Autonomous Systems,
University of Lincoln, Lincoln, UK. Correspondence to: Oleg
Arenz <oleg@robot-learning.de>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

use it for inference, a common approach is to use Variational Inference (VI) to approximate the target distribution
p∗ (x) with a tractable distribution p such as multi-variate
Gaussians (Blei et al., 2017; Regier et al., 2017) or Gaussian
Mixture Models (GMM) (Miller et al., 2017; Guo et al.,
2016; Zobay, 2014). The optimization problem to obtain
this approximation is commonly framed as minimizing the
reverse Kullback-Leibler divergence (KL)


Z
p(x; θ)
KL(p||p∗ ) =
p(x; θ) log
dx
(1)
p∗ (x)
x
with respect to the parameters θ of the approximation. This
objective is typically evaluated on samples drawn from
p(x; θ) and optimized by stochastic optimization algorithms
(Fan et al., 2015; Gershman et al., 2012). However, in order
to perform the KL minimization efficiently, p(x) is often restricted to belong to a simple family of models or is assumed
to have non-correlating degrees of freedom (Blei et al., 2017;
Peterson & Hartman, 1989), which is known as the mean
field approximation. Unfortunately, such restrictions can
introduce significant approximation errors.
Our approach focuses on learning multivariate Gaussian
Mixture Models (GMMs) with full covariance matrices for
approximating the target distribution. GMMs are desirable
for VI, because they are capable of representing any continuous probability density function arbitrarily well, while inference with GMMs is relatively cheap. Naturally, variational
inference with GMM approximations has been considered
in the past. However, in order to make the minimization
of objective (1) feasible, previous work either assumed factorized (Jaakkola & Jordan, 1998; Bishop et al., 1998) or
isotropic (Gershman et al., 2012) mixture components or
applied boosting by successively adding and optimizing new
components while keeping previously added components
fixed (Miller et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2016).
As areas of high density p̃∗ (x) are initially unknown, Variational Inference can essentially be seen as a search problem
that is inflicted by the exploration-exploitation dilemma
which is typical for reinforcement learning or policy search
problems. The algorithms need to explore the sample
space in order to ensure that all relevant areas are covered
while they also need to exploit the current approximation
p(x; θ) in order to fine tune p(x; θ) in areas of high density.
This exploration-exploitation based view is so far under-

