Fourier Policy Gradients
Matthew Fellows * 1 Kamil Ciosek * 1 Shimon Whiteson 1

Abstract
We propose a new way of deriving policy gradient updates for reinforcement learning. Our technique, based on Fourier analysis, recasts integrals
that arise with expected policy gradients as convolutions and turns them into multiplications. The
obtained analytical solutions allow us to capture
the low variance benefits of EPG in a broad range
of settings. For the critic, we treat trigonometric
and radial basis functions, two function families
with the universal approximation property. The
choice of policy can be almost arbitrary, including
mixtures or hybrid continuous-discrete probability distributions. Moreover, we derive a general
family of sample-based estimators for stochastic
policy gradients, which unifies existing results on
sample-based approximation. We believe that this
technique has the potential to shape the next generation of policy gradient approaches, powered by
analytical results.

1. Introduction
Policy gradient methods, also known as actor-critic methods,
are an effective way to perform reinforcement learning in
large or continuous action spaces (Lillicrap et al., 2015;
Schulman et al., 2015; 2017; Wu et al., 2017; Peters &
Schaal, 2008; Sutton et al., 1999; Williams, 1992). Since
they adjust the policy in small increments, they do not have
to perform expensive optimisations over the action space,
in contrast to methods based on value functions, such as Qlearning (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017; van Hasselt
et al., 2015) or SARSA (van Seijen et al., 2009; Sutton &
Barto, 1998; Sutton, 1996). Moreover, they are naturally
suited to stochastic policies, which are useful for exploration
and necessary to achieve optimality in some settings, e.g.,
competitive multi-agent systems.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Matthew
Fellows <matthew.fellows@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Until recently, policy gradient methods were either restricted
to deterministic policies (Silver et al., 2014) or suffered from
high variance (Sutton et al., 1999). The latter problem is exacerbated in large state spaces, when the number of samples
required to reduce the variance of the gradient estimate becomes infeasible for the simple score function estimators on
which policy gradient methods typically rely. The problem
also arises when training recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
(Xu et al., 2015; Ba et al., 2015; Sukhbaatar et al., 2016)
that have to be unrolled over several timesteps, each adding
to the overall variance, and in multi-agent settings (Foerster
et al., 2017), where the actions of other agents introduce a
compounding source of variance.
Recently, a new approach called expected policy gradients
(EPG) (Ciosek & Whiteson, 2018a;b) was proposed that
eliminates the variance of a stochastic policy gradient by
integrating over the actions analytically. However, this requires analytic solutions to the policy gradient integral and
the original work addressed only polynomial critics.
In this paper, we employ techniques from Fourier analysis
to derive analytic policy gradient updates for two important
families of critics. The first, radial basis functions (RBFs),
combines the benefits of shallow structure, which makes
them tractable, with an impressive empirical track record
(Buhmann, 2003; Carr et al., 2001). The second, trigonometric critics, is useful for modelling periodic phenomena.
Similarly to polynomial critics (Ciosek & Whiteson, 2018b),
these function classes are universal, i.e., they can approximate an arbitrary function on a bounded interval.
Furthermore, to address cases where analytical solutions are
infeasible, we provide a general theorem for deriving Monte
Carlo estimators that links existing methods using the first
and second derivatives of the action-value function, relating
it to existing sampling approaches.
Our technique also enables analytic solutions for new families of policies, extending EPG to any policy that has unbounded support, where it previously required the policy to
be in an exponential family. We also develop results for mixture policies and hybrid discrete-continuous policies, which
we posit can be useful in multi-agent settings, where having
a rich class of policies is important not just for exploration
but also for optimality (Nisan et al., 2007).

