Discrete-Continuous Mixtures in Probabilistic Programming:
Generalized Semantics and Inference Algorithms

Yi Wu 1 Siddharth Srivastava 2 Nicholas Hay 3 Simon S. Du 4 Stuart Russell 1

Abstract
Despite the recent successes of probabilistic programming languages (PPLs) in AI applications,
PPLs offer only limited support for random variables whose distributions combine discrete and
continuous elements. We develop the notion of
measure-theoretic Bayesian networks (MTBNs)
and use it to provide more general semantics for
PPLs with arbitrarily many random variables defined over arbitrary measure spaces. We develop
two new general sampling algorithms that are
provably correct under the MTBN framework:
the lexicographic likelihood weighting (LLW)
for general MTBNs and the lexicographic particle filter (LPF), a specialized algorithm for statespace models. We further integrate MTBNs into
a widely used PPL system, BLOG, and verify
the effectiveness of the new inference algorithms
through representative examples.

1. Introduction
As originally defined by Pearl (1988), Bayesian networks
express joint distributions over finite sets of random variables as products of conditional distributions. Probabilistic
programming languages (PPLs) (Koller et al., 1997; Milch
et al., 2005a; Goodman et al., 2008; Wood et al., 2014b)
apply the same idea to potentially infinite sets of variables
with general dependency structures. Thanks to their expressive power, PPLs have been used to solve many real-world
applications, including Captcha (Le et al., 2017), seismic
monitoring (Arora et al., 2013), 3D pose estimation (Kulkarni et al., 2015), generating design suggestions (Ritchie et al.,
2015), concept learning (Lake et al., 2015), and cognitive
science applications (Stuhlmüller & Goodman, 2014).
In practical applications, we often have to deal with a mix1

University of California, Berkeley 2 Arizona State University
3
Vicarious Inc. 4 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to:
Yi Wu <jxwuyi@gmail.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

ture of continuous and discrete random variables. Existing
PPLs support both discrete and continuous random variables, but not discrete-continuous mixtures, i.e., variables
whose distributions combine discrete and continuous elements. Such variables are fairly common in practical applications: sensors that have thresholded limits, e.g. thermometers, weighing scales, speedometers, pressure gauges; or a
hybrid sensor that can report a either real value or an error
condition. The occurrence of such variables has been noted
in many other applications from a wide range of scientific
domains (Kharchenko et al., 2014; Pierson & Yau, 2015;
Gao et al., 2017).
Many PPLs have a restricted syntax that forces the expressed random variables to be either discrete or continuous, including WebPPL (Goodman & Stuhlmüller, 2014),
Edward (Tran et al., 2016), Figaro (Pfeffer, 2009) and
Stan (Carpenter et al., 2016). Even for PPLs whose syntax allows for mixtures of discrete and continuous variables, such as BLOG (Milch et al., 2005a), Church (Goodman, 2013), Venture (Mansinghka et al., 2014) and Anglican (Wood et al., 2014a), the underlying semantics of
these PPLs implicitly assumes the random variables are not
mixtures. Moreover, the inference algorithms associated
with the semantics inherit the same assumption and can produce incorrect results when discrete-continuous mixtures
are used.
Consider the following GPA example: a two-variable Bayes
net Nationality → GPA where the nationality follows a
binary distribution
P (Nationality = USA) = P (Nationality = India) = 0.5
and the conditional probabilities are discrete-continuous
mixtures
GPA|Nationality = USA
∼0.01 · 1 {GPA = 4} + 0.99 · Unif(0, 4),
GPA|Nationality = India
∼0.01 · 1 {GPA = 10} + 0.99 · Unif(0, 10).
This is a typical scenario in practice because many top
students have perfect GPAs. Now suppose we observe a
student with a GPA of 4.0. Where do they come from? If the
student is Indian, the probability of any singleton set {g}

