Black-Box Variational Inference for Stochastic Differential Equations

Thomas Ryder * 1 2 Andrew Golightly 1 A. Stephen McGough 2 Dennis Prangle * 1

Abstract

error involved converges to zero as the grid becomes finer.

Parameter inference for stochastic differential
equations is challenging due to the presence of a
latent diffusion process. Working with an EulerMaruyama discretisation for the diffusion, we use
variational inference to jointly learn the parameters and the diffusion paths. We use a standard
mean-field variational approximation of the parameter posterior, and introduce a recurrent neural
network to approximate the posterior for the diffusion paths conditional on the parameters. This
neural network learns how to provide Gaussian
state transitions which bridge between observations as the conditioned diffusion process does.
The resulting black-box inference method can be
applied to any SDE system with light tuning requirements. We illustrate the method on a LotkaVolterra system and an epidemic model, producing accurate parameter estimates in a few hours.

Even under discretisation, statistical inference for SDEs
observed at discrete times is challenging. The difficulty is
that, along with unknown parameters θ in the description of
the SDE, there is an unknown latent path of the diffusion
process, x. An inference method must somehow deal with
these high dimensional, highly structured latent variables.

1. Introduction
A stochastic differential equation (SDE) defines a diffusion
process, which evolves randomly over time, by describing
its instantaneous behaviour. As such, SDEs are powerful
modelling tools used extensively in fields such as econometrics (Black & Scholes, 1973; Eraker, 2001), biology
(Gillespie, 2000; Golightly & Wilkinson, 2011), physics
(van Kampen, 2007) and epidemiology (Fuchs, 2013).
It is only possible to work with analytic solutions to SDEs
in special cases. Therefore it is common to use a numerical approximation, such as the Euler-Maruyama scheme.
Here the diffusion process is defined only on a grid of time
points, and the transition density between successive diffusion states is approximated as Gaussian. The approximation
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Mathematics, Statistics and
Physics, Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK 2 School of Computing, Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK. Correspondence to:
Tom Ryder <t.ryder2@newcastle.ac.uk>, Dennis Prangle <dennis.prangle@newcastle.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Our proposed method uses recent advances in variational
inference to jointly infer θ and x. We introduce a flexible
family of approximations to the posterior distribution and
select the member closest to the true posterior. We use a
standard mean-field approximation for the θ posterior, and
introduce a novel recurrent neural network (RNN) approximation for the posterior of x conditional on θ. The RNN
learns how to supply Gaussian state transitions between
successive time points which closely match those for the
intractable conditioned diffusion process.
Our black-box variational inference method is a simple and
fast way to produce approximate inference for any SDE
system. We illustrate our method on Lotka-Volterra and
epidemic examples, achieving accurate parameter estimates
in just a few hours under default tuning choices. Although
our parameter posteriors are over-concentrated, as in most
variational methods, our approximation of the conditioned
diffusion process is close to the true posterior. In comparison, existing Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods
(see Section 1.1) require more tuning choices and can take
days to run (Whitaker et al., 2017a).
1.1. Related Work
Variational inference Several authors have looked at variational inference for SDEs (Archambeau et al., 2008) or related problems such as Markov jump processes (Ruttor et al.,
2010) and state space models (Archer et al., 2016; Quiroz
et al., 2018). The novelty of our approach is to use: (1)
stochastic optimisation rather than variational calculus; (2)
a RNN-based variational approximation for the latent states
instead of a mean-field or multivariate Gaussian approach.
We expect (2) is especially relevant to sparsely observed
SDEs, where the latent states between observations may
have a particularly complex dependency structure.
Another approach (Moreno et al., 2016) is to perform vari-

