Learning Low-Dimensional Temporal Representations

Bing Su 1 Ying Wu 2

Abstract
Low-dimensional discriminative representations
enhance machine learning methods in both performance and complexity, motivating supervised
dimensionality reduction (DR) that transforms
high-dimensional data to a discriminative subspace. Most DR methods require data to be i.i.d.,
however, in some domains, data naturally come
in sequences, where the observations are temporally correlated. We propose a DR method
called LT-LDA to learn low-dimensional temporal representations. We construct the separability among sequence classes by lifting the holistic
temporal structures, which are established based
on temporal alignments and may change in different subspaces. We jointly learn the subspace and
the associated alignments by optimizing an objective which favors easily-separable temporal structures, and show that this objective is connected to
the inference of alignments, thus allows an iterative solution. We provide both theoretical insight
and empirical evaluation on real-world sequence
datasets to show the interest of our method.

1. Introduction
Multivariate temporal sequences arise in a wide range of
applications, where the pattern of interest is represented
as a sequence of local feature vectors. The local features
may be high-dimensional and contain noisy information.
Thus it is desirable to reduce the dimension of the features in sequences by projecting them to a discriminative
low-dimensional subspace, in which sequence classification would become faster and more accurate.
Various supervised dimensionality reduction (DR) methods
1

Science & Technology on Integrated Information System Laboratory, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Bing Su <subingats@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

have been developed for vector data under the i.i.d. assumption, but they cannot be applied to the features in sequences
by omitting the temporal dependencies. DR for sequence
data aims at learning a subspace by maximizing the separability among sequence classes, where the separability
embodies in the differences on temporal structures. The
temporal structures reflect the common evolutions of all sequences from the same class, and they depend on temporal
alignments to establish correspondences among sequences
with local temporal differences. The separability and objective are more difficult to formulate and manipulate by
nature. For these reasons, DR for sequence data has received much less attention.
Existing methods such as Linear Sequence Discriminant Analysis (LSDA) (Su & Ding, 2013; Su et al., 2018)
and Max-Min inter-Sequence Distance Analysis (MMSDA) (Su et al., 2017a) construct the separability based on
generative models. For each class, they train a leftto-right Hidden Markov Model (HMM) (Rabiner, 1989))
from the original sequences. The mean of the features
aligned to each hidden state is calculated, and the means of all ordered states form a mean sequence. The interclass distance is measured as the Dynamic Time Warping
(DTW) (Sakoe & Chiba, 1978) distance between the mean
sequences. Such separability depends on the alignments
between the sequences and the hidden states, which further rely on the similarities of the features. When projecting the features to a subspace, the local similarities among the transformed features may change, and hence the
alignments may change accordingly. On the other hand,
the projection is determined by maximizing the separability, where the separability should be constructed based on
the alignments in the subspace. Therefore, learning the
projection and inferring the alignments are entangled. To
make it tractable, existing methods simply fix the alignments in the underlying subspace to those in the original space. However, the resulting separability cannot reflect the
real confusion relationship between classes in the subspace.
Also, HMM-based separability requires a large number of
sequences for training and is poor in scalability.
In this paper, we propose a supervised DR method for sequence data called Latent Temporal Linear Discriminant Analysis (LT-LDA) . We learn an abstract template for
each class to discover the temporal structures via employ-

