Synthesizing Robust Adversarial Examples

Anish Athalye * 1 2 Logan Engstrom * 1 2 Andrew Ilyas * 1 2 Kevin Kwok 2

Abstract
Standard methods for generating adversarial examples for neural networks do not consistently
fool neural network classifiers in the physical
world due to a combination of viewpoint shifts,
camera noise, and other natural transformations,
limiting their relevance to real-world systems. We
demonstrate the existence of robust 3D adversarial objects, and we present the first algorithm for
synthesizing examples that are adversarial over a
chosen distribution of transformations. We synthesize two-dimensional adversarial images that
are robust to noise, distortion, and affine transformation. We apply our algorithm to complex
three-dimensional objects, using 3D-printing to
manufacture the first physical adversarial objects.
Our results demonstrate the existence of 3D adversarial objects in the physical world.

1. Introduction
The existence of adversarial examples for neural networks (Szegedy et al., 2013; Biggio et al., 2013) was initially
largely a theoretical concern. Recent work has demonstrated
the applicability of adversarial examples in the physical
world, showing that adversarial examples on a printed page
remain adversarial when captured using a cell phone camera in an approximately axis-aligned setting (Kurakin et al.,
2016). But while minute, carefully-crafted perturbations
can cause targeted misclassification in neural networks, adversarial examples produced using standard techniques fail
to fool classifiers in the physical world when the examples
are captured over varying viewpoints and affected by natural
phenomena such as lighting and camera noise (Luo et al.,
2016; Lu et al., 2017). These results indicate that real-world
systems may not be at risk in practice because adversarial
examples generated using standard techniques are not robust
in the physical world.
*

Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 LabSix. Correspondence to: Anish Athalye <aathalye@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

classified as turtle
classified as rifle
classified as other
Figure 1. Randomly sampled poses of a 3D-printed turtle adversarially perturbed to classify as a rifle at every viewpoint2 . An
unperturbed model is classified correctly as a turtle nearly 100%
of the time.

We show that neural network-based classifiers are vulnerable to physical-world adversarial examples that remain
adversarial over a different viewpoints. We introduce a new
algorithm for synthesizing adversarial examples that are
robust over a chosen distribution of transformations, which
we apply for reliably producing robust adversarial images as
well as physical-world adversarial objects. Figure 1 shows
an example of an adversarial object constructed using our
approach, where a 3D-printed turtle is consistently classified as rifle (a target class that was selected at random) by
an ImageNet classifier. In this paper, we demonstrate the
efficacy and generality of our method, demonstrating conclusively that adversarial examples are a practical concern
in real-world systems.
1.1. Challenges
Methods for transforming ordinary two-dimensional images
into adversarial examples, including techniques such as the
L-BFGS attack (Szegedy et al., 2013), FGSM (Goodfellow et al., 2015), and the CW attack (Carlini & Wagner,
2017c), are well-known. While adversarial examples generated through these techniques can transfer to the physical
world (Kurakin et al., 2016), the techniques have limited
success in affecting real-world systems where the input may
be transformed before being fed to the classifier. Prior work
has shown that adversarial examples generated using these
standard techniques often lose their adversarial nature once
2

See https://youtu.be/YXy6oX1iNoA for a video
where every frame is fed through the ImageNet classifier: the turtle
is consistently classified as a rifle.

