Adaptive Exploration-Exploitation Tradeoff for Opportunistic Bandits

Huasen Wu 1 Xueying Guo 2 Xin Liu 2

Abstract
In this paper, we propose and study opportunistic bandits - a new variant of bandits where the
regret of pulling a suboptimal arm varies under
different environmental conditions, such as network load or produce price. When the load/price
is low, so is the cost/regret of pulling a suboptimal arm (e.g., trying a suboptimal network
configuration). Therefore, intuitively, we could
explore more when the load/price is low and
exploit more when the load/price is high. Inspired by this intuition, we propose an Adaptive
Upper-Confidence-Bound (AdaUCB) algorithm
to adaptively balance the exploration-exploitation
tradeoff for opportunistic bandits. We prove that
AdaUCB achieves O(log T ) regret with a smaller
coefficient than the traditional UCB algorithm.
Furthermore, AdaUCB achieves O(1) regret with
respect to T if the exploration cost is zero when
the load level is below a certain threshold. Last,
based on both synthetic data and real-world traces,
experimental results show that AdaUCB significantly outperforms other bandit algorithms, such
as UCB and TS (Thompson Sampling), under
large load/price fluctuations.

1. Introduction
In existing studies of multi-armed bandits (MABs) (Auer
et al., 2002; Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi, 2012), pulling a suboptimal arm results in a constant regret. While this is a
valid assumption in many existing applications, there exists
a variety of applications where the actual regret of pulling a
suboptimal arm may vary depending on external conditions.
Consider the following application scenarios.
1

Twitter Inc., San Francisco, California, USA; 2 University
of California, Davis, California, USA. This work was partially
completed while the first author was a postdoctoral researcher
at University of California, Davis. Correspondence to: Xin Liu
<xinliu@ucdavis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Motivating scenario 1: price variation. MAB has been
widely used in studying effective procedures and treatments
(Lai, 1987; Press, 2009; Villar et al., 2015), including in
agriculture. In agriculture, price often varies significantly
for produce and livestock. For example, the pork price
varied from $0.46/lb to $1.28/lb, and orange $608/ton to
$1140/ton, in 2014-2017 (Index Mundi). Commodity price
forecast has achieved high accuracy and been widely used
for production decisions (Brandt & Bessler, 1983). In this
scenario, different treatments can be considered as arms.
The effectiveness of a particular treatment is captured by
the value of the arm, and is independent of the market price
of the product. (The latter is true because an experiment
in one farm, among tens of thousands of such farms in
the US, has negligible impact on the overall production
and thus the commodity’s market price.) The monetary
reward is proportional to price and to the effectiveness of
the treatment. The goal of a producer is to minimize the
overall monetary regret, compared to the oracle. Therefore,
intuitively, when the product price is low, the monetary
regret of pulling a suboptimal arm is low, and vice versa.
Motivating scenario 2: load variation. Network configuration is widely used in wireless networks, data-center networks, and the Internet, in order to control network topology,
routing, load balancing, and thus improve the overall performance. For example, in a cellular network, a cell tower has
a number of parameters to configure, including radio spectrum, transmission power, antenna angle and direction, etc.
The configuration of such parameters can greatly impact the
overall performance, e.g., coverage, throughput, and service
quality. A network configuration can be considered as an
arm, where its performance needs to be learned. Networks
are typically designed and configured to handle the peak
load, and thus we hope to learn the best configuration for
the peak load.
Network traffic load fluctuates over time. When the network
load is low, we can inject dummy traffic into the network so
that the total load, the real load plus the dummy load, resembles the peak load. It allows us to learn the performance of
the configuration under the peak load. At the same time, the
regret of using a suboptimal configuration is low because
the real load affected is low. Furthermore, in practice, we
can set the priority of the dummy traffic to be lower than that
of the real traffic. Because networks handle high priority

