Stochastic Training of Graph Convolutional Networks with Variance Reduction

Jianfei Chen 1 Jun Zhu 1 Le Song 2 3

Abstract
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) are powerful deep neural networks for graph-structured data.
However, GCN computes the representation of a
node recursively from its neighbors, making the
receptive field size grow exponentially with the
number of layers. Previous attempts on reducing
the receptive field size by subsampling neighbors
do not have convergence guarantee, and their receptive field size per node is still in the order of
hundreds. In this paper, we develop control variate based algorithms with new theoretical guarantee to converge to a local optimum of GCN
regardless of the neighbor sampling size. Empirical results show that our algorithms enjoy similar
convergence rate and model quality with the exact
algorithm using only two neighbors per node. The
running time of our algorithms on a large Reddit
dataset is only one seventh of previous neighbor
sampling algorithms.

1. Introduction
Graph convolution networks (GCNs) (Kipf & Welling,
2017) generalize convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al., 1995) to graph structured data. The “graph
convolution” operation applies same linear transformation
to all the neighbors of a node, followed by mean pooling
and nonlinearity. By stacking multiple graph convolution
layers, GCNs can learn node representations by utilizing
information from distant neighbors. GCNs and their variants (Hamilton et al., 2017a; Veličković et al., 2018) have
been applied to semi-supervised node classification (Kipf &
Welling, 2017), inductive node embedding (Hamilton et al.,
2017a), link prediction (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Berg et al.,
2017) and knowledge graphs (Schlichtkrull et al., 2017),
outperforming multi-layer perceptron (MLP) models that
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, State Key Lab
for Intell. Tech. & Sys., THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
100084, China 2 Georgia Institute of Technology 3 Ant Financial.
Correspondence to: Jun Zhu <dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

do not use the graph structure, and graph embedding approaches (Perozzi et al., 2014; Tang et al., 2015; Grover &
Leskovec, 2016) that do not use node features.
However, the graph convolution operation makes GCNs
difficult to be trained efficiently. The representation of a
node at layer L is computed recursively by the representations of all its neighbors at layer L − 1. Therefore, the
receptive field of a single node grows exponentially with
respect to the number of layers, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a), so
exactly computing the stochastic gradient is expensive even
for a single node. Due to the large receptive field size, Kipf
& Welling (2017) propose to train GCN by a batch algorithm, which computes the representations of all the nodes
altogether. However, batch algorithms cannot handle largescale datasets because of their slow convergence and the
requirement to fit the entire dataset in GPU memory.
Hamilton et al. (2017a) make an initial attempt to develop
stochastic training algorithms for GCNs via a scheme of
neighbor sampling (NS). Instead of considering all the neighbors, they randomly subsample D(l) neighbors at the l-th
layer.
Q (l)Therefore, they reduce the receptive field size to
l D , as shown in Fig. 1(b). They find that for two-layer
GCNs, keeping D(1) = 10 and D(2) = 25 neighbors can
achieve comparable performance with the original model.
However, there is no theoretical guarantee on the convergence of the stochastic training algorithm with NS. Moreover, the time complexity of NS is still D(1) D(2) = 250
times larger than training an MLP, which is unsatisfactory.
In this paper, we develop novel control variate-based
stochastic approximation algorithms for GCN by utilizing
the historical activations of nodes as a control variate. Our
algorithms have new theoretical results on (1) variance reduction from the magnitude of the activation to the magnitude of the difference between current-and-historical activations; (2) exact (zero-variance) predictions at testing time;
(3) convergence to a local optimum of GCN during training regardless of the neighbor sampling size D(l) , with an
asymptotically unbiased stochastic gradient. The theoretical
properties allow us to significantly reduce the time complexity of stochastic training by sampling only D(l) = 2
neighbors per node, yet still retain the quality of the model.
We empirically test our algorithms on six graph datasets, and
the results match with the theory. Comparing with NS, our

