Canonical Tensor Decomposition for Knowledge Base Completion

Timothée Lacroix 1 2 Nicolas Usunier 1 Guillaume Obozinski 2

Abstract
The problem of Knowledge Base Completion
can be framed as a 3rd-order binary tensor completion problem. In this light, the Canonical
Tensor Decomposition (CP) (Hitchcock, 1927)
seems like a natural solution; however, current
implementations of CP on standard Knowledge
Base Completion benchmarks are lagging behind their competitors. In this work, we attempt to understand the limits of CP for knowledge base completion. First, we motivate and
test a novel regularizer, based on tensor nuclear
p-norms. Then, we present a reformulation of
the problem that makes it invariant to arbitrary
choices in the inclusion of predicates or their reciprocals in the dataset. These two methods combined allow us to beat the current state of the
art on several datasets with a CP decomposition,
and obtain even better results using the more advanced ComplEx model.

1. Introduction
In knowledge base completion, the learner is given triples
(subject, predicate, object) of facts about the world, and has
to infer new triples that are likely but not yet known to be
true. This problem has attracted a lot of attention (Nickel
et al., 2016a; Nguyen, 2017) both as an example application of large-scale tensor factorization, and as a benchmark
of learning representations of relational data.
The standard completion task is link prediction, which consists in answering queries (subject, predicate, ?) or (?, predicate, object). In that context, the canonical decomposition
of tensors (also called CANDECOMP/PARAFAC or CP)
(Hitchcock, 1927) is known to perform poorly compared to
more specialized methods. For instance, DistMult (Yang
1
Facebook AI Research, Paris, France 2 Université Paris-Est,
Equipe Imagine, LIGM (UMR8049) Ecole des Ponts ParisTech
Marne-la-Vallée, France. Correspondence to: Lacroix Timothee
<timothee.lax@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

et al., 2014), a particular case of CP which shares the factors for the subject and object modes, was recently shown
to have state-of-the-art results (Kadlec et al., 2017). This
result is surprising because DistMult learns a tensor that
is symmetric in the subject and object modes, while the
datasets contain mostly non-symmetric predicates.
The goal of this paper is to study whether and how CP can
perform as well as its competitors. To that end, we evaluate
three possibilities.
First, as Kadlec et al. (2017) showed that performances for
these tasks are sensitive to the loss function and optimization parameters, we re-evaluate CP with a broader parameter search and a multiclass log-loss.
Second, since the best performing approaches are less expressive than CP, we evaluate whether regularization helps.
On this subject, we show that the standard regularization
used in knowledge base completion does not correspond to
regularization with a tensor norm. We then propose to use
tensor nuclear p-norms (Friedland & Lim, 2018), with the
goal of designing more principled regularizers.
Third, we propose a different formulation of the objective, in which we model separately predicates and their inverse: for each predicate pred, we create an inverse predicate pred−1 and create a triple (obj, pred−1 , sub) for each
training triple (sub, pred, obj). At test time, queries of the
form (?, pred, obj) are answered as (obj, pred−1 , ?). Similar formulations were previously used by Shen et al. (2016)
and Joulin et al. (2017), but for different models for which
there was no clear alternative, so the impact of this reformulation has never been evaluated.
To assess whether the results we obtain are specific to CP,
we also carry on the same experiments with a state-of-theart model, ComplEx (Trouillon et al., 2016). ComplEx has
the same expressivity as CP in the sense that it can represent any tensor, but it implements a specific form of parameter sharing. We perform all our experiments on 5 common
benchmark datasets of link prediction in knowledge bases.
Our results first confirm that within a reasonable time budget, the performance of both CP and ComplEx are highly
dependent on optimization parameters. With systematic
parameter searches, we obtain better results for ComplEx
than what was previously reported, confirming its status as

