Learning to Branch

Maria-Florina Balcan 1 Travis Dick 1 Tuomas Sandholm 1 Ellen Vitercik 1

Abstract
Tree search algorithms, such as branch-andbound, are the most widely used tools for solving combinatorial problems. These algorithms
recursively partition the search space to find an
optimal solution. To keep the tree small, it is crucial to carefully decide, when expanding a tree
node, which variable to branch on at that node to
partition the remaining space. Many partitioning
techniques have been proposed, but no theory describes which is optimal. We show how to use
machine learning to determine an optimal weighting of any set of partitioning procedures for the
instance distribution at hand using samples. Via
theory and experiments, we show that learning to
branch is both practical and hugely beneficial.

1. Introduction
Many widely-used algorithms are customizable: they have
tunable parameters that have an enormous effect on runtime,
solution quality, or both. Tuning parameters by hand is notoriously tedious and time-consuming. In this work, we study
algorithm configuration via machine learning, where the
goal is to design algorithms that learn the optimal parameter
setting for the problem instance distribution at hand.
We study configuration of tree search algorithms. These
algorithms are the most widely used tools for solving combinatorial and nonconvex problems throughout artificial intelligence, operations research, and beyond (e.g., (Russell
& Norvig, 2010; Williams, 2013)). For example, branchand-bound (B&B) algorithms (Land & Doig, 1960) solve
mixed integer linear programs (MILPs), and thus have diverse applications, including ones in machine learning such
as MAP estimation (Kappes et al., 2013), object recognition (Kokkinos, 2011), clustering (Komodakis et al., 2009),
and semi-supervised SVMs (Chapelle et al., 2007).
1

Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Ellen Vitercik
<vitercik@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

A tree search algorithm systematically partitions the search
space to find an optimal solution. It organizes this partition
via a tree: the original problem is at the root and the children of a given node represent the subproblems formed by
partitioning the feasible set of the parent node. A branch is
pruned if it is infeasible or it cannot produce a better solution
than the best one found so far. Typically the search space
is partitioned by adding an additional constraint on some
variable. For example, suppose the feasible set is defined
by the constraint Ax ≤ b, with x ∈ {0, 1}n . A tree search
algorithm might partition this feasible set into two sets, one
where Ax ≤ b, x1 = 0, and x2 , . . . , xn ∈ {0, 1}, and
another where Ax ≤ b, x1 = 1, and x2 , . . . , xn ∈ {0, 1},
in which case the algorithm has branched on x1 . A crucial question in tree search algorithm design is determining
which variable to branch on at each step. An effective variable selection policy can have a tremendous effect on the
size of the tree. Currently, there is no known optimal strategy and the vast majority of existing techniques are backed
only by empirical comparisons. In the worst-case, finding
an approximately optimal branching variable, even at the
root of the tree alone, is NP-hard. This is true even in the
case of satisfiability, which is a special case of constraint
satisfaction and of MILP (Liberatore, 2000).
In this work, rather than attempt to characterize a branching
strategy that is universally optimal, we show empirically
and theoretically that it is possible to learn high-performing
branching strategies for a given application domain. We
model an application domain as a distribution over problem
instances, such as a distribution over scheduling problems
that an airline solves on a day-to-day basis. This model is
standard throughout the algorithm configuration literature
(e.g., (Hutter et al., 2009; 2011; Dai et al., 2017; Kleinberg
et al., 2017)). The approach has also been used on largescale problems in industry to configure and select winner
determination algorithms for clearing tens of billions of
dollars of combinatorial auctions (Sandholm, 2013). The
algorithm designer does not know the underlying distribution over problem instances, but has sample access to the
distribution. We show how to use samples from the distribution to learn a variable selection policy that will result
in as small a search tree as possible in expectation over the
underlying distribution.
Our learning algorithm adaptively partitions the parameter

