Self-Imitation Learning

Junhyuk Oh * 1 Yijie Guo * 1 Satinder Singh 1 Honglak Lee 2 1

Abstract

MontezumaRevenge

This paper proposes Self-Imitation Learning
(SIL), a simple off-policy actor-critic algorithm
that learns to reproduce the agent’s past good decisions. This algorithm is designed to verify our
hypothesis that exploiting past good experiences
can indirectly drive deep exploration. Our empirical results show that SIL significantly improves
advantage actor-critic (A2C) on several hard exploration Atari games and is competitive to the
state-of-the-art count-based exploration methods.
We also show that SIL improves proximal policy
optimization (PPO) on MuJoCo tasks.

1. Introduction
The trade-off between exploration and exploitation is one of
the fundamental challenges in reinforcement learning (RL).
The agent needs to exploit what it already knows in order to
maximize reward. But, the agent also needs to explore new
behaviors in order to find a potentially better policy. The
resulting performance of an RL agent emerges from this
interaction between exploration and exploitation.
This paper studies how exploiting the agent’s past experiences improves learning in RL. More specifically, we hypothesize that learning to reproduce past good experiences
can indirectly lead to deeper exploration depending on the
domain. A simple example of how this can occur can be
seen through our results on an example Atari game, Montezuma’s Revenge (see Figure 1). In this domain, the first
and more proximal source of reward is obtained by picking up the key. Obtaining the key is a precondition of the
second and more distal source of reward (i.e., opening the
door with the key). Many existing methods occasionally
generate experiences that pick up the key and obtain the first
reward, but fail to exploit these experiences often enough
to learn how to open the door by exploring after picking up
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Michigan 2 Google Brain.
Correspondence to: Junhyuk Oh <junhyuk@umich.edu>, Yijie
Guo <guoyijie@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Average reward

2500
2000
1500
A2C
A2C (Best)
A2C+SIL
A2C+SIL (Best)

1000
500
0
0M

5M

10M
Steps

15M

20M

Figure 1. Learning curves on Montezuma’s Revenge. (Left) The
agent needs to pick up the key in order to open the door. Picking
up the key gives a small reward. (Right) The baseline (A2C) often
picks up the key as shown by the best episode reward in 100K
steps (A2C (Best)), but it fails to consistently reproduce such an
experience. In contrast, self-imitation learning (A2C+SIL) quickly
learns to pick up the key as soon as the agent experiences it, which
leads to the next source of reward (door).

the key. Thus, they end up with a poor policy (see A2C in
Figure 1). On the other hand, by exploiting the experiences
that pick up the key, the agent is able to explore onwards
from the state where it has the key to successfully learn how
to open the door (see A2C+SIL in Figure 1). Of course, this
sort of exploitation can also hurt performance in problems
where there are proximal distractor rewards and repeated
exploitation of such rewards does not help in learning about
more distal and higher rewards; in other words, these two aspects may both be present. In this paper we will empirically
investigate many different domains to see how exploiting
past experiences can be beneficial for learning agents.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows: (1) To
study how exploiting past good experiences affects learning,
we propose a Self-Imitation Learning (SIL) algorithm which
learns to imitate the agent’s own past good decisions. In
brief, the SIL algorithm stores experiences in a replay buffer,
learns to imitate state-action pairs in the replay buffer only
when the return in the past episode is greater than the agent’s
value estimate. (2) We provide a theoretical justification
of the SIL objective by showing that the SIL objective is
derived from the lower bound of the optimal Q-function. (3)
The SIL algorithm is very simple to implement and can be
applied to any actor-critic architecture. (4) We demonstrate
that SIL combined with advantage actor-critic (A2C) is
competitive to the state-of-the-art count-based exploration

