Synthesizing Programs for Images using Reinforced Adversarial Learning

Yaroslav Ganin 1 Tejas Kulkarni 2 Igor Babuschkin 2 S. M. Ali Eslami 2 Oriol Vinyals 2

Abstract
Advances in deep generative networks have led
to impressive results in recent years. Nevertheless, such models can often waste their capacity
on the minutiae of datasets, presumably due to
weak inductive biases in their decoders. This is
where graphics engines may come in handy since
they abstract away low-level details and represent
images as high-level programs. Current methods
that combine deep learning and renderers are limited by hand-crafted likelihood or distance functions, a need for large amounts of supervision, or
difficulties in scaling their inference algorithms
to richer datasets. To mitigate these issues, we
present SPIRAL, an adversarially trained agent
that generates a program which is executed by a
graphics engine to interpret and sample images.
The goal of this agent is to fool a discriminator
network that distinguishes between real and rendered data, trained with a distributed reinforcement learning setup without any supervision. A
surprising finding is that using the discriminator’s output as a reward signal is the key to allow
the agent to make meaningful progress at matching the desired output rendering. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of
an end-to-end, unsupervised and adversarial inverse graphics agent on challenging real world
(MNIST, O MNIGLOT, C ELEBA) and synthetic
3D datasets. A video of the agent can be found at
https://youtu.be/iSyvwAwa7vk.

Figure 1. SPIRAL takes as input either random noise or images
and iteratively produces plausible samples or reconstructions via
graphics program synthesis. The first row depicts an unconditional
run given random noise. The second, third and fourth rows depict
conditional execution given an image with a handwritten character,
the Mona Lisa, and objects arranged in a 3D scene.

it into strokes can make it easier to classify or re-imagine
that character, and similarly, knowing the underlying layout
of a room can aid with planning, navigation and interaction
in that room. Furthermore, this structure can be exploited
for generalization, rapid learning, and even communication
with other agents. It is commonly believed that humans
exploit simulations to learn this skill (Lake et al., 2017).
By experimenting with a pen and a piece of paper we learn
how our hand movements lead to written characters, and
via imagination we learn how architectural layouts manifest
themselves in reality.

Work done while YG was an intern at DeepMind. 1 Montreal
Institute for Learning Algorithms, Montréal, Canada 2 DeepMind,
London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Yaroslav Ganin
<yaroslav.ganin@gmail.com>.

In the visual domain, inversion of a renderer for the purposes
of scene understanding is typically referred to as inverse
graphics (Mansinghka et al., 2013; Kulkarni et al., 2015a).
Training vision systems using the inverse graphics approach
has remained a challenge. Renderers typically expect as input programs that have sequential semantics, are composed
of discrete symbols (e.g., keystrokes in a CAD program),
and are long (tens or hundreds of symbols). Additionally,
matching rendered images to real data poses an optimization
problem as black-box graphics simulators are not differentiable in general.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

To address these problems, we present a new approach for
interpreting and generating images using Deep Reinforced
Adversarial Learning. In this approach, an adversarially

1. Introduction
Recovering structured representations from raw sensations
is an ability that humans readily possess and frequently use.
Given a picture of a hand-written character, decomposing

