Probabilistic Boolean Tensor Decomposition

Tammo Rukat 1 2 Chris C. Holmes 1 2 Christopher Yau 2 3

Abstract
Boolean tensor decomposition approximates data
of multi-way binary relationships as product of
interpretable low-rank binary factors, following
the rules of Boolean algebra. Here, we present
its first probabilistic treatment. We facilitate scalable sampling-based posterior inference by exploitation of the combinatorial structure of the
factor conditionals. Maximum a posteriori decompositions feature higher accuracies than existing
techniques throughout a wide range of simulated
conditions. Moreover, the probabilistic approach
facilitates the treatment of missing data and enables model selection with much greater accuracy. We investigate three real-world data-sets.
First, temporal interaction networks in a hospital
ward and behavioural data of university students
demonstrate the inference of instructive latent patterns. Next, we decompose a tensor with more
than 10 billion data points, indicating relations of
gene expression in cancer patients. Not only does
this demonstrate scalability, it also provides an
entirely novel perspective on relational properties
of continuous data and, in the present example,
on the molecular heterogeneity of cancer. Our
implementation is available on GitHub2 .

1. Introduction
Matrix decomposition methods such as factor analysis are a
widely used class of models for unsupervised learning. Typically, they operate on two-way matrices with rows thought
of as objects and columns thought of as properties. The
decomposition amounts to computing two low-rank matrices, one that contains prototypes of properties (loadings)
1
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK 2 The
Alan Turing Institute, London, UK 3 Centre for Computational
Biology, Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK. Correspondence to: Tammo Rukat
<tammo.rukat@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).
2

https://github.com/TammoR/LogicalFactorisationMachines

Figure 1: Graphical intuition for 3-way Boolean tensor
decomposition. Logical conjunction (∧) of Boolean vectors
(columns of factor matrices) generates Rank-1 tensors. The
full tensor is the logical disjunction (∨) of rank-1 tensors.
and one that denotes a compressed representation of each
object as a combination of the prototypes (factors). However, these methods are ill-suited for data with higher arity
such as ternary interactions. Examples include network interactions at different time-points, gene-gene interactions
for different individuals or any two-way data under different
experimental conditions. Such data requires methods that
specifically account for the higher-order relationship and
that are commonly referred to as tensor decomposition.
Boolean tensor decomposition factorises a K-way binary
tensor X ∈ {0, 1}N1 ×...×NK , into K binary factor matrices
Fk ∈ {0, 1}Nk ×L , using the Boolean algebra such that


L
_ ^

x[n] ≈
fnl  .
(1)
l=1

n∈[n]

Here, x[n] is a single tensor entry and [n] denotes a tuple
of indices [n1 , . . . , nK ]. We call k = 1 . . . K the modes of
the tensor, ∨ and ∧ denote the logical OR and the logical
AND operation, respectively. In plain English, eq. (1) says
that an observation is 1, if and only if there exist one or
more latent dimensions in which all corresponding factors
are 1. This leads to easily interpretable factor matrices, Fk ,
where each latent dimension denotes a subset of entries
along mode k, for instance subsets of objects, properties
and conditions that occur jointly in the data. This can be
thought of as a particular type of canonical polyadic (CP)
decomposition, as illustrated in Fig. 1. A different graphical
intuition starts from the factor rows and considers the 3-way
Boolean tensor product as a three-stage template assignment
procedure. Rows of a factor matrix F1 are one-dimensional
binary templates of size of the first tensor mode. Rows

