Spectrally Approximating Large Graphs with Smaller Graphs

Andreas Loukas 1 Pierre Vandergheynst 1

Abstract
How does coarsening affect the spectrum of a
general graph? We provide conditions such that
the principal eigenvalues and eigenspaces of a
coarsened and original graph Laplacian matrices
are close. The achieved approximation is shown
to depend on standard graph-theoretic properties,
such as the degree and eigenvalue distributions,
as well as on the ratio between the coarsened
and actual graph sizes. Our results carry implications for learning methods that utilize coarsening. For the particular case of spectral clustering, they imply that coarse eigenvectors can
be used to derive good quality assignments even
without refinement—this phenomenon was previously observed, but lacked formal justification.

1. Introduction
One of the most wide-spread techniques for sketching
graph-structured data is coarsening. As with most sketching methods, instead of solving a large graph problem in its
native domain, coarsening involves solving an akin problem of reduced size at a lower cost; the solution can then
be inexpensively lifted and refined in the native domain.
The benefits of coarsening are well known both in the algorithmic and machine learning communities. There exists a
long list of algorithms that utilize it for partitioning (Hendrickson & Leland, 1995; Karypis & Kumar, 1998a; Kushnir et al., 2006; Dhillon et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2014)
and visualizing (Koren, 2002; Walshaw, 2006) large graphs
in a computationally efficient manner. In addition, it has
been frequently used to create multi-scale representations
of graph-structured data, such as coarse-grained diffusion
maps (Lafon & Lee, 2006), multi-scale wavelets (Gavish
et al., 2010) and pyramids (Shuman et al., 2016).
More recently, coarsening is employed as a component of
graph convolutional networks analogous to pooling (Bruna
1
École Polytechnique Fédérale Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Andreas Loukas <andreas.loukas@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

et al., 2014; Defferrard et al., 2016; Bronstein et al., 2017;
Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2017). Combining the values
of adjacent vertices reduces the spatial size of each layer’s
output, prevents overfitting, and encourages a hierarchical
scaling of representations.
Yet, much remains to be understood about the properties
and limitations of graph coarsening.
The majority of theoretical work has so far focused on
constructing fast linear solvers using multigrid techniques.
These methods are especially relevant for approximating
the solution of differential equations on grids and finiteelement meshes. Multigrids were also adapted to arbitrary graphs by Koutis et al. (2011) and later on by Livne
and Brandt (2012). Based on an optimized version of
the Galerkin coarsening, the authors demonstrate an algebraic multi-level approximation scheme that is numerically
shown to solve symmetric diagonally dominant linear systems in almost linear time. Similar techniques have also
been applied for approximating the Fiedler vector (Urschel
et al., 2014; Gandhi, 2016) and solving least-squares problems (Hirani et al., 2015; Colley et al., 2017).
Despite this progress, with the exception of certain interlacing results (Chung, 1997; Chen et al., 2004), it is currently an open question how coarsening affects the spectrum of a general graph. As a consequence, there is no rigorous way of determining to what extend one may coarsen
a graph without significantly affecting the performance of
spectral methods for graph partitioning and visualization.
The absence of a fundamental understanding of what and
how much information is lost also hinders our ability to design efficient learning algorithms for graph-structured data:
e.g., coarsening is the least studied (and less optimized)
component of graph convolutional networks.
This paper sheds light into some of these questions. Specifically, we consider a one-shot coarsening operation and ask
how much it affects the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the
graph Laplacian. Key to our argument is the introduced
restricted spectral similarity (RSS) property, asserting that
the Laplacian of the coarsened and actual graphs behave
similarly (up to some constants) with respect to an appropriate set of vectors. The RSS property is shown to hold
for coarsenings constructed by contracting the edges contained in a randomized matching. Moreover, the attained

