Structured Evolution with Compact Architectures
for Scalable Policy Optimization

Krzysztof Choromanski * 1 Mark Rowland * 2 Vikas Sindhwani 1 Richard E. Turner 2 Adrian Weller 2 3

Abstract
We present a new method of blackbox optimization via gradient approximation with the use of
structured random orthogonal matrices, providing
more accurate estimators than baselines and with
provable theoretical guarantees. We show that
this algorithm can be successfully applied to learn
better quality compact policies than those using
standard gradient estimation techniques. The compact policies we learn have several advantages
over unstructured ones, including faster training
algorithms and faster inference. These benefits
are important when the policy is deployed on real
hardware with limited resources. Further, compact policies provide more scalable architectures
for derivative-free optimization (DFO) in highdimensional spaces. We show that most robotics
tasks from the OpenAI Gym can be solved using
neural networks with less than 300 parameters,
with almost linear time complexity of the inference phase, with up to 13x fewer parameters relative to the Evolution Strategies (ES) algorithm
introduced by Salimans et al. (2017). We do not
need heuristics such as fitness shaping to learn
good quality policies, resulting in a simple and
theoretically motivated training mechanism.

agent via direct policy search can be cast as a maximization
problem of the form,
max F (θ),

θ∈Rd

(1)

where the objective F : Rd → R measures the expected
total reward of the policy πθ . One would then expect to
iteratively improve the policy via gradient ascent,
θk+1 = θk + η∇F (θk ) .
However, when the environment is stochastic and implemented either in blackbox physics simulators or as opaque
wrappers around a real mechanical system such as a robot,
the objective function F is only accessible via noisy and
expensive function evaluations, with no gradients ∇F (θk )
available. In such situations, one can turn to derivative-free
optimization (DFO) (Conn et al., 2009).

*
Equal contribution 1 Google Brain Robotics 2 University of
Cambridge 3 The Alan Turing Institute. Correspondence to:
Krzysztof Choromanski <kchoro@google.com>, Mark Rowland
<mr504@cam.ac.uk>.

Given that DFO techniques usually require O(d) times
more iterations than standard gradient methods (Nesterov
& Spokoiny, 2017; Jamieson et al., 2012), conventional
wisdom dictates that it is unreasonable to expect them to
work well for high-dimensional problems; indeed Conn
et al. (2009) remark that “the scale of the problems that can
currently be efficiently solved by derivative-free methods
is still relatively small and does not exceed a few hundred
variables even in easy cases”. It is therefore no surprise that
pure blackbox methods were largely abandoned in favor of
“greybox” policy gradient methods (Schulman et al., 2017;
2015; Lillicrap et al., 2015) that exploit the Markovian structure of the RL setting with considerable success. However,
in recent work, Salimans et al. (2017) demonstrated that
a very simple randomized finite difference DFO approach,
derived as an “evolutionary strategy” (ES), is comparable
to state of the art policy gradient schemes for training deep
neural network controllers on a variety of simulated robotics
tasks in MuJoCo and on Atari games. These results, together
with the relative simplicity, generality and parallelizability
of DFO methods has generated renewed interest in them for
policy optimization.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

In this paper, our motivation is to significantly improve the
overall efficiency of DFO-based optimization of neural network policies, noting that Salimans et al. (2017) required

1. Introduction
The goal of reinforcement learning (RL) is to find, through
trial and error, a feedback policy that prescribes how an
agent should optimally act in a dynamic, uncertain environment. If a family of policies mapping states to actions is
parameterized by θ ∈ Rd – say d weights of a deep neural
network πθ – optimizing the long-term objectives of the

