Hierarchical Deep Generative Models for Multi-Rate Multivariate Time Series

Zhengping Che * 1 Sanjay Purushotham * 1 Guangyu Li * 1 Bo Jiang 1 Yan Liu 1

Abstract
Multi-Rate Multivariate Time Series (MR-MTS)
are the multivariate time series observations
which come with various sampling rates and encode multiple temporal dependencies. State-space
models such as Kalman filters and deep learning
models such as deep Markov models are mainly
designed for time series data with the same sampling rate and cannot capture all the dependencies
present in the MR-MTS data. To address this challenge, we propose the Multi-Rate Hierarchical
Deep Markov Model (MR-HDMM), a novel deep
generative model which uses the latent hierarchical structure with a learnable switch mechanism to
capture the temporal dependencies of MR-MTS.
Experimental results on two real-world datasets
demonstrate that our MR-HDMM model outperforms the existing state-of-the-art deep learning
and state-space models on forecasting and interpolation tasks. In addition, the latent hierarchies
in our model provide a way to show and interpret
the multiple temporal dependencies.

1. Introduction
Multivariate time series (MTS) analysis (Hamilton, 1994;
Reinsel, 2003) has attracted a lot of attention in machine
learning, signal processing, and other related areas, due to
its impact and usefulness in many real world applications
such as healthcare, climate, and financial forecasting. Statespace models such as Kalman filters (Kalman et al., 1960)
and hidden Markov models (Rabiner, 1989) have been developed to model MTS and have shown promising results
on prediction tasks such as forecasting and interpolation.
However, in many applications, the MTS observations usually come from multiple sources and are often characterized
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States. Correspondence to: Zhengping Che,
Sanjay Purushotham, Guangyu Li, Bo Jiang, Yan Liu
<{zche,spurusho,guangyul,boj,yanliu.cs}@usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

by various sampling rates. For example, in healthcare, vital
signs such as heart rate are sampled frequently, while lab
results such as pH are measured infrequently; in finance,
the stock prices are sampled daily or even more frequently,
while macro-economic data such as employment, GDP are
sampled monthly or quarterly. Such time series observations
with either regular or irregular sampling rates are termed as
Multi-Rate Multivariate Time Series (MR-MTS) data. Modeling the MR-MTS using state-space models is challenging
since MR-MTS naturally comes with multiple temporal
dependencies and these dependencies may not have direct
relationship to the sampling rates. That is, the long and
short-term temporal dependencies may be associated with
a few or all the time series data with different sampling
rates. Capturing these temporal dependencies is important
as they model the underlying data generation mechanism,
and they impact the interpolation and forecasting tasks. Upsampling or downsampling MR-MTS to a single rate time
series cannot address this challenge, since these simple techniques may artifically introduce or remove some naturally
occurring dependencies present in MR-MTS. For example,
forward/backward imputation will introduce long-term dependencies. Therefore, building models which can capture
multiple temporal dependencies directly from the MR-MTS
data is still an open problem in the time series analysis field.
Deep learning models such as recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) have emerged
as successful models for time series analysis (Graves et al.,
2013; Mikolov et al., 2010) and sequence modeling applications (Socher et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2015). While deep discriminative models (Hermans & Schrauwen, 2013; Martens
& Sutskever, 2011; Pascanu et al., 2013; Chung et al., 2016)
have been shown to model complex non-linear temporal
dependencies present in MTS, deep generative models (Gan
et al., 2015; Rezende et al., 2014) have become more popular
since they are intuitive, interpretable and are more powerful
than their discriminative counterparts (Durbin & Koopman,
2012) and they capture the data generation process. Despite
their success with single-rate time series data, the existing
deep generative models are not suitable for modeling MRMTS as they are not designed to capture multiple temporal
dependencies from different sampling rates.
Recently, latent hierarchical structure learning based
on deep learning models have led to remarkable ad-

