Semi-Supervised Learning via Compact Latent Space Clustering

Konstantinos Kamnitsas 1 2 Daniel C. Castro 1 2 Loic Le Folgoc 2 Ian Walker 2 Ryutaro Tanno 1 3
Daniel Rueckert 2 Ben Glocker 2 Antonio Criminisi 1 Aditya Nori 1

Abstract
We present a novel cost function for semisupervised learning of neural networks that encourages compact clustering of the latent space to
facilitate separation. The key idea is to dynamically create a graph over embeddings of labeled
and unlabeled samples of a training batch to capture underlying structure in feature space, and use
label propagation to estimate its high and low density regions. We then devise a cost function based
on Markov chains on the graph that regularizes the
latent space to form a single compact cluster per
class, while avoiding to disturb existing clusters
during optimization. We evaluate our approach
on three benchmarks and compare to state-of-the
art with promising results. Our approach combines the benefits of graph-based regularization
with efficient, inductive inference, does not require modifications to a network architecture, and
can thus be easily applied to existing networks to
enable an effective use of unlabeled data.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) addresses the problem of
learning a model by effectively leveraging both labeled and
unlabeled data (Chapelle et al., 2006). SSL is effective when
it results in a model that generalizes better than a model
learned from labeled data only. More formally, let X be a
sample space with data points and Y the set of labels (e.g.,
referring to different classes). Let DL ⊆ X × Y be a set of
labeled data points, and let DU ⊆ X be a set of unlabeled
data. In this work we focus on classification tasks, where
for each (x, y) ∈ DL , y is the ground truth label for sample
x. Our objective is to learn a predictive model f (x; θ) =
p(y|x, θ), parametrized by θ, which approximates the true
1
Microsoft Research Cambridge, United Kingdom 2 Imperial
College London, United Kingdom 3 University College London,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Konstantinos Kamnitsas
<konstantinos.kamnitsas12@imperial.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Figure 1. Overview of our method. We dynamically construct a
graph in the latent space of a network at each training iteration,
propagate labels to capture the manifold’s structure, and regularize
it to form a single, compact cluster per class to facilitate separation.

conditional distribution q(y|x) generating the target labels.
SSL methods learn this by utilizing both DL and DU , often
assuming that |DU |  |DL |. Thus leveraging the ample
unlabeled data allows capturing more faithfully the structure
of data.
Various approaches to SSL have been proposed (see Section 2 for an overview). Underlying most of them is the
notion of consistency (Zhou et al., 2004): samples that are
close in feature space should be close in output space (local
consistency) and samples forming an underlying structure
should also map to similar labels (global consistency). This
is the essence of the smoothness and cluster assumptions in
SSL (Chapelle et al., 2006) that underpin our work. They
respectively state that the label function should be smooth in
high density areas of feature space, and points that belong to
the same cluster should be of the same class. Hence decision
boundaries should lie in low density areas.
We present a simple and effective SSL method for regularizing inductive neural networks (Fig. 1). The main idea
is to dynamically create a graph in the network’s latent
space over samples in each training batch (containing both
labeled and unlabeled data) to model the data manifold as
it evolves during training. We then regularize the manifold’s structure globally towards a more favorable state for
class separation. We argue that the optimal feature space
for classification should cluster all examples of a class to a

