Stein Points
Wilson Ye Chen 1 Lester Mackey 2 Jackson Gorham 3 François-Xavier Briol 4 5 6 Chris. J. Oates 7 6

Abstract

are extensively used for this task but suffer (in terms of
accuracy) from ‘clustering’ of the points {xi }ni=1 when n is
small. This observation motivates us to instead consider a
range of goal-oriented discrete approximation methods that
are designed with un-normalised densities in mind.

An important task in computational statistics and
machine learning is to approximate a posterior
distribution p(x) with an empirical measure supported on a set of representative points {xi }ni=1 .
This paper focuses on methods where the selection of points is essentially deterministic, with an
emphasis on achieving accurate approximation
when n is small. To this end, we present Stein
Points. The idea is to exploit either a greedy or
a conditional gradient method to iteratively minimise a kernel Stein discrepancy between the empirical measure and p(x). Our empirical results
demonstrate that Stein Points enable accurate approximation of the posterior at modest computational cost. In addition, theoretical results are
provided to establish convergence of the method.

The problem of discrete approximation of a distribution,
given its normalised density, has been considered in detail
and relevant methods include quasi-Monte Carlo (QMC)
(Dick & Pillichshammer, 2010), kernel herding (Chen et al.,
2010; Lacoste-Julien et al., 2015), support points (Mak &
Joseph, 2016; 2017), transport maps (Marzouk et al., 2016),
and minimum energy methods (Johnson et al., 1990). On
the other hand, the question of how to proceed with unnormalised densities has been primarily answered with increasingly sophisticated MCMC.

1. Introduction
This paper is motivated by approximation of a Borel distribution P , defined on a topological space X, with deterministic
point sets or sequences {xi }ni=1 ⊂ X for n ∈ N, such that
n
1
h(xi )
n ∑i=1

→

∫ h dP

(1)

as n → ∞ for all functions h ∶ X → R in a specified set H.
Throughout it will be assumed that P admits a density p,
with respect to a reference measure, available in a form that
is un-normalised (i.e., we know q(x) in closed form where
p(x) = q(x)/C for some C > 0). Such problems occur
in Bayesian statistics where P represents a posterior distribution, and the integral represents a posterior expectation
of interest. Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods

At the same time, recent work had led to theoreticallyjustified measures of sample quality in the case of an unnormalised target. In (Gorham & Mackey, 2015; Mackey
& Gorham, 2016) it was shown that Stein’s method can be
used to construct discrepancy measures that control weak
convergence of an empirical measure to a target. This was
later extended in (Gorham & Mackey, 2017) to encompass
a family of discrepancy measures indexed by a reproducing
kernel. In the latter case, the discrepancy measure can be
recognised as a maximum mean discrepancy (Smola et al.,
2007). As such, one can consider discrete approximation as
an optimisation problem in a Hilbert space and attempt to
optimise this objective with either a greedy or a conditional
gradient method. The resulting method – Stein Points – and
its variants are proposed and studied in this work.
Our Contribution
tributions:

This paper makes the following con-

1

School of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, University of
Technology Sydney, Australia 2 Microsoft Research New England,
USA 3 Opendoor Labs, Inc., USA 4 Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, UK 5 Department of Mathematics, Imperial
College London, UK 6 Alan Turing Institute, UK 7 School of Mathematics, Statistics and Physics, Newcastle University, UK. Correspondence to: Wilson Ye Chen <ye.chen@uts.edu.au>, Lester
Mackey <lmackey@microsoft.com>.

• Two algorithms are proposed for minimisation of the
kernel Stein discrepancy (KSD; Chwialkowski et al.,
2016; Liu et al., 2016; Gorham & Mackey, 2017); a
greedy algorithm and a conditional gradient method.
In each case, a convergence result of the form in Eqn.
1 is established.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

• Novel kernels are proposed for the KSD, and we prove
that, with these kernels, the KSD controls weak convergence of the empirical measure to the target. In other

