A Semantic Loss Function for Deep Learning with Symbolic Knowledge
Jingyi Xu 1 Zilu Zhang 2 Tal Friedman 1 Yitao Liang 1 Guy Van den Broeck 1

Abstract
This paper develops a novel methodology for using symbolic knowledge in deep learning. From
first principles, we derive a semantic loss function that bridges between neural output vectors
and logical constraints. This loss function captures how close the neural network is to satisfying the constraints on its output. An experimental evaluation shows that it effectively guides
the learner to achieve (near-)state-of-the-art results on semi-supervised multi-class classification. Moreover, it significantly increases the ability of the neural network to predict structured objects, such as rankings and paths. These discrete
concepts are tremendously difficult to learn, and
benefit from a tight integration of deep learning
and symbolic reasoning methods.

1. Introduction
The widespread success of representation learning raises
the question of which AI tasks are amenable to deep learning, which tasks require classical model-based symbolic
reasoning, and whether we can benefit from a tighter integration of both approaches. In recent years, significant
effort has gone towards various ways of using representation learning to solve tasks that were previously tackled
by symbolic methods. Such efforts include neural computers or differentiable programming (Weston et al., 2014;
Reed & De Freitas, 2015; Graves et al., 2016; Riedel et al.,
2016), relational embeddings or deep learning for graph
data (Yang et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2015; Bordes et al., 2013;
Neelakantan et al., 2015; Duvenaud et al., 2015; Niepert
et al., 2016), neural theorem proving, and learning with
constraints (Hu et al., 2016; Stewart & Ermon, 2017; Minervini et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017).
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA 2 Peking University, Beijing,
China. Correspondence to: Tal Friedman <tal@cs.ucla.edu>,
Yitao Liang <yliang@cs.ucla.edu>, Guy Van den Broeck
<guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

This paper considers learning in domains where we have
symbolic knowledge connecting the different outputs of a
neural network. This knowledge takes the form of a constraint (or sentence) in Boolean logic. It can be as simple
as an exactly-one constraint for one-hot output encodings,
or as complex as a structured output prediction constraint
for intricate combinatorial objects such as rankings, subgraphs, or paths. Our goal is to augment neural networks
with the ability to learn how to make predictions subject to
these constraints, and use the symbolic knowledge to improve the learning performance.
Most neuro-symbolic approaches aim to simulate or learn
symbolic reasoning in an end-to-end deep neural network,
or capture symbolic knowledge in a vector-space embedding. This choice is partly motivated by the need for
smooth differentiable models; adding symbolic reasoning
code (e.g., SAT solvers) to a deep learning pipeline destroys this property. Unfortunately, while making reasoning differentiable, the precise logical meaning of the
knowledge is often lost. In this paper, we take a distinctly
unique approach, and tackle the problem of differentiable
but sound logical reasoning from first principles. Starting
from a set of intuitive axioms, we derive the differentiable
semantic loss which captures how well the outputs of a neural network match a given constraint. This function precisely captures the meaning of the constraint, and is independent of its syntax.
Next, we show how semantic loss gives significant practical improvements in semi-supervised classification. In this
setting, semantic loss for the exactly-one constraint permits us to obtain a learning signal from vast amounts of
unlabeled data. The key idea is that semantic loss helps
us improve how confidently we are able to classify the
unlabeled data. This simple addition to the loss function
of standard deep learning architectures yields (near-)stateof-the-art performance in semi-supervised classification on
MNIST, FASHION, and CIFAR-10 datasets.
Our final set of experiments study the benefits of semantic loss for learning tasks with highly structured output, such as preference learning and path prediction in a
graph (Daumé et al., 2009; Chang et al., 2013; Choi et al.,
2015; Graves et al., 2016). In these scenarios, the task is
two-fold: learn both the structure of the output space, and

