Submodular Hypergraphs: p-Laplacians, Cheeger Inequalities
and Spectral Clustering

Pan Li 1 Olgica Milenkovic 1

Abstract
We introduce submodular hypergraphs, a family
of hypergraphs that have different submodular
weights associated with different cuts of hyperedges. Submodular hypergraphs arise in clustering applications in which higher-order structures
carry relevant information. For such hypergraphs,
we define the notion of p-Laplacians and derive
corresponding nodal domain theorems and k-way
Cheeger inequalities. We conclude with the description of algorithms for computing the spectra
of 1- and 2-Laplacians that constitute the basis of
new spectral hypergraph clustering methods.

1. Introduction
Spectral clustering algorithms are designed to solve a relaxation of the graph cut problem based on graph Laplacians
that capture pairwise dependencies between vertices, and
produce sets with small conductance that represent clusters.
Due to their scalability and provable performance guarantees, spectral methods represent one of the most prevalent
graph clustering approaches (Chung, 1997; Ng et al., 2002).
Many relevant problems in clustering, semisupervised learning and MAP inference (Zhou et al., 2007; Hein et al., 2013;
Zhang et al., 2017) involve higher-order vertex dependencies that require one to consider hypergraphs instead of
graphs. To address spectral hypergraph clustering problems,
several approaches have been proposed that typically operate by first projecting the hypergraph onto a graph via
clique expansion and then performing spectral clustering
on graphs (Zhou et al., 2007). Clique expansion involves
transforming a weighted hyperedge into a weighted clique
such that the graph cut weights approximately preserve the
cut weights of the hyperedge. Almost exclusively, these
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA. Correspondence to: Pan Li <panli2@illinois.edu>, Olgica Milenkovic
<milenkov@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

approximations have been based on the assumption that
each hyperedge cut has the same weight, in which case the
underlying hypergraph is termed homogeneous.
However, in image segmentation, MAP inference on
Markov random fields (Arora et al., 2012; Shanu et al.,
2016), network motif studies (Li & Milenkovic, 2017; Benson et al., 2016; Tsourakakis et al., 2017) and rank learning (Li & Milenkovic, 2017), higher order relations between
vertices captured by hypergraphs are typically associated
with different cut weights. In (Li & Milenkovic, 2017), Li
and Milenkovic generalized the notion of hyperedge cut
weights by assuming that different hyperedge cuts have
different weights, and that consequently, each hyperedge
is associated with a vector of weights rather than a single
scalar weight. If the weights of the hyperedge cuts are submodular, then one can use a graph with nonnegative edge
weights to efficiently approximate the hypergraph, provided
that the largest size of a hyperedge is a relatively small constant. This property of the projected hypergraphs allows one
to leverage spectral hypergraph clustering algorithms based
on clique expansions with provable performance guarantees. Unfortunately, the clique expansion method in general
has two drawbacks: The spectral clustering algorithm for
graphs used in the second step is merely quadratically optimal, while the projection step can cause a large distortion.
To address the quadratic optimality issue in graph clustering, Amghibech (Amghibech, 2003) introduced the notion
of p-Laplacians of graphs and derived Cheeger-type inequalities for the second smallest eigenvalue of a p-Laplacian,
p > 1, of a graph. These results motivated Bühler and
Hein’s work (Bühler & Hein, 2009) on spectral clustering
based on p-Laplacians that provided tighter approximations
of the Cheeger constant. Szlam and Bresson (Szlam &
Bresson, 2010) showed that the 1-Laplacian allows one to
exactly compute the Cheeger constant, but at the cost of
computational hardness (Chang, 2016). Very little is known
about the use of p-Laplacians for hypergraph clustering and
their spectral properties.
To address the clique expansion problem, Hein et al. (Hein
et al., 2013) introduced a clustering method for homogeneous hypergraphs that avoids expansions and works directly with the total variation of homogeneous hypergraphs,

