High-Quality Prediction Intervals for Deep Learning:
A Distribution-Free, Ensembled Approach

Tim Pearce 1 2 Mohamed Zaki 1 Alexandra Brintrup 1 Andy Neely 1

Abstract
This paper considers the generation of prediction
intervals (PIs) by neural networks for quantifying
uncertainty in regression tasks. It is axiomatic that
high-quality PIs should be as narrow as possible,
whilst capturing a specified portion of data. We
derive a loss function directly from this axiom that
requires no distributional assumption. We show
how its form derives from a likelihood principle,
that it can be used with gradient descent, and that
model uncertainty is accounted for in ensembled
form. Benchmark experiments show the method
outperforms current state-of-the-art uncertainty
quantification methods, reducing average PI width
by over 10%.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (NNs) have achieved impressive performance in a wide variety of tasks in recent years, however,
success is generally in terms of aggregated accuracy metrics.
For many real-world applications, it is not enough that on average a model performs well, rather the uncertainty of each
prediction must also be quantified. This can be particularly
important where there is a large downside to an incorrect
prediction: Examples can be found in prognostics, manufacturing, finance, weather, traffic and energy networks. There
is therefore interest in how NNs can be modified to meet
this requirement (Krzywinski & Altman, 2013; Gal, 2016).
In this work the output of prediction intervals (PIs) in regression tasks is considered. Whilst NNs by default output point
estimates, PIs directly communicate uncertainty, offering
a lower and upper bound for a prediction and assurance
that, with some high probability (e.g. 95% or 99%), the
realised data point will fall between these bounds. Having
this information allows for better-informed decisions.
1

Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, UK
Alan Turing Institute, UK. Correspondence to: Tim Pearce
<tp424@cam.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

As an example, a point estimate stating that a machine will
fail in 60 days may not be sufficient to schedule a repair,
however given a PI of 45-65 days with 99% probability,
timing of a repair is easily scheduled.
A diverse set of approaches have been developed to quantify
NN uncertainty, ranging from fully Bayesian NNs (BNNs)
(MacKay, 1992), to interpreting dropout as performing variational inference (Gal & Ghahramani, 2015). These require
either high computational demands or strong assumptions.
In this work we formulate PI output as a constrained optimisation problem. It is self evident that high-quality PIs should
be as narrow as possible, whilst capturing some specified
proportion of data points (hereafter referred to as the HQ
principle). Indeed it is through these metrics that PI quality
is often assessed (Papadopoulos et al., 2000; Khosravi et al.,
2011b; Galván et al., 2017). We show how a loss function
can be derived directly from this HQ principle, and used
in an ensemble to produce PIs accounting for both model
uncertainty and data noise variance. The key advantages
of the method are its intuitive objective, low computational
demand, robustness to outliers, and lack of distributional
assumption.
Notably we build on the work of Khosravi et al. (2011a)
who developed the Lower Upper Bound Estimation (LUBE)
method, incorporating the HQ principle directly into the NN
loss function for the first time. LUBE is gaining popularity
in several communities, for example in the forecasting of
energy demand and wind speed (section 2). However, we
have identified several limitations of its current form.
• Gradient Descent - It was stated that the method was
incompatible with gradient descent (GD), a belief carried forward, unchallenged, in all subsequent work
(section 2). Implementations therefore require nongradient based methods for training, such as Simulated Annealing (SA) and Particle Swarm Optimisation
(PSO). This is inconvenient since GD has become the
standard training method for NNs (Goodfellow et al.,
2016), used by all modern NN APIs.
• Loss Form - Its current form suffers from several problems. The function is at a global minimum when all

