Using Inherent Structures to design
Lean 2-layer RBMs

Abhishek Bansal 1 Abhinav Anand 2 Chiranjib Bhattacharyya 2

Abstract

Understanding the representational power of Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) with multiple layers is an ill-understood problem and
is an area of active research. Motivated from
the approach of Inherent Structure formalism
(Stillinger & Weber, 1982), extensively used in
analysing Spin Glasses, we propose a novel measure called Inherent Structure Capacity (ISC),
which characterizes the representation capacity
of a fixed architecture RBM by the expected
number of modes of distributions emanating
from the RBM with parameters drawn from a
prior distribution. Though ISC is intractable,
we show that for a single layer RBM architecture ISC approaches a finite constant as number
of hidden units are increased and to further improve the ISC, one needs to add a second layer.
Furthermore, we introduce Lean RBMs, which
are multi-layer RBMs where each layer can have
at-most O(n) units with the number of visible
units being n. We show that for every single
layer RBM with Ω(n2+r ), r ≥ 0, hidden units
there exists a two-layered lean RBM with Θ(n2 )
parameters with the same ISC, establishing that
2 layer RBMs can achieve the same representational power as single-layer RBMs but using far
fewer number of parameters. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first result which quantitatively establishes the need for layering.

1
IBM Research 2 Dept of CSA, IISc, Bengaluru, India. Correspondence to: Abhishek Bansal <abbansal@in.ibm.com>, Abhinav Anand <abhinava@iisc.ac.in>, Chiranjib Bhattacharyya
<chiru@iisc.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Deep Boltzmann Machines (DBMs1 ) are largely tuned using empirical methods based on trial and error. Despite
much effort, there is still very little theoretical understanding about why a particular neural network architecture
works better than another for any given application. Furthermore there is no well defined metric to compare different network architectures.
It is known that given any input distribution on the set of binary vectors of length n, there exists an RBM with α2n − 1
(α < 1) hidden units that can approximate that distribution
to an arbitrary precision (Montúfar & Rauh, 2017). However with these many hidden units the number of parameters increase exponentially. We call a network lean if for
each layer, the number of hidden units m = O(n) where
n is the number of visible units. The deep narrow Boltzmann Machines whose universal approximation properties
were studied in (Montúfar, 2014) are a special case of lean
networks. In this paper we study lean 2-layer deep RBMs.
We ask the questions, is there a measure that can relate
DBM architectures to their representational power? Once
we have such a measure then can we gain insights into the
capabilities of different DBM architectures?
For example, given a wide single layer RBM, an RBM with
many hidden nodes, can we find a lean multilayer RBM
with equivalent representational power but with far lesser
parameters? Despite much effort these questions are not
satisfactorily answered and may provide important insights
to the area of Deep Learning.
Our main contributions are as follows:
1. We study the Inherent structures formalism, first introduced in Statistical Mechanics(Stillinger & Weber, 1982), to understand the configuration space of
RBMs. We introduce a capacity measure Inherent
Structure Capacity (ISC) (Definition 5) and discuss its
relation with the expected number of perfectly reconstructible vectors (Montúfar & Morton, 2015), oneflip stable states and the modes of the input distribu1

We shall use the terms RBM and DBM interchangebly

