An Efficient Semismooth Newton Based Algorithm for Convex Clustering

Yancheng Yuan 1 Defeng Sun 2 Kim-Chuan Toh 3

Abstract
Clustering is a fundamental problem in unsupervised learning. Popular methods like K-means,
may suffer from instability as they are prone to
get stuck in its local minima. Recently, the sumof-norms (SON) model (also known as clustering path), which is a convex relaxation of hierarchical clustering model, has been proposed in
(Lindsten et al., 2011) and (Hocking et al., 2011).
Although numerical algorithms like alternating
direction method of multipliers (ADMM) and alternating minimization algorithm (AMA) have
been proposed to solve convex clustering model
(Chi & Lange, 2015), it is known to be very challenging to solve large-scale problems. In this paper, we propose a semismooth Newton based augmented Lagrangian method for large-scale convex
clustering problems. Extensive numerical experiments on both simulated and real data demonstrate that our algorithm is highly efficient and
robust for solving large-scale problems. Moreover, the numerical results also show the superior
performance and scalability of our algorithm comparing to existing first-order methods.

1. Introduction
Clustering is one of the most fundamental problems in unsupervised learning. Traditional clustering models such as
K-means clustering, hierarchical clustering may suffer from
instability because of the non-convexity of the model and
the difficulties in finding a global optimal solution. The
clustering results are generally highly dependent on the
initialization and the results could differ significantly with
different initializations. Moreover, these clustering models
require the prior knowledge about the number of clusters
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, National
University of Singapore 2 Department of Applied Mathematics,
Hong Kong Polytechnic University 3 Department of Mathematics,
National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Yancheng
Yuan <yuanyancheng@u.nus.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

which is not available in many real applications. Therefore, in real applications, k-means is typically tried with
different cluster numbers and the user will then decide on
a suitable value based on his judgment on which computed
result agrees best with his domain knowledge or experience.
Obviously, such a process could make the clustering results
subjective.
In order to overcome the above issues, a new clustering model has been proposed recently (Lindsten et al.,
2011; Hocking et al., 2011) which is generally more robust comparing to those traditional ones. Let A ∈ Rd×n =
[a1 , a2 , · · · , an ] be a given data matrix with n observations
and d features. Convex clustering model for these n observations solves the following convex optimization problem:
n
X
1X
kxi − ai k2 + γ
kxi − xj kq ,
X∈Rd×n 2
i=1
i<j

min

(1)

where k · k denotes the 2-norm, and X = [x1 , . . . , xn ]. The
q-norm k · kq above with q ≥ 1 ensures the convexity of the
model. The popular choices of q are q ∈ {1, 2, ∞}. In this
paper, we focus on q = 2. After solving (1) and obtaining
the optimal solution X ∗ , ai and aj belong to the same cluster if and only if x∗i = x∗j . In other words, x∗i is the centroid
for observation ai . (Here we used the word “centroid” to
mean the approximate one associated with ai but not the
final centroid of the cluster to which ai belongs to.) The
idea behind this model is that if two input observations ai
and aj belong to same cluster, then their corresponding centroids x∗i and x∗j should be the same. The first term in (1) is
the fidelity term. The second term is the regularization term
to penalize the difference between different centroids and
enforce the property that centroids for observations in the
same cluster should be identical.
The advantages of convex clustering lie mainly in two aspects. First, since the clustering model (1) is strongly convex, the optimal solution for a given positive γ is unique
and is more easily obtainable than traditional clustering algorithms like K-means. Second, instead of requiring the
prior knowledge of the cluster number, we can generate a
clustering path via solving (1) for a sequence of positive
values of γ.
To handle cluster recovery for large-scale data sets, various
researchers, e.g., (Pelckmans et al., 2005; Lindsten et al.,
2011; Hocking et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2014; Tan & Wit-

