Predict and Constrain: Modeling Cardinality in Deep Structured Prediction

Nataly Brukhim 1 Amir Globerson 1

Abstract
Many machine learning problems require the prediction of multi-dimensional labels. Such structured prediction models can benefit from modeling dependencies between labels. Recently, several deep learning approaches to structured prediction have been proposed. Here we focus on
capturing cardinality constraints in such models.
Namely, constraining the number of non-zero labels that the model outputs. Such constraints have
proven very useful in previous structured prediction approaches, but it is a challenge to introduce
them into a deep learning framework. Here we
show how to do this via a novel deep architecture. Our approach outperforms strong baselines,
achieving state-of-the-art results on multi-label
classification benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Deep structured prediction models have attracted considerable interest in recent years (Belanger et al. 2017; Zheng
et al. 2015; Schwing & Urtasun 2015; Chen et al. 2015;
Ma & Hovy 2016). The goal in the structured prediction
setting is to predict multiple labels simultaneously while
utilizing dependencies between labels to improve accuracy.
Examples of such application domains include dependency
parsing of text and semantic image segmentation.
Several recent approaches have proposed to combine the
representational power of deep neural networks with the
ability of structured prediction models to capture label dependence. This concept has been shown to be effective for
various applications (Zheng et al. 2015; Schwing & Urtasun
2015; Ma & Hovy 2016; Belanger et al. 2017). However,
there are still many important label dependency structures
which are not fully captured by these approaches.
One of the most effective forms of label dependencies is
1

Tel Aviv University, Blavatnik School of Computer Science.
Correspondence to: Nataly Brukhim <natalybr@mail.tau.ac.il>,
Amir Globerson <gamir@post.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

cardinality (Tarlow et al. 2012; Tarlow et al. 2010; Milch
et al. 2008; Swersky et al. 2012; Gupta et al. 2007). Namely,
the fact that the overall number of labels taking a specific
value has a distribution specific to the domain. For example,
in natural language processing, they can express a constraint
on the number of occurrences of a part-of-speech (e.g., that
each sentence contains at least one verb (Ganchev et al.,
2010)). In computer vision, a cardinality potential can encode a prior distribution over object sizes in an image.
Although cardinality potentials have been very effective
in many structured prediction works, they have not yet
been successfully integrated into deep structured prediction
frameworks. This is precisely the goal of our work.
The challenge in modeling cardinality in deep learning is
that cardinality is essentially a combinatorial notion, and
it is thus not clear how to integrate it into a differentiable
model. Our proposal to achieve this goal is based on two
key observations.
First, we note that learning to predict how many labels are
active for a given input is easier than predicting which labels
are active. Hence, we break our inference process into two
complementary components: we first estimate the label
cardinality for a given input using a learned neural network,
and then predict a label that satisfies this constraint.
The second observation is that constraining a label to satisfy a cardinality constraint can be approximated via projected gradient descent, where the cardinality constraint
corresponds to a set of linear constraints. Thus, the overall
label prediction architecture performs projected gradient
descent in label space. Moreover, the above projection can
be implemented via sorting, and results in an end-to-end
differentiable architecture which can be directly optimized
to maximize any performance measure (e.g., F1 , recall at
K, etc.). Importantly, with this approach cardinality can be
naturally integrated with other higher-order scores, such as
the global scores considered in Belanger & McCallum 2016,
and used in our model as well.
Our proposed method significantly improves prediction accuracy on several datasets, when compared to recent deep
structured prediction methods. We also experiment with
other approaches for modeling cardinality in deep structured prediciton, and observe that our Predict and Constrain

