Gated Path Planning Networks
Lisa Lee * 1 Emilio Parisotto * 1 Devendra Singh Chaplot 1 Eric Xing 1 Ruslan Salakhutdinov 1

Abstract
Value Iteration Networks (VINs) are effective differentiable path planning modules that can be
used by agents to perform navigation while still
maintaining end-to-end differentiability of the entire architecture. Despite their effectiveness, they
suffer from several disadvantages including training instability, random seed sensitivity, and other
optimization problems. In this work, we reframe
VINs as recurrent-convolutional networks which
demonstrates that VINs couple recurrent convolutions with an unconventional max-pooling activation. From this perspective, we argue that
standard gated recurrent update equations could
potentially alleviate the optimization issues plaguing VIN. The resulting architecture, which we
call the Gated Path Planning Network, is shown
to empirically outperform VIN on a variety of
metrics such as learning speed, hyperparameter
sensitivity, iteration count, and even generalization. Furthermore, we show that this performance
gap is consistent across different maze transition
types, maze sizes and even show success on a
challenging 3D environment, where the planner
is only provided with first-person RGB images.

1. Introduction
A common type of sub-task that arises in various reinforcement learning domains is path finding: finding a shortest set
of actions to reach a subgoal from some starting state. Path
finding is a fundamental part of any application which requires navigating in an environment, such as robotics (Ackerman & Guizzo, 2015) and video game AI (Silver, 2005).
Due to its ubiquity in these important applications, recent
work (Tamar et al., 2017) has designed a differentiable submodule that performs path-finding as directed by the agent
in some inner loop. These Value Iteration Network (VIN)
*

Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University, Machine Learning Department. Correspondence to: Lisa Lee
<lslee@cs.cmu.edu>, Emilio Parisotto <eparisot@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

modules mimic the application of Value Iteration on a 2D
grid world, but without a pre-specified model or reward
function. VINs were shown to be capable of computing
near-optimal paths in 2D mazes and 3D landscapes where
the transition model P (s0 |s, a) was not provided a priori
and had to be learned.
In this paper, we show that VINs are often plagued by
training instability, oscillating between high and low performance between epochs; random seed sensitivity, often
converging to different performances depending on the random seed that was used; and hyperparameter sensitivity,
where relatively small changes in hyperparameters can cause
diverging behaviour. Owing to these optimization difficulties, we reframe the VIN as a recurrent-convolutional
network, which enables us to replace the unconventional
recurrent VIN update (convolution & max-pooling) with
well-established gated recurrent operators such as the LSTM
update (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997). These Gated
Path Planning Networks (GPPNs) are a more general model
that relaxes the architectural inductive bias of VINs that
was designed to perform a computation resembling valueiteration.
We then establish empirically that GPPNs perform better
or equal to the performance of VINs on a wide variety of
2D maze experiments, including different transition models,
maze sizes and different training dataset sizes. We further
demonstrate that GPNNs exhibit fewer optimization issues
than VINs, including reducing random seed and hyperparameter sensitivity and increasing training stability. GPPNs
are also shown to work with larger kernel sizes, often outperforming VINs with significantly fewer recurrent iterations,
and also learn faster on average and generalize better given
less training samples. Finally, we present results for both
VIN and GPPN on challenging 3D ViZDoom environments
(Kempka et al., 2016), where the planner is only provided
with first-person RGB images instead of the top-down 2D
maze design.

2. Background
In reinforcement learning, the environment is formulated
as a Markov decision process (MDP) consisting of states
s, actions a, a reward function R, and state transition
kernels P (s0 | s, a). Value iteration is a method of

