On the Optimization of Deep Networks:
Implicit Acceleration by Overparameterization

Sanjeev Arora 1 2 Nadav Cohen 2 Elad Hazan 1 3

Abstract
Conventional wisdom in deep learning states that
increasing depth improves expressiveness but
complicates optimization. This paper suggests
that, sometimes, increasing depth can speed up
optimization. The effect of depth on optimization
is decoupled from expressiveness by focusing on
settings where additional layers amount to overparameterization – linear neural networks, a wellstudied model. Theoretical analysis, as well as
experiments, show that here depth acts as a preconditioner which may accelerate convergence.
Even on simple convex problems such as linear
regression with `p loss, p > 2, gradient descent
can benefit from transitioning to a non-convex
overparameterized objective, more than it would
from some common acceleration schemes. We
also prove that it is mathematically impossible to
obtain the acceleration effect of overparametrization via gradients of any regularizer.

1. Introduction
How does depth help? This central question of deep learning still eludes full theoretical understanding. The general
consensus is that there is a trade-off: increasing depth improves expressiveness, but complicates optimization. Superior expressiveness of deeper networks, long suspected, is
now confirmed by theory, albeit for fairly limited learning
problems (Eldan & Shamir, 2015; Raghu et al., 2016; Lee
et al., 2017; Cohen et al., 2017; Daniely, 2017; Arora et al.,
2018). Difficulties in optimizing deeper networks have also
been long clear – the signal held by a gradient gets buried
as it propagates through many layers. This is known as
the “vanishing/exploding gradient problem”. Modern techniques such as batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015)
and residual connections (He et al., 2015) have somewhat
alleviated these difficulties in practice.
1
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ, USA 2 School of Mathematics, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ, USA 3 Google Brain, USA. Correspondence to: Nadav Cohen <cohennadav@ias.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Given the longstanding consensus on expressiveness vs. optimization trade-offs, this paper conveys a rather counterintuitive message: increasing depth can accelerate optimization. The effect is shown, via first-cut theoretical and
empirical analyses, to resemble a combination of two wellknown tools in the field of optimization: momentum, which
led to provable acceleration bounds (Nesterov, 1983); and
adaptive regularization, a more recent technique proven to
accelerate by Duchi et al. (2011) in their proposal of the
AdaGrad algorithm. Explicit mergers of both techniques
are quite popular in deep learning (Kingma & Ba, 2014;
Tieleman & Hinton, 2012). It is thus intriguing that merely
introducing depth, with no other modification, can have a
similar effect, but implicitly.
There is an obvious hurdle in isolating the effect of depth
on optimization: if increasing depth leads to faster training on a given dataset, how can one tell whether the improvement arose from a true acceleration phenomenon, or
simply due to better representational power (the shallower
network was unable to attain the same training loss)? We
respond to this hurdle by focusing on linear neural networks
(cf. Saxe et al. (2013); Goodfellow et al. (2016); Hardt &
Ma (2016); Kawaguchi (2016)). With these models, adding
layers does not alter expressiveness; it manifests itself only
in the replacement of a matrix parameter by a product of
matrices – an overparameterization.
We provide a new analysis of linear neural network optimization via direct treatment of the differential equations
associated with gradient descent when training arbitrarily
deep networks on arbitrary loss functions. We find that the
overparameterization introduced by depth leads gradient
descent to operate as if it were training a shallow (single
layer) network, while employing a particular preconditioning scheme. The preconditioning promotes movement along
directions already taken by the optimization, and can be seen
as an acceleration procedure that combines momentum with
adaptive learning rates. Even on simple convex problems
such as linear regression with `p loss, p > 2, overparameterization via depth can significantly speed up training.
Surprisingly, in some of our experiments, not only did overparameterization outperform naı̈ve gradient descent, but it
was also faster than two well-known acceleration methods –
AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011) and AdaDelta (Zeiler, 2012).

