Out-of-sample extension of graph adjacency spectral embedding

Keith Levin 1 Farbod Roosta-Khorasani 2 3 Michael W. Mahoney 3 4 Carey E. Priebe 5

Abstract
Many popular dimensionality reduction procedures have out-of-sample extensions, which allow
a practitioner to apply a learned embedding to observations not seen in the initial training sample.
In this work, we consider the problem of obtaining an out-of-sample extension for the adjacency
spectral embedding, a procedure for embedding
the vertices of a graph into Euclidean space. We
present two different approaches to this problem,
one based on a least-squares objective and the
other based on a maximum-likelihood formulation. We show that if the graph of interest is
drawn according to a certain latent position model
called a random dot product graph, then both of
these out-of-sample extensions estimate the true
latent position of the out-of-sample vertex with
the same error rate. Further, we prove a central
limit theorem for the least-squares-based extension, showing that the estimate is asymptotically
normal about the truth in the large-graph limit.

1. Introduction
Given a graph G = (V, E) on n vertices with adjacency
matrix A ∈ {0, 1}n×n , the problem of graph embedding
is to map the vertices of G to some d-dimensional vector
space S in such a way that geometry in S reflects the topology of G. For example, we may ask that vertices with high
conductance in G be assigned to nearby vectors in S. This
is a special case of the problem of dimensionality reduction,
well-studied in machine learning and related disciplines
(van der Maaten et al., 2009). When applied to graph data,
each vertex in G is described by an n-dimensional binary
1

Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, USA.
School of Mathematics and Physics, University of Queensland,
Australia. 3 International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley,
USA. 4 Department of Statistics, University of California at Berkeley, USA. 5 Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics,
Johns Hopkins University, USA. Correspondence to: Keith Levin
<klevin@umich.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

vector, namely its corresponding column (or row) in adjacency matrix A ∈ {0, 1}n×n , and we wish to associate
with each vertex v ∈ V a lower-dimensional representation,
say xv ∈ S. The two most commonly-used approaches
for graph embeddings are the graph Laplacian embedding
and its variants (Belkin & Niyogi, 2003; Coifman & Lafon,
2006) and the adjacency spectral embedding (ASE, Sussman
et al., 2012). Both of these embedding procedures produce
low-dimensional representations of the vertices in a graph
G, and the question of “which embedding is preferable?” is
dependent on the downstream task. Indeed, one can show
that neither embedding dominates the other for the purposes
of vertex classification; see, for example, Section 4.3 of
Tang & Priebe (to appear). In addition, the results in Section
4.3 of Tang & Priebe (to appear) suggest that ASE performs
better than the Laplacian eigenmaps embedding for graphs
that exhibit a core-periphery structure. Such structures are
ubiquitous in real networks, such as those arising in social
and biological sciences (Jeub et al., 2015; Leskovec et al.,
2009).
The ASE and Laplacian embedding differ in that the latter
has received far more attention, especially with respect to
questions of limit objects (Hein et al., 2005) and out-ofsample extensions (Bengio et al., 2003). The aim of this
paper is to establish theoretical foundations for the latter
of these two problems in the case of the adjacency spectral
embedding.

2. Background and Notation
In the standard out-of-sample (OOS) extension, we are presented with training data D = {z1 , z2 , . . . , zn } ⊆ X , where
X is the set of possible observations. The data D give rise
to a symmetric matrix M = [K(zi , zj )] ∈ Rn×n , where
K : X × X → R≥0 is a kernel function that measures
similarity between elements of X , so that K(y, z) is large if
y, z ∈ X are similar, and is small otherwise. Suppose that
we have computed an embedding of the data D. Let us denote this embedding by X ∈ Rn×d , so that the embedding
of zi ∈ D is given by the i-th row of X. Suppose that we
are given an additional observation z ∈ X , not necessarily
included in D, and we wish to embed z under the same
scheme as was used to produce X. A naı̈ve approach would
be to discard the old embedding X, consider the augmented

