Randomized Block Cubic Newton Method
Nikita Doikov 1 Peter Richtárik 2 3 4
where Q ⊆ RN is a closed convex set, and g, φ and ψ are
convex functions with different smoothness and structural
properties. Our aim is to capitalize on these different properties in the design of our algorithm. We assume that g has
Lipschitz gradient1 , φ has Lipschitz Hessian, while ψ is
allowed to be nonsmooth, albeit “simple”.

Abstract
We study the problem of minimizing the sum of
three convex functions—a differentiable, twicedifferentiable and a non-smooth term—in a high
dimensional setting. To this effect we propose
and analyze a randomized block cubic Newton
(RBCN) method, which in each iteration builds
a model of the objective function formed as the
sum of the natural models of its three components: a linear model with a quadratic regularizer for the differentiable term, a quadratic model
with a cubic regularizer for the twice differentiable term, and perfect (proximal) model for the
nonsmooth term. Our method in each iteration
minimizes the model over a random subset of
blocks of the search variable. RBCN is the first
algorithm with these properties, generalizing several existing methods, matching the best known
bounds
√ in all special cases. We establish O(1/),
O(1/ ) and O(log(1/)) rates under different
assumptions on the component functions. Lastly,
we show numerically that our method outperforms
the state of the art on a variety of machine learning
problems, including cubically regularized leastsquares, logistic regression with constraints, and
Poisson regression.

1.1. Block Structure
Moreover, we assume that the N coordinates of
Px are partitioned into n blocks of sizes N1 , . . . , Nn , with i Ni = N ,
and then write x = (x(1) , . . . , x(n) ), where x(i) ∈ RNi .
This block structure is typically dictated by the particular
application considered. Once the block structure is fixed,
we further
that φ and ψ are block
Passume
Pn separable. That is,
n
φ(x) = i=1 φi (x(i) ) and ψ(x) = i=1 ψi (x(i) ), where
φi are twice differentiable with Lipschitz Hessians, and ψi
are closed convex (and possibly nonsmooth) functions.
Revealing this block structure, problem (1) takes the form
def

min F (x) = g(x) +
x∈Q

i=1

φi (x(i) ) +

n
X

ψi (x(i) ).

(2)

i=1

We are specifically interested in the case when n is big, in
which case it make sense to update a small number of the
block in each iteration only.
1.2. Related Work

1. Introduction
In this paper we develop an efficient randomized algorithm
for solving an optimization problem of the form
def

min F (x) = g(x) + φ(x) + ψ(x),
x∈Q

n
X

(1)

1
National Research University Higher School of Economics, Samsung-HSE Laboratory, Moscow, Russia 2 King
Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal,
Saudi Arabia 3 University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United
Kingdom 4 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia.
Correspondence to: Nikita
Doikov <nikita.doikov@gmail.com>, Peter Richtárik <peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa, peter.richtarik@ed.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

There has been a substantial and growing volume of research
related to second-order and block-coordinate optimization.
In this part we briefly mention some of the papers most
relevant to the present work.
A major leap in second-order optimization theory was
made since the cubic Newton method was proposed by
Griewank (1981) and independently rediscovered by Nesterov & Polyak (2006), who also provided global complexity
guarantees.
Cubic regularization was equipped with acceleration by Nesterov (2008), adaptive stepsizes by (Cartis et al., 2011a;b)
and extended to a universal framework by Grapiglia & Nesterov (2017). The universal schemes can automatically
1
Our assumption is bit more general than this; see Assumptions 1, 2 for details.

