Disentangling by Factorising

Hyunjik Kim 1 2 Andriy Mnih 1

VAE

Abstract
We define and address the problem of unsupervised learning of disentangled representations on
data generated from independent factors of variation. We propose FactorVAE, a method that disentangles by encouraging the distribution of representations to be factorial and hence independent
across the dimensions. We show that it improves
upon β-VAE by providing a better trade-off between disentanglement and reconstruction quality.
Moreover, we highlight the problems of a commonly used disentanglement metric and introduce
a new metric that does not suffer from them.

1. Introduction
Learning interpretable representations of data that expose
semantic meaning has important consequences for artificial
intelligence. Such representations are useful not only for
standard downstream tasks such as supervised learning and
reinforcement learning, but also for tasks such as transfer
learning and zero-shot learning where humans excel but
machines struggle (Lake et al., 2016). There have been
multiple efforts in the deep learning community towards
learning factors of variation in the data, commonly referred
to as learning a disentangled representation. While there is
no canonical definition for this term, we adopt the one due
to Bengio et al. (2013): a representation where a change
in one dimension corresponds to a change in one factor
of variation, while being relatively invariant to changes in
other factors. In particular, we assume that the data has
been generated from a fixed number of independent factors
of variation.3 We focus on image data, where the effect of
factors of variation is easy to visualise.
Using generative models has shown great promise in learning disentangled representations in images. Notably, semi1
DeepMind, UK 2 Department of Statistics, University
of Oxford.
Correspondence to: Hyunjik Kim <hyunjikk@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).
3
We discuss the limitations of this assumption in Section 4.

randomly permute
each dimension
across batch

+

Discriminator

Input

FactorVAE objective = VAE objective -

Cross-entropy loss
for classifying samples
from each class
- encouraging
to
be factorised

cross-entropy loss

Figure 1. Architecture of FactorVAE, a Variational Autoencoder
(VAE) that encourages the code distribution to be factorial. The
top row is a VAE with convolutional encoder and decoder, and
the bottom row is an MLP classifier, the discriminator, that distinguishes whether the input was drawn from the marginal code
distribution or the product of its marginals.

supervised approaches that require implicit or explicit
knowledge about the true underlying factors of the data have
excelled at disentangling (Kulkarni et al., 2015; Kingma
et al., 2014; Reed et al., 2014; Siddharth et al., 2017; Hinton
et al., 2011; Mathieu et al., 2016; Goroshin et al., 2015; Hsu
et al., 2017; Denton & Birodkar, 2017). However, ideally
we would like to learn these in an unsupervised manner, due
to the following reasons: 1. Humans are able to learn factors
of variation unsupervised (Perry et al., 2010). 2. Labels are
costly as obtaining them requires a human in the loop. 3.
Labels assigned by humans might be inconsistent or leave
out the factors that are difficult for humans to identify.
β-VAE (Higgins et al., 2016) is a popular method for unsupervised disentangling based on the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) framework (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende
et al., 2014) for generative modelling. It uses a modified version of the VAE objective with a larger weight (β > 1) on
the KL divergence between the variational posterior and the
prior, and has proven to be an effective and stable method
for disentangling. One drawback of β-VAE is that reconstruction quality (compared to VAE) must be sacrificed
in order to obtain better disentangling. The goal of our
work is to obtain a better trade-off between disentanglement
and reconstruction, allowing to achieve better disentanglement without degrading reconstruction quality. In this work,
we analyse the source of this trade-off and propose FactorVAE, which augments the VAE objective with a penalty that

