Fast Bellman Updates for Robust MDPs

Chin Pang Ho 1 * Marek Petrik 2 * Wolfram Wiesemann 1 *

Abstract
We describe two efficient, and exact, algorithms
for computing Bellman updates in robust Markov
decision processes (MDPs). The first algorithm
uses a homotopy continuation method to compute
updates for L1 -constrained s, a-rectangular ambiguity sets. It runs in quasi-linear time for plain L1
norms and also generalizes to weighted L1 norms.
The second algorithm uses bisection to compute
updates for robust MDPs with s-rectangular ambiguity sets. This algorithm, when combined with
the homotopy method, also has a quasi-linear runtime. Unlike previous methods, our algorithms
compute the primal solution in addition to the optimal objective value, which makes them useful
in policy iteration methods. Our experimental results indicate that the proposed methods are over
1,000 times faster than Gurobi, a state-of-the-art
commercial optimization package, for small instances, and the performance gap grows considerably with problem size.

1. Introduction
Markov decision processes (MDPs) provide a versatile
methodology for modeling dynamic decision problems under uncertainty (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996; Sutton &
Barto, 1998; Puterman, 2005). By assuming that transition probabilities and rewards are known precisely, however,
MDPs are sensitive to model and sample errors. In recent years, the reinforcement learning literature has studied
robust MDPs (RMDPs), which assume that the transition
probabilities and/or rewards are uncertain and can take on
any plausible value from a so-called ambiguity set (also
known as an uncertainty set) to mitigate the errors (Xu &
Mannor, 2006; 2009; Mannor et al., 2012; Petrik, 2012;
*

Equal contribution 1 Imperial College London 2 Department
of Computer Science, University of New Hampshire. Correspondence to: Chin Pang Ho <c.ho12@imperial.ac.uk>,
Marek Petrik <mpetrik@cs.unh.edu>, Wolfram Wiesemann
<ww@imperial.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Hanasusanto & Kuhn, 2013; Tamar et al., 2014; Delgado
et al., 2016; Petrik et al., 2016). RMDPs are reminiscent of
dynamic zero-sum games: the decision maker chooses the
best actions, while an adversarial nature chooses the worst
plausible transition probabilities.
The majority of the RMDP literature assumes that the ambiguity set is rectangular, in which case the analysis and
computation become particularly convenient (Iyengar, 2005;
Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2005; Le Tallec, 2007; Kaufman &
Schaefer, 2013; Wiesemann et al., 2013). RMDPs with rectangular ambiguity sets are optimized by stationary (that is,
history-independent) policies, and they satisfy a robust Bellman optimality equation which allows the optimal policy to
be computed using value or policy iteration in polynomial
time (Hansen et al., 2013). Polynomial time complexity is,
however, often insufficient. In all but the smallest RMDPs,
computing the worst-case realization of the transition probabilities involves solving at least a linear program (LP). The
runtime of LP solvers can grow cubically with the number of
states. Although modern LP solvers are very efficient, solving an LP to compute the Bellman update for each state and
iteration becomes prohibitively expensive even for problems
with only a few hundred states.
In this paper, we develop new algorithms that mitigate the
computational concerns for RMDPs with ambiguity sets
constrained by plain and weighted L1 norms. Such ambiguity sets are common in reinforcement learning and operations research for two main reasons (Iyengar, 2005; Strehl
et al., 2009; Jaksch et al., 2010; Petrik & Subramanian,
2014; Taleghan et al., 2015; Petrik et al., 2016). First, it
is easy to construct them from samples using Hoeffdingstyle bounds (Weissman et al., 2003). Second, they are
convenient to work with computationally, since the worst
transition probabilities can be computed using LPs.
Our main contributions are two efficient, and exact, algorithms for computing Bellman updates in RMDPs. The
first algorithm uses a homotopy continuation approach (Vanderbei, 2001) for RMDPs with so-called s, a-rectangular
ambiguity sets that are constrained by weighted L1 norms.
s, a-rectangular ambiguity sets assume that nature can observe the decision-maker’s actions before choosing the worst
plausible realization of the transition probabilities (Le Tallec, 2007; Wiesemann et al., 2013). Using these sets resem-

