Universal Planning Networks

Aravind Srinivas 1 Allan Jabri 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 Sergey Levine 1 Chelsea Finn 1

Abstract
A key challenge in complex visuomotor control
is learning abstract representations that are effective for specifying goals, planning, and generalization. To this end, we introduce universal planning networks (UPN). UPNs embed differentiable planning within a goal-directed policy. This planning computation unrolls a forward
model in a latent space and infers an optimal
action plan through gradient descent trajectory
optimization. The plan-by-gradient-descent process and its underlying representations are learned
end-to-end to directly optimize a supervised imitation learning objective. We find that the representations learned are not only effective for
goal-directed visual imitation via gradient-based
trajectory optimization, but can also provide a
metric for specifying goals using images. The
learned representations can be leveraged to specify distance-based rewards to reach new target
states for model-free reinforcement learning, resulting in substantially more effective learning
when solving new tasks described via imagebased goals. Visit https://sites.google.
com/view/upn-public/home for video
highlights.

1. Introduction
Learning visuomotor policies is a central pursuit in building machines capable of performing complex skills in the
variety of unstructured and dynamic environments seen in
the real world (Levine et al., 2016; Pinto et al., 2016). A
key challenge in learning such policies lies in acquiring
representations of the visual environment and its dynamics
that are suitable for control. This challenge arises both in
the construction of the policy itself and in the specification
of the task. Extrinsic and perfect reward signals are typi1
UC Berkeley, Computer Science. Correspondence to: Aravind
Srinivas <aravind@cs.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

GDP

improve plan

râ(i) L

i

plan

(i)

Lplan

optimized
actions

actions
latent
initial

forward dynamics

encoder

latent
end

latent
goal

improve model

r ,✓ Limitate
expert
actions

encoder

initial
obs.

Limitate

goal
obs.

(a) Universal Planning Network (UPN)
Demonstrations for training tasks
learn UPN representations

U P N✓,

derive reward functions
from learned metric

Reinforcement learning on harder tasks

(b) Leveraging learned latent representations
Figure 1. An overview of the UPN, which embeds a gradient descent planner (GDP) in the action-selection process. We demonstrate transfer to different, harder control tasks, including morphological (yellow point robot to ant) and topological (3-link to 7-link
reacher) variants, as shown above.

cally not available for real world reinforcement learning and
users must manually specify tasks via hand-crafted rewards
with hand-crafted representations. To automate this process,
some prior methods have proposed to specify tasks by providing an image of the goal scene (Deguchi & Takahashi,
1999; Watter et al., 2015; Finn et al., 2016b). However, a
reward that measures success based on matching the raw
pixels of the goal image is far from ideal: such a reward
is both uninformative and overconstrained, since matching
all pixels is usually not required for succeeding in tasks. If
we can automatically identify the right representation, we
can both accelerate the policy learning process and simplify
the specification of tasks via goal images. Prior work in
visual representation learning for planning and control has
relied predominantly on unsupervised or self-supervised
objectives (Watter et al., 2015; Finn et al., 2016b), which in
principle only provide an indirect connection to the utility

