Learning Representations and Generative Models for 3D Point Clouds

Panos Achlioptas 1 Olga Diamanti 1 Ioannis Mitliagkas 2 Leonidas Guibas 1

Abstract
Three-dimensional geometric data offer an excellent domain for studying representation learning
and generative modeling. In this paper, we look
at geometric data represented as point clouds. We
introduce a deep AutoEncoder (AE) network with
state-of-the-art reconstruction quality and generalization ability. The learned representations
outperform existing methods on 3D recognition
tasks and enable shape editing via simple algebraic manipulations, such as semantic part editing, shape analogies and shape interpolation, as
well as shape completion. We perform a thorough
study of different generative models including
GANs operating on the raw point clouds, significantly improved GANs trained in the fixed latent
space of our AEs, and Gaussian Mixture Models
(GMMs). To quantitatively evaluate generative
models we introduce measures of sample fidelity
and diversity based on matchings between sets
of point clouds. Interestingly, our evaluation of
generalization, fidelity and diversity reveals that
GMMs trained in the latent space of our AEs yield
the best results overall.

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional (3D) representations of real-life objects
are a core tool for vision, robotics, medicine, augmented
reality and virtual reality applications. Recent attempts
to encode 3D geometry for use in deep learning include
view-based projections, volumetric grids and graphs. In this
work, we focus on the representation of 3D point clouds.
Point clouds are becoming increasingly popular as a homogeneous, expressive and compact representation of surfacebased geometry, with the ability to represent geometric details while taking up little space. Point clouds are partic1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, USA
MILA, Department of Computer Science and Operations Research, University of Montréal, Canada. Correspondence to: Panos
Achlioptas <optas@cs.stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

ularly amenable to simple geometric operations and are
a standard 3D acquisition format used by range-scanning
devices like LiDARs, the Kinect or iPhone’s face ID feature.
All the aforementioned encodings, while effective in their
target tasks (e.g. rendering or acquisition), are hard to manipulate directly in their raw form. For example, naı̈vely
interpolating between two cars in any of those representations does not yield a representation of an “intermediate” car.
Furthermore, these representations are not well suited for
the design of generative models via classical statistical methods. Using them to edit and design new objects involves the
construction and manipulation of custom, object-specific
parametric models, that link the semantics to the representation. This process requires significant expertise and effort.
Deep learning brings the promise of a data-driven approach.
In domains where data is plentiful, deep learning tools have
eliminated the need for hand-crafting features and models.
Architectures like AutoEncoders (AEs) (Rumelhart et al.,
1988; Kingma & Welling, 2013) and Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Radford et al.;
Che et al., 2016) are successful at learning data representations and generating realistic samples from complex underlying distributions. However, an issue with GAN-based
generative pipelines is that training them is notoriously hard
and unstable (Salimans et al., 2016). In addition, and perhaps more importantly, there is no universally accepted
method for the evaluation of generative models.
In this paper, we explore the use of deep architectures for
learning representations and introduce the first deep generative models for point clouds. Only a handful of deep
architectures tailored to 3D point clouds exist in the literature, and their focus is elsewhere: they either aim at
classification and segmentation (Qi et al., 2016a; 2017), or
use point clouds only as an intermediate or output representation (Kalogerakis et al., 2016; Fan et al., 2016). Our
specific contributions are:
• A new AE architecture for point clouds—inspired by
recent architectures used for classification (Qi et al.,
2016a)—that can learn compact representations with
(i) good reconstruction quality on unseen samples; (ii)
good classification quality via simple methods (SVM),
outperforming the state of the art (Wu et al., 2016);
(iii) the capacity for meaningful semantic operations,

