Not to Cry Wolf:
Distantly Supervised Multitask Learning in Critical Care

Patrick Schwab 1 Emanuela Keller 2 Carl Muroi 2 David J. Mack 2 Christian Strässle 2 Walter Karlen 1

Abstract
Patients in the intensive care unit (ICU) require
constant and close supervision. To assist clinical
staff in this task, hospitals use monitoring systems that trigger audiovisual alarms if their algorithms indicate that a patient’s condition may
be worsening. However, current monitoring systems are extremely sensitive to movement artefacts and technical errors. As a result, they
typically trigger hundreds to thousands of false
alarms per patient per day - drowning the important alarms in noise and adding to the exhaustion
of clinical staff. In this setting, data is abundantly
available, but obtaining trustworthy annotations
by experts is laborious and expensive. We frame
the problem of false alarm reduction from multivariate time series as a machine-learning task and
address it with a novel multitask network architecture that utilises distant supervision through
multiple related auxiliary tasks in order to reduce
the number of expensive labels required for training. We show that our approach leads to significant improvements over several state-of-theart baselines on real-world ICU data and provide
new insights on the importance of task selection
and architectural choices in distantly supervised
multitask learning.

1. Introduction
False alarms are an enormous mental burden for clinical
staff and are extremely dangerous to patients, as alarm
fatigue and desensitisation may lead to clinically important
alarms being missed (Drew et al., 2014). Reportedly,
several hundreds of deaths a year are associated with false
alarms in patient monitoring in the United States alone
(Cvach, 2012).
1
Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Systems, ETH Zurich,
Switzerland 2 Neurocritical Care Unit, Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Patrick Schwab <patrick.schwab@hest.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Intracranial Pressure

Arterial Blood Pressure
Alarm
Pulse Oximetry

Relevant 

!
Artefact 

Electrocardiography

Figure 1. Schematic overview of the described problem setting in
critical care. Before an alarm is brought to the attention of clinical staff, an alarm classification algorithm could analyse a recent
window of the full set of available data streams in order to identify
whether the alarm was likely caused by an artefact or technical error and may therefore be reported with a lower degree of urgency.

An intelligent alarm classification system could potentially
reduce the burden of a large subset of those false alarms
by assessing which alarms were likely caused by either an
artefact or a technical error and reporting those alarms with
a lower degree of urgency (Figure 1). Roadblocks that have
so far prevented the adoption of machine learning for this
task are the heterogeneity of monitoring systems, the requirement for an extremely high specificity, to avoid suppressing important alarms, and the prohibitively high cost
associated with obtaining a representative set of clinically
validated labels for each of the manifold alarm types and
monitoring system configurations in use at hospitals.
We present a semi-supervised approach to false alarm reduction that automatically identifies and incorporates a
large amount of distantly supervised auxiliary tasks in order to significantly reduce the number of expensive labels
required for training. We demonstrate, on real-world ICU
data, that our approach is able to correctly classify alarms
originating from artefacts and technical errors better than
several state-of-the-art methods for semi-supervised learning when using just 25, 50 and 100 labelled samples. Besides their importance for clinical practice, our results highlight the power of distant multitask supervision as a flexible and effective tool for learning when unlabelled data are
readily available, and shed new light on semi-supervised
learning beyond low-resolution image benchmark datasets.

