Accelerating Greedy Coordinate Descent Methods

Haihao Lu 1 Robert M. Freund 2 Vahab Mirrokni 3

Abstract
We introduce and study two algorithms to accelerate greedy coordinate descent in theory and in
practice: Accelerated Semi-Greedy Coordinate
Descent (ASCD) and Accelerated Greedy Coordinate Descent (AGCD). On the theory side,
our main results are for ASCD: we show that
ASCD achieves O(1/k 2 ) convergence, and it
also achieves accelerated linear convergence for
strongly convex functions. On the empirical side,
while both AGCD and ASCD outperform Accelerated Randomized Coordinate Descent on most instances in our numerical experiments, we note that
AGCD significantly outperforms the other two
methods in our experiments, in spite of a lack of
theoretical guarantees for this method. To complement this empirical finding for AGCD, we present
an explanation why standard proof techniques for
acceleration cannot work for AGCD, and we introduce a technical condition under which AGCD
is guaranteed to have accelerated convergence.
Finally, we confirm that this technical condition
holds in our numerical experiments.

1. Introduction
Coordinate descent methods have received much-deserved
attention recently due to their capability for solving largescale optimization problems (with sparsity) that arise in
machine learning applications and elsewhere. With inexpensive updates at each iteration, coordinate descent algorithms
obtain faster running times than similar full gradient descent algorithms in order to reach the same near-optimality
tolerance; indeed some of these algorithms now comprise
the state-of-the-art in machine learning algorithms for loss
minimization.
Most recent research on coordinate descent has focused on
versions of randomized coordinate descent, which can es1

Department of Mathematics and Operations Research Center, MIT 2 Sloan School of Management, MIT 3 Google Research.
Correspondence to: Haihao Lu <haihao@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

sentially recover the same results (in expectation) as full
gradient descent, including obtaining “accelerated” (i.e.,
O(1/k 2 )) convergence guarantees. On the other hand, in
some important machine learning applications, greedy coordinate methods demonstrate superior numerical performance while also delivering much sparser solutions. For
example, greedy coordinate descent is one of the fastest
algorithms for the graphical LASSO implemented in DPGLASSO (Mazumder & Hastie, 2012). And sequence minimization optimization (SMO) (a variant of greedy coordinate descent) is widely known as the best solver for kernel
SVM (Joachims, 1999)(Platt, 1999) and is implemented in
LIBSVM and SVMLight.
In general, for smooth convex optimization the standard
first-order methods converge at a rate of O(1/k) (including
greedy coordinate descent). In 1983, Nesterov (Nesterov,
1983) proposed an algorithm that achieved a rate of O(1/k 2 )
– which can be shown to be the optimal rate achievable by
any first-order method (Nemirovsky & Yudin, 1983). This
method (and other similar methods) is now referred to as
Accelerated Gradient Descent (AGD).
However, there has not been much work on accelerating
the standard Greedy Coordinate Descent (GCD) due to the
inherent difficulty in demonstrating O(1/k 2 ) computational
guarantees (we discuss this difficulty further in Section 4.1).
The only work that might be close as far as the authors are
aware is (Song et al., 2017), which updates the z-sequence
using the full gradient and thus should not be considered as
a coordinate descent method in the standard sense.
In this paper, we study ways to accelerate greedy coordinate descent in theory and in practice. We introduce and
study two algorithms: Accelerated Semi-Greedy Coordinate Descent (ASCD) and Accelerated Greedy Coordinate
Descent (AGCD). While ASCD takes greedy steps in the
x-updates and randomized steps in the z-updates, AGCD is
a straightforward extension of GCD that only takes greedy
steps. On the theory side, our main results are for ASCD:
we show that ASCD achieves O(1/k 2 ) convergence, and
it also achieves accelerated linear convergence when the
objective function is furthermore strongly convex. However,
a direct extension of convergence proofs for ARCD does not
work for ASCD due to the different coordinates we use to
update x-sequence and z-sequence. Thus, we present a new

