Error Estimation for Randomized Least-Squares Algorithms via the Bootstrap
Miles E. Lopes 1 Shusen Wang 2 Michael W. Mahoney 2

Abstract
Over the course of the past decade, a variety of
randomized algorithms have been proposed for
computing approximate least-squares (LS) solutions in large-scale settings. A longstanding practical issue is that, for any given input, the user
rarely knows the actual error of an approximate
solution (relative to the exact solution). Likewise,
it is difficult for the user to know precisely how
much computation is needed to achieve the desired error tolerance. Consequently, the user often
appeals to worst-case error bounds that tend to
offer only qualitative guidance. As a more practical alternative, we propose a bootstrap method
to compute a posteriori error estimates for randomized LS algorithms. These estimates permit
the user to numerically assess the error of a given
solution, and to predict how much work is needed
to improve a “preliminary” solution. In addition,
we provide theoretical consistency results for the
method, which are the first such results in this
context (to the best of our knowledge). From a
practical standpoint, the method also has considerable flexibility, insofar as it can be applied to
several popular sketching algorithms, as well as
a variety of error metrics. Moreover, the extra
step of error estimation does not add much cost
to an underlying sketching algorithm. Finally, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of the method with
empirical results.

1. Introduction
Randomized sketching algorithms have been intensively
studied in recent years as a general approach to computing
fast approximate solutions to large-scale least-squares (LS)
problems (Drineas et al., 2006; Rokhlin & Tygert, 2008;
Avron et al., 2010; Drineas et al., 2011; Mahoney, 2011;
1

Department of Statistics, UC Davis 2 ICSI and Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley.
Correspondence to:
<melopes@ucdavis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Drineas et al., 2012; Clarkson & Woodruff, 2013; Woodruff,
2014; Ma et al., 2014; Meng et al., 2014; Pilanci & Wainwright, 2015; 2016). During this time, much progress has
been made in analyzing the performance of these algorithms,
and existing theory provides a good qualitative description
of approximation error (relative to the exact solution) in
terms of various problem parameters. However, in practice,
the user rarely knows the actual error of a randomized solution, or how much extra computation may be needed to
achieve a desired level of accuracy.
A basic source of this problem is that it is difficult to translate theoretical error bounds into numerical error bounds
that are tight enough to be quantitatively meaningful. For
instance, theoretical bounds are often formulated to hold
for the worst-case input among a large class of possible inputs. Consequently, they are often pessimistic for “generic”
problems, and they may not account for the structure that
is unique to the input at hand. Another practical issue is
that these bounds typically involve constants that are either conservative, unspecified, or dependent on unknown
parameters.
In contrast with worst-case error bounds, we are interested
in “a posteriori” error estimates. By this, we mean error
bounds that can be estimated numerically in terms of the
computed solution or other observable information. Although methods for obtaining a posteriori error estimates
are well-developed in some areas of computer science and
applied mathematics, there has been very little development
for randomized sketching algorithms (cf. Section 1.4). (For
brevity, we will usually omit the qualifier ‘a posteriori’ from
now on when referring to error estimation.)
The main purpose of this paper is to show that it is possible
to directly estimate the error of randomized LS solutions
in a way that is both practical and theoretically-justified.
Accordingly, we propose a flexible estimation method that
can enhance existing sketching algorithms in a variety of
ways. In particular, we will explain how error estimation
can help the user to (1) select the “sketch size” parameter,
(2) assess the convergence of iterative sketching algorithms,
and (3) measure error in a wider range of metrics than can
be handled by existing theory.

