Least-Squares Temporal Difference Learning for the Linear Quadratic
Regulator

Stephen Tu 1 Benjamin Recht 1

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been successfully used to solve many continuous control tasks.
Despite its impressive results however, fundamental questions regarding the sample complexity of
RL on continuous problems remain open. We
study the performance of RL in this setting by considering the behavior of the Least-Squares Temporal Difference (LSTD) estimator on the classic
Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) problem from
optimal control. We give the first finite-time analysis of the number of samples needed to estimate
the value function for a fixed static state-feedback
policy to within ε-relative error. In the process
of deriving our result, we give a general characterization for when the minimum eigenvalue of
the empirical covariance matrix formed along the
sample path of a fast-mixing stochastic process
concentrates above zero, extending a result by
Koltchinskii and Mendelson (2013) in the independent covariates setting. Finally, we provide
experimental evidence indicating that our analysis correctly captures the qualitative behavior of
LSTD on several LQR instances.

1. Introduction
Despite excellent performance on locomotion (Kober et al.,
2013; Levine & Koltun, 2014; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2016; Tedrake et al., 2004) and manipulation (Krishnan et al., 2017; Levine et al., 2016a;b; 2015) tasks,
model-free reinforcement learning (RL) is still considered
very data intensive. This is especially a problem for learning on robotic systems which requires human supervision,
limiting the applicability of RL. While there have been
various attempts to improve the sample efficiency of RL
in practice (Gu et al., 2017; 2016; Schaul et al., 2016), a
1
EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Stephen Tu <stephent@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

theoretical understanding of the issue is still an open question. A more rigorous foundation could help to differentiate
between whether RL suffers from fundamental statistical
limitations in the continuous setting, or if more sample efficient estimators are possible.
For continuous control tasks, the Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) is an ideal benchmark for studying RL, due to a
combination of its theoretical tractability combined with its
practical application in various engineering domains. Recent work by Dean et al. (2017) adopts this point of view,
and studies the problem of designing a stabilizing controller
for LQR when the system dynamics are unknown to the
practitioner. Here, the authors take a model-based approach,
and propose to directly estimate the state-transition matrices
that describe the dynamics from observations. In practice
however, model-free methods such as Q-learning or policygradient type algorithms are preferred over model-based
methods due to their flexibility and ease of use. This naturally raises the question of how well do model-free RL
methods perform on the LQR problem.
In this paper, we shed light on this question by focusing
on the classic Least-Squares Temporal Difference (LSTD)
estimator (Boyan, 1999; Bradtke & Barto, 1996). Given a
sample trajectory from a Markov Decision Process (MDP)
in feedback with a fixed policy π, LSTD computes the value
function V π associated to π. Estimating V π is the core
primitive in value and policy-iteration type algorithms (Sutton & Barto, 1998). The key property exploited by LSTD
is the linear-architecture assumption, which states that the
value function can be expressed as a linear function after
applying a known non-linear transformation to the state. To
the best of our knowledge, LQR is the simplest continuous
problem which exhibits this property.
Our main result regarding the LSTD estimator for LQR is
an upper bound on the necessary length of a single trajectory
to estimate the value function of a stabilizing state-feedback
policy. Letting n denote the dimension of the state and ignoring instance specific factors, we establish that roughly
n2 /ε2 samples are sufficient to estimate the value function
up to ε-relative error. Our analysis builds upon the work of
Lazaric et al. (2012), which requires bounding the minimum
eigenvalue of the sample covariance matrix formed by the

