Detecting non-causal artifacts in multivariate linear regression models

Dominik Janzing 1 Bernhard Schölkopf 2

Abstract
We consider linear models where d potential
causes X1 , . . . , Xd are correlated with one target
quantity Y and propose a method to infer whether
the association is causal or whether it is an artifact
caused by overfitting or hidden common causes.
We employ the idea that in the former case the
vector of regression coefficients has ‘generic’ orientation relative to the covariance matrix ΣXX of
X. Using an ICA based model for confounding,
we show that both confounding and overfitting
yield regression vectors that concentrate mainly
in the space of low eigenvalues of ΣXX .

1. Introduction
Inferring causal relations from passive observations data has
gained increasing interest in machine learning and statistics.
Although reliable causal conclusions can only be drawn
from interventional data, the idea of postulating assumptions that render causal inference from passive observations
feasible becomes more and more accepted. In addition to
the more ‘traditional’ causal Markov condition and causal
faithfulness assumption (Spirtes et al., 1993; Pearl, 2000), researchers have also stated assumptions that admit causal inference when no conditional statistical independences hold,
e.g., Kano & Shimizu (2003); Sun et al. (2006); Hoyer et al.
(2009); Zhang & Hyvärinen (2009); Bloebaum et al. (2018);
Marx & Vreeken (2017). Each of these method relies on
idealized assumptions that rarely hold in practice; nevertheless they can be useful if the methods possess a degree of
robustness regarding violation of model assumptions (Mooij
et al., 2016). In a similar vein, the present work considers a
causal inference problem that becomes solvable only under
an idealized model assumption that is certainly debatable.
However, it illustrates that high-dimensional observations
1
Amazon Development Center, Tübingen, Germany 2 Max
Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany. This
work has been done at the MPI before DJ joined Amazon. Correspondence to: Dominik Janzing <janzind@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Z
X

Z
Y

X

Z
Y

X

Y

Figure 1. Generic scenario where the statistical relation between
X and Y is due to an unobserved confounder Z and due to the
influence of X on Y . The purely confounded (middle) and the
purely causal (right) scenarios are obtained as limiting cases where
one of the arrows is negligible.

contain a kind of causal information that has not been employed so far.
We assume that we are given a scalar target variable Y that
is potentially influenced by a multi-dimensional predictor
variable X = (X1 , . . . , Xd ). Suppose that i.i.d. samples
from PX,Y show that X and Y are significantly correlated,
but it is unclear whether this is mainly due to the influence
of X on Y or due to a common cause of X and Y (here
we assume that prior knowledge excludes the case where
Y causally influences X, e.g, due to time order). Y may,
for instance, be a quantitiave property of a material (e.g.,
electrical resistence) and Xj some features describing its
chemical and physical structure. In biology, X and Y could
represent information about genotype and phenotype, respectively. Note that conditional independences allow to
decide which of the variables Xj influence Y , given that
the association between X and Y is unconfounded. The
question of unconfoundedness, which we address here, is
therefore prior to the former problem.
Figure 1, left, visualizes the generic scenario that we consider throughout the paper, where the statistical dependences
between X and Y are due to the influence of X on Y and
due to the common cause Z. It contains the purely confounded case (middle) as limiting case where the arrow
from X to Y is arbitrarily weak. Likewise, the purely causal
case is obtained when one of the arrows from Z gets weak
(right).
Our confounder detection is based on observing ‘nongeneric’ relations between PX and PY |X (Janzing &
Schölkopf, 2017). We thus follow the abstract principle
of independent mechanisms (Janzing & Schölkopf, 2010;
Lemeire & Janzing, 2012; Peters et al., 2017), stating that for
the purely causal relation X → Y of two arbitrary variables

