Semi-Implicit Variational Inference
Mingzhang Yin 1 Mingyuan Zhou 2

Abstract
Semi-implicit variational inference (SIVI) is introduced to expand the commonly used analytic
variational distribution family, by mixing the variational parameter with a flexible distribution. This
mixing distribution can assume any density function, explicit or not, as long as independent random samples can be generated via reparameterization. Not only does SIVI expand the variational
family to incorporate highly flexible variational
distributions, including implicit ones that have no
analytic density functions, but also sandwiches
the evidence lower bound (ELBO) between a
lower bound and an upper bound, and further derives an asymptotically exact surrogate ELBO that
is amenable to optimization via stochastic gradient ascent. With a substantially expanded variational family and a novel optimization algorithm,
SIVI is shown to closely match the accuracy of
MCMC in inferring the posterior in a variety of
Bayesian inference tasks.

1. Introduction
Variational inference (VI) is an optimization based method
that is widely used for approximate Bayesian inference. It
introduces variational distribution Q over the latent variables to approximate the posterior (Jordan et al., 1999),
and its stochastic version is scalable to big data (Hoffman
et al., 2013). VI updates the parameters of Q to move it
closer to the posterior in each iteration, where the closeness is in general measured by the Kullback–Leibler (KL)
divergence from the posterior to Q, minimizing which is
shown to be the same as maximizing the evidence lower
bound (ELBO) (Jordan et al., 1999). To make it simple to
climb the ELBO to a local optimum, one often takes the
1

Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, 2 Department
of IROM, McCombs School of Business, The University of
Texas at Austin, Austin TX 78712, USA. Correspondence
to: Mingzhang Yin <mzyin@utexas.edu>, Mingyuan Zhou
<mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

mean-field assumption that Q is factorized over the latent
variables. The optimization problem is further simplified if
each latent variable’s distribution is in the same exponential family as its prior, which allows exploiting conditional
conjugacy to derive closed-form coordinate-ascent update
equations (Bishop & Tipping, 2000; Blei et al., 2017).
Despite its popularity, VI has a well-known issue in underestimating the variance of the posterior, which is often
attributed to the mismatch between the representation power
of the variational family that Q is restricted to and the complexity of the posterior, and the use of KL divergence, which
is asymmetric, to measure how different Q is from the posterior. This issue is often further amplified in mean-field VI
(MFVI), due to the factorized assumption on Q that ignores
the dependencies between different factorization components (Wainwright et al., 2008; Blei et al., 2017). While
there exists a variety of methods that add some structure
back to Q to partially restore the dependencies (Saul & Jordan, 1996; Jaakkola & Jordan, 1998; Hoffman & Blei, 2015;
Giordano et al., 2015; Tran et al., 2015; 2016; Han et al.,
2016; Ranganath et al., 2016; Maaløe et al., 2016; Gregor
et al., 2015), it is still necessary for Q to have an analytic
probability density function (PDF).
To further expand the variational family that Q belongs
to, there has been significant recent interest in defining Q
with an implicit model, which makes the PDF of Q become
intractable (Huszár, 2017; Mohamed & Lakshminarayanan,
2016; Tran et al., 2017; Li & Turner, 2017; Mescheder et al.,
2017; Shi et al., 2017). While using an implicit model
could make Q more flexible, it makes it no longer possible
to directly computing the log density ratio, as required for
evaluating the ELBO. Thus, one often resorts to density ratio
estimation, which, however, not only adds an additional
level of complexity into each iteration of the optimization,
but also is known to be a very difficult problem, especially
in high-dimensional settings (Sugiyama et al., 2012).
To well characterize the posterior while maintaining simple
optimization, we introduce semi-implicit VI (SIVI) that imposes a mixing distribution on the parameters of the original
Q to expand the variational family with a semi-implicit hierarchical construction. The meaning of “semi-implicit” is
twofold: 1) the original Q distribution is required to have
an analytic PDF, but its mixing distribution is not subject to

