Bayesian Coreset Construction via Greedy Iterative Geodesic Ascent

Trevor Campbell 1 Tamara Broderick 1

Abstract
Coherent uncertainty quantification is a key
strength of Bayesian methods. But modern algorithms for approximate Bayesian posterior inference often sacrifice accurate posterior uncertainty
estimation in the pursuit of scalability. This work
shows that previous Bayesian coreset construction
algorithms—which build a small, weighted subset
of the data that approximates the full dataset—are
no exception. We demonstrate that these algorithms scale the coreset log-likelihood suboptimally, resulting in underestimated posterior uncertainty. To address this shortcoming, we develop greedy iterative geodesic ascent (GIGA), a
novel algorithm for Bayesian coreset construction
that scales the coreset log-likelihood optimally.
GIGA provides geometric decay in posterior approximation error as a function of coreset size,
and maintains the fast running time of its predecessors. The paper concludes with validation of
GIGA on both synthetic and real datasets, demonstrating that it reduces posterior approximation
error by orders of magnitude compared with previous coreset constructions.

1. Introduction
Bayesian methods provide a wealth of options for principled
parameter estimation and uncertainty quantification. But
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods (Robert &
Casella, 2004; Neal, 2011; Hoffman & Gelman, 2014), the
gold standard for Bayesian inference, typically have complexity Θ(N T ) for dataset size N and number of samples T
and are intractable for modern large-scale datasets. Scalable
methods (see (Angelino et al., 2016) for a recent survey),
on the other hand, often sacrifice the strong guarantees of
MCMC and provide unreliable posterior approximations.
For example, variational methods and their scalable and
1

Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States.
Correspondence to: Trevor Campbell <tdjc@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

streaming variants (Jordan et al., 1999; Wainwright & Jordan, 2008; Hoffman et al., 2013; Ranganath et al., 2014;
Broderick et al., 2013; Campbell & How, 2014; Campbell
et al., 2015; Dieng et al., 2017) are both susceptible to finding bad local optima in the variational objective and tend to
either over- or underestimate posterior variance depending
on the chosen discrepancy and variational family.
Bayesian coresets (Huggins et al., 2016; Campbell & Broderick, 2017) provide an alternative approach—based on the
observation that large datasets often contain redundant data—
in which a small subset of the data of size M  min{N, T }
is selected and reweighted such that it preserves the statistical properties of the full dataset. The coreset can be passed
to a standard MCMC algorithm, providing posterior inference with theoretical guarantees at a significantly reduced
O(M (N + T )) computational cost. But despite their advantages, existing Bayesian coreset constructions—like many
other scalable inference methods—tend to underestimate
posterior variance (Fig. 1). This effect is particularly evident when the coreset is small, which is the regime we are
interested in for scalable inference.
In this work, we show that existing Bayesian coreset constructions underestimate posterior uncertainty because they
scale the coreset log-likelihood suboptimally in order to
remain unbiased (Huggins et al., 2016) or to keep their
weights in a particular constraint polytope (Campbell &
Broderick, 2017). The result is an overweighted coreset
with too much “artificial data,” and therefore an overly certain posterior. Taking this intuition to its limit, we demonstrate that there exist models for which previous algorithms
output coresets with arbitrarily large relative posterior approximation error at any coreset size (Proposition 2.1). We
address this issue by developing a novel coreset construction
algorithm, greedy iterative geodesic ascent (GIGA), that optimally scales the coreset log-likelihood to best fit the full
dataset log-likelihood. GIGA has the same computational
complexity as the current state of the art, but its optimal
log-likelihood scaling leads to uniformly bounded relative
error for all models, as well as asymptotic exponential error
decay (Theorem 3.1 and Corollary 3.2). The paper concludes with experimental validation of GIGA on a synthetic
vector approximation problem as well as regression models
applied to multiple real and synthetic datasets.

