Yes, but Did It Work?: Evaluating Variational Inference

Yuling Yao 1 Aki Vehtari 2 Daniel Simpson 3 Andrew Gelman 1

Abstract
While it’s always possible to compute a variational approximation to a posterior distribution,
it can be difficult to discover problems with this
approximation. We propose two diagnostic algorithms to alleviate this problem. The Paretosmoothed importance sampling (PSIS) diagnostic
gives a goodness of fit measurement for joint distributions, while simultaneously improving the
error in the estimate. The variational simulationbased calibration (VSBC) assesses the average
performance of point estimates.

1. Introduction
Variational Inference (VI), including a large family of posterior approximation methods like stochastic VI (Hoffman
et al. 2013), black-box VI (Ranganath et al. 2014), automatic
differentiation VI (ADVI, Kucukelbir et al. 2017), and many
other variants, has emerged as a widely-used method for
scalable Bayesian inference. These methods come with few
theoretical guarantees and it’s difficult to assess how well
the computed variational posterior approximates the true
posterior.
Instead of computing expectations or sampling draws from
the posterior p(θ | y), variational inference fixes a family of approximate densities Q, and finds the member q ∗
minimizing the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence to the
true posterior: KL (q(θ), p(θ | y)) . This is equivalent to
maximizing the evidence lower bound (ELBO):
Z
ELBO(q) =
(log p(θ, y) − log q(θ)) q(θ)dθ. (1)
Θ

There are many situations where the VI approximation is
flawed. This can be due to the slow convergence of the
1

Department of Statistics, Columbia University, NY, USA
2
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology, Department of
Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland 3 Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto, Canada. Correspondence
to: Yuling Yao <yy2618@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

optimization problem, the inability of the approximation
family to capture the true posterior, the asymmetry of the
true distribution, the fact that the direction of the KL divergence under-penalizes approximation with too-light tails, or
all these reasons. We need a diagnostic algorithm to test
whether the VI approximation is useful.
There are two levels of diagnostics for variational inference.
First the convergence test should be able to tell if the objective function has converged to a local optimum. When
the optimization problem (1) is solved through stochastic
gradient descent (SGD), the convergence can be assessed
by monitoring the running average of ELBO changes. Researchers have introduced many convergence tests based on
the asymptotic property of stochastic approximations (e.g.,
Sielken, 1973; Stroup & Braun, 1982; Pflug, 1990; Wada &
Fujisaki, 2015; Chee & Toulis, 2017). Alternatively, Blei
et al. (2017) suggest monitoring the expected log predictive
density by holding out an independent test dataset. After
convergence, the optimum is still an approximation to the
truth. This paper is focusing on the second level of VI diagnostics whether the variational posterior q ∗ (θ) is close
enough to the true posterior p(θ|y) to be used in its place.
Purely relying on the objective function or the equivalent
ELBO does not solve the problem. An unknown multiplicative constant exists in p(θ, y) ∝ p(θ | y) that changes
with reparametrization, making it meaningless to compare
ELBO across two approximations. Moreover, the ELBO is
a quantity on an uninterpretable scale, that is it’s not clear at
what value of the ELBO we can begin to trust the variational
posterior. This makes it next to useless as a method to assess
how well the variational inference has fit.
In this paper we propose two diagnostic methods that assess,
respectively, the quality of the entire variational posterior for
a particular data set, and the average bias of a point estimate
produced under correct model specification.
The first method is based on generalized Pareto distribution
diagnostics used to assess the quality of a importance sampling proposal distribution in Pareto smoothed importance
sampling (PSIS, Vehtari et al., 2017). The benefit of PSIS
diagnostics is two-fold. First, we can tell the discrepancy
between the approximate and the true distribution by the
estimated continuous k̂ value. When it is larger than a prespecified threshold, users should be alert of the limitation

