Multicalibration: Calibration for the (Computationally-Identifiable) Masses

Úrsula Hébert-Johnson 1 Michael P. Kim 1 Omer Reingold 1 Guy N. Rothblum 2

Abstract
We develop and study multicalibration as a new
measure of fairness in machine learning that aims
to mitigate inadvertent or malicious discrimination that is introduced at training time (even from
ground truth data). Multicalibration guarantees
meaningful (calibrated) predictions for every subpopulation that can be identified within a specified
class of computations. The specified class can
be quite rich; in particular, it can contain many
overlapping subgroups of a protected group. We
demonstrate that in many settings this strong notion of protection from discrimination is provably
attainable and aligned with the goal of accurate
predictions. Along the way, we present algorithms
for learning a multicalibrated predictor, study the
computational complexity of this task, and illustrate tight connections to the agnostic learning
model.

1. Introduction
Machine-learned predictors are informing decisions that
affect all aspects of life; from news article recommendations to criminal sentencing decisions to healthcare diagnostics, increasingly algorithms are used to make predictions about individuals. A potential risk is that these predictors might discriminate against groups of individuals
that are protected by law or by ethics. Indeed, examples
of such unintended but harmful discrimination have been
well-documented across many learning tasks including image classification (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018) and natural
language tasks (Bolukbasi et al., 2016). This work aims
to mitigate such risks of algorithmic discrimination in the
context of prediction tasks.

a number of reasons. First, the training data may contain
biases that should be corrected. Second, the analysis of the
training data may inadvertently introduce biases that are not
borne out in the data. In this work, we focus on the latter
concern.
Indeed, even given accurate ground-truth training data, the
typical approach to supervised learning – choosing a model
that minimizes the expected loss on the training data – runs
the risk of choosing a prediction model that is good for
the majority population, but overlooks the minority populations. Consider the case where a financial institution
trains a model to predict the probability that applicants will
default on their loans. If on average, the individuals from
S are financially disadvantaged compared to the majority
population, the model may assign a fixed, low probability
to all i ∈ S, while still achieving good empirical loss by
predicting very accurately in the majority population. Such
a model discriminates against the qualified members of S.
Worse yet, this form of discrimination has the potential
to amplify S’s underrepresentation by refusing to approve
members that are capable of repaying the loan.
Focusing on such concerns, we develop a theoretical framework that aims to mitigate such risks of algorithmic discrimination, in the context of prediction tasks. Specifically,
we focus on a setting where a learner has access to a small
sample of ground truth data D from some domain of individuals X . Each individual i ∈ D has a boolean label
oi ∈ {0, 1} representing the outcome of a certain stochastic event (ad click, loan repayment, cancer diagnosis, etc.)
that the learner wishes to predict. We suppose that for each
i ∈ X , there is an underlying probability p∗i which governs
the distribution of the resulting outcome oi . We say a predictor f : X → [0, 1] is a map from individuals i ∈ X to an
estimate of the true parameters. Next, we discuss desirable
properties of predictors that motivate our new perspective
on fairness.

The output of a learning algorithm can be discriminatory for
1
Computer Science Department, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA 2 Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics,
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. Correspondence
to: Michael P. Kim <mpk@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Calibration and Multicalibration. If we do not want a
predictor f to downplay the fitness of a group S ⊆ X ,
we can require that it be
unbiased over
 (approximately)

S; namely, that Ei∼S fi − p∗i
≤ α, for some small
α ≥ 0. This means that the expectation of f and p∗
over S are almost identical. Calibration strengthens this
requirement by essentially asking that for any particular

