Understanding and Simplifying One-Shot Architecture Search
Gabriel Bender 1 Pieter-Jan Kindermans 1 Barret Zoph 1 Vijay Vasudevan 1 Quoc Le 1

Abstract
There is growing interest in automating neural
network architecture design. Existing architecture
search methods can be computationally expensive, requiring thousands of different architectures
to be trained from scratch. Recent work has explored weight sharing across models to amortize
the cost of training. Although previous methods
reduced the cost of architecture search by orders
of magnitude, they remain complex, requiring hypernetworks or reinforcement learning controllers.
We aim to understand weight sharing for one-shot
architecture search. With careful experimental
analysis, we show that it is possible to efficiently
identify promising architectures from a complex
search space without either hypernetworks or RL.

1. Introduction
Designing neural networks is a labor-intensive process that
requires a large amount of trial and error by experts. There
is growing interest in automating the search for good neural
network architectures (Zoph & Le, 2016; Baker et al., 2016;
Real et al., 2017). For instance, Zoph et al. (2017) show that
one can find an architecture that simultaneously achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the CIFAR-10, ImageNet,
and COCO datasets. However these search methods are
incredibly resource-hungry. Zoph et al. (2017) used 450
GPUs for four days in order to run a single experiment. They
proposed an RL-based approach in which a neural network
(the controller) enumerates a set of architectures to evaluate.
Each architecture is trained from scratch on CIFAR-10 for a
fixed number of epochs and then evaluated on a validation
set. The weights of the controller are subsequently updated
based on the validation accuracies of the trained models.
Training thousands of models is difficult or impossible for
a typical machine learning practitioner. To address this
weakness of architecture search, new methods have been
1
Google Brain, Mountain View, CA. Correspondence to:
Gabriel Bender <gbender@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Input
Legend
3x3

5x5
Sum

Max Pool

Edge on
Edge oﬀ

Figure 1. Example building block used in a one-shot model. The
search space contains three different operations; the one-shot
model adds their outputs together. Some of the operations are
removed or zeroed out at evaluation time.

proposed (Brock et al., 2017; Pham et al., 2018; Elsken
et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017a; Cai et al., 2017; Liu et al.,
2017b). One promising direction is sharing weights between
models (Brock et al., 2017; Pham et al., 2018): rather than
training thousands of separate models from scratch, one
can train a single large network capable of emulating any
architecture in the search space.
A simple example is shown in Figure 1, where we have
the option of applying either a 3x3 convolution, a 5x5 convolution, or a max-pooling layer at a particular position
in the network. Instead of training three separate models,
we can train a single model containing all three operations
(the one-shot model). We selectively zero out two of the
three operations’ outputs at evaluation time in order to determine which operation leads to the best prediction accuracy.
In more complex examples, a search space may include
choices at many different positions within a network. The
size of the search space grows exponentially with the number of choices, while the size of the one-shot model grows
only linearly. The same weights are used to evaluate many
different architectures, reducing the resources required to
run an architecture search by orders of magnitude.
Despite the improvements in efficiency, it is natural to wonder whether there are inherent limits to weight sharing across
models. Why should a heterogeneous set of architectures
be able to share a single set of weights? One-shot models
are typically only used to rank architectures in the search
space; the best-performing architectures are retrained from
scratch after the search is completed. But even with that restriction, the idea that a single fixed set of weights can work
well across a wide range of architectures is counterintuitive.
SMASH (Brock et al., 2017) tries to address this concern
by using a hypernetwork to generate a large fraction of the
weights in each candidate architecture. Efficient Neural

