Convergence guarantees for a class of
non-convex and non-smooth optimization problems

Koulik Khamaru 1 Martin J. Wainwright 1 2

Abstract
Non-convex optimization problems arise frequently in machine learning, including feature selection, structured matrix learning, mixture modeling, and neural network training. We consider the
problem of finding critical points of a broad class
of non-convex problems with non-smooth components. We analyze the behavior of two gradientbased methods—namely a sub-gradient method,
and a proximal method. Our main results are to
establish rates of convergence for general problems, and also exhibit faster rates for sub-analytic
functions. As an application of our theory, we
obtain a simplification of the popular CCCP algorithm, which retains all the desirable convergence
properties of the original method, along with a
significantly lower cost per iteration. We illustrate our methods and theory via application to
the problems of best subset selection, robust estimation and shape from shading reconstruction.

well as references therein. Accordingly, recent years have
witnessed an explosion of research on different algorithms
for non-convex problems, with the goal of trying to characterize the nature of their fixed points, and their convergence
properties.

1. Introduction

The most straightforward approach to obtaining a first-order
critical point is via gradient descent which can be shown,
under suitable regularity conditions and step size choices,
to compute (approximate) first-order critical points. Recently, Lee et al. (2016) showed that for twice continuously
differentiable smooth functions, gradient descent with random initializations converges to a second order stationary
solution almost surely. Despite the empirical success of
(sub)gradient-based methods in many non-convex problems,
an issue is that all the available theory applies to smooth
non-convex functions. In practice, many machine learning
problems have non-smooth components; examples include
the hinge loss in support vector machines, the rectified linear
unit in neural networks, and various types of matrix regularizers in collaborative filtering and recommender systems.
Accordingly, a natural goal is to develop subgradient-based
techniques that apply to a broader class of non-convex functions, allowing for non-smoothness.

Non-convex optimization problems arise frequently in statistical machine learning; examples include the use of nonconvex penalties for enforcing sparsity, non-convexity in
likelihoods in mixture modeling, and non-convexity in neural network training. Of course, minimizing a non-convex
problem is NP-hard in general, but in machine learning applications, it is often sufficient to find critical points that
are first-order (and possibly second-order) stationary. There
have been a number of recent papers demonstrating that
all first (and/or second) order critical points have desirable
properties for certain statistical problems; for instance, see
the papers (Loh & Wainwright, 2013; Ge et al., 2017) as

The main contribution of this paper is to provide precisely
such a set of techniques, along with non-asymptotic guarantees on their convergence rates. In particular, we study
algorithms that can be used to obtain first-order (and in
some cases, also second-order) optimal solutions to a relatively broad class of non-convex functions, allowing for
non-smoothness in certain portions of the problem. For
each sequence {xk }k≥0 generated by one of our algorithms,
we provide non-asymptotic bounds on the convergence rate
of the gradient sequence {k∇f (xk )k2 }k≥0 . Moreover, for
functions that satisfy a form of the Kurdaya-Łojasiewicz
inequality, we show that our methods achieve faster rates.

1

Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, USA
Department of EECS, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: Koulik Khamaru <koulik@berkeley.edu>, Martin J.
Wainwright <wainwrig@eecs.berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Our work also makes interesting points of contact with a
second line of work on non-convex optimization, namely
to functions that can be represented as a difference of two
convex functions, popularly known as DC functions. One
of the most popular DC optimization algorithms is Convex Concave Procedure (CCCP); see the papers (Yuille &
Rangarajan, 2003; Lipp & Boyd, 2016) for further details.

