Disentangled Sequential Autoencoder

Yingzhen Li 1 Stephan Mandt 2

Abstract
We present a VAE architecture for encoding and
generating high dimensional sequential data, such
as video or audio. Our deep generative model
learns a latent representation of the data which is
split into a static and dynamic part, allowing us to
approximately disentangle latent time-dependent
features (dynamics) from features which are preserved over time (content). This architecture gives
us partial control over generating content and dynamics by conditioning on either one of these
sets of features. In our experiments on artificially
generated cartoon video clips and voice recordings, we show that we can convert the content of
a given sequence into another one by such content
swapping. For audio, this allows us to convert
a male speaker into a female speaker and vice
versa, while for video we can separately manipulate shapes and dynamics. Furthermore, we give
empirical evidence for the hypothesis that stochastic RNNs as latent state models are more efficient
at compressing and generating long sequences
than deterministic ones, which may be relevant
for applications in video compression.

1. Introduction
Representation learning remains an outstanding research
problem in machine learning and computer vision. Recently there is a rising interest in disentangled representations, in which each component of learned features refers
to a semantically meaningful concept. In the example of
video sequence modelling, an ideal disentangled representation would be able to separate time-independent concepts
(e.g. the identity of the object in the scene) from dynamical
information (e.g. the time-varying position and the orientation or pose of that object). Such disentangled represen1

University of Cambridge, UK 2 Disney Research, Los Angeles,
CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yingzhen Li <yl494@cam.ac.uk>,
Stephan Mandt <stephan.mandt@disneyresearch.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

tations would open new efficient ways of compression and
style manipulation, among other applications.
Recent work has investigated disentangled representation
learning for images within the framework of variational
auto-encoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Rezende
et al., 2014) and generative adversarial networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al., 2014). Some of them, e.g. the β-VAE
method (Higgins et al., 2016), proposed new objective functions/training techniques that encourage disentanglement.
On the other hand, network architecture designs that directly
enforce factored representations have also been explored
by e.g. Siddharth et al. (2017); Bouchacourt et al. (2017).
These two types of approaches are often mixed together,
e.g. the infoGAN approach (Chen et al., 2016) partitioned
the latent space and proposed adding a mutual information
regularisation term to the vanilla GAN loss. Mathieu et al.
(2016) also partitioned the encoding space into style and
content components, and performed adversarial training to
encourage the datapoints from the same class to have similar
content representations, but diverse style features.
Less research has been conducted for unsupervised learning
of disentangled representations of sequences. For video
sequence modelling, Villegas et al. (2017) and Denton &
Birodkar (2017) utilised different networks to encode the
content and dynamics information separately, and trained
the auto-encoders with a combination of reconstruction loss
and GAN loss. Structured (Johnson et al., 2016) and Factorised VAEs (Deng et al., 2017) used hierarchical priors to
learn more interpretable latent variables. Hsu et al. (2017)
designed a structured VAE in the context of speech recognition. Their VAE architecture is trained using a combination
of the standard variational lower bound and a discriminative regulariser to further encourage disentanglement. More
related work is discussed in Section 3.
In this paper, we propose a generative model for unsupervised structured sequence modelling, such as video or audio.
We show that, in contrast to previous approaches, a disentangled representation can be achieved by a careful design of
the probabilistic graphical model. In the proposed architecture, we explicitly use a latent variable to represent content,
i.e., information that is invariant through the sequence, and
a set of latent variables associated to each frame to represent
dynamical information, such as pose and position. Com-

