Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting with Hard Attention to the Task

Joan Serrà 1 Dı́dac Surı́s 1 2 Marius Miron 1 3 Alexandros Karatzoglou 1

Abstract
Catastrophic forgetting occurs when a neural network loses the information learned in a previous
task after training on subsequent tasks. This problem remains a hurdle for artificial intelligence
systems with sequential learning capabilities. In
this paper, we propose a task-based hard attention
mechanism that preserves previous tasks’ information without affecting the current task’s learning.
A hard attention mask is learned concurrently to
every task, through stochastic gradient descent,
and previous masks are exploited to condition
such learning. We show that the proposed mechanism is effective for reducing catastrophic forgetting, cutting current rates by 45 to 80%. We also
show that it is robust to different hyperparameter
choices, and that it offers a number of monitoring
capabilities. The approach features the possibility
to control both the stability and compactness of
the learned knowledge, which we believe makes
it also attractive for online learning or network
compression applications.

1. Introduction
With the renewed interest in neural networks, old problems
re-emerge, specially if the solution is still open. That is
the case with the so-called catastrophic forgetting or catastrophic interference problem (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989;
Ratcliff, 1990). In essence, catastrophic forgetting corresponds to the tendency of a neural network to forget what
it learned upon learning from new or different information.
For instance, when a network is first trained to convergence
on one task, and then trained on a second task, it forgets
how to perform the first task.
Overcoming catastrophic forgetting is an important step
1
Telefónica Research, Barcelona, Spain 2 Universitat
Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain 3 Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. Correspondence to: Joan Serrà
<joan.serra@telefonica.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

in the advancement towards more general artificial intelligence systems (Legg & Hutter, 2007). Such systems
should be able to seamlessly remember different tasks, and
to learn them sequentially, following a lifelong learning
paradigm (Thrun & Mitchell, 1995). Apart from being more
biologically plausible (Clegg et al., 1998), there are many
practical situations which require a sequential learning system (cf. Thrun & Mitchell, 1995). For instance, it may be
unattainable for a robot to retrain from scratch its underlying model upon encountering a new object/task. After
accumulating a large number of objects/tasks and their corresponding information, performing concurrent or multitask
learning at scale may be too costly.
Storing previous information and using it to retrain the
model was among the earliest attempts to overcome catastrophic forgetting; a strategy named “rehearsal” (Robins,
1995). The use of memory modules in this context has
been a subject of research until today (Rebuffi et al., 2017;
Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017). However, due to efficiency
and capacity constrains, memory-free approaches were also
introduced, starting with what was termed as “pseudorehearsal” (Robins, 1995). This approach has found some
success in transfer learning situations where one needs to
maintain a certain accuracy on the source task after learning
the target task (Jung et al., 2016; Li & Hoiem, 2017). Within
the pseudo-rehearsal category, we could also consider recent
approaches that substitute the memory module by a generative network (Venkatesan et al., 2017; Shin et al., 2017;
Nguyen et al., 2017). Besides the difficulty of training a
generative network for a sequence of tasks or certain types
of data, both rehearsal and pseudo-rehearsal approaches
imply some form of concurrent learning, that is, having to
re-process ‘old’ instances for learning a new task.
The other popular strategy to overcome catastrophic forgetting is to reduce representational overlap (French, 1991).
This can be done at the output, intermediate, and also input
levels (Gutsein & Stump, 2015; He & Jaeger, 2018). A
clean way of doing that in a soft manner is through so-called
“structural regularization” (Zenke et al., 2017), either present
in the loss function (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Zenke et al.,
2017) or at a separate merging step (Lee et al., 2017). With
these strategies, one seeks to prevent major changes in the
weights that were important for previous tasks. Dedicating
specific sub-parts of the network for each task is another

