Focused Hierarchical RNNs for Conditional Sequence Processing

Nan Rosemary Ke 1 2 3 Konrad Żołna 4 1 Alessandro Sordoni 3 Zhouhan Lin 1 3 5 Adam Trischler 3
Yoshua Bengio 1 6 7 Joelle Pineau 8 9 7 Laurent Charlin 1 10 Chris Pal 1 2

Abstract
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) with attention mechanisms have obtained state-of-the-art
results for many sequence processing tasks. Most
of these models use a simple form of encoder
with attention that looks over the entire sequence
and assigns a weight to each token independently. We present a mechanism for focusing RNN encoders for sequence modelling tasks
which allows them to attend to key parts of the
input as needed. We formulate this using a multilayer conditional sequence encoder that reads in
one token at a time and makes a discrete decision on whether the token is relevant to the context or question being asked. The discrete gating
mechanism takes in the context embedding and
the current hidden state as inputs and controls information flow into the layer above. We train it
using policy gradient methods. We evaluate this
method on several types of tasks with different
attributes. First, we evaluate the method on synthetic tasks which allow us to evaluate the model
for its generalization ability and probe the behavior of the gates in more controlled settings. We
then evaluate this approach on large scale Question Answering tasks including the challenging
MS MARCO and SearchQA tasks. Our models shows consistent improvements for both tasks
over prior work and our baselines. It has also
shown to generalize significantly better on synthetic tasks as compared to the baselines.

1

Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms, Montreal,
Canada 2 Polytechnique Montreal 3 Microsoft Research, Montreal 4 Jagiellonian University, Cracow, Poland 5 AdeptMind
Scholar 6 University of Montreal 7 Senior Cifar Member 8 McGill
University 9 Facebook AI Research, Montreal 10 HEC Montreal.
Correspondence to: Nan Rosemary Ke <rosemary.nan.ke@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1

Introduction

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) with attention are
wildly used for many sequence modeling tasks, such as:
image captioning (Yao et al., 2016; Lu et al., 2017), speech
recognition (Chan et al., 2016; Bahdanau et al., 2016), text
summarization (Nallapati et al., 2016) and Question and
Answering (QA) (Kadlec et al., 2016). The attention mechanism allows the model to look over the entire sequence
and pick up the most relevant information. This not only
allows the model to learn a dynamic summarization of the
input sequence, it allows gradients to be passed directly
to the earlier time-steps in the input sequence, which also
helps with the vanishing and exploding gradient problem
(Hochreiter, 1991; Bengio et al., 1994; Hochreiter, 1998).
Most of these models use a simple form of encoder with attention that is identical to the first one proposed (Bahdanau
et al., 2015), where the attention looks over the entire encoded sequence and assigns a soft weight to each token.
However, for more complex tasks we conjecture that more
structured encoding mechanisms may help the attention to
more effectively identify and selectively process relevant
information within the input.
Imagine reading a Wikipedia article and trying to identify
information that is relevant to answering a question before
one knows what the question is. Now, compare this to the
situation where the context or question is given before reading the article. It would be much easier to read over the article, identify relevant information, group items and selectively process relevant information based on its relevance
to a given context or question.
Keeping this intuition in mind, we have developed a focused RNN encoder that is modeled by a multi-layer RNN
that groups input sub-sequences based on gates that are
controlled or conditioned on a question or input context.
We dub the core part of the minimal form of this model a
focused hierarchical encoder module. Our approach represents a general framework that applies to many sequence
modeling tasks where the context or question can be beneficial to focus (attend) over the input sequence. Our focused encoder module examined here is based on a two
layer LSTM where the upper layer is updated when a group
of relevant tokens has been read. The boundaries of the

