On Learning Sparsely Used Dictionaries from Incomplete Samples
Thanh V. Nguyen 1 Akshay Soni 2 Chinmay Hegde 1

Abstract
Existing algorithms for dictionary learning assume that the entries of the (high-dimensional)
input data are fully observed. However, in several
practical applications, only an incomplete fraction
of the data entries may be available. For incomplete settings, no provably correct and polynomialtime algorithm has been reported in the dictionary learning literature. In this paper, we provide provable approaches for learning – from
incomplete samples – a family of dictionaries
whose atoms have sufficiently “spread-out” mass.
First, we propose a descent-style iterative algorithm that linearly converges to the true dictionary when provided a sufficiently coarse initial
estimate. Second, we propose an initialization algorithm that utilizes a small number of extra fully
observed samples to produce such a coarse initial
estimate. Finally, we theoretically analyze their
performance and provide asymptotic statistical
and computational guarantees.

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation
In this paper, we consider a variant of the problem of dictionary learning, a widely used unsupervised technique for
learning compact (sparse) representations of high dimensional data. At its core, the challenge in dictionary learning is to discover a basis (or dictionary) that can sparsely
represent a given set of data samples with as little empirical representation error as possible. The study of sparse
coding enjoys a rich history in image processing, machine
learning, and compressive sensing (Elad & Aharon, 2006;
Aharon et al., 2006; Olshausen & Field, 1997; Candes &
Tao, 2005; Rubinstein et al., 2010; Gregor & LeCun, 2010;
Boureau et al., 2010). While the majority of these aforementioned works involved heuristics, several exciting re1
Iowa State University 2 Yahoo! Research. Correspondence to:
Thanh V. Nguyen <thanhng@iastate.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

cent results (Spielman et al., 2012; Agarwal et al., 2013;
2014; Arora et al., 2014; 2015; Sun et al., 2015; Chatterji &
Bartlett, 2017; Nguyen et al., 2018) have established rigorous conditions under which their algorithms recover the true
dictionary under suitable generative models for the data.
An important underlying assumption that guides the success
of all existing dictionary learning algorithms is the availability of (sufficiently many) data samples that are fully
observed. Our focus, on the other hand, is on the special
case where the given data points are only partially observed,
that is, we are given access to only a small fraction of the
coordinates of the data samples.
Such a setting of incomplete observations is natural in many
applications like image-inpainting and demosaicing (Rubinstein et al., 2010). For example, this routinely appears
in hyper-spectral imaging (Xing et al., 2012) where entire
spectral bands of signals could be missing or unobserved.
Moreover, in other applications, collecting fully observed
samples can be expensive (or in some cases, even infeasible).
Examples include the highly unreliable continuous blood
glucose (CBG) monitoring systems that suffer from signal
dropouts, where often the task is to learn a dictionary from
partially observed signals (Naumova & Schnass, 2017a).
Earlier works that tackle the incomplete variant of the dictionary learning problem only offer heuristic solutions (Xing
et al., 2012; Naumova & Schnass, 2017a) or involve constructing intractable statistical estimators (Soni et al., 2016).
Indeed, the recovery of the true dictionary involves analyzing an extremely non-convex optimization problem that is,
in general, not solvable in polynomial time (Loh & Wainwright, 2011). To our knowledge, our work is the first to
give a theoretically sound as well as tractable algorithm to
recover the exact dictionary from missing data (provided
certain natural assumptions are met).
1.2. Our Contributions
In this paper, we make concrete theoretical algorithmic
progress to the dictionary learning problem with incomplete samples. Inspired by recent algorithmic advances in
dictionary learning (Arora et al., 2014; 2015), we adopt a
learning-theoretic setup. Specifically, we assume that each
data sample is synthesized from a generative model with
an unknown dictionary and a random k-sparse coefficient

