Born-Again Neural Networks

Tommaso Furlanello 1 Zachary C. Lipton 2 3 Michael Tschannen 4 Laurent Itti 1 Anima Anandkumar 5 3

Abstract
Knowledge Distillation (KD) consists of transferring “knowledge” from one machine learning model (the teacher) to another (the student).
Commonly, the teacher is a high-capacity model
with formidable performance, while the student
is more compact. By transferring knowledge,
one hopes to benefit from the student’s compactness, without sacrificing too much performance. We study KD from a new perspective:
rather than compressing models, we train students parameterized identically to their teachers. Surprisingly, these Born-Again Networks
(BANs), outperform their teachers significantly,
both on computer vision and language modeling tasks. Our experiments with BANs based
on DenseNets demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on the CIFAR-10 (3.5%) and CIFAR-100
(15.5%) datasets, by validation error. Additional
experiments explore two distillation objectives: (i)
Confidence-Weighted by Teacher Max (CWTM)
and (ii) Dark Knowledge with Permuted Predictions (DKPP). Both methods elucidate the essential components of KD, demonstrating the effect
of the teacher outputs on both predicted and nonpredicted classes.

1. Introduction
In a 2001 paper on statistical modeling (Breiman et al.,
2001), Leo Breiman noted that different stochastic algorithmic procedures (Hansen & Salamon, 1990; Liaw et al., 2002;
Chen & Guestrin, 2016) can lead to diverse models with
similar validation performances. Moreover, he noted that
we can often compose these models into an ensemble that
achieves predictive power superior to each of the constituent
1

University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 3 Amazon AI,
Palo Alto, CA, USA 4 ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland 5 Caltech,
Pasadena, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Tommaso Furlanello
<furlanel@usc.edu>.

models. Interestingly, given such a powerful ensemble, one
can often find a simpler model — no more complex than one
of the ensemble’s constituents — that mimics the ensemble
and achieves its performance. Previously, in Born-Again
Trees Breiman & Shang (1996) pioneered this idea, learning single trees that match the performance of multiple-tree
predictors. These born-again trees approximate the ensemble decision but offer some desired properties of individual
decision trees, such as their purported amenability to interpretation. A number of subsequent papers have proposed
variations the idea of born-again models. In the neural network community, similar ideas emerged in papers on model
compression by Bucilua et al. (2006) and related work on
knowledge distillation (KD) by Hinton et al. (2015). In both
cases, the idea is typically to transfer the knowledge of a
high-capacity teacher with desired high performance to a
more compact student (Ba & Caruana, 2014; Urban et al.,
2016; Rusu et al., 2015). Although the student cannot match
the teacher when trained directly on the data, the distillation
process brings the student closer to matching the predictive
power of the teacher.
We propose to revisit KD with the objective of disentangling the benefits of this training technique from its use in
model compression. In experiments transferring knowledge
from teachers to students of identical capacity, we make
the surprising discovery that the students become the masters, outperforming their teachers by significant margins. In
a manner reminiscent to Minsky’s Sequence of Teaching
Selves (Minsky, 1991), we develop a simple re-training procedure: after the teacher model converges, we initialize a
new student and train it with the dual goals of predicting
the correct labels and matching the output distribution of
the teacher. We call these students Born-Again Networks
(BANs) and show that applied to DenseNets, ResNets and
LSTM-based sequence models, BANs consistently have
lower validation errors than their teachers. For DenseNets,
we show that this procedure can be applied for multiple
steps, albeit with diminishing returns.

2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

We observe that the gradient induced by KD can be decomposed into two terms: a dark knowledge term, containing
the information on the wrong outputs, and a ground-truth
component which corresponds to a simple rescaling of the
original gradient that would be obtained using the real labels. We interpret the second term as training from the real

