Gradient Descent for Sparse Rank-One Matrix Completion for
Crowd-Sourced Aggregation of Sparsely Interacting Workers

Yao Ma 1 Alex Olshevsky 2 Venkatesh Saligrama 2 Csaba Szepesvari 3

Abstract
We consider worker skill estimation for the singlecoin Dawid-Skene crowdsourcing model. In
practice skill-estimation is challenging because
worker assignments are sparse and irregular due
to the arbitrary, and uncontrolled availability of
workers. We formulate skill estimation as a
rank-one correlation-matrix completion problem,
where the observed components correspond to
observed label correlation between workers. We
show that the correlation matrix can be successfully recovered and skills identifiable if and only
if the sampling matrix (observed components) is
irreducible and aperiodic. We then propose an
efficient gradient descent scheme and show that
skill estimates converges to the desired global optima for such sampling matrices. Our proof is
original and the results are surprising in light of
the fact that even the weighted rank-one matrix
factorization problem is NP hard in general. Next
we derive sample complexity bounds for the noisy
case in terms of spectral properties of the signless
Laplacian of the sampling matrix. Our proposed
scheme achieves state-of-art performance on a
number of real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of label estimation in crowdsourcing. The basis of our work is the single-coin model
of Dawid & Skene (1979): In this model, the input comes
in the form of a sparsely filled W × T worker-task label
matrix. The workers possess unique unknown skills, and
tasks assume unique unknown labels. The worker-task label
1

Division of Systems Engineering, Boston University, USA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University, USA 3 Department of Computing Science, University of
Alberta, Canada. Authors listed in Alphabetical Order. Correspondence to: Venkatesh Saligrama <srv@bu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

matrix collects the random labels provided by the workers
for the individual tasks. The skill level of a worker is the
(scaled) probability of the worker’s label matching the true
unknown label for any of the tasks. The observed labels are
independent of each other.
Given the workers’ skill levels, the optimal way (Nitzan &
Paroush, 1981; Shapley & Grofman, 1984) to reconstruct
the unknown labels is to use weighted majority voting where
the weights assigned to the label provided by a worker is
equal to the log-odds underlying the worker’s skill. In practice, the crowd is often highly heterogenous ranging from
highly skilled to negatively skilled workers. Downweighting unskilled workers and upweighting skilled workers has
a significant impact on performance. Since skill levels are
unknown, we follow prior works (e.g., Dalvi et al., 2013;
Berend & Kontorovich, 2014; Szepesvári, 2015; Bonald &
Combes, 2016) and adopt a two-step approach, whereby
worker skills are first estimated and then these skills are
used with the optimal weighting method to recover labels.
Sparse & Irregular Assignments: In practice, skill estimation is challenging because worker assignments are sparse
and irregular due to the arbitrary and uncontrolled availability of workers (Karger et al., 2013; Dalvi et al., 2013). An
additional subtle issue is the lack of diversity in terms of interactions between the workers: A worker is often grouped
with a limited subset of workers across all tasks 1 .
Our Contributions: (i) we formulate skill estimation as a
weighted least-squares rank-one problem where the weights
are proposed to compensate for the varying accuracy of the
moment estimates which is expected to be seen in most practical applications; (ii) we propose to use projected gradient
descent to minimize the resulting objective function; (iii)
we provide a theoretical justification of this approach: we
give natural and mild conditions on the weighting matrix
1

This situation is remarkably evident on benchmark datasets:
The ‘Web’ dataset has 177 workers, with 3 to 20 workers/task and
each worker on average interacting with about another 2.7 workers
only, while the standard deviation of how many workers a worker
is interacting with is 15. The RTE dataset has 164 workers, has
only 10 workers/task on the average and each worker interacts
with fewer than 2.5 other workers, while the standard deviation of
the interaction degree is 20.

