Convolutional Imputation of Matrix Networks

Qingyun Sun * 1 Mengyuan Yan * 2 David Donoho 3 Stephen Boyd 2

Abstract
A matrix network is a family of matrices, with relatedness modeled by a weighted graph. We consider the task of completing a partially observed
matrix network. We assume a novel sampling
scheme where a fraction of matrices might be
completely unobserved. How can we recover the
entire matrix network from incomplete observations? This mathematical problem arises in many
applications including medical imaging and social networks. To recover the matrix network, we
propose a structural assumption that the matrices
have a graph Fourier transform which is low-rank.
We formulate a convex optimization problem and
prove an exact recovery guarantee for the optimization problem. Furthermore, we numerically
characterize the exact recovery regime for varying
rank and sampling rate and discover a new phase
transition phenomenon. Then we give an iterative
imputation algorithm to efficiently solve the optimization problem and complete large scale matrix
networks. We demonstrate the algorithm with a
variety of applications such as MRI and Facebook
user network.

Figure 1: (a) Original MRI image frames (oracle). (b)
Our sampled and corrupted observation. (c) Recovered image frames using nuclear norm minimization on individual
frames. (d) Recovered image frames using our convolutional imputation algorithm.

1. Introduction
In machine learning and social network problems, information is often encoded in matrix form. User profiles in
social networks can be embedded into feature matrices; item
profiles in recommendation systems can also be modeled as
matrices. Many medical imaging modalities, such as MRI
and CT, also represent data as a stack of images. These
matrices have underlying connections that can come from
spatial or temporal proximity, or observed similarities between the items being described, etc. A weighted graph
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, Stanford
University, California, USA 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, California, USA 3 Department of Statistics, Stanford University, California, USA. Correspondence to:
Qingyun Sun <qysun@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

can be built to represent the connections between matrices.
Therefore we propose matrix networks as a general model
for data representation. A matrix network is defined by a
weighted graph whose nodes are matrices.
Due to the limitations of data acquisition processes, sometimes we can only observe a subset of entries from each
data matrix. The fraction of entries we observe may vary
from matrix to matrix. In many real problems, a subset of
matrices can be completely unobserved, leaving no information for ordinary matrix completion methods to recover
the missing matrices. To our knowledge, we are the first to
examine this novel sampling scheme.
As an example, in the following MRI image sequence (figure 1(a)), we sample each frame of the MRI images with
i.i.d. Bernoulli distribution p = 0.2, and 2 out of 88 frames
are completely unobserved, shown in figure 1(b). If we perform matrix completion by nuclear norm minimization on

