Learning Steady-States of Iterative Algorithms over Graphs

Hanjun Dai 1 Zornitsa Kozareva 2 Bo Dai 1 Alexander J. Smola 2 Le Song 1 3

Abstract
Many graph analytics problems can be solved via
iterative algorithms where the solutions are often
characterized by a set of steady-state conditions.
Different algorithms respect to different set of fixed
point constraints, so instead of using these traditional algorithms, can we learn an algorithm which
can obtain the same steady-state solutions automatically from examples, in an effective and scalable
way? How to represent the meta learner for such
algorithm and how to carry out the learning? In this
paper, we propose an embedding representation for
iterative algorithms over graphs, and design a learning method which alternates between updating the
embeddings and projecting them onto the steadystate constraints. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our framework using a few commonly used
graph algorithms, and show that in some cases, the
learned algorithm can handle graphs with more
than 100,000,000 nodes in a single machine.

1. Introduction
Graphs and networks arise in various real-world applications
and machine learning problems, such as social network analysis (Hamilton et al., 2017b), molecule screening (Hachmann
et al., 2011; Duvenaud et al., 2015; Lei et al., 2017) and
knowledge base reasoning (Trivedi et al., 2017). Many graph
analytics problems can be solved via iterative algorithms
according to the graph structure, and the solutions of the algorithms are often characterized by a set of steady-state conditions. For instance, the PageRank (Page et al., 1999) score of
a node in a graph can be computed iteratively by averaging the
scores of its neighbors, until the node score and this neighbor
averaging are approximately equal. Mean field inference for
the posterior distribution of a variable in a graphical model
can be updated iteratively by aggregating the messages from
its neighbors until the posterior is approximately equal to
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Amazon 3 Ant Financial.
Correspondence to: Hanjun Dai <hanjundai@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

the results of the aggregation operator. More generally, the
intermediate representation hv for each node v in the node
set V is updated iteratively according to an operator T as


(t)
h(t+1)
←
T
{h
}
v
u u∈N (v) , ∀t ⩾ 1, and
h(0)
v ← constant, ∀v ∈ V

(1)

until the steady-state conditions are met

h∗v = T {h∗u }u∈N (v) , ∀v ∈ V.

(2)

Variants of graph neural network (GNN) (Scarselli et al.,
2009), like GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2016), neural message
passing network (Gilmer et al., 2017), GATs (Veličković
et al., 2017) etc., perform fixed T rounds of updates to
Eq (1) without respecting the steady state. Thus for learning
algorithms like PageRank or mean field inference, a large
T is required. In such case, both the computational cost
and gradient updates will become problematic. Also note
that due to the batch-update nature of GNN family models,
multiple rounds of update over all nodes are needed. These
two limitations make them not scalable and effective enough,
regarding the computational cost and convergence.
In this paper, instead of designing algorithms for each
individual graph problem, we take a different perspective,
and ask the question:
Can we design a learning framework for a diverse
range of graph problems that learns the algorithm
over large graphs achieving the steady-state
solutions efficiently and effectively?
Furthermore, how to represent the meta learner for such algorithm and how to carry out the learning of these algorithms?
In this paper we propose a stochastic learning framework
of algorithm design based on the idea of embedding the intermediate representation of an iterative algorithm over graphs
into vector spaces, and then learn such algorithms using
example outputs from the desired algorithms to be learned.
More specifically, in our framework, each node in the graph
will maintain an embedding vector, and these embedding
vectors will be updated using a parameterized operator
Tθ where the parameters θ will be learned. Furthermore,
following each embedding update step, the embedding
will also be projected towards the steady state constraint
space, gradually enforcing the steady-state conditions. As
illustrated in Figure 1, both of the two steps are stochastic,

