The Limits of Maxing, Ranking, and Preference Learning

Moein Falahatgar 1 Ayush Jain 1 Alon Orlitsky 1 Venkatadheeraj Pichapati 1 Vaishakh Ravindrakumar 1

Abstract
We present a comprehensive understanding of
three important problems in PAC preference
learning: maximum selection (maxing), ranking,
and estimating all pairwise preference probabilities, in the adaptive setting. With just Weak
Stochastic Transitivity, we show that maxing requires Ω(n2 ) comparisons and with slightly more
restrictive Medium Stochastic Transitivity, we
present a linear complexity maxing algorithm.
With Strong Stochastic Transitivity and Stochastic Triangle Inequality, we derive a ranking algorithm with optimal O(n log n) complexity and
an optimal algorithm that estimates all pairwise
preference probabilities.

1. Introduction
1.1. Background and motivation
Maximum selection (maxing) and sorting (ranking) are
fundamental problems in Computer Science with numerous important applications. Deterministic versions of these
problems are well studied.
In practical applications, comparisons are rarely deterministic. For example in soccer, when Real Madrid plays
Barcelona the outcome is not always the same. Similarly,
individual preferences in restaurants vary a lot. Other practical applications are in areas such as social choice (Caplin
& Nalebuff, 1991; Soufiani et al., 2013), web search and information retrieval (Radlinski & Joachims, 2007; Radlinski
et al., 2008), crowdsourcing (Chen et al., 2013; gif), recommender systems (Baltrunas et al., 2010) and several others.
These practical applications and the intrinsic theoretical interest, has led to significant work on the probabilistic version of maxing and ranking. Yet the most general model for
which maxing can be done using near-linear comparisons is
not known. We consider the most general transitive model
1
University of California, San Diego. Correspondence to:
Venkatadheeraj Pichapati <dheerajpv7@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

that guarantees the existence of maximum and show that
under this model any maxing algorithm requires quadratic
many comparisons. We also consider a slightly more restrictive transitive model and propose a linear complexity maxing algorithm, making it the most general model
known for which linear complexity maxing is possible.
Also, for the most general known model with sub-quadratic
complexity for ranking, we improve the complexity, making it orderwise optimal. We also propose an optimal algorithm that can simulate all pairwise comparisons.
1.2. Notation and problem formulation
def

Without loss of generality, let [n] = {1, 2, ..., n} be the
set of n elements. We consider probabilistic noisy comparisons i.e., whenever two elements i and j are compared, i
is returned with an unknown probability pi,j . There are no
def

“ties” i.e., pj,i = 1 − pi,j . Let p̃i,j = pi,j − 12 be the
centered preference probability.
A maximal is an element i that is preferable to every other
element i.e., p̃i,j ≥ 0 ∀j. A ranking is a permutation
σ1 , σ2 , ..., σn of [n] such that p̃σi ,σj ≥ 0 whenever i > j.
But sometimes maximal and ranking might not even exist. For example, consider the popular Rock-Paper-Scissor
game i.e., p1,2 = p2,3 = p3,1 = 1. Notice that under this
model there is neither a maximal nor a ranking. Hence we
need additional constraints on pairwise probabilities pi,j .
Notice that for ranking to exist, there must exist an ordering () among elements s.t. whenever i  j, p̃i,j ≥ 0.
The models that have such an ordering are said to satisfy
Weak Stochastic Transitivity (WST). Observe that WST is
sufficient for existence of both maximal and ranking.
More restrictive notions of transitivity are motivated and
used in different contexts. Strong Stochastic Transitivity
(SST) which assumes that whenever i  j  k, p̃i,k ≥
max(p̃i,j , p̃j,k ), as its name suggests is a stronger notion of
transitivity that confines the model more than WST, hence
less general. Medium Stochastic Transitivity (MST) (Skorepa, 2010) sitting in between WST and SST, assumes that
whenever i  j  k, p̃i,k ≥ min(p̃i,j , p̃j,k ). From WST to
MST to SST, the model becomes more restrictive.
Another model restriction used in some of the previous

