Online Convolutional Sparse Coding with Sample-Dependent Dictionary
Yaqing Wang 1 Quanming Yao 1 2 James T. Kwok 1 Lionel M. Ni 3

Abstract
Convolutional sparse coding (CSC) has been
popularly used for the learning of shift-invariant
dictionaries in image and signal processing. However, existing methods have limited scalability.
In this paper, instead of convolving with a
dictionary shared by all samples, we propose
the use of a sample-dependent dictionary in
which each filter is a linear combination of
a small set of base filters learned from data.
This added flexibility allows a large number of
sample-dependent patterns to be captured, which
is especially useful in the handling of large or
high-dimensional data sets. Computationally,
the resultant model can be efficiently learned
by online learning. Extensive experimental
results on a number of data sets show that
the proposed method outperforms existing CSC
algorithms with significantly reduced time and
space complexities.

1. Introduction
Convolutional sparse coding (CSC) (Zeiler et al., 2010) has
been successfully used in image processing (Gu et al., 2015;
Heide et al., 2015), signal processing (Cogliati et al., 2016),
and biomedical applications (Pachitariu et al., 2013; Andilla
& Hamprecht, 2014; Chang et al., 2017; Jas et al., 2017;
Peter et al., 2017). It is closely related to sparse coding
(Aharon et al., 2006), but CSC is advantageous in that its
shift-invariant dictionary can capture shifted local patterns
common in signals and images. Each data sample is then
represented by the sum of a set of filters from the dictionary
convolved with the corresponding codes.
Traditional CSC algorithms operate in the batch mode
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology University, Hong
3
Kong 2 4Paradigm Inc, Beijing, China.
Department of
Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, Macau.
Correspondence to: jamesk@cse.ust.hk <James T. Kwok>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

(Kavukcuoglu et al., 2010; Zeiler et al., 2010; Bristow et al.,
2013; Heide et al., 2015; Šorel & Šroubek, 2016; Wohlberg,
2016; Papyan et al., 2017), which take O(N K 2 P +
N KP log P ) time and O(N KP ) space (where N is the
number of samples, K is the number of filters, and P
is the dimensionality. Recently, a number of online
CSC algorithms have been proposed for better scalability
(Degraux et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017; Wang et al.,
2018). As data samples arrive, relevant information is
compressed into small history statistics, and the model is
incrementally updated. In particular, the state-of-the-art
OCSC algorithm (Wang et al., 2018) has the much smaller
time and space complexities of O(K 2 P + KP log P ) and
O(K 2 P ), respectively.
However, the complexities of OCSC still depend quadratically on K, and cannot be used with a large number of
filters. The number of local patterns that can be captured
is thus limited, and may lead to inferior performance
especially on higher-dimensional data sets. Besides, the use
of more filters also leads to a larger number of expensive
convolution operations. Rigamonti et al. (2013) and Sironi
et al. (2015) proposed to post-process the learned filters
by approximating them with separable filters, making the
convolutions less expensive. However, as learning and
post-processing are then two independent procedures, the
resultant filters may not be optimal. Moreover, these
separate filters cannot be updated online with the arrival
of new samples.
Another direction to scale up CSC is via distributed
computation (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1997). By distributing
the data and workload onto multiple machines, the recent
consensus CSC algorithm (Choudhury et al., 2017) can
handle large, higher-dimensional data sets such as videos,
multispectral images and light field images. However, the
heavy computational demands of the CSC problem are only
shared over the computing platform, but not fundamentally
reduced.
In this paper, we propose to approximate the possibly large
number of filters by a sample-dependent combination of
a small set of base filters learned from the data. While
the standard CSC dictionary is shared by all samples, we
propose each sample to have its own “personal” dictionary
to compensate for the reduced flexibility of using these

