Gradient Coding from Cyclic MDS Codes and Expander Graphs

Netanel Raviv 1 Itzhak Tamo 2 Rashish Tandon 3 Alexandros G. Dimakis 4

Abstract
Gradient coding is a technique for straggler mitigation in distributed learning. In this paper we
design novel gradient codes using tools from classical coding theory, namely, cyclic MDS codes,
which compare favourably with existing solutions,
both in the applicable range of parameters and in
the complexity of the involved algorithms. Second, we introduce an approximate variant of the
gradient coding problem, in which we settle for
approximate gradient computation instead of the
exact one. This approach enables graceful degradation, i.e., the `2 error of the approximate gradient is a decreasing function of the number of
stragglers. Our main result is that the normalized
adjacency matrix of an expander graph can yield
excellent approximate gradient codes, and that
this approach allows us to perform significantly
less computation compared to exact gradient coding. We experimentally test our approach on Amazon EC2, and show that the generalization error
of approximate gradient coding is very close to
the full gradient while requiring significantly less
computation from the workers.

1. Introduction
Data intensive machine learning tasks have become ubiquitous in many real-world applications, and with the increasing size of training data, distributed methods have
gained increasing popularity. However, the performance of
distributed methods (in synchronous settings) is strongly
dictated by stragglers, i.e., nodes that are slow to respond
or unavailable. In this paper, we focus on coding theoretic
(and graph theoretic) techniques for mitigating stragglers in
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, California Institute
of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA. 2 Department of Electrical
Engineering–Systems, Tel-Aviv University, Israel. 3 Apple, Seattle,
WA, USA. 4 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.. Correspondence to: Netanel Raviv <netanel.raviv@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

distributed synchronous gradient descent.
The coding theoretic framework for straggler mitigation
called gradient coding was first introduced in (Tandon et al.,
2017). It consists of a system with one master and n worker
nodes, in which the data is partitioned into k parts, and one
or more parts is assigned to each one of the workers. In turn,
each worker computes the partial gradient on each of its
assigned partitions, linearly combines the results according
to some predetermined vector of coefficients, and sends this
linear combination back to the master node. Choosing the
coefficients at each node judiciously, one can guarantee that
the master node is capable of reconstructing the full gradient
even if any s machines fail to perform their work. The storage overhead of the system, which is denoted by d, refers
to the amount of redundant computations, or alternatively,
to the number of data parts that are sent to each node (see
example in Fig. 1).
The importance of straggler mitigation was demonstrated
in a series of recent studies (e.g., (Li et al., 2014) and (Yadwadkar et al., 2016)). In particular, it was demonstrated
in (Tandon et al., 2017) that stragglers may run up to ×5
slower than the typical worker performance (×8 in (Yadwadkar et al., 2016)) on Amazon EC2, especially for the
cheaper virtual machines; such erratic behavior is unpredictable and can significantly delay training. One can, of
course, use more expensive instances but the goal here is
to use coding theoretic methods to provide reliability out
of cheap unreliable workers, overall reducing the cost of
training.
The work of (Tandon et al., 2017) established the fundamental bound d ≥ s + 1, provided a deterministic construction
which achieves it with equality when s + 1|n, and a randomized one which applies to all s and n. Subsequently,
deterministic constructions were also obtained by (Dutta
et al., 2016) and (Halbawi, 2017). These works have focused on the scenario where s is known prior to the construction of the system. Furthermore, the exact computation
of the full gradient is guaranteed if the number of stragglers
is at most s, but no error bound is guaranteed if this number
exceeds s.
The contribution of this work is twofold. For the computation of the exact gradient we employ tools from classic
coding theory, namely, cyclic MDS codes, in order to ob-

