Learning Registered Point Processes from Idiosyncratic Observations

Hongteng Xu 1 2 Lawrence Carin 1 Hongyuan Zha 3

Abstract
A parametric point process model is developed,
with modeling based on the assumption that sequential observations often share latent phenomena, while also possessing idiosyncratic effects.
An alternating optimization method is proposed to
learn a “registered” point process that accounts for
shared structure, as well as “warping” functions
that characterize idiosyncratic aspects of each observed sequence. Under reasonable constraints,
in each iteration we update the sample-specific
warping functions by solving a set of constrained
nonlinear programming problems in parallel, and
update the model by maximum likelihood estimation. The justifiability, complexity and robustness
of the proposed method are investigated in detail, and the influence of sequence stitching on
the learning results is discussed empirically. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world data
demonstrate that the method yields explainable
point process models, achieving encouraging results compared to state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The behavior of real-world entities often may be recorded
as event sequences; for example, interactions of participants
in a social network, the admissions of patients, and the jobhopping behavior of employees. In practice, these behaviors
are under the control of complicated mechanisms, which
can be captured approximately by an appropriate parametric
temporal point process model. While the observed event
sequences associated with a given process (e.g., disease)
may share common (“standard”) attributes, there are often
subject-specific factors that may impact the observed data.
For example, the admission records of different patients
are always personalized: even if the patients suffer from
1

Department of ECE, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
InfiniaML Inc., Durham, NC, USA 3 College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. Correspondence
to: Hongteng Xu <hongteng.xu@duke.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Intensity function

Registered
Temporal
Point Process
Original timeline
and realizations
Warped
idiosyncratic
observations
Warping
function 1

Warping
function 2

Warping
function 3

Figure 1. The illustration of concepts in our work. The dotted
parts (parametric point process model, unwarped realizations and
warping functions) are what we aim to learn.

the same disease, they may spend unequal time on recovery because their medications, history and environmental
conditions may be distinct. Another typical example is the
job-hopping behavior of employees. The employees in the
same company often make very different career plans depending on their age, family situation and unobserved status
of the job market.
The examples above reveal that event sequences that share
an underlying temporal point process linked to a given phenomenon of interest may be personalized by hidden idiosyncratic factors, yielding a subject-specific “warping” along
timeline, as shown in Fig. 1. The characteristics of such
data often have a negative influence on the learning of the
target point process, i.e., increase the uncertainty of the
model. The complexity of models can be increased to fit the
personalized observations well, e.g., the locally-stationary
point processes in (Roueff et al., 2016; Mammen, 2017; Xu
et al., 2017a). However, from the viewpoint of model registration, it is desirable to separate the essential mechanism
of the model and idiosyncratic aspects of the data, such that
the final model is “registered” and characterizes the shared
phenomena, while also inferring what is sample-specific.
Learning registered point processes from idiosyncratic observations is a challenging problem, requiring one to jointly
learn a shared point process model and a set of samplespecific warping functions corresponding to observed event
sequences. To solve this problem, we propose a novel and
effective learning method based on alternating optimization.
Specifically, in each iteration we first apply the inverse of
estimated warping functions (i.e., unwarping functions) to

