Faster Derivative-Free Stochastic Algorithm
for Shared Memory Machines

Bin Gu 1 Zhouyuan Huo 1 Cheng Deng 2 Heng Huang 1 2

Abstract
Asynchronous parallel stochastic gradient optimization has been playing a pivotal role to solve
large-scale machine learning problems in big data
applications. Zeroth-order (derivative-free) methods estimate the gradient only by two function
evaluations, thus have been applied to solve the
problems where the explicit gradient calculations
are computationally expensive or infeasible. Recently, the first asynchronous parallel stochastic
zeroth-order algorithm (AsySZO) was proposed.
However, its convergence rate is O( √1T ) for the
smooth, possibly non-convex learning problems,
which is significantly slower than O( T1 ) the best
convergence rate of (asynchronous) stochastic gradient algorithm. To fill this gap, in this paper, we
first point out the fundamental reason leading to
the slow convergence rate of AsySZO, and then
propose a new asynchronous stochastic zerothorder algorithm (AsySZO+). We provide a faster
1
) (b is the mini-batch size)
convergence rate O( bT
for AsySZO+ by the rigorous theoretical analysis,
which is a significant improvement over O( √1T ).
The experimental results on the application of ensemble learning confirm that our AsySZO+ has
a faster convergence rate than the existing (asynchronous) stochastic zeroth-order algorithms.

1. Introduction
In the current big data era, the asynchronous parallel algorithms for stochastic optimization have achieved huge
successes in machine learning community. Most of the
asynchronous parallel stochastic algorithms are built on the
first-order gradient or second-order information (e.g. Hes1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 School of Electronic Engineering,
Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China. Correspondence to:
Heng Huang <henghuanghh@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

sian matrix or its approximations) of the objective function.
For example, Hogwild! (Recht et al., 2011) (the first asynchronous parallel stochastic gradient descent, SGD, algorithm) uses the first-order gradient to update the solution for
smooth convex functions. Other variational asynchronous
parallel SGD algorithms (Mania et al., 2015; Lian et al.,
2015; Gu et al., 2018a; Zhao & Li, 2016; Gu et al., 2018b)
also use the first-order derivative to update the solution for
smooth convex or non-convex problems. The second-order
information (e.g. approximated Hessian matrix) (Byrd et al.,
2016) was also used to accelerate the optimization. To sum
up, the asynchronous parallel stochastic gradient optimization has been playing a pivotal role for handling large-scale
machine learning problems.
However, for a large number of machine learning problems, calculating the explicit gradient is computationally
expensive. Specifically, as mentioned in (Wainwright &
Jordan, 2008; Taskar et al., 2005), it is difficult to compute the explicit gradients for the objective functions of
graphical model inference (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008)
and structured-prediction (Taskar et al., 2005). Even worse,
for several machine learning applications, the explicit gradient calculations are infeasible. For example, in bandit
problems (Bubeck et al., 2012) and black box ensemble
learning problems (Lian et al., 2016), it is infeasible to get
the explicit gradients of the objective functions because
only the observations of function values are available. In the
above scenarios, zeroth-order (also called derivative-free)
method is the best and only choice of the optimization, because zeroth-order method estimates the gradient only by
two function evaluations. Thus, zeroth-order optimization is
important and attracts a lot of attentions in recent machine
learning research.
As discussed above, designing the asynchronous stochastic
zeroth-order algorithms is crucial and desired for large-scale
machine learning problems. However, existing works (Nesterov & Spokoiny, 2011; Ghadimi & Lan, 2013; Duchi
et al., 2012; Bach & Perchet, 2016) mainly focus on the nonparallel (i.e., sequential) stochastic zeroth-order algorithms
(SZO). These works are summarized in Table 1. Specifically, Nesterov & Spokoiny (2011) first proposed SZO algorithm for convex problems, and proved the convergence rate

