Goodness-of-Fit Testing for Discrete Distributions via Stein Discrepancy

Jiasen Yang 1 Qiang Liu * 2 Vinayak Rao * 1 Jennifer Neville 1 3

Abstract
Recent work has combined Stein’s method with
reproducing kernel Hilbert space theory to develop nonparametric goodness-of-fit tests for unnormalized probability distributions. However,
the currently available tests apply exclusively to
distributions with smooth density functions. In
this work, we introduce a kernelized Stein discrepancy measure for discrete spaces, and develop
a nonparametric goodness-of-fit test for discrete
distributions with intractable normalization constants. Furthermore, we propose a general characterization of Stein operators that encompasses
both discrete and continuous distributions, providing a recipe for constructing new Stein operators. We apply the proposed goodness-of-fit
test to three statistical models involving discrete
distributions, and our experiments show that the
proposed test typically outperforms a two-sample
test based on the maximum mean discrepancy.

for network data. While a variety of approximate inference
techniques such as pseudo-likelihood estimation, Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), and variational methods have
been studied to allow learning and inference in these models, it is usually hard to quantify the approximation errors
involved, making it difficult to establish statistical tests with
calibrated uncertainty estimates.

1. Introduction

Recently, a new line of research (Gorham & Mackey, 2015;
Oates et al., 2017; Chwialkowski et al., 2016; Liu et al.,
2016; Gorham & Mackey, 2017; Jitkrittum et al., 2017) has
developed goodness-of-fit tests which work directly with
un-normalized model distributions. Central to these tests
is the notion of a Stein operator, originating from Stein’s
method (Stein, 1986) for characterizing convergence in distribution. Given a distribution p(x) on X d and a class of
test functions f ∈ F on X d , a Stein operator Ap satisfies
Ex∼p [Ap f (x)] = 0, so that when Ap is applied to any test
function f , the resulting function Ap f has zero-expectation
under p. Additionally, the expectation under any other distribution q 6= p should be non-zero for at least some function
f in F. When F is sufficiently rich, the maximum value
supf ∈F Ex∼q [Ap f (x)] serves as a discrepancy measure,
called Stein discrepancy, between distributions p and q.

Goodness-of-fit testing is a central problem in statistics,
measuring how well a model distribution p(x) fits observed
data {xi }ni=1 ⊆ X d , for some domain X (e.g., X ⊆ R for
continuous data or X ⊆ N for discrete data). Examples of
classical goodness-of-fit tests include the χ2 test (Pearson,
1900), the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (Kolmogorov, 1933;
Smirnov, 1948), and the Anderson-Darling test (Anderson &
Darling, 1954). These tests typically assume that the model
distribution p(x) is fully specified and is easy to evaluate.
In modern statistical and machine learning applications,
however, p(x) is often specified only up to an intractable
normalization constant; examples include large-scale graphical models, latent variable models, and statistical models

The properties of the Stein discrepancy measure depends
on two objects: the Stein operator Ap , and the set F. Different authors have studied different choices of F: Gorham
& Mackey (2015) considered test functions in the W 2,∞
Sobolev space, and the resulting test statistic requires solving a linear program under certain smoothness constraints.
On the other hand, Oates et al. (2017); Chwialkowski et al.
(2016); Liu et al. (2016) proposed taking F to be the unit
ball of a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), which
leads to test statistics that can be computed in closed form
and with time quadratic in n, the number of samples. Jitkrittum et al. (2017) further proposed a linear-time adaptive test
that constructs test features by optimizing test power.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 2 Department of Computer Science,
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 3 Department of
Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN. Correspondence to: Jiasen Yang <jiaseny@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Regarding the choice of the Stein operator Ap , all the aforementioned works consider the case when X ⊆ R is a continuous domain, p(x) is a smooth density on X d , and the
Stein operator is defined in terms of the score function of p,
sp (x) = ∇ log p(x) = ∇p(x)/p(x), where ∇ is the gradient
operator. Observe that any normalization constant in p cancels out in the score function, so that if the Stein operator Ap

