Adaptive Sampled Softmax with Kernel Based Sampling

Guy Blanc 1 Steffen Rendle 2

Abstract
Softmax is the most commonly used output function for multiclass problems and is widely used in
areas such as vision, natural language processing,
and recommendation. A softmax model has linear costs in the number of classes which makes it
too expensive for many real-world problems. A
common approach to speed up training involves
sampling only some of the classes at each training step. It is known that this method is biased
and that the bias increases the more the sampling
distribution deviates from the output distribution.
Nevertheless, almost all recent work uses simple
sampling distributions that require a large sample
size to mitigate the bias. In this work, we propose
a new class of kernel based sampling methods and
develop an efficient sampling algorithm. Kernel
based sampling adapts to the model as it is trained,
thus resulting in low bias. It can also be easily applied to many models because it relies only on the
model’s last hidden layer. We empirically study
the trade-off of bias, sampling distribution and
sample size and show that kernel based sampling
results in low bias with few samples.

1. Introduction
Classification problems with a large number of classes are
common in many language tasks (Mikolov et al., 2013; Bengio & Sénécal, 2008) and recommender systems (Covington
et al., 2016). A standard and effective approach to these
classification tasks is to use some model, such as a neural
network, to compute a logit for each class, and assume that
the class probabilities are a softmax of the logits. Computing class probabilities with softmax involves a normalization
step where a partition function over the logits of all classes
is computed. For learning the model parameters, an opti1
Work done during internship at Google, Mountain View,
USA 2 Google, Mountain View, USA. Correspondence to:
Guy Blanc <guy.blanc@gmail.com>, Steffen Rendle <srendle@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

mization algorithm, e.g., stochastic gradient descent, needs
to compute the gradients with respect to the loss. When the
number of classes, n, is large, computing the probability of
each class is often too slow, as the time for each training
step grows linearly with n. Sampled softmax, which creates
a sample of m < n classes in every update step, is commonly used when the number of classes becomes too large.
It is well known that sampled softmax is biased (Bengio &
Sénécal, 2008), i.e., it does not converge to the same loss as
a full softmax – no matter how many update steps are taken.
The only way to eliminate the bias is to sample from the
softmax distribution which is not efficient. For any other
sampling distribution, there are two directions to mitigate
the bias: (i) choose a sampling distribution that is closer
to softmax, or (ii) increase the sample size, m – which is
trivial but costly. Early work (Bengio & Sénécal, 2008) has
shown that a good sampling distribution should be adaptive
and should depend on the model’s output.
While the importance of the sampling distribution is known,
surprisingly, almost all recent applications use simple sampling distributions such as uniform or global popularity,
which require large sample sizes to achieve an acceptable
bias. One reason for this trend could be that the models
have tended to get more complex, e.g. stacked LSTMs, very
deep networks, convolutional NN, etc. which makes it hard
to design an efficient sampling distribution that adapts to
the model.
In this work, we propose a new class of sampling distributions that approximate softmax but are efficient to compute.
The proposed sampling distributions are defined over the
model’s output, making them adaptive to the input, the
model’s structure, and the current model parameters. The
main idea is to sample proportionally to a non-negative
kernel. We show that kernels allow us to compute the partition function efficiently in the kernel space. This result can
be used in a divide and conquer algorithm that samples in
O(D log n) time, where D is the dimension of the kernel
space. We suggest the quadratic kernel as an approximation
for (absolute) softmax. See Section 3.3 for details. Kernel
based sampling is generic and can be applied directly to
any model where the final layer is a dot product between a
hidden layer and class embeddings.
We study the bias of uniform, quadratic kernel and softmax

