Ranking Distributions based on Noisy Sorting
Adil El Mesaoudi-Paul 1 Eyke Hüllermeier 1 Róbert Busa-Fekete 2

Abstract
We propose a new statistical model for ranking
data, i.e., a new family of probability distributions
on permutations. Our model is inspired by the
idea of a data-generating process in the form of
a noisy sorting procedure, in which deterministic
comparisons between pairs of items are replaced
by Bernoulli trials. The probability of producing a certain ranking as a result then essentially
depends on the Bernoulli parameters, which can
be interpreted as pairwise preferences. We show
that our model can be written in closed form if
insertion sort is used as sorting algorithm and can
be characterized recursively if quick sort is used,
and propose a maximum likelihood approach for
parameter estimation. We also introduce a generalization of the model, in which the constraints on
pairwise preferences are relaxed, and for which
maximum likelihood estimation can be carried
out based on a variation of the generalized iterative scaling algorithm. Experimentally, we show
that the models perform very well in terms of
goodness of fit, compared to existing models for
ranking data.

1. Introduction
The analysis of ranking data has a long tradition in statistics,
and corresponding methods have been used in various fields
of application, such as psychology and the social sciences
(Marden, 1996). More recently, applications in information
retrieval (Liu, 2009) and machine learning (Fürnkranz &
Hüllermeier, 2010) have caused a renewed interest in the
analysis of rankings and related statistical tools, such as
probability distributions on rankings.
In contrast to probability distributions on the reals, the number of parametric distributions on rankings (permutations
1

Heinz Nixdorf Institute and Department of Computer Science,
Paderborn University, Germany 2 Yahoo Research, New York, USA.
Correspondence to: Adil El Mesaoudi-Paul <adil.paul@upb.de>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

of a fixed size) is rather limited. The most popular models
are Mallows (Mallows, 1957) and Plackett-Luce (Plackett,
1975; Luce, 1959), and to a lesser extent Babington Smith
(Babington-Smith, 1950). In this paper, we add another
class of probability distributions to this repertoire.
Our model is inspired by the idea of a data-generating process in the form of a noisy sorting procedure (Biernacki &
Jacques, 2013), that is, the idea that a ranking is produced
as the result of a sorting process, in which comparisons are
not deterministic but dependant on chance. More specifically, comparisons between pairs of items are modelled as
Bernoulli trials, with the Bernoulli parameters representing
pairwise preferences. While these preferences obey certain
consistency constraints for our basic model, we also introduce a generalization for which these constraints are relaxed.
For two sorting algorithms, insertion sort and quick sort, we
show that the former model can be written in closed form,
and that the latter has a recursive characterization.
In addition to proposing the models themselves, we address
the problem of parameter estimation based on sample data.
More specifically, we devise procedures for efficient maximum likelihood estimation. In an experimental study, we
assess the performance of our models in terms of goodness
of fit on a large number of real-world data sets.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next
section, we introduce notation and recall the basic families
of probability distributions on rankings. Our new model
classes are introduced in Section 3, their instantiation for
specific sorting algorithms is discussed in Section 4, and the
problem of parameter estimation is addressed in Section 5.
Experimental results are presented in Section 6, prior to
concluding the paper in Section 7.

2. Probability Distributions on Rankings
Consider a fixed set O = {o1 , . . . , oK } of K choice alternatives (objects/options/items). We identify a ranking over O
with a permutation ⇡ 2 SK , where SK denotes the collection of permutations on [K] = {1, . . . , K}. Thus, each ⇡
is a mapping [K] ! [K], such that ⇡(k) denotes the position of the k th item ok in the associated ranking. With each
ranking ⇡, we associate an ordering ⇡ 1 , where ⇡ 1 (j) is
the index of the item on position j. To simplify notation, we

