Path Consistency Learning in Tsallis Entropy Regularized MDPs
Ofir Nachum * 1 Yinlam Chow * 2 Mohamamd Ghavamzadeh * 2

Abstract
We study the sparse entropy-regularized reinforcement learning (ERL) problem in which the
entropy term is a special form of the Tsallis entropy. The optimal policy of this formulation is
sparse, i.e., at each state, it has non-zero probability for only a small number of actions. This
addresses the main drawback of the standard
Shannon entropy-regularized RL (soft ERL) formulation, in which the optimal policy is softmax,
and thus, may assign a non-negligible probability
mass to non-optimal actions. This problem is aggravated as the number of actions is increased. In
this paper, we follow the work of Nachum et al.
(2017) in the soft ERL setting, and propose a
class of novel path consistency learning (PCL)
algorithms, called sparse PCL, for the sparse
ERL problem that can work with both on-policy
and off-policy data. We first derive a sparse consistency equation that specifies a relationship between the optimal value function and policy of
the sparse ERL along any system trajectory. Crucially, a weak form of the converse is also true,
and we quantify the sub-optimality of a policy
which satisfies sparse consistency, and show that
as we increase the number of actions, this suboptimality is better than that of the soft ERL optimal policy. We then use this result to derive the
sparse PCL algorithms. We empirically compare
sparse PCL with its soft counterpart, and show
its advantage, especially in problems with a large
number of actions.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), the goal is to find a policy with maximum long-term performance, defined as the
sum of discounted rewards generated by following the policy (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996; Sutton & Barto, 1998).
In case the number of states and actions are small, and the
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Brain 2 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Yinlam Chow <yinlamchow@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

model is known, the optimal policy is the solution of the
non-linear Bellman optimality equations (Bellman, 1957).
When the system is large or the model is unknown, greedily solving the Bellman equations often results in policies
that are far from optimal. A principled way of dealing
with this issue is regularization. Among different forms
of regularization, such as `2 (e.g., Farahmand et al. 2008;
2009) and `1 (e.g., Kolter & Ng 2009; Johns et al. 2010;
Ghavamzadeh et al. 2011), entropy regularization is among
the most studied in both value-based (e.g., Kappen 2005;
Todorov 2006; Ziebart 2010; Azar et al. 2012; Fox et al.
2016; O’Donoghue et al. 2017; Asadi & Littman 2017)
and policy-based (e.g., Peters et al. 2010; Todorov 2010)
RL formulations. In particular, two of the most popular
deep RL algorithms, TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) and
A3C (Mnih et al., 2016), are based on entropy-regularized
policy search. We refer the interested readers to Neu et al.
(2017), for an insightful discussion on entropy-regularized
RL algorithms and their connection to online learning.
In entropy-regularized RL (ERL), an entropy term is added
to the Bellman equation. This formulation has four main
advantages: 1) it softens the non-linearity of the Bellman
equations and makes it possible to solve them more easily, 2) the solution of the softened problem is quantifiably
not much worse than the optimal solution in terms of accumulated return, 3) the addition of the entropy term brings
nice properties, such as encouraging exploration (Shannon
entropy) (e.g., Fox et al. 2016; Nachum et al. 2017) and
maintaining a close distance to a baseline policy (relative
entropy) (e.g., Schulman et al. 2015; Belousov & Peters
2017; Nachum et al. 2018), and 4) unlike the original problem that has a deterministic solution, the solution to the
softened problem is stochastic, which is preferable in problems in which exploration or dealing with unexpected situations is important. However, in the most common form
of ERL, in which a Shannon (or relative) entropy term is
added to the Bellman equations, the optimal policy is of
the form of softmax. Despite the advantages of a softmax
policy in terms of exploration, its main drawback is that
at each step, it assigns a non-negligible probability mass
to non-optimal actions, a problem that is aggravated as the
number of actions is increased. This may result in policies
that may not be safe to execute. To address this issue, Lee
et al. (2018) proposed to add a special form of a general no-

