Neural Dynamic Programming for Musical Self Similarity

Christian J. Walder 1 2 Dongwoo Kim 2 3

Abstract
We present a neural sequence model designed
specifically for symbolic music. The model is
based on a learned edit distance mechanism which
generalises a classic recursion from computer science, leading to a neural dynamic program. Repeated motifs are detected by learning the transformations between them. We represent the arising
computational dependencies using a novel data
structure, the edit tree; this perspective suggests
natural approximations which afford the scaling
up of our otherwise cubic time algorithm. We
demonstrate our model on real and synthetic data;
in all cases it out-performs a strong stacked long
short-term memory benchmark.

1. Introduction
A popular approach to symbolic music modelling is to represent pieces by sequences and model them with a Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN) (Eck & Schmidhuber, 2002; Fernandez & Vico, 2013; Jaques et al., 2016; Pachet et al., 2017;
Briot et al., 2017; Johnson, 2017). The RNN architecture is
typically based on the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
(Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997).
Such models are useful for algorithmic composition and
accompaniment; e.g. one may conditionally sample with
human input constraints (Pachet & Roy, 2011; Walder &
Kim, 2017). Without such constraints, sampling from an
LSTM tends to produce music with an undesirable meandering quality that is unlike human composed music (see
e.g. (Jaques et al., 2016) for a discussion of the issue).
Rather, human music is strongly self similar (Pareyon,
2011); a few motifs may form the building blocks for an entire piece — see e.g. movement one of Beethoven’s Pastoral
Symphony and its entertaining analysis by Bernstein (1973).
1
CSIRO Data61, Black Mountain, Australia 2 The Australian National University 3 Data to Decisions CRC, Kent
Town, SA, Australia. Correspondence to: Christian <christian.walder@data61.csiro.au>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

j

i

Figure 1. An excerpt from Bach’s BWV 1007 as a piano roll (horizontal = time; vertical = pitch as per the keyboard at left), which
ends during the third repetition of a motif. By analogy with the
earlier repeats, the last two notes of the excerpt will likely repeat
immediately. Note that the third cycle of the motif introduces a
non-trivial diatonic (within musical scale) shift of the upper notes.
The indices i and j above are referred to in subsubsection 4.2.1.

These motific building blocks are not simply repeated verbatim throughout a piece of music; rather, as in the example
of figure 1, the fragments are transformed in a musically
logical way. This logic demands coherent harmony, melody
and phrasing structure; this in turns requires such non-trivial
motif transformations as transposition, diatonic shifting,
deletion, insertion of passing tones, truncation, etc.
The logic of motif transformation is our focus. Like any
sequence model, our model may be factorised causally as
in (5) of section 4 below. The key idea is that whenever,
as we are generating a sequence, we detect earlier point(s)
which are motifically related, then we may expect the future to unfold analogously. This is similar in spirit to the
concept of attention (Bahdanau et al., 2014), which has
spurred lots of research interest, especially in sequence to
sequence modelling for machine translation. Attentional
sequence models are far less common however — the single
example we are aware of is (Laird & Irvin, 2017). Indeed,
naı̈vely modelling sequences with attention suffers from a
quadratic time complexity, and is arguably less appropriate
for language modelling than for machine translation.
Our model explicitly compares all sub-sequences of all
lengths within the very sequence being modelled, using
a dynamic program (DP) that aligns by explicitly modelling
generalised edit operations; a naı̈ve implementation has a cubic time complexity. This is a challenging example of recent
research investigating structured attention and neural (or
differentiable) dynamic programming; e.g. (Schulze et al.,
2007; Lample et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2017; Cuturi & Blondel, 2017; Mensch & Blondel, 2018). The computational

