Causal Bandits with Propagating Inference

Akihiro Yabe 1 Daisuke Hatano 2 Hanna Sumita 3 Shinji Ito 1 Naonori Kakimura 4 Takuro Fukunaga 2
Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi 5

Abstract
Bandit is a framework for designing sequential experiments, where a learner selects an arm A ∈ A
and obtains an observation corresponding to A in
each experiment. Theoretically, the tight regret
lower-bound for the general bandit is polynomial
with respect to the number of arms |A|, and thus,
to overcome this bound, the bandit problem with
side-information is often considered. Recently,
a bandit framework over a causal graph was introduced, where the structure of the causal graph
is available as side-information and the arms are
identified with interventions on the causal graph.
Existing
p algorithms for causal bandit overcame
the Ω( |A|/T ) simple-regret lower-bound; however, their algorithms work only when the interventions A are localized around a single node (i.e.,
an intervention propagates only to its neighbors).
We then propose a novel causal bandit algorithm
for an arbitrary set of interventions, which can
propagate throughout thep
causal graph. We also
show that it achieves O( γ ∗ log(|A|T )/T ) regret bound, where γ ∗ is determined by using a
causal graph structure. In particular, if the maximum in-degree of the causal graph is a constant,
then γ ∗ = O(N 2 ), where N is the number of
nodes.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandit has been widely recognized as a standard framework for modeling online learning with a limited
number of observations. In each round in the bandit problem, a learner chooses an arm A from given candidates A,
and obtains a corresponding observation. Since observation
is limited, the learner must adopt an efficient strategy for
1
NEC Corporation, Japan 2 RIKEN AIP, Japan 3 Tokyo
Metropolitan University, Japan 4 Keio University, Japan 5 National
Institute of Informatics, Japan. Correspondence to: Akihiro Yabe
<a-yabe@cq.jp.nec.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

exploring the optimal arm A∗ ∈ A. The efficiency of the
strategy is measured
pby regret, and the theoretically tight
lower-bound is O( |A|) with respect to the number of
arms |A| in the general multi-armed bandit setting. Thus,
in order to improve the above lower bound, one requires
additional information for the bandit setting. For example,
contextual bandit (Agarwal et al., 2014; Auer et al., 2002)
is a well-known class of bandit problems with side information on domain-expert knowledge.
p For this setting, there is
a logarithmic regret bound O( log |A|) with respect
p to the
number of arms. In this paper, we also achieve O( log |A|)
regret bound for a novel class of bandit problems with side
information. To this end, let us introduce our bandit setting
in detail.
Causal graph (Pearl, 2009) is a well-known tool for modeling a variety of real problems, including computational
advertising (Bottou et al., 2013), genetics (Meinshausen
et al., 2016), agriculture (Splawa-Neyman et al., 1990), and
marketing (Kim et al., 2008). Based on causal graph discovery studies (Eberhardt et al., 2005; Hauser & Bühlmann,
2014; Hu et al., 2014; Shanmugam et al., 2015), Lattimore
et al. (2016) recently introduced the causal bandit framework. They consider the problem of finding the best intervention which causes desirable propagation of a probabilistic distribution over a given causal graph with a limited
number of experiments T . In this setting, the arms are
identified as interventions A on the causal graph. A set
of binary random variables V1 , V2 , . . . , VN is associated
with nodes v1 , v2 , . . . , vN of the causal graph. At each
round of an experiment, a learner selects an intervention
A ∈ A ⊆ {0, 1, ∗}N which enforces a realization of a
variable Vi to Ai when Ai ∈ {0, 1}. The effect of the intervention then propagates throughout the causal graph through
the edges, and a realization ω ∈ {0, 1}N over all nodes is
observed after propagation. The goal of the causal bandit
problem is to control the realization of a target variable VN
with an optimal intervention.
Figure 1 is an illustrative example of the causal bandit problem. In the figure, the four nodes on the right represent a
consumer decision-making model in e-commerce borrowed
from (Kim et al., 2008). This model assumes that customers
make a decision to purchase based on their perceived risk
in an online transition (e.g., defective product), the con-

