Riemannian Stochastic Recursive Gradient Algorithm

Hiroyuki Kasai 1 Hiroyuki Sato 2 Bamdev Mishra 3

Abstract
Stochastic variance reduction algorithms have recently become popular for minimizing the average of a large, but finite number of loss functions on a Riemannian manifold. The present paper proposes a Riemannian stochastic recursive
gradient algorithm (R-SRG), which does not require the inverse of retraction between two distant iterates on the manifold. Convergence analyses of R-SRG are performed on both retractionconvex and non-convex functions under computationally efficient retraction and vector transport
operations. The key challenge is analysis of the
influence of vector transport along the retraction
curve. Numerical evaluations reveal that R-SRG
competes well with state-of-the-art Riemannian
batch and stochastic gradient algorithms.

1

Introduction

Let f : M → R be a smooth real-valued function on a
Riemannian manifold M (Absil et al., 2008). The target
problem concerns a given model variable w ∈ M, and is
expressed as
{
}
n
1∑
min f (w) :=
fi (w) ,
(1)
w∈M
n i=1
where n is the total number of the elements. This problem has many applications; for example, in principal component analysis (PCA) and the subspace tracking problem
(Balzano et al., 2010) on the Grassmann manifold. The
low-rank matrix/tensor completion problem is a promising application concerning the manifold of fixed-rank matrices/tensors (Mishra & Sepulchre, 2014; Kasai & Mishra,
2016). The linear regression problem is also defined on the
manifold of fixed-rank matrices (Meyer et al., 2011).
A popular choice of algorithms for solving (1) is the Rie1

The University of Electro-Communications, Japan. 2 Kyoto
University, Japan. 3 Microsoft, India. Correspondence to: Hiroyuki Kasai <kasai@is.uec.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

mannian gradient descent method, which calculates the
Riemannian
full gradient estimation, i.e., gradf (w) =
∑n
1
gradf
i (w), for every iteration, where gradfi (w)
i=1
n
is the Riemannian gradient on the Riemannian manifold M
for the i-th sample. However, this estimation is computationally costly when n is extremely large. A popular alternative is the Riemannian stochastic gradient descent algorithm (R-SGD), which extends the stochastic gradient descent algorithm (SGD) in the Euclidean space (Bonnabel,
2013) to the Riemannian manifold. As R-SGD calculates
only gradfi (w) for the i-th sample, the complexity per iteration is independent of the sample size n. Although R-SGD
requires retraction and vector transport operations in every
iteration, those calculation costs can be ignored when they
are lower than those of gradfi (w); this applies to many important Riemannian optimization problems, including the
low-rank tensor completion problem and the Riemannian
centroid problem as seen in Section 5.
Similar to SGD (Robbins & Monro, 1951), R-SGD is hindered by a slow convergence rate due to a decaying step
size sequence. To accelerate the rate of R-SGD, the Riemannian stochastic variance reduced gradient algorithm
(R-SVRG) (Sato et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2016) has recently been proposed; this technique reduces the variance of the stochastic gradient exploiting the finite-sum
form of (1) based on recent progress in variance reduction methods in the Euclidean space (Johnson & Zhang,
2013; Roux et al., 2012; Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2013;
Defazio et al., 2014; Reddi et al., 2016). One distinguished
feature is reduction of the variance of noisy stochastic
gradients by periodical full gradient estimations, which
yields a linear convergence rate. R-SQN-VR has also recently been proposed, where a stochastic quasi-Newton algorithm and the variance reduced methods are mutually
combined (Kasai et al., 2018). Although it achieves practical improvements for ill-conditioned problems, its convergence rate is worse than that of R-SVRG. Both R-SVRG
and R-SQN-VR transport vectors between two distant iterates on the manifold M; thus, they must calculate a tangent
vector to connect them at every iteration, and are hindered
by additional larger errors caused by vector transport compared with the parallel translation approach.
Here, we propose a Riemannian stochastic recursive gradient algorithm (R-SRG) that does not rely on two distant

