Tight Regret Bounds for Bayesian Optimization in One Dimension

Jonathan Scarlett 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of Bayesian optimization (BO) in one dimension, under a Gaussian
process prior and Gaussian sampling noise. We
provide a theoretical analysis showing that, under
fairly mild technical assumptions on the kernel,
the best possible
√ cumulative
√ regret up to time T
behaves as Ω( T ) and O( T √
log T ). This gives
a tight characterization up to a log T factor, and
includes the first non-trivial lower bound for noisy
BO. Our assumptions are satisfied, for example,
by the squared exponential and Matérn-ν kernels,
with the latter requiring ν > 2. Our results certify
the near-optimality of existing bounds (Srinivas et
al., 2009) for the SE kernel, while proving them
to be strictly suboptimal for the Matérn kernel
with ν > 2.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al., 2016) is a
powerful and versatile tool for black-box function optimization, with applications including parameter tuning, robotics,
molecular design, sensor networks, and more. The idea is
to model the unknown function as a Gaussian process with
a given kernel function dictating the smoothness properties. This model is updated using (typically noisy) samples,
which are selected to steer towards the function maximum.
One of the most attractive properties of BO is its efficiency
in terms of the number of function samples used. Consequently, algorithms with rigorous guarantees on the tradeoff between samples and optimization performance are particularly valuable. Perhaps the most prominent work in the
literature giving such guarantees is that of (Srinivas et al.,
1

Department of Computer Science & Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore. Correspondence to:
Jonathan Scarlett <scarlett@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

2010), who consider the cumulative regret:
RT =

T 
X
t=1


max f (x) − f (xt ) ,
x

(1)

where f is the function being optimized, and xt is the point
chosen at time t. Under a Gaussian process (GP) prior and
Gaussian noise, it is shown in (Srinivas et al., 2010) that
an algorithm called Gaussian Process Upper Confidence
Bound (GP-UCB) achieves a cumulative regret of the form
p
RT = O∗ ( T γT ),
(2)
where γT = maxx1 ,...,xT I(f ; y) (with function values f =
(f (x1 ), . . . , f (xT )) and noisy samples y = (y1 , . . . , yT ))
is known as the maximum information gain. Here I(f ; y)
denotes the mutual information (Cover & Thomas, 2001)
between the function values and noisy samples, and O∗ (·)
denotes asymptotic notation up to logarithmic factors.
The guarantee (2) ensures sub-linear cumulative regret for
many kernels of interest. However, the literature is severely
lacking in algorithm-independent lower bounds, and without these, it is impossible to know to what extent the upper bounds, including (2), can be improved. In this work,
we address this gap in detail in the special case of a onedimensional function. We show
√ that the best possible cumulative regret behaves as Θ∗ ( T ) under mild assumptions
on the kernel, thus identifying both cases where (2) is nearoptimal, and cases where it is strictly suboptimal.
1.1. Related Work
An extensive range of BO algorithms have been proposed
in the literature, typically involving the maximization of an
acquisition function (Hennig & Schuler, 2012; HernándezLobato et al., 2014; Russo & Van Roy, 2014; Wang et al.,
2016); see (Shahriari et al., 2016) for a recent overview.
As mentioned above, the most relevant algorithm to this
work for the noisy setting is GP-UCB (Srinivas et al., 2010),
which constructs confidence bounds in which the function
lies with high probability, and samples the point with the
highest upper confidence bound. Several extensions to GPUCB have also been proposed, including contextual (Krause
& Ong, 2011; Bogunovic et al., 2016a), batch (Contal et al.,
2013; Desautels et al., 2014), and high-dimensional (Kandasamy et al., 2015; Rolland et al., 2018) variants.

