The Edge Density Barrier: Computational-Statistical Tradeoffs in
Combinatorial Inference
Hao Lu 1 Yuan Cao 1 Zhuoran Yang 1 Junwei Lu 2 Han Liu 3 Zhaoran Wang 4

Abstract
We study the hypothesis testing problem of inferring the existence of combinatorial structures in
undirected graphical models. Although there exist extensive studies on the information-theoretic
limits of this problem, it remains largely unexplored whether such limits can be attained by
efficient algorithms. In this paper, we quantify
the minimum computational complexity required
to attain the information-theoretic limits based
on an oracle computational model. We prove
that, for testing common combinatorial structures,
such as clique and nearest neighbor graph against
an empty graph, or large clique against small
clique, the information-theoretic limits are provably unachievable by tractable algorithms in general. More importantly, we define structural quantities called the weak and strong edge densities,
which offer deep insight into the existence of such
computational-statistical tradeoffs. To the best of
our knowledge, our characterization is the first
to identify and explain the fundamental tradeoffs
between statistics and computation for combinatorial inference problems in undirected graphical
models.

1. Introduction
One of the most important goals of statistical inference is to
identify dependency structures among variables. In specific,
given n realizations {xi }ni=1 of a random vector X ∈ Rd ,
we are interested in inferring the structures of the underlying
graphical model. This problem plays a fundamental role
1

Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 2 Department of
Biostatistics, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA 3 Department
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL, USA 4 Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston,
IL, USA. Correspondence to: Hao Lu <haolu@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

in bioinformatics (Friedman, 2004), information retrieval
(Welling et al., 2005), speech recognition (Bilmes & Bartels, 2005) and image processing (Murphy et al., 2004). In
this paper, we focus on a more specific inference problem:
testing whether the underlying graph has a certain combinatorial structure. For instance, we consider the graph
associated with the precision matrix Θ of X, we aim to test,
e.g., whether it is a clique of size s or is an empty graph (see
§2 for more such examples). There exists a vast body of literature on efficient algorithms and fundamental informationtheoretic limits for combinatorial inference problem. See,
e.g., (Arias-Castro et al., 2008; Addario-Berry et al., 2010;
Chen et al., 2012; Arias-Castro et al., 2012; Verzelen &
Arias-Castro, 2013; Castro et al., 2014; Arias-Castro &
Verzelen, 2014; Arias-Castro et al., 2015a;b; Neykov et al.,
2016) and the references therein. However, under their settings, there is generally a lack of algorithms that are both
computationally efficient and information-theoretically optimal. Consequently, it gives rise to the natural question
of whether or not the information-theoretic limits can be
attained by any efficient algorithms, which remains largely
unexplored. Moreover, it is even less clear how the formulations of testing problems, especially the combinatorial
structures of graphical models, affect the achievability of
the information-theoretic limits. Our goal is to understand
these two questions. In particular, we aim to characterize the
fundamental limits for combinatorial inference in graphical
model, particularly from the computational perspective. To
study the minimum computational complexity required to
attain the information-theoretic limits, we use the oracle
computational model developed by (Kearns, 1998; Feldman
et al., 2013; 2015a;b; 2017).
Our Contribution: First, based on the oracle computational model, we establish the unachievability of
information-theoretic limits for several common combinatorial structures. As concrete examples, for precision graphs
we consider testing clique and nearest neighbor graph structures against the empty graph, as well as large clique against
small clique. In these examples, we identify a significant gap
between the information-theoretic limit and the minimum
signal strength that allows for tractable algorithms. This gap
depicts the fundamental tradeoffs between computational
tractability and statistical optimality.

