Gradually Updated Neural Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition

Siyuan Qiao 1 Zhishuai Zhang 1 Wei Shen 1 2 Bo Wang 3 Alan Yuille 1

Abstract
Depth is one of the keys that make neural networks succeed in the task of large-scale image
recognition. The state-of-the-art network architectures usually increase the depths by cascading
convolutional layers or building blocks. In this
paper, we present an alternative method to increase the depth. Our method is by introducing
computation orderings to the channels within convolutional layers or blocks, based on which we
gradually compute the outputs in a channel-wise
manner. The added orderings not only increase
the depths and the learning capacities of the networks without any additional computation costs,
but also eliminate the overlap singularities so that
the networks are able to converge faster and perform better. Experiments show that the networks
based on our method achieve the state-of-the-art
performances on CIFAR and ImageNet datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have become the state-of-the-art systems for image recognition (He et al., 2016a; Huang et al.,
2017b; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Qiao et al., 2018; Simonyan
& Zisserman, 2014; Szegedy et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2017;
Zeiler & Fergus, 2013) as well as other vision tasks (Chen
et al., 2015; Girshick et al., 2014; Long et al., 2015; Qiao
et al., 2017; Ren et al., 2015; Shen et al., 2015; Xie & Tu,
2015). The architectures keep going deeper, e.g., from five
convolutional layers (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) to 1001 layers (He et al., 2016b). The benefit of deep architectures
is their strong learning capacities because each new layer
can potentially introduce more non-linearities and typically
uses larger receptive fields (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014).
In addition, adding certain types of layers (e.g. (He et al.,
2016b)) will not harm the performance theoretically since
they can just learn identity mapping. This makes stacking
up layers more appealing in the network designs.
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 Shanghai University 3 Hikvision Research. Correspondence to: Siyuan Qiao <siyuan.qiao@jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

SoftMax
Block 3

SoftMax
× 𝑁3

Pooling
Block 2

Image

×1

Pooling
× 𝑁2

Pooling
Block 1

GUNN 3

GUNN 2

×1

Pooling
× 𝑁1

GUNN 1

×1

Image

Figure 1. Comparing architecture designs based on cascading convolutional building blocks (left) and GUNN (right). Cascadingbased architecture increases the depth by repeating the blocks.
GUNN-based networks increases the depth by adding computation
orderings to the channels of the building blocks.

Although deeper architectures usually lead to stronger learning capacities, cascading convolutional layers (e.g. VGG (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014)) or blocks (e.g. ResNet (He
et al., 2016a)) is not necessarily the only method to achieve
this goal. In this paper, we present a new way to increase
the depth of the networks as an alternative to stacking up
convolutional layers or blocks. Figure 2 provides an illustration that compares our proposed convolutional network
that gradually updates the feature representations against the
traditional convolutional network that computes its output
simultaneously. By only adding an ordering to the channels without any additional computation, the later computed
channels become deeper than the corresponding ones in the
traditional convolutional network. We refer to the neural
networks with the proposed computation orderings on the
channels as Gradually Updated Neural Networks (GUNN).
Figure 1 provides two examples of architecture designs
based on cascading building blocks and GUNN. Without
repeating the building blocks, GUNN increases the depths
of the networks as well as their learning capacities.
It is clear that converting plain networks to GUNN increases
the depths of the networks without any additional computations. What is less obvious is that GUNN in fact eliminates
the overlap singularities inherent in the loss landscapes of
the cascading-based convolutional networks, which have
been shown to adversely affect the training of deep neural
networks as well as their performances (Wei et al., 2008;

