Smoothed Action Value Functions for Learning Gaussian Policies

Ofir Nachum 1 Mohammad Norouzi 1 George Tucker 1 Dale Schuurmans 1 2

Abstract
State-action value functions (i.e., Q-values) are
ubiquitous in reinforcement learning (RL), giving
rise to popular algorithms such as SARSA and Qlearning. We propose a new notion of action value
defined by a Gaussian smoothed version of the
expected Q-value. We show that such smoothed
Q-values still satisfy a Bellman equation, making
them learnable from experience sampled from an
environment. Moreover, the gradients of expected
reward with respect to the mean and covariance of
a parameterized Gaussian policy can be recovered
from the gradient and Hessian of the smoothed
Q-value function. Based on these relationships,
we develop new algorithms for training a Gaussian policy directly from a learned smoothed Qvalue approximator. The approach is additionally
amenable to proximal optimization by augmenting the objective with a penalty on KL-divergence
from a previous policy. We find that the ability to
learn both a mean and covariance during training
leads to significantly improved results on standard
continuous control benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Model-free reinforcement learning algorithms often alternate between two concurrent but interacting processes: (1)
policy evaluation, where an action value function (i.e., a
Q-value) is updated to obtain a better estimate of the return
associated with taking a specific action, and (2) policy improvement, where the policy is updated aiming to maximize
the current value function. In the past, different notions
of Q-value have led to distinct but important families of
RL methods. For example, SARSA (Rummery & Niranjan,
1994; Sutton & Barto, 1998; Van Seijen et al., 2009) uses the
expected Q-value, defined as the expected return of following the current policy. Q-learning (Watkins, 1989) exploits a
1

Google Brain 2 Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta. Correspondence to: Ofir Nachum <ofirnachum@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

hard-max notion of Q-value, defined as the expected return
of following an optimal policy. Soft Q-learning (Haarnoja
et al., 2017) and PCL (Nachum et al., 2017) both use a
soft-max form of Q-value, defined as the future return of
following an optimal entropy regularized policy. Clearly,
the choice of Q-value function has a considerable effect on
the resulting algorithm; for example, restricting the types of
policies that can be expressed, and determining the type of
exploration that can be naturally applied. In each case, the
Q-value at a state s and action a answers the question,
“What would my future value from s be if I were to take an
initial action a?”
Such information about a hypothetical action is helpful
when learning a policy; we want to nudge the policy distribution to favor actions with potentially higher Q-values.
In this work, we investigate the practicality and benefits of
answering a more difficult, but more relevant, question:
“What would my future value from s be if I were to sample my
initial action from a distribution centered at a?”
We focus our efforts on Gaussian policies and thus the counterfactual posited by the Q-value inquires about the expected
future return of following the policy when changing the
mean of the initial Gaussian distribution. Thus, our new
notion of Q-values maps a state-action pair (s, a) to the
expected return of first taking an action sampled from a
normal distribution N (·|a, Σ(s)) centered at a, and following actions sampled from the current policy thereafter. In
this way, the Q-values we introduce may be interpreted as a
Gaussian-smoothed version of the expected Q-value, hence
we term them smoothed Q-values.
We show that smoothed Q-values possess a number of important properties that make them attractive for use in RL
algorithms. It is clear from the definition of smoothed Qvalues that, if known, their structure is highly beneficial for
learning the mean of a Gaussian policy. We are able to show
more than this: although the smoothed Q-values are not a
direct function of the covariance, one can surprisingly use
knowledge of the smoothed Q-values to derive updates to
the covariance of a Gaussian policy. Specifically, the gradient of the standard expected return objective with respect to
the mean and covariance of a Gaussian policy is equivalent
to the gradient and Hessian of the smoothed Q-value func-

