Unbiased Objective Estimation in Predictive Optimization

Shinji Ito 1 Akihiro Yabe 1 Ryohei Fujimaki 1

Abstract
For data-driven decision-making, one promising
approach, called predictive optimization, is to
solve maximization problems i n which the objective function to be maximized is estimated from
data. Predictive optimization, however, suffers
from the problem of a calculated optimal solution’s being evaluated too optimistically, i.e., the
value of the objective function is overestimated.
This paper investigates such optimistic bias and
presents two methods for correcting it. The first,
which is analogous to cross-validation, successfully corrects the optimistic bias but results in
underestimation of the true value. Our second
method employs resampling techniques to avoid
both overestimation and underestimation. We
show that the second method, referred to as the
parameter perturbation method, achieves asymptotically unbiased estimation. Empirical results
for both artificial and real-world datasets demonstrate that our proposed approach successfully
corrects the optimistic bias.

1. Introduction
Data-driven decision-making has become the subject of
increased interest and been used in a number of practical applications. One of the most promising approaches is mathematical programming based on predictive models generated
by machine learning. Recent advances in machine learning
have made it easier to create accurate predictive models,
and resulting predictions have been used to build mathematical programming problems (we refer to such approaches
as predictive optimization). Predictive optimization is employed in applications for which frequent trial-and-error
process are not practical, such as water distribution optimization (Draper et al., 2003), energy generation planning (Baos et al., 2011), retail price optimization (Johnson
1
NEC Corporation.
ito@me.jp.nec.com>.

Correspondence to: Shinji Ito <s-

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

et al., 2016; Ito & Fujimaki, 2016), supply chain management (Thomas et al., 1996; Jung et al., 2004; Bertsimas &
Thiele, 2004), and portfolio optimization (Markowitz, 1952;
Chan et al., 1999; Konno & Yamazaki, 1991). Another
important use for data-driven decision-making is in reinforcement learning (Kaelbling et al., 1996; Sutton & Barto,
2013). Here it is employed in situations mainly in which
frequent trial-and-error operations are possible, except for
batch reinforcement learning (Lange et al., 2012). The focus of this paper is on the first approach, i.e., predictive
optimization.
In many practical applications of predictive optimization, it
is essential to estimate the quality of the computed strategy
because executing a strategy is often costly and risky. For
example, predictive price optimization has been used to estimate revenue functions through regressions of demand as
functions of product prices, and then, to optimize pricing
strategies by maximizing estimated revenue functions (Johnson et al., 2016; Ito & Fujimaki, 2016; 2017; Yabe et al.,
2017). In practice, users need to assess the return for the
computed “optimal” strategy before changing prices, in order to prevent unforeseen heavy losses. In a situation in
which costs for trial-and-error processes are unrealistically
high, a key challenge in predictive optimization is how to
assess the quality (or expected return) of the “optimal” solution by means of an estimated objective function.
Predictive optimization consists of two steps: estimation
and optimization. In the estimation step, we construct an
estimated objective function f (z, θ̂) for the true objective
function f (z, θ∗ ), where θ is a parameter of f , and z is a decision variable corresponding to the strategy to be optimized.
In the optimization step, we compute the estimated optimal
strategy ẑ = arg maxz∈Z f (z, θ̂), where Z is the domain of
z. Because it would be expensive to observe f (ẑ, θ∗ ) (i.e.,
to perform ẑ in a real environment), we usually estimate
it by f (ẑ, θ̂), which we call simple evaluation, in order to
assess the quality of ẑ.
It has been empirically seen, however, that this simple evaluation tends to be too optimistic. For example, in the contexts
of algorithmic investment and portfolio optimization, it has
been reported (Michaud, 1989; Chapados, 2011; Harvey
& Liu, 2015) that f (ẑ, θ̂) is much better than the acutual
return. Michaud (Michaud, 1989) argued that this bias ap-

