Learning to Explain: An Information-Theoretic Perspective
on Model Interpretation

Jianbo Chen 1 2 Le Song 3 4 Martin J. Wainwright 1 5 Michael I. Jordan 1

Abstract
We introduce instancewise feature selection as
a methodology for model interpretation. Our
method is based on learning a function to extract a subset of features that are most informative
for each given example. This feature selector is
trained to maximize the mutual information between selected features and the response variable,
where the conditional distribution of the response
variable given the input is the model to be explained. We develop an efficient variational approximation to the mutual information, and show
the effectiveness of our method on a variety of
synthetic and real data sets using both quantitative
metrics and human evaluation.

1. Introduction
Interpretability is an extremely important criterion when a
machine learning model is applied in areas such as medicine,
financial markets, and criminal justice (e.g., see the discussion paper by Lipton ((Lipton, 2016)), as well as references
therein). Many complex models, such as random forests,
kernel methods, and deep neural networks, have been developed and employed to optimize prediction accuracy, which
can compromise their ease of interpretation.
In this paper, we focus on instancewise feature selection as a
specific approach for model interpretation. Given a machine
learning model, instancewise feature selection asks for the
importance score of each feature on the prediction of a given
instance, and the relative importance of each feature is allowed to vary across instances. Thus, the importance scores
can act as an explanation for the specific instance, indicating
which features are the key for the model to make its prediction on that instance. A related concept in machine learning
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Work done partially during
an internship at Ant Financial 3 Georgia Institute of Technology
4
Ant Financial 5 The Voleon Group. Correspondence to: Jianbo
Chen <jianbochen@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

is feature selection, which selects a subset of features that
are useful to build a good predictor for a specified response
variable (Guyon & Elisseeff, 2003). While feature selection
produces a global importance of features with respect to the
entire labeled data set, instancewise feature selection measures feature importance locally for each instance labeled
by the model.
Existing work on interpreting models approach the problem from two directions. The first line of work computes
the gradient of the output of the correct class with respect
to the input vector for the given model, and uses it as a
saliency map for masking the input (Simonyan et al., 2013;
Springenberg et al., 2014). The gradient is computed using
a Parzen window approximation of the original classifier
if the original one is not available (Baehrens et al., 2010).
Another line of research approximates the model to be interpreted via a locally additive model in order to explain
the difference between the model output and some “reference” output in terms of the difference between the input
and some “reference” input (Bach et al., 2015; Kindermans
et al., 2016; Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg & Lee, 2017;
Shrikumar et al., 2017; Sundararajan et al., 2017). Ribeiro
et al. (2016) proposed the LIME, methods which randomly
draws instances from a density centered at the sample to
be explained, and fits a sparse linear model to predict the
model outputs for these instances. Shrikumar et al. (2017)
presented DeepLIFT, a method designed specifically for
neural networks, which decomposes the output of a neural
network on a specific input by backpropagating the contribution back to every feature of the input. Lundberg & Lee
(2017) used Shapley values to quantify the importance of
features of a given input, and proposed a sampling based
method “kernel SHAP” for approximating Shapley values.
(Sundararajan et al., 2017) proposed Integrated Gradients
(IG), which constructs the additive model by cumulating the
gradients along the line between the input and the reference
point. Essentially, the two directions both approximate the
model locally via an additive model, with different definitions of locality. While the first one considers infinitesimal
regions on the decision surface and takes the first-order term
in the Taylor expansion as the additive model, the second
one considers the finite difference between an input vector
and a reference vector.

