Automatic Goal Generation for
Reinforcement Learning Agents

Carlos Florensa * 1 David Held * 2 Xinyang Geng * 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 3

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful technique to train an agent to perform a task; however,
an agent that is trained using RL is only capable
of achieving the single task that is specified via its
reward function. Such an approach does not scale
well to settings in which an agent needs to perform a diverse set of tasks, such as navigating to
varying positions in a room or moving objects to
varying locations. Instead, we propose a method
that allows an agent to automatically discover the
range of tasks that it is capable of performing
in its environment. We use a generator network
to propose tasks for the agent to try to accomplish, each task being specified as reaching a certain parametrized subset of the state-space. The
generator network is optimized using adversarial
training to produce tasks that are always at the
appropriate level of difficulty for the agent, thus
automatically producing a curriculum. We show
that, by using this framework, an agent can efficiently and automatically learn to perform a wide
set of tasks without requiring any prior knowledge of its environment, even when only sparse
rewards are available. Videos and code available
at: https://sites.google.com/view/
goalgeneration4rl.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) can be used to train an agent
to perform a task by optimizing a reward function. Recently,
a number of impressive results have been demonstrated by
training agents using RL: such agents have been trained
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
UC Berkeley 2 Department of Computer Science, CMU
3
International Computer Science Institute (ICSI). Correspondence to: Carlos Florensa <florensa@berkeley.edu>, David Held
<dheld@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

to defeat a champion Go player (Silver et al., 2016), to
outperform humans in 49 Atari games (Guo et al., 2016;
Mnih et al., 2015), and to perform a variety of difficult
robotics tasks (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Duan et al., 2016;
Levine et al., 2016). In each of the above cases, the agent
is trained to optimize a single reward function in order to
learn to perform a single task. However, there are many
real-world environments in which a robot will need to be
able to perform not a single task but a diverse set of tasks,
such as navigating to varying positions in a room or moving
objects to varying locations. We consider the problem of
maximizing the average success rate of our agent over all
possible goals, where success is defined as the probability
of successfully reaching each goal by the current policy.
In order to efficiently maximize this objective, the algorithm
must intelligently choose which goals to focus on at every
training stage: goals should be at the appropriate level of
difficulty for the current policy. To do so, our algorithm
allows an agent to generate its own reward functions, defined
with respect to target subsets of the state space, called goals.
We generate such goals using a Goal Generative Adversarial
Network (Goal GAN), a variation of to the GANs introduced
by Goodfellow et al. (2014). A goal discriminator is trained
to evaluate whether a goal is at the appropriate level of
difficulty for the current policy, and a goal generator is
trained to generate goals that meet this criteria. We show
that such a framework allows an agent to quickly learn a
policy that reaches all feasible goals in its environment, with
no prior knowledge about the environment or the tasks being
performed. Our method automatically creates a curriculum,
in which, at each step, the generator generates goals that
are only slightly more difficult than the goals that the agent
already knows how to achieve.
In summary, our main contribution is a method for automatic curriculum generation that considerably improves the
sample efficiency of learning to reach all feasible goals in
the environment. Learning to reach multiple goals is useful
for multi-task settings such as navigation or manipulation,
in which we want the agent to perform a wide range of tasks.
Our method also naturally handles sparse reward functions,
without needing to manually modify the reward function
for every task, based on prior task knowledge. Instead, our

