Adversarial Learning with Local Coordinate Coding

Jiezhang Cao * 1 Yong Guo * 1 Qingyao Wu * 1 Chunhua Shen 2 Junzhou Huang 3 Mingkui Tan 1

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) aim to
generate realistic data from some prior distribution (e.g., Gaussian noises). However, such prior
distribution is often independent of real data and
thus may lose semantic information (e.g., geometric structure or content in images) of data.
In practice, the semantic information might be
represented by some latent distribution learned
from data, which, however, is hard to be used
for sampling in GANs. In this paper, rather than
sampling from the pre-defined prior distribution,
we propose a Local Coordinate Coding (LCC)
based sampling method to improve GANs. We
derive a generalization bound for LCC based
GANs and prove that a small dimensional input is sufficient to achieve good generalization
performance. Extensive experiments on various
real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) have been successfully applied to many tasks,
such as video prediction (Ranzato et al., 2014; Mathieu
et al., 2016), image translation (Isola et al., 2017; Kim
et al., 2017), etc. Specifically, GANs learn to generate data
by playing a two-player game: a generator tries to produce
samples from a simple latent distribution, and a discriminator distinguishes between the generated data and real data.
Recently, many attempts have been made to improve GANs
(Radford et al., 2015; Arjovsky et al., 2017; Karras et al.,
2018). However, existing studies suffer from two limitations. First, many studies employ some simple prior distri*

Equal contribution 1 School of Software Engineering, South
China University of Technology, China 2 School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia 3 Tencent AI Lab,
China; University of Texas at Arlington, America. Correspondence to: Mingkui Tan <mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

bution, such as Gaussian distributions (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) and uniform distributions (Radford et al., 2015).
However, such pre-defined prior distributions are often independent of the data distributions and these methods may
produce images with distorted structures without sufficient
semantic information. Although such semantic information can be represented by some latent distribution, e.g.,
extracting embeddings using an AutoEncoder (Hinton &
Salakhutdinov, 2006), how to conduct sampling from this
distribution still remains an open question in GANs.
Second, the generalization ability of GANs w.r.t. the dimension of the latent distribution is unknown. In practice,
we observe that the performance of GANs is sensitive to
the dimension of the latent distribution. Unfortunately, it is
difficult to analyze the dimensionality of the latent distribution, since the specified prior distribution is independent of
the real data. Therefore, it is very necessary and important
to explore a new method to study the dimension of latent
distribution and its impacts on the generalization ability.
In this paper, relying on the manifold assumption on images (Tenenbaum et al., 2000; Roweis & Saul, 2000), we
propose a novel generative model using Local Coordinate
Coding (LCC) (Yu et al., 2009) to improve GANs in generating perceptually convincing images. First, we employ an
AutoEncoder to learn embeddings lying on the latent manifold to capture the semantic information in data. Then, we
develop a new LCC sampling method for training GANs
by exploiting the local information on the latent manifold.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
First, we propose an LCC sampling method for GANs to
capture the local information of data. With the LCC sampling, the proposed scheme, called LCC-GANs, is able to
sample meaningful points from the latent manifold to generate new data.
Second, we study the generalization bound of LCC-GANs
based on the Rademacher complexity of the discriminator set and the error w.r.t. the intrinsic dimensionality of
the manifold. In particular, we prove that a small dimensional input is sufficient to achieve good generalization performance. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method over
several state-of-the-arts.

