Tempered Adversarial Networks

Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi 1 2 Giambattista Parascandolo 1 2 Arash Mehrjou 1 Bernhard Schölkopf 1

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have
been shown to produce realistic samples from
high-dimensional distributions, but training them
is considered hard. A possible explanation for
training instabilities is the inherent imbalance between the networks: While the discriminator is
trained directly on both real and fake samples,
the generator only has control over the fake samples it produces since the real data distribution is
fixed by the choice of a given dataset. We propose a simple modification that gives the generator control over the real samples which leads to a
tempered learning process for both generator and
discriminator. The real data distribution passes
through a lens before being revealed to the discriminator, balancing the generator and discriminator by gradually revealing more detailed features necessary to produce high-quality results.
The proposed module automatically adjusts the
learning process to the current strength of the networks, yet is generic and easy to add to any GAN
variant. In a number of experiments, we show that
this can improve quality, stability and/or convergence speed across a range of different GAN architectures (DCGAN, LSGAN, WGAN-GP).

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have been introduced as the state of the art in generative models (Goodfellow et al., 2014). They have been shown to produce
sharp and realistic images with fine details (Chen et al.,
2016; Denton et al., 2015; Radford et al., 2016; Zhang et al.,
2017). The basic setup of GANs is to train a parametric nonlinear function, the generator G, which maps samples from
random noise drawn from a distribution Z into samples of
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen,
Germany 2 Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems,
Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi
<msajjadi.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

a fake distribution G(Z) which are close in terms of some
measure to a real world empirical data distribution X . To
achieve this goal, a discriminator D is trained to provide
feedback in the form of gradients for the generator. This
feedback can be the confidence of a classifier discriminating between real and fake examples (Arjovsky et al., 2017;
Goodfellow et al., 2014; Gulrajani et al., 2017; Mao et al.,
2017) or an energy defined in terms of a reconstruction loss
of an autoencoder (Berthelot et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2017).
GANs are infamous for being difficult to train and sensitive
to small changes in hyper-parameters (Goodfellow et al.,
2016). A typical source of instability is the discriminator
rapidly overpowering the generator which leads to problems such as vanishing gradients or mode collapse. In this
case, G(X ) and X are too distant from each other and the
discriminator learns to fully distinguish them (Arjovsky &
Bottou, 2017). While several GAN variants have been introduced to address the problems encountered during training (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Berthelot et al., 2017; Gulrajani
et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2017), finding stable and more reliable training procedures for GANs is still an open research
question (Lucic et al., 2017).
1.1. Our Contributions
In this work we propose a general and dynamic, yet simple to implement extension to GANs that encourages a
smoother training procedure. We introduce a lens module L
which gives the generator control over the real data distribution X before it enters the discriminator. By adding the lens
between the real data samples and the discriminator, we
allow training to self-stabilize by automatically balancing
a reconstruction loss with the current performance of the
generator and discriminator. For instance, a lens could implement an image blurring operation which gradually gets
reduced during training, thus only requiring the generation
of good blurry images at the beginning, which gradually
become sharper during training. While this analogy from
optics motivates the term lens, in practice we learn the lens
from data as explained below.
While the generator in a regular GAN chases a fixed distribution X , the proposed lens moves the target distribution
closer to the generated samples G(Z) which leads to a better optimization behavior.

