Reinforcement Learning with Function-Valued Action Spaces
for Partial Differential Equation Control

Yangchen Pan 1 2 Amir-massoud Farahmand 3 2 Martha White 1 Saleh Nabi 2 Piyush Grover 2
Daniel Nikovski 2

Abstract
Recent work has shown that reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising approach to control dynamical systems described by partial differential
equations (PDE). This paper shows how to use
RL to tackle more general PDE control problems
that have continuous high-dimensional action
spaces with spatial relationship among action dimensions. In particular, we propose the concept
of action descriptors, which encode regularities
among spatially-extended action dimensions and
enable the agent to control high-dimensional action PDEs. We provide theoretical evidence suggesting that this approach can be more sample efficient compared to a conventional approach that
treats each action dimension separately and does
not explicitly exploit the spatial regularity of
the action space. The action descriptor approach
is then used within the deep deterministic policy gradient algorithm. Experiments on two PDE
control problems, with up to 256-dimensional
continuous actions, show the advantage of the
proposed approach over the conventional one.

1. Introduction
This paper develops an algorithmic framework for handling reinforcement learning (RL) problems with highdimensional action spaces. We are particularly interested
in problems where the dimension of the action space is
very large or even infinite. These types of problems naturally appear in the control of Partial Differential/Difference
Equations (PDE), which have attracted attention because
of their potential applications spreading over physical dy1
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada 2 Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories
(MERL), Cambridge, USA 3 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada.
Correspondence to: Yangchen Pan <pan6@ualberta.ca>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

namic system (Lions, 1971) and engineering problems, including the design of air conditioning systems (Popescu
et al., 2008), modelling of flexible artificial muscles with
many degrees of freedom (Kim et al., 2013), traffic control (Richards, 1956; Lighthill & Whitham, 1955), and the
modelling of information flow in social networks (Wang
et al., 2013).
Many dynamical systems can be described by a set of Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE). Some examples are the
dynamics describing inverted pendulum, robotic arm manipulator (with inflexible joints), and electrical circuits (in
low-frequency regime for which the electromagnetic radiation is negligible). The property of these systems is that
their state can be described by a finite dimensional variable.
The use of RL to control ODE-based problems, with either
discretized action or continuous actions, has been widely
presented in various RL works (Sutton & Barto, 1998;
Kober et al., 2013; Deisenroth et al., 2013). The success
is most significant for problems where the traditional control engineering approaches may not fare well, due to the
complexity of the dynamics, either in the form of nonlinearity or uncertainty. There are, however, many other physical phenomena that cannot be well-described by an ODE,
but can be described by a PDE. Examples are the distribution of heat in an object as a function of time and location,
motion of fluids, and electromagnetic radiation, which are
described by the heat, Navier-Stokes, and Maxwell’s equations, respectively. The control of PDEs using data-driven
approaches, including RL-based formulation, has just recently attracted attention and is a relatively an unexplored
area (Farahmand et al., 2016b; 2017; Belletti et al., 2018;
Duriez et al., 2016).
Control of PDEs has been investigated in conventional control engineering (Krstic & Smyshlyaev, 2008; Ahuja et al.,
2011; Borggaard et al., 2009; Burns et al., 2016; Burns
& Hu, 2013; Brunton & Noack, 2015). Despite the mathematical elegance of conventional approaches, they have
some drawbacks that motivate investigating learning-based
methods, in particular RL-based approaches. Many conventional approaches require the knowledge of the PDE
model, which might be difficult to obtain. Designing a con-

