Scalable Approximate Bayesian Inference for Particle Tracking Data

Ruoxi Sun 1 Liam Paninski 2

Abstract
Many important datasets in physics, chemistry,
and biology consist of noisy sequences of images of multiple moving overlapping particles.
In many cases, the observed particles are indistinguishable, leading to unavoidable uncertainty
about nearby particles’ identities. Exact Bayesian
inference is intractable in this setting, and previous approximate Bayesian methods scale poorly.
Non-Bayesian approaches that output a single
“best” estimate of the particle tracks (thus discarding important uncertainty information) are
therefore dominant in practice. Here we propose
a flexible and scalable amortized approach for
Bayesian inference on this task. We introduce
a novel neural network method to approximate
the (intractable) filter-backward-sample-forward
algorithm for Bayesian inference in this setting.
By varying the simulated training data for the network, we can perform inference on a wide variety
of data types. This approach is therefore highly
flexible and improves on the state of the art in
terms of accuracy; provides uncertainty estimates
about the particle locations and identities; and has
a test run-time that scales linearly as a function
of the data length and number of particles, thus
enabling Bayesian inference in arbitrarily large
particle tracking datasets.

1. Introduction
In many biological and physical experiments it is necessary
to track the movement of many isolated particles in a video
datastream. This is an essential task in biomedical research,
for example, to reveal the biophysical properties of both
the imaged particles (e.g., single molecules) and the biological substrate (e.g., cell membrane) that the particles are
traversing. Effective particle tracking algorithms have wide
1
Department of Biological Sciences; 2 Departments of Statistics
and Neuroscience; Grossman Center for the Statistics of Mind;
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience; Columbia University. Correspondence to: Liam Paninski <liam@stat.columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

applications in both fundamental and applied biology, and
more generally in chemistry and physical applications.
Previous scalable approaches to this task have largely involved non-Bayesian methods aiming at estimating a single
“best” path of the underlying particles. However, in many
applications particles have indistinguishable shapes under
light microscopic resolution. This leads to a fundamental non-identifiability: if two particles pass close by each
other (“meet”) then it is impossible to deterministically link
the pre-meeting paths with the correct post-meeting paths
(see Figure 1 below for an illustration). This motivates a
Bayesian approach for assigning posterior probabilities over
all the possible sets of particle paths consistent with the
observed data.
Formally, at each timestep we observe a noisy, blurry image
recording the particles’ current positions. In the simplest
case, we can cast the tracking task in a factorial hidden
Markov Model (HMM) framework, where each particle
evolves according to a Markov process and thus multiple
HMMs (one per particle) jointly determine the observed
image data. The classic HMM inference approach is the
forward-backward algorithm (Rabiner, 1990), but the complexity of forward-backward scales superlinearly with the
number of particles here.
In this work, we propose an amortized inference approach
utilizing a specialized recurrent neural network architecture
to approximate the posterior particle transition densities
inferred by forward-backward. After network training, posterior inference can be performed very quickly: given a new
video dataset, the network outputs the conditional particle
initialization and transition densities, and then we can simply sample forward from the resulting Markov chain to draw
samples from the posterior particle paths.
We apply the method to simulated and real data. We show
that the method robustly performs approximate Bayesian
inference on the observed data, and provides more accurate
results than competing methods that output just a single
“best” path. Our approach is much more scalable than previously proposed Bayesian approaches, scaling linearly in the
number of frames and in the number of observed pixels.

