Convergent T REE BACKUP and R ETRACE with Function Approximation

Ahmed Touati 1 2 Pierre-Luc Bacon 3 Doina Precup 3 4 Pascal Vincent 1 2 4

Abstract
Off-policy learning is key to scaling up reinforcement learning as it allows to learn about a target
policy from the experience generated by a different behavior policy. Unfortunately, it has been
challenging to combine off-policy learning with
function approximation and multi-step bootstrapping in a way that leads to both stable and efficient
algorithms. In this work, we show that the T REE
BACKUP and R ETRACE algorithms are unstable
with linear function approximation, both in theory and in practice with specific examples. Based
on our analysis, we then derive stable and efficient gradient-based algorithms using a quadratic
convex-concave saddle-point formulation. By exploiting the problem structure proper to these algorithms, we are able to provide convergence guarantees and finite-sample bounds. The applicability of our new analysis also goes beyond T REE
BACKUP and R ETRACE and allows us to provide
new convergence rates for the GTD and GTD2
algorithms without having recourse to projections
or Polyak averaging.

1. Introduction
Rather than being confined to their own stream of experience, off-policy learning algorithms are capable of leveraging data from a different behavior than the one being
followed, which can provide many benefits: efficient parallel exploration as in Mnih et al. (2016) and Wang et al.
(2016), reuse of past experience with experience replay (Lin,
1992) and, in many practical contexts, learning form data
produced by policies that are currently deployed, but which
we want to improve (as in many scenarios of working with
an industrial or health care partner). Moreover, a single
stream of experience can be used to learn about a variety of
1
MILA, Université de Montréal 2 Facebook AI Research 3 MILA, McGill University 4 Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR). Correspondence to: Ahmed Touati
<ahmed.touati@umontreal.ca>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

different targets which may take the form of value functions
corresponding to different policies and time scales (Sutton
et al., 1999) or to predicting different reward functions as
in Sutton & Tanner (2004) and Sutton et al. (2011). Therefore, the design and analysis of off-policy algorithms using
all the features of reinforcement learning, e.g. bootstrapping, multi-step updates (eligibility traces), and function
approximation has been explored extensively over three
decades. While off-policy learning and function approximation have been understood in isolation, their combination
with multi-steps bootstrapping produces a so-called deadly
triad (Sutton, 2015; Sutton & Barto, 2018), i.e., many algorithms in this category are unstable.
A convergent approach to this triad is provided by importance sampling, which bends the behavior policy distribution onto the target one (Precup, 2000; Precup et al., 2001).
However, as the length of the trajectories increases, the variance of importance sampling corrections tends to become
very large. The T REE BACKUP algorithm (Precup, 2000) is
an alternative approach which remarkably does not rely on
importance sampling ratios directly. More recently, Munos
et al. (2016) introduced the R ETRACE algorithm which also
builds on T REE BACKUP to perform off-policy learning
without importance sampling.
Until now, T REE BACKUP and R ETRACE(λ) had only been
shown to converge in the tabular case, and their behavior
with linear function approximation was not known. In this
paper, we show that this combination with linear function approximation is in fact divergent. We obtain this result by analyzing the mean behavior of T REE BACKUP and R ETRACE
using the ordinary differential equation (ODE) (Borkar &
Meyn, 2000) associated with them. We also demonstrate
this instability with a concrete counterexample.
Insights gained from this analysis allow us to derive a new
gradient-based algorithm with provable convergence guarantees. Instead of adapting the derivation of Gradient Temporal Difference (GTD) learning from (Sutton et al., 2009c),
we use a primal-dual saddle point formulation (Liu et al.,
2015; Macua et al., 2015) which facilitates the derivation
of sample complexity bounds. The underlying saddle-point
problem combines the primal variables, function approximation parameters, and dual variables through a bilinear
term.

