Learning Adversarially Fair and Transferable Representations

David Madras 1 2 Elliot Creager 1 2 Toniann Pitassi 1 2 Richard Zemel 1 2

Abstract
In this paper, we advocate for representation learning as the key to mitigating unfair prediction
outcomes downstream. Motivated by a scenario
where learned representations are used by third
parties with unknown objectives, we propose and
explore adversarial representation learning as a
natural method of ensuring those parties act fairly.
We connect group fairness (demographic parity,
equalized odds, and equal opportunity) to different adversarial objectives. Through worst-case
theoretical guarantees and experimental validation, we show that the choice of this objective is
crucial to fair prediction. Furthermore, we present
the first in-depth experimental demonstration of
fair transfer learning and demonstrate empirically
that our learned representations admit fair predictions on new tasks while maintaining utility, an
essential goal of fair representation learning.

1. Introduction
There are two implicit steps involved in every prediction
task: acquiring data in a suitable form, and specifying an
algorithm that learns to predict well given the data. In
practice these two responsibilities are often assumed by
distinct parties. For example, in online advertising the socalled prediction vendor profits by selling its predictions
(e.g., person X is likely to be interested in product Y ) to
an advertiser, while the data owner profits by selling a
predictively useful dataset to the prediction vendor (Dwork
et al., 2012).
Because the prediction vendor seeks to maximize predictive accuracy, it may (intentionally or otherwise) bias the
predictions to unfairly favor certain groups or individuals.
The use of machine learning in this context is especially
concerning because of its reliance on historical datasets
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada 2 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: David Madras <madras@cs.toronto.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

that include patterns of previous discrimination and societal
bias. Thus there has been a flurry of recent work from the
machine learning community focused on defining and quantifying these biases and proposing new prediction systems
that mitigate their impact.
Meanwhile, the data owner also faces a decision that critically affects the predictions: what is the correct representation of the data? Often, this choice of representation is
made at the level of data collection: feature selection and
measurement. If we want to maximize the prediction vendor’s utility, then the right choice is to simply collect and
provide the prediction vendor with as much data as possible.
However, assuring that prediction vendors learn only fair
predictors complicates the data owner’s choice of representation, which must yield predictors that are never unfair but
nevertheless have relatively high utility.
In this paper, we frame the data owner’s choice as a representation learning problem with an adversary criticizing
potentially unfair solutions. Our contributions are as follows: We connect common group fairness metrics (demographic parity, equalize odds, and equal opportunity) to
adversarial learning by providing appropriate adversarial
objective functions for each metric that upper bounds the
unfairness of arbitrary downstream classifiers in the limit
of adversarial training; we distinguish our algorithm from
previous approaches to adversarial fairness and discuss its
suitability to fair classification due to the novel choice of
adversarial objective and emphasis on representation as the
focus of adversarial criticism; we validate experimentally
that classifiers trained naively (without fairness constraints)
from representations learned by our algorithm achieve their
respective fairness desiderata; furthermore, we show empirically that these representations achieve fair transfer —
they admit fair predictors on unseen tasks, even when those
predictors are not explicitly specified to be fair.
In Sections 2 and 3 we discuss relevant background materials and related work. In Section 4 we describe our model
and motivate our learning algorithm. In Section 5 we discuss our novel adversarial objective functions, connecting
them to common group fairness metrics and providing theoretical guarantees. In Section 6 we discuss experiments
demonstrating our method’s success in fair classification
and fair transfer learning.

