Contextual Graph Markov Model:
A Deep and Generative Approach to Graph Processing

Davide Bacciu 1 Federico Errica 1 Alessio Micheli 1

Abstract
We introduce the Contextual Graph Markov
Model, an approach combining ideas from generative models and neural networks for the processing of graph data. It founds on a constructive
methodology to build a deep architecture comprising layers of probabilistic models that learn
to encode the structured information in an incremental fashion. Context is diffused in an efficient
and scalable way across the graph vertexes and
edges. The resulting graph encoding is used in
combination with discriminative models to address structure classification benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Learning in structured domains (SDs) deals with data of
varying size and topology and amounts to identifying, synthesizing and embedding structural relationships into the
model. A naive approach, widely diffused in the past, would
preprocess the structure to obtain a fixed vectorial representation of hand-designed features, and feed it to standard
learning models. In doing so, many of the relationships carrying useful information are definitively lost. Recurrent and
recursive models have been widely used to learn such encodings by imposing a topological order on directed acyclic
structures (sequences, trees and DAGs) known as the causality assumption which, however, restricts the classes of data
that can be handled. In particular, the recursive definition
of the state space cannot be applied to cyclic inputs without
expensive diffusion mechanisms and constraints on the state
transition function of the model. The paper introduces a
novel generative model for learning unsupervised encodings
of cyclic structures, that borrows from previous SD processing works, namely the generative Bottom-Up Hidden Tree
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Pisa. Correspondence to: Davide Bacciu <bacciu@di.unipi.it>, Federico Errica <f.errica@protonmail.com>,
Alessio Micheli <micheli@di.unipi.it>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Markov Model (Bacciu et al., 2012a) and the constructive
approach of Neural Network for Graphs (Micheli, 2009).
We believe this to be the first scalable realization of a generative model for the processing of variable size graphs. Its
probabilistic nature allows to model labeling uncertainty
as well as to perform inference on graph vertexes and arcs.
The unsupervised generative encoders can capture rich patterns in the data that do not depend on the problem at hand,
allowing wide reuse of the encoding across different tasks
and to eventually leverage unlabeled examples to boost accuracy in a semi-supervised setting. In addition, the model
is trained in an incremental fashion, which allows automatic
construction of the architecture in supervised tasks. Information diffusion is achieved thanks to layering in a deep
learning fashion. Computation within each layer is fully local, highly scalable and does not require iterative procedures
or convergence conditions. Depth has a profound impact on
context shaping since it allows each vertex to gather a wider
picture of its surroundings, with a number of layers that is
functional to the generative contextual encoding. We will
focus on classification tasks that require a transduction T
from the domain of graphs to a discrete or continuous space.
Such mapping has the advantage to be adaptive, in contrast
to kernel functions which are fixed, and it is built by composition of an encoding function Tenc and an output function
Tout . The former takes as input a graph g and produces an
hidden representation z(g), while the latter takes such encoding as input and outputs the prediction. We will consider
an output function implemented through a Support Vector
Machine (SVM), taking in input the hidden representation
z(g) learned by the latent variables of the generative model.
The representational capability of our model, referred to
as Contextual Graph Markov Model (CGMM), is tested on
popular benchmarks for tree classification and on biochemical datasets where compounds are naturally represented as
undirected graphs.

2. Background
Let us first define the class of graphs we deal with in the
rest of the paper together with the associated notation. We
consider the problem of learning from a population of graphs
structured data G = {g1 , . . . , gN } where each sample gn

