Using Reward Machines for High-Level Task Specification
and Decomposition in Reinforcement Learning

Rodrigo Toro Icarte 1 2 Toryn Q. Klassen 1 Richard Valenzano 3 Sheila A. McIlraith 1 2

Abstract
In this paper we propose Reward Machines – a
type of finite state machine that supports the specification of reward functions while exposing reward function structure to the learner and supporting decomposition. We then present Q-Learning
for Reward Machines (QRM), an algorithm which
appropriately decomposes the reward machine
and uses off-policy q-learning to simultaneously
learn subpolicies for the different components.
QRM is guaranteed to converge to an optimal policy in the tabular case, in contrast to Hierarchical
Reinforcement Learning methods which might
converge to suboptimal policies. We demonstrate
this behavior experimentally in two discrete domains. We also show how function approximation
methods like neural networks can be incorporated
into QRM, and that doing so can find better policies more quickly than hierarchical methods in a
domain with a continuous state space.

1. Introduction
A standard assumption in reinforcement learning (RL) is
that the agent does not have access to the environment model
(Sutton & Barto, 1998). This means that it does not know, a
priori, the transition probabilities or reward function manifest in the environment. To learn optimal behavior, an RL
agent must therefore interact with the environment and learn
from its experience. While assuming that the transition probabilities are unknown seems reasonable, there is less reason
to hide the reward function from the agent. Artificial agents
cannot inherently perceive reward from the environment;
someone must program those rewards functions (even if the
agent is interacting with the real world). Typically, though,
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 2 Vector Institute, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada 3 Element AI, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Correspondence
to: Rodrigo Toro Icarte <rntoro@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

a programmed reward function is given as a black box to the
agent. The agent can query the function for the reward in
the current situation, but does not have access to whatever
structures or high-level ideas the programmer may have
used in defining it. However, an agent that had access to
the specification of the reward function might be able to use
it to decompose the problem and speed up learning. We
consider a way to do so in this paper.
Previous work on giving an agent knowledge about the
reward function focus on defining a task specification
language, usually based on sub-goal sequences (Singh,
1992a;b) or linear temporal logic (Li et al., 2017; Camacho et al., 2017; Littman et al., 2017; Toro Icarte et al.,
2018; Hasanbeig et al., 2018), and then generate a reward
function towards fulfilling that specification. In this work,
we instead directly tackle the problem of defining reward
functions that expose structure to the agent. As such, our
approach is able to reward behaviors to varying degrees in
manners that cannot be expressed by previous approaches.
There are two main contributions of this work. First, we introduce a type of finite state machine, called the Reward Machine, which we use in defining rewards. A reward machine
allows for composing different reward functions in flexible ways, including concatenations, loops, and conditional
rules. As an agent acts in the environment, moving from
state to state, it also moves from state to state within a reward machine (as determined by high-level events detected
within the environment). After every transition, the reward
machine outputs the reward function the agent should use
at that time. For example, we might construct a reward
machine for “delivering coffee to an office” using two states.
In the first state, the agent does not receive any rewards, but
it moves to the second state whenever it gets the coffee. In
the second state, the agent gets rewards after delivering the
coffee. The advantage of defining rewards this way is that
the agent knows that the problem consists of two stages and
might use this information for decomposing it.
Our second contribution is to introduce an algorithm, called
Q-Learning for Reward Machines (QRM), that can exploit a
reward machine’s internal structure to decompose the problem and thereby improve sample efficiency. QRM’s task
decomposition does not prune optimal policies and uses q-

