Asynchronous Stochastic Quasi-Newton MCMC for Non-Convex Optimization

Umut Şimşekli 1 Çağatay Yıldız 2 Thanh Huy Nguyen 1 Gaël Richard 1 A. Taylan Cemgil 3

Abstract

where U is a twice continuously differentiable function that
can be convex or non-convex, and is often referred to as
the empirical risk. In a typical machine learning context, a
dataset Y with NY independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) data points is considered, which renders the function
Y
U as a sum of NY different functions {Ui }N
i=1 .

Recent studies have illustrated that stochastic
gradient Markov Chain Monte Carlo techniques
have a strong potential in non-convex optimization, where local and global convergence guarantees can be shown under certain conditions. By
building up on this recent theory, in this study,
we develop an asynchronous-parallel stochastic
L-BFGS algorithm for non-convex optimization.
The proposed algorithm is suitable for both distributed and shared-memory settings. We provide formal theoretical analysis and show that
the proposed method achieves
an ergodic con√
vergence rate of O(1/ N ) (N being the total
number of iterations) and it can achieve a linear
speedup under certain conditions. We perform
several experiments on both synthetic and real
datasets. The results support our theory and show
that the proposed algorithm provides a significant
speedup over the recently proposed synchronous
distributed L-BFGS algorithm.

In large scale applications, the number of data points NY
often becomes prohibitively large and therefore using a
‘batch’ L-BFGS algorithm becomes computationally infeasible. As a remedy, stochastic L-BGFS methods have
been proposed (Byrd et al., 2016; Schraudolph et al., 2007;
Moritz et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2017; Yousefian et al.,
2017; Zhao et al., 2017), which aim to reduce the computational requirements of L-BFGS by replacing ∇U (i.e.
the full gradients that are required by L-BFGS) with some
stochastic gradients that are computed on small subsets of
the dataset. However, using stochastic gradients within LBFGS turns out to be a challenging task since it brings additional technical difficulties, which we will detail in Section 2.

1. Introduction
Quasi-Newton (QN) methods are powerful optimization
techniques that are able to attain fast convergence rates
by incorporating local geometric information through an
approximation of the inverse of the Hessian matrix. The
L-BFGS algorithm (Nocedal & Wright, 2006) is a wellknown limited-memory QN method that aims at solving the
following optimization problem:
NY
n
o
X
θ? = arg min U (θ) ,
Ui (θ) ,
θ∈Rd

(1)

i=1

1
LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, 75013,
Paris, France 2 Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo, 02150, Finland 3 Department of Computer Engineering, Boğaziçi University, 34342, Bebek, Istanbul, Turkey.
Correspondence to: Umut Şimşekli <umut.simsekli@telecomparistech.fr>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

In a very recent study, Berahas et al. (2016) proposed a
parallel stochastic L-BFGS algorithm, called multi-batch
L-BFGS (mb-L-BFGS), which is suitable for synchronous
distributed architectures. This work illustrated that carrying out L-BFGS in a distributed setting introduces further
theoretical and practical challenges; however, if these challenges are addressed, stochastic L-BFGS can be powerful
in a distributed setting as well, and outperform conventional algorithms such as distributed stochastic gradient descent (SGD), as shown by their experimental results.
Despite the fact that synchronous parallel algorithms have
clear advantages over serial optimization algorithms, the
computational efficiency of synchronous algorithms is often limited by the overhead induced by the synchronization
and coordination among the worker processes. Inspired by
asynchronous parallel stochastic optimization techniques
(Agarwal & Duchi, 2011; Lian et al., 2015; Zhang et al.,
2015; Zhao & Li, 2015; Zheng et al., 2017), in this study,
we propose an asynchronous parallel stochastic L-BFGS
algorithm for large-scale non-convex optimization problems. The proposed approach aims at speeding up the
synchronous algorithm presented in (Berahas et al., 2016)
by allowing all the workers work independently from each

