Locally Private Hypothesis Testing

Or Sheffet 1

Abstract
We initiate the study of differentially private hypothesis testing in the local-model, under both
the standard (symmetric) randomized-response
mechanism (Warner, 1965; Kasiviswanathan
et al., 2008) and the newer (non-symmetric)
mechanisms (Bassily & Smith, 2015; Bassily
et al., 2017). First, we study the general framework of mapping each user’s type into a signal and show that the problem of finding the
maximum-likelihood distribution over the signals is feasible. Then we discuss the randomizedresponse mechanism and show that, in essence,
it maps the null- and alternative-hypotheses onto
new sets, an affine translation of the original sets.
We then give sample complexity bounds for identity and independence testing under randomizedresponse. We then move to the newer nonsymmetric mechanisms and show that there too
the problem of finding the maximum-likelihood
distribution is feasible. Under the mechanism of
Bassily et al (2017) we give identity and independence testers with better sample complexity
than the testers in the symmetric case, and we
also propose a χ2 -based identity tester which we
investigate empirically.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy is a mathematically rigorous notion of
privacy that has become the de-facto gold-standard of privacy preserving data analysis. Informally, -differential
privacy bounds the affect of a single datapoint on any result of the computation by . In recent years the subject of
private hypothesis testing has been receiving increasing attention (see Related Work below). However, by and large,
the focus of private hypothesis testing is in the centralized
model (or the curated model), where a single trusted entity
holds the sensitive details of n users and runs the private
hypothesis tester on the actual data.
1

Dept. of Computing Science, University of Alberta.. Correspondence to: Or Sheffet <osheffet@ualberta.ca>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

In contrast, the subject of this work is private hypothesis testing in the local-model (or the distributed model),
where a -differentially private mechanism is applied independently to each datum. This model, which alleviates trust (each user can run the mechanism independently
on her own and release the noisy signal from the mechanism), has gained much popularity in recent years, especially since it was adopted by Google’s Rappor (Erlingsson
et al., 2014) and Apple (Apple, 2017). And yet, despite
its popularity, and the fact that recent works (Bassily &
Smith, 2015; Bassily et al., 2017) have shown the space of
possible locally-private mechanism is richer than what was
originally thought, little is known about private hypothesis
testing in the local-model.
1.1. Background: Local Differential Privacy
We view the local differentially private model as a signaling
scheme. Each datum / user has a type x taken from a predefined and publicly known set of possible types X whose
size is T = |X |. The differentially private mechanism is
merely a randomized function M : ([n], X ) → S, mapping each possible type X of the i-th datum to some set of
possible signals S, which we assume to be -differentially
private: for any index i, any pair of types x, x0 ∈ X
and any signal s ∈ S it holds that Pr[M(i, x) = s] ≤
e Pr[M(i, x0 ) = s].1 In our most general results (Theorems 1 and 9), we ignore the fact that M is -differentially
private, and just refer to any signaling scheme that transforms one domain (namely, X ) into another (S). For example, a surveyer might unify rarely occurring types under
the category of “other”, or perhaps users report their types
over noisy channels, etc.
We differentiate between two types of signaling schemes:
the symmetric (or index-oblivious) variety, and the nonsymmetric (index-aware) type. A local signaling mechanism is called symmetric if it is independent of the index of the datum. Namely, if for any i 6= j we have
def
that M(i, x) = M(j, x) = M(x). A classic exam1
For simplicity, we assume S, the set of possible signals,
is discrete. Note that this doesn’t exclude mechanisms such as
adding Gaussian/Gamma noise to a point in Rd — such mechanisms require X to be some bounded subset of Rd and use the
bound to set the noise appropriately. Therefore, the standard approach of discretizing X and projecting the noisy point to the closest point in the grid yields a finite set of signals S.

