Fast Variance Reduction Method with Stochastic Batch Size
Xuanqing Liu 1 Cho-Jui Hsieh 1 2

Abstract

Here we assume each fi (w) is a µ-strongly convex, Lsmooth function, the regularization term g(w) is convex
but not necessarily differentiable. In machine learning applications, n is the number of training samples, each fi
is the loss function such as logistic loss or ℓ2 loss, and
g(w) is the regularization term which can be non-smooth
(e.g., ℓ1 regularization). For large data, SGD is preferred
over gradient descent and has been widely used in largescale applications. However, since the variance of stochastic gradient will not go to zero even when w = w∗ (the
optimal solution), SGD has to gradually shrink the step
size to guarantee convergence, at the cost of suboptimal
rate. To speed up the convergence, there is a recent line
of research on developing new algorithms with linear convergence rate using variance reduction techniques, the representative work includes SAG (Hofmann et al., 2015),
SVRG (Johnson & Zhang, 2013), SAGA (Defazio et al.,
2014), S2GD (Konecnỳ & Richtárik, 2013) etc. Further,
one can accelerate this framework via concepts similar to
the Nesterov’s momentum method (Lin et al., 2015; AllenZhu, 2017).

In this paper we study a family of variance reduction methods with randomized batch size—at
each step, the algorithm first randomly chooses
the batch size and then selects a batch of samples to conduct a variance-reduced stochastic update. We give the linear convergence rate for this
framework for composite functions, and show
that the optimal strategy to achieve the optimal
convergence rate per data access is to always
choose batch size of 1, which is equivalent to the
SAGA algorithm. However, due to the presence
of cache/disk IO effect in computer architecture,
the number of data access cannot reflect the running time because of 1) random memory access
is much slower than sequential access, 2) when
data is too big to fit into memory, disk seeking
takes even longer time. After taking these into
account, choosing batch size of 1 is no longer
optimal, so we propose a new algorithm called
SAGA++ and show how to calculate the optimal
average batch size theoretically. Our algorithm
outperforms SAGA and other existing batched
and stochastic solvers on real datasets. In addition, we also conduct a precise analysis to compare different update rules for variance reduction
methods, showing that SAGA++ converges faster
than SVRG in theory.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the following finite-sum composite optimization problem:
n
{
}
1∑
w∗ = arg min F (w) ≜
fi (w) + g(w) .
n i=1
w∈Rp

(1)

1

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Davis, California, USA 2 Department of Statistic, University of California, Davis, California, USA. Correspondence to: Xuanqing Liu <xqliu@ucdavis.edu>, Cho-Jui Hsieh
<chohsieh@ucdavis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

The motivation of this paper is to study the effect of batch
size in variance reduction methods. The effect of batch
size in SGD (without variance reduction) has been studied in the literature such as (Li et al., 2014; Bengio, 2012;
Keskar et al., 2016). Assuming a subset of b samples
is chosen for SGD at each step, the theoretical analysis
in (Dekel et√al., 2012) suggests that the error is at the order of O(1/ bT + 1/T ) after
√ T iterations, and this bound
is later improved to O(1/ bT ) in (Li et al., 2014). When
constraining on SVM-hinge loss, (Takác et al., 2013) also
1
shows an order of O( nb + βbb · λϵ
) iterations to get an ϵsuboptimal solution. Since each iteration will take the time
proportional to b, these bounds suggest that the acceleration of convergence exactly covers the overhead of each
iteration. It is thus interesting to see whether the same conclusion also applies for variance reduction methods.
To answer this question, we study a family of variance reduction methods with randomized batch sizes. At each iteration, the algorithm first randomly selects the batch size
and then chooses a batch of samples to conduct a variance
reduced stochastic update. Our main findings and contributions can be listed as follows:
• We prove linear convergence rate for this family of

