Learning to Optimize Combinatorial Functions

Nir Rosenfeld 1 Eric Balkanski 1 Amir Globerson 2 Yaron Singer 1

Abstract
Submodular functions have become a ubiquitous
tool in machine learning. They are learnable
from data, and can be optimized efficiently and
with guarantees. Nonetheless, recent negative
results show that optimizing learned surrogates
of submodular functions can result in arbitrarily
bad approximations of the true optimum. Our
goal in this paper is to highlight the source of
this hardness, and propose an alternative criterion
for optimizing general combinatorial functions
from sampled data. We prove a tight equivalence
showing that a class of functions is optimizable if
and only if it can be learned. We provide efficient
and scalable optimization algorithms for several
function classes of interest, and demonstrate their
utility on the task of optimally choosing trending
social media items.

1. Introduction
Submodular optimization is fast becoming a primary tool in
machine learning. The power of submodularity as a model
has been demonstrated in numerous applications, including
document summarization (Lin & Bilmes, 2011), clustering (Gomes & Krause, 2010), active learning (Golovin &
Krause, 2011; Guillory & Bilmes, 2011; Hoi et al., 2006),
graph and network inference (Gomez Rodriguez et al., 2010;
Rodriguez & Schölkopf, 2012; Defazio & Caetano, 2012),
and information diffusion in networks (Kempe et al., 2003).
Crucial to the success of these methods is the fact that optimizing submodular functions can be done efficiently and
with provable guarantees (Krause & Golovin, 2014).
In many cases, however, the true function cannot be accessed, and instead a surrogate function is learned from
data (Balkanski et al., 2017). To this end, PMAC learning
(Balcan & Harvey, 2011) offers a framework for analyzing
the learnability of submodular functions, as well as algo1
Harvard University 2 Tel Aviv University. Correspondence to:
Nir Rosenfeld <nirr@g.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

rithms for learning in practice. Encouraging results show
that in many cases submodular functions can be efficiently
learned from data (Balcan & Harvey, 2011; Iyer et al., 2013;
Feldman & Kothari, 2014; Feldman & Vondrak, 2016). A
natural approach in this setting is to first learn a surrogate
function from samples, and then optimize it, hoping that the
estimated optimum will be close to the true one. A recent
line of work has been devoted to this setting of optimization
from samples (OPS) (Balkanski et al., 2016; 2017).
The main result of OPS is unfortunately discouraging: for
maximizing a submodular function under a cardinality constraint, no algorithm can obtain a constant factor approximation guarantee given polynomially-many samples from
any distribution (Balkanski et al., 2017). Thus, optimizing
over learned surrogates does not provide any meaningful
guarantees with respect to the true function.
The hardness of OPS is, however, a worst-case result. The
hardness stems from the discrepancy between how the algorithm gains access to information (via samples) and how it
is evaluated (globally). In contrast, machine learning objectives are typically concerned with expected outcomes, and
are evaluated over the same distribution from which data is
acquired (Valiant, 1984). In this paper, we build on this motivation and propose an alternative framework for optimizing
from samples. The objective we propose, called distributional optimization from samples (DOPS), circumvents the
above difficulties by considering a distribution-dependent
objective. In general, a function class F is in α-DOPS if an
α-approximation of the empirical argmax can be found with
arbitrarily high probability using polynomially many samples, for any distribution D and for any f ∈ F. Formally:
Definition 1 (α-DOPS). Let F = {f : 2[n] → R+ } be a
class of set functions over n elements. We say that F is
α-distributionally optimizable from samples if there is an
algorithm A that, for every distribution D over 2[n] , every
f ∈ F, and every , δ ∈ [0, 1], when A is given as input
iid

i
a sample set S = {(S i , f (S i ))}M
i=1 where S ∼ D, with
probability of at least 1 − δ over S it holds that:



1
PT ∼Dm f A(T ) ≥ max f (S) ≥ 1 − 
(1)
α S∈T

where T = {(S j )}m
j=1 , A(T ) ∈ T is the output of the
algorithm, and S is of size M ∈ poly(n, m, 1/, 1/δ, α).

