Learning Longer-term Dependencies in RNNs with Auxiliary Losses

Trieu H. Trinh1 Andrew M. Dai Minh-Thang Luong Quoc V. Le
{thtrieu, adai, thangluong, qvl}@google.com

Abstract
Despite recent advances in training recurrent neural networks (RNNs), capturing long-term dependencies in sequences remains a fundamental
challenge. Most approaches use backpropagation
through time (BPTT), which is difficult to scale
to very long sequences. This paper proposes a
simple method that improves the ability to capture long term dependencies in RNNs by adding
an unsupervised auxiliary loss to the original objective. This auxiliary loss forces RNNs to either
reconstruct previous events or predict next events
in a sequence, making truncated backpropagation
feasible for long sequences and also improving
full BPTT. We evaluate our method on a variety
of settings, including pixel-by-pixel image classification with sequence lengths up to 16 000, and
a real document classification benchmark. Our
results highlight good performance and resource
efficiency of this approach over competitive baselines, including other recurrent models and a comparable sized Transformer. Further analyses reveal beneficial effects of the auxiliary loss on optimization and regularization, as well as extreme
cases where there is little to no backpropagation.

1. Introduction
Many important applications in artificial intelligence require the understanding of long term dependencies between
events in a sequence. For example, in natural language
processing, it is sometimes necessary to understand relationships between distant events described in a book to
answer questions about it. Typically, this is achieved by
gradient descent and BPTT (Rumelhart et al., 1986) with
recurrent networks. Learning long term dependencies with
gradient descent, however, is difficult because the gradients
computed by BPTT tend to vanish or explode during train1

Work done as a member of the Google Brain Residency program (g.co/brainresidency.)
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Figure 1. An overview of our method. The auxiliary loss improves
the memory of the recurrent network such that the number of steps
needed for the main task’s BPTT is small.

ing (Hochreiter et al., 2001). Additionally, for BPTT to
work, one needs to store the intermediate hidden states in
the sequence. The memory requirement is therefore proportional to the sequence length, making it difficult to scale to
large problems.
Several promising approaches have been proposed to alleviate the aforementioned problems. First, instead of using
the vanilla recurrent network, one can use Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), which
is designed to improve gradient flow in recurrent networks.
In addition, one can also use gradient clipping (Pascanu
et al., 2013) to stabilize the training of the LSTM. Finally,
to reduce the memory requirement, one can either store
the hidden states only periodically (Gruslys et al., 2016;
Chen et al., 2016), use truncated BPTT, or use synthetic
gradients (Jaderberg et al., 2017).
Convolutional neural networks also mitigate the problem of
long-term dependencies since large kernel sizes and deep
networks such as ResNets (He et al., 2016) allow long-term
dependencies to be learnt across distant parts of an image.
However, this is a fundamentally different kind of architecture that has other tradeoffs. For example, the entire input
(an image or sequence) and the intermediate activations of
the model must be stored in memory during training. At
inference time, typical CNNs also need O(n) storage where
n is the size of the input.2 The Transformer (Vaswani et al.,
2

A convolutional layer is often followed by a reduction layer

