PredRNN++: Towards A Resolution of the Deep-in-Time Dilemma in
Spatiotemporal Predictive Learning

Yunbo Wang 1 Zhifeng Gao 1 Mingsheng Long 1 Jianmin Wang 1 Philip S. Yu 1

Abstract
We present PredRNN++, a recurrent network for
spatiotemporal predictive learning. In pursuit of
a great modeling capability for short-term video
dynamics, we make our network deeper in time
by leveraging a new recurrent structure named
Causal LSTM with cascaded dual memories. To
alleviate the gradient propagation difficulties in
deep predictive models, we propose a Gradient
Highway Unit, which provides alternative quick
routes for the gradient flows from outputs back to
long-range previous inputs. The gradient highway
units work seamlessly with the causal LSTMs,
enabling our model to capture the short-term and
the long-term video dependencies adaptively. Our
model achieves state-of-the-art prediction results
on both synthetic and real video datasets, showing
its power in modeling entangled motions.

1. Introduction
Spatiotemporal predictive learning is to learn the features
from label-free video data in a self-supervised manner
(sometimes called unsupervised) and use them to perform a
specific task. This learning paradigm has benefited or could
potentially benefit practical applications, e.g. precipitation
forecasting (Shi et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2017), traffic flows
prediction (Zhang et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2018) and physical
interactions simulation (Lerer et al., 2016; Finn et al., 2016).
An accurate predictive learning method requires effectively
modeling video dynamics in different time scales. Consider
two typical situations: (i) When sudden changes happen, future images should be generated upon nearby frames rather
than distant frames, which requires that the predictive model
learns short-term video dynamics; (ii) When the moving objects in the scene are frequently entangled, it would be hard
1

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
E-mail: wangyb15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn. Correspondence to:
Mingsheng Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

to separate them in the generated frames. This requires that
the predictive model recalls previous contexts before the
occlusion happens. Thus, video relations in the short term
and the long term should be adaptively taken into account.
1.1. Deep-in-Time Structures and Vanishing Gradients
Dilemma in Spatiotemporal Modeling
In order to capture the long-term frame dependencies, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Rumelhart et al., 1988;
Werbos, 1990; Williams & Zipser, 1995) have been recently
applied to video predictive learning (Ranzato et al., 2014).
However, most methods (Srivastava et al., 2015a; Shi et al.,
2015; Patraucean et al., 2016) followed the traditional RNNs
chain structure and did not fully utilize the network depth.
The transitions between adjacent RNN states from one time
step to the next are modeled by simple functions, though
theoretical evidence shows that deeper networks can be
exponentially more efficient in both spatial feature extraction (Bianchini & Scarselli, 2014) and sequence modeling
(Pascanu et al., 2013). We believe that making the network
deeper-in-time, i.e. increasing the number of recurrent states
from the input to the output, would significantly increase its
strength in learning short-term video dynamics.
Motivated by this, a former state-of-the-art model named
PredRNN (Wang et al., 2017) applied complex nonlinear
transition functions from one frame to the next, constructing
a dual memory structure upon Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997). Unfortunately,
this complex structure easily suffers from the vanishing gradient problem (Bengio et al., 1994; Pascanu et al., 2013),
that the magnitude of the gradients decays exponentially
during the back-propagation through time (BPTT). There
is a dilemma in spatiotemporal predictive learning: the increasingly deep-in-time networks have been designed for
complex video dynamics, while also introducing more difficulties in gradients propagation. Therefore, how to maintain
a steady flow of gradients in a deep-in-time predictive model,
is a path worth exploring. Our key insight is to build adaptive connections among RNN states or layers, providing our
model with both longer routes and shorter routes at the same
time, from input frames to the expected future predictions.

