Variance Regularized Counterfactual Risk Minimization
via Variational Divergence Minimization

Hang Wu 1 May D. Wang 1
Abstract
There has been extensive studies on off-policy learning in
the context of reinforcement learning and contextual banOff-policy learning, the task of evaluating and
dits, including various methods such as Q learning (Sutton
improving policies using historic data collected
&
Barto, 1998), doubly robust estimator (Dudı́k et al., 2014),
from a logging policy, is important because onself-normalized
(Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015b), etc. A
policy evaluation is usually expensive and has
recently
emerging
direction of off-policy learning involves
adverse impacts. One of the major challenge of
the
use
of
logged
interaction data with bandit feedback.
off-policy learning is to derive counterfactual esHowever,
in
this
setting,
we can only observe limited feedtimators that also has low variance and thus low
back,
often
in
the
form
of
a scalar reward or loss, for every
generalization error. In this work, inspired by
action;
a
larger
amount
of
information
about other possibililearning bounds for importance sampling probties
is
never
revealed,
such
as
what
reward
we could have
lems, we present a new counterfactual learning
obtained
had
we
taken
another
action,
the
best
action we
principle for off-policy learning with bandit feedshould
have
take,
and
the
relationship
between
the
change
backs. Our method regularizes the generalization
in
policy
and
the
change
in
reward.
For
example,
after
an
error by minimizing the distribution divergence
item
is
suggested
to
a
user
by
an
online
recommendation
between the logging policy and the new policy,
system, although we can observe the user’s subsequent inand removes the need for iterating through all
teractions with this particular item, we cannot anticipate the
training samples to compute sample variance reguser’s reaction to other items that could have been the better
ularization in prior work. With neural network
options.
policies, our end-to-end training algorithms using variational divergence minimization showed
significant improvement over conventional baseline algorithms and is also consistent with our
theoretical results.

1. Introduction
Off-policy learning refers to evaluating and improving a
deterministic policy using historic data collected from a
stationary policy, which is important because in real-world
scenarios on-policy evaluation is oftentimes expensive and
has adverse impacts. For instance, evaluating a new treatment option, a clinical policy, by administering it to patients
requires rigorous human clinical trials, in which patients are
exposed to risks of serious side effects. As another example,
an online advertising A/B testing can incur high cost for
advertisers and bring them few gains. Therefore, we need
to utilize historic data to perform off-policy evaluation and
learning that can enable safe exploration of the hypothesis
space of policies before deploying them.
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. Correspondence to: Hang Wu <hangwu@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Using historic data to perform off-policy learning in bandit
feedback case faces a common challenge in counterfactual
inference: How do we handle the distribution mismatch between the logging policy and a new policy and the induced
generalization error? To answer this question, (Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015a) derived the new counterfactual
risk minimization framework, that added the sample variance as a regularization term into conventional empirical
risk minimization objective. However, the parametrization
of policies in their work as linear stochastic models has limited representation power, and the computation of sample
variance regularization requires iterating through all training
samples. Although a first-order approximation technique
was proposed in the paper, deriving accurate and efficient
end-to-end training algorithms under this framework still
remains a challenging task.
Our contribution in this paper is three-fold:
1. By drawing a connection to the generalization error
bound of importance sampling (Cortes et al., 2010), we
propose a new learning principle for off-policy learning
with bandit feedback. We explicitly regularize the
generalization error of the new policy by minimizing
the distribution divergence between it and the logging
policy. The proposed learning objective automatically

