A Classification–Based Study of Covariate Shift in GAN Distributions

Shibani Santurkar 1 Ludwig Schmidt 1 Aleksander M ˛
adry 1

Abstract
A basic, and still largely unanswered, question in
the context of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) is whether they are truly able to capture
all the fundamental characteristics of the distributions they are trained on. In particular, evaluating
the diversity of GAN distributions is challenging
and existing methods provide only a partial understanding of this issue. In this paper, we develop
quantitative and scalable tools for assessing the
diversity of GAN distributions. Specifically, we
take a classification-based perspective and view
loss of diversity as a form of covariate shift introduced by GANs. We examine two specific
forms of such shift: mode collapse and boundary
distortion. In contrast to prior work, our methods need only minimal human supervision and
can be readily applied to state-of-the-art GANs
on large, canonical datasets. Examining popular
GANs using our tools indicates that these GANs
have significant problems in reproducing the more
distributional properties of their training dataset.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
have achieved impressive results in producing realistic samples of natural images. They thus have become a promising
approach to learning generative models. How well can
GANs learn the truly underlying data distribution though?
Answering this question would be key to properly understanding the power and limitations of the GAN framework,
and the effectiveness of the adversarial setup.
A natural first step to evaluate the distribution-learning performance of a GAN is to examine whether the generated
samples lie in the support of the true distribution, i.e., the
distribution the GAN was trained on. In the case of images 1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Shibani Santurkar <shibani@mit.edu>, Ludwig Schmidt <ludwigs@mit.edu>, Aleksander Madry <madry@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

arguably the most common application domain for GANs this corresponds to checking if the GAN samples look realistic and are of good quality. Visual inspection of generated
images by a human is currently the most widespread way of
performing such checks, and from this perspective they indeed achieve impressive results (Denton et al., 2015; Karras
et al., 2017). These successes were further corroborated by
metrics such as the Inception Score (Salimans et al., 2016)
and other divergence measures (Im et al., 2018).
Once we have established that GANs produce images that
look realistic, the next concern might be that this is due
to them simply memorizing the training data. While this
hypothesis cannot be ruled out entirely, there are reasons to
believe that GANs indeed tend to avoid this deficiency. In
particular, previous studies show that interpolations in the
latent space of the generator produce novel image variations
(Radford et al., 2015), and that there is a clear distinction
between GAN samples and their nearest neighbors in the
true dataset (Arora & Zhang, 2017). Taken together, these
results provide evidence that GANs, at the very least, perform some non-trivial version of learning the true distribution. The question that remains though is: To what extent
do GANs capture the full diversity of the underlying true
distribution?
Prior work (Arora & Zhang, 2017; Goodfellow, 2016) has
provided a methodology to study the diversity of the distributions that GANs learn. However these approaches fall
short of examining the full extent of the potential problems.
This is so as they tend to consider only simplified models (Goodfellow, 2016; Metz et al., 2016), rely heavily on
manual annotation (Arora & Zhang, 2017) or fail to detect
certain basic forms of diversity loss (Salimans et al., 2016).
The focus of this work is thus to address these shortcomings
and pursue the following question:
Can we develop a quantitative and universal methodology
for studying diversity in GAN distributions?
The approach we take uses classification as a lens to examine
the diversity of GAN distributions. More precisely, we aim
to measure the covariate shift (Sugiyama et al., 2006) with
respect to the true distribution that GANs introduce. The
key motivation here is that were GANs able to fully learn
the true distribution, they would exhibit no such shift.

