Noisin: Unbiased Regularization for Recurrent Neural Networks
Adji B. Dieng 1 Rajesh Ranganath 2 Jaan Altosaar 3 David M. Blei 1

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are powerful models of sequential data. They have been
successfully used in domains such as text and
speech. However, RNNs are susceptible to overfitting; regularization is important. In this paper
we develop Noisin, a new method for regularizing RNNs. Noisin injects random noise into the
hidden states of the RNN and then maximizes
the corresponding marginal likelihood of the data.
We show how Noisin applies to any RNN and we
study many different types of noise. Noisin is
unbiased—it preserves the underlying RNN on
average. We characterize how Noisin regularizes its RNN both theoretically and empirically.
On language modeling benchmarks, Noisin improves over dropout by as much as 12.2% on
the Penn Treebank and 9.4% on the Wikitext-2
dataset. We also compared the state-of-the-art
language model of Yang et al. 2017, both with
and without Noisin. On the Penn Treebank, the
method with Noisin more quickly reaches stateof-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are powerful models of
sequential data (Robinson & Fallside, 1987; Werbos, 1988;
Williams, 1989; Elman, 1990; Pearlmutter, 1995). RNNs
have achieved state-of-the-art results on many tasks, including language modeling (Mikolov & Zweig, 2012; Yang
et al., 2017), text generation (Graves, 2013), image generation (Gregor et al., 2015), speech recognition (Graves et al.,
2013; Chiu et al., 2017), and machine translation (Sutskever
et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2016).
The main idea behind an RNN is to posit a sequence of recursively defined hidden states, and then to model each obser1

Columbia University 2 New York University 3 Princeton
University.
Correspondence to:
Adji B. Dieng
<abd2141@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

vation conditional on its state. The key element of an RNN
is its transition function. The transition function determines
how each hidden state is a function of the previous observation and previous hidden state; it defines the underlying
recursion. There are many flavors of RNNs—examples include the Elman Recurrent Neural Network (ERNN) (Elman,
1990), the Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997), and the Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU)
(Cho et al., 2014). Each flavor amounts to a different way of
designing and parameterizing the transition function.
We fit an RNN by maximizing the likelihood of the observations with respect to its parameters, those of the transition function and of the observation likelihood. But RNNs
are very flexible and they overfit; regularization is crucial.
Researchers have explored many approaches to regularizing RNNs, such as Tikhonov regularization (Bishop, 1995),
dropout and its variants (Srivastava et al., 2014; Zaremba
et al., 2014; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Wan et al., 2013),
and zoneout (Krueger et al., 2016). (See the related work
section below for more discussion.)
In this paper, we develop Noisin, an effective new way
to regularize an RNN. The idea is to inject random noise
into its transition function and then to fit its parameters
to maximize the corresponding marginal likelihood of the
observations. We can easily apply Noisin to any flavor of
RNN and we can use many types of noise.
Figure 1 demonstrates how an RNN can overfit and how
Noisin can help. The plot involves a language modeling task
where the RNN models a sequence of words. The horizontal
axis is epochs of training; the vertical axis is perplexity,
which is an assessment of model fitness (lower numbers
are better). The figure shows how the model fits to both
the training set and the validation set. As training proceeds,
the vanilla RNN improves its fitness to the training set but
performance on the validation set degrades—it overfits. The
performance of the RNN with Noisin continues to improve
in both the training set and the validation set.
Noisin regularizes the RNN by smoothing its loss, averaging
over local neighborhoods of the transition function. Further,
Noisin requires that the noise-injected transition function
be unbiased. This means that, on average, it preserves the
transition function of the original RNN.

