Rectify Heterogeneous Models with Semantic Mapping

Han-Jia Ye 1 De-Chuan Zhan 1 Yuan Jiang 1 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract

Current Model

Previous Model

Current Feature Set

Previous Feature Set

1. Introduction
As machine learning has been successfully applied in many
real-world applications, the robustness of the learner is attracting more attention (Dietterich, 2017). Increasing the
robustness of models in dynamic environments is desirable
in real-world scenarios. For example, dictionaries encode
words for documents classification, whose keys change as
hot topics appear/vanish with time; In a recommendation
system, statistics on interactions over items are characterized as user profiles, which fluctuates with newly arrival and
out-dated items; Although targeting the same goal, branches
of a company deal with locality specific features apart from
the general ones, which hampers the experience exchange
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China. Correspondence to:
De-Chuan Zhan <zhandc@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Time

On the way to the robust learner for real-world
applications, there are still great challenges, including considering unknown environments with
limited data. Learnware (Zhou, 2016) describes a
novel perspective, and claims that learning models should have reusable and evolvable properties. We propose to Encode Meta InformaTion
of features (E MIT), as the model specification
for characterizing the changes, which grants the
model evolvability to bridge heterogeneous feature spaces. Then, pre-trained models from related tasks can be Reused by our REctiFy via
heterOgeneous pRedictor Mapping (R E F ORM)
framework. In summary, the pre-trained model
is adapted to a new environment with different
features, through model refining on only a small
amount of training data in the current task. Experimental results over both synthetic and real-world
tasks with diverse feature configurations validate
the effectiveness and practical utility of the proposed framework.

澢
澢
澢
݀ଵ

݀ଷ

澢
澢

ܺ

݀ଶ

Figure 1. Example of modeling with heterogeneous feature spaces
as environment changing. The number/types of extracted features
for each instance (each row) will increase or decrease. The two
task specific and shared feature dimensions are d1 , d2 , and d3 ,
respectively. To increase the robustness of models, the goal of
this paper is to smartly utilize limited current task data X and the
previous well-trained model (over d1 + d3 features) to improve
the performance of the current task (with d3 + d2 dimensions).

between branches. In summary, it is the feature set transition that becomes one of the fundamental issues in a nonstationary environment, as in Fig. 1. Besides, due to the
expensive labeling cost, there are usually only a few collected examples such as newly labeled documents for new
circumstances later, especially within a short period.
Learnware (Zhou, 2016) describes a novel perspective towards the robust modeling, which is a well-performed pretrained learner with specifications. Two essential properties
of learnware, i.e., the reusable and evolvable, are emphasized in this work. Specifically, reusability ensures that for a
new related target, the model is capable of being enhanced,
adapted, and refined easily, with only limited new task data.
Evolvability considers the non-stationary nature of the environment, so that the model is able to handle variations in the
environment, ensuring that it can be reused for tasks with
heterogeneous feature spaces.
This paper makes a preliminary step towards robust modeling guided by learnware, containing two parts implementing the reusable and evolvable properties accordingly. We
develop a new model reuse framework on heterogeneous feature spaces in a dynamic environment, and propose a novel
evolvability solution via linking different feature spaces.
Popular approaches upon landmark (Gong et al., 2013),
instance weights (Sugiyama & Kawanabe, 2012), or sub-

