Hierarchical Long-term Video Prediction without Supervision

Nevan Wichers 1 Ruben Villegas 2 Dumitru Erhan 1 Honglak Lee 1

Abstract
Much of recent research has been devoted to video
prediction and generation, yet most of the previous works have demonstrated only limited success
in generating videos on short-term horizons. The
hierarchical video prediction method by Villegas
et al. (2017b) is an example of a state-of-the-art
method for long-term video prediction, but their
method is limited because it requires ground truth
annotation of high-level structures (e.g., human
joint landmarks) at training time. Our network
encodes the input frame, predicts a high-level encoding into the future, and then a decoder with
access to the first frame produces the predicted
image from the predicted encoding. The decoder
also produces a mask that outlines the predicted
foreground object (e.g., person) as a by-product.
Unlike Villegas et al. (2017b), we develop a novel
training method that jointly trains the encoder, the
predictor, and the decoder together without highlevel supervision; we further improve upon this
by using an adversarial loss in the feature space to
train the predictor. Our method can predict about
20 seconds into the future and provides better results compared to Denton and Fergus (2018) and
Finn et al. (2016) on the Human 3.6M dataset.

1. Introduction
Building a model that is able to predict the future states of
an environment from raw high-dimensional sensory data
(e.g., video) has recently emerged as an important research
problem in machine learning and computer vision. Models
that are able to accurately predict the future can play a vital
role in developing intelligent agents that interact with their
environment (Jayaraman and Grauman, 2015; 2016; Finn
et al., 2016).
1
Google Brain, Mountain View, CA, USA. 2 Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.. Correspondence to: Nevan Wichers
<wichersn@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Popular video prediction approaches focus on recursively
observing the generated frames to make predictions farther into the future (Oh et al., 2015; Mathieu et al., 2016;
Goroshin et al., 2015; Srivastava et al., 2015; Ranzato et al.,
2014; Finn et al., 2016; Villegas et al., 2017a; Lotter et al.,
2017). In order to make reasonable long-term frame predictions in natural videos, these approaches need to automatically identify the dynamics of the main factors of variation
changing through time, while also being highly robust to
pixel-level noise. However, it is common for the previously
mentioned methods to generate quality predictions for the
first few steps, but then the prediction dramatically degrades
until all of the video context is lost or the predicted motion
becomes static.
A hierarchical method makes predictions in a high-level
information hierarchy (e.g., landmarks) and then decodes
the predicted future in high-level back into low-level pixel
space. The advantage of predicting the future in high-level
space first is that the predictions degrade less quickly compared to predictions made solely in pixel space. The method
by Villegas et al. (2017b) is an example of a hierarchical
model; however, it requires ground truth human landmark
annotations during training time. In this work, we explore
ways to generate videos using a hierarchical model without requiring ground truth landmarks or other high-level
structure annotations during training. In a similar fashion
to Villegas et al. (2017b), the proposed network predicts
the pixels of future video frames given the first few frames.
Specifically, our network never observes any of the predicted frames, and the predicted future frames are driven
solely by the high-level space predictions.
The contributions of our work are summarized below:
• An unsupervised approach for discovering high-level
features necessary for long-term future prediction.
• A joint training strategy for generating high-level features from low-level features and low-level features
from high-level features simultaneously.
• Use of adversarial training in feature space for improved high-level feature discovery and generation.
• Long-term pixel-level video prediction for about 20
seconds into the future for the Human 3.6M dataset.

