Gradient-Based Meta-Learning with Learned Layerwise Metric and Subspace

Yoonho Lee 1 Seungjin Choi 1

Abstract
Gradient-based meta-learning methods leverage
gradient descent to learn the commonalities
among various tasks. While previous such methods have been successful in meta-learning tasks,
they resort to simple gradient descent during metatesting. Our primary contribution is the MT-net,
which enables the meta-learner to learn on each
layer’s activation space a subspace that the taskspecific learner performs gradient descent on. Additionally, a task-specific learner of an MT-net
performs gradient descent with respect to a metalearned distance metric, which warps the activation space to be more sensitive to task identity. We demonstrate that the dimension of this
learned subspace reflects the complexity of the
task-specific learner’s adaptation task, and also
that our model is less sensitive to the choice of initial learning rates than previous gradient-based
meta-learning methods. Our method achieves
state-of-the-art or comparable performance on
few-shot classification and regression tasks.

1. Introduction
While recent deep learning methods achieve superhuman
performance on various tasks including image classification
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012) or playing games (Mnih et al.,
2015), they can only do so using copious amounts of data
and computational resources. In many problems of interest, learners may not have such luxuries. Meta-learning
(Schmidhuber, 1987; Schmidhuber et al., 1997; Thrun &
Pratt, 1998) methods are a potential solution to this problem; these methods leverage information gathered from
prior learning experience to learn more effectively in novel
tasks. This line of research typically casts learning as a twolevel process, each with a different scope. The meta-learner
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Pohang
University of Science and Technology, Korea. Correspondence
to: Yoonho Lee <einet89@postech.ac.kr>, Seungjin Choi <seungjin@postech.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

operates on the level of tasks, gathering information from
several instances of task-specific learners. A task-specific
learner, on the other hand, operates on the level of datapoints, and incorporates the meta-learner’s knowledge in its
learning process.
Model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) (Finn et al., 2017)
is a meta-learning method that directly optimizes the gradient descent procedure of task-specific learners. All taskspecific learners of MAML share initial parameters, and a
meta-learner optimizes these initial parameters such that gradient descent starting from such initial parameters quickly
yields good performance. An implicit assumption in having
the meta-learner operate in the same space as task-specific
learners is that the two different scopes of learning require
equal degrees of freedom.
Our primary contribution is the MT-net (Figure 1), a neural network architecture and task-specific learning procedure. An MT-net differs from previous gradient-based metalearning methods in that the meta-learner determines a subspace and a corresponding metric that task-specific learners
can learn in, thus setting the degrees of freedom of taskspecific learners to an appropriate amount. Note that the activation space of the cell shown in Fig.1(b) is 3-dimensional.
Because the task-specific learners can only change weights
that affect two of the three intermediate activations, taskspecific learning only happens on a subspace with 2 degrees
of freedom. Additionally, meta-learned parameters T alter the geometry of the activation space (Fig.1(c)) of taskspecific parameters so that task-specific learners are more
sensitive to change in task.

2. Background
2.1. Problem Setup
We briefly explain the meta-learning problem setup which
we apply to few-shot tasks.
The problems of k-shot regression and classification
are as follows.
In the training phase for a metalearner, we are given a (possibly infinite) set of tasks
{T1 , T2 , T3 , . . .}. Each task provides a training set and a
test set {DTi ,train , DTi ,test }. We assume here that the training set DTi ,train has k examples per class, hence the name
k-shot learning. A particular task T ∈ {T1 , T2 , T3 , . . .}

