SBEED: Convergent Reinforcement Learning
with Nonlinear Function Approximation

Bo Dai 1 Albert Shaw 1 Lihong Li 2 Lin Xiao 3 Niao He 4 Zhen Liu 1 Jianshu Chen 5 Le Song 1

Abstract

are referred to the textbook of Puterman (2014) for details.

When function approximation is used, solving
the Bellman optimality equation with stability
guarantees has remained a major open problem
in reinforcement learning for decades. The fundamental difficulty is that the Bellman operator
may become an expansion in general, resulting in
oscillating and even divergent behavior of popular algorithms like Q-learning. In this paper, we
revisit the Bellman equation, and reformulate it
into a novel primal-dual optimization problem
using Nesterov’s smoothing technique and the
Legendre-Fenchel transformation. We then develop a new algorithm, called Smoothed Bellman
Error Embedding, to solve this optimization problem where any differentiable function class may
be used. We provide what we believe to be the first
convergence guarantee for general nonlinear function approximation, and analyze the algorithm’s
sample complexity. Empirically, our algorithm
compares favorably to state-of-the-art baselines
in several benchmark control problems.

Many of the most effective RL algorithms have their root
in such a fixed-point view. The most prominent family of
algorithms is perhaps the temporal-difference algorithms, including TD(λ) (Sutton, 1988), Q-learning (Watkins, 1989),
SARSA (Rummery & Niranjan, 1994; Sutton, 1996), and
numerous variants such as the empirically very successful
DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) and A3C (Mnih et al., 2016) implementations. Compared to direct policy search/gradient
algorithms like REINFORCE (Williams, 1992), these fixedpoint methods make learning more efficient by bootstrapping (a sample-based version of Bellman operator).

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), the goal of an agent is to
learn a policy that maximizes long-term returns by sequentially interacting with an unknown environment (Sutton &
Barto, 1998). The dominating framework to model such
an interaction is the Markov decision process, or MDP, in
which the optimal value function are characterized as a
fixed point of the Bellman operator. A fundamental result
for MDP is that the Bellman operator is a contraction in the
value-function space, so the optimal value function is the
unique fixed point. Furthermore, starting from any initial
value function, iterative applications of the Bellman operator ensure convergence to the fixed point. Interested readers
1

Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Google Inc. 3 Microsoft
Research 4 University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign 5 Tencent
AI Lab. Correspondence to: Bo Dai <bodai@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

When the Bellman operator can be computed exactly (even
on average), such as when the MDP has finite state/actions,
convergence is guaranteed thanks to the contraction property (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996). Unfortunately, when
function approximatiors are used, such fixed-point methods
easily become unstable or even divergent (Boyan & Moore,
1995; Baird, 1995; Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1997), except in a
few special cases. For example,
• for some rather restrictive function classes, such as
those with a non-expansion property, some of the finitestate MDP theory continues to apply with proper modifications (Gordon, 1995; Ormoneit & Sen, 2002; Antos
et al., 2008);
• when linear value function approximation in certain
cases, convergence is guaranteed: for evaluating a
fixed policy from on-policy samples (Tsitsiklis & Van
Roy, 1997), for evaluating the policy using a closedform solution from off-policy samples (Boyan, 2002;
Lagoudakis & Parr, 2003), or for optimizing a policy
using samples collected by a stationary policy (Maei
et al., 2010).
In recent years, a few authors have made important progress
toward finding scalable, convergent TD algorithms, by designing proper objective functions and using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to optimize them (Sutton et al., 2009;
Maei, 2011). Later on, it was realized that several of these
gradient-based algorithms can be interpreted as solving a
primal-dual problem (Mahadevan et al., 2014; Liu et al.,
2015; Macua et al., 2015; Dai et al., 2017). This insight has

