Optimizing the Latent Space of Generative Networks

Piotr Bojanowski 1 Armand Joulin 1 David Lopez Paz 1 Arthur Szlam 1

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have
achieved remarkable results in the task of generating realistic natural images. In most successful
applications, GAN models share two common
aspects: solving a challenging saddle point optimization problem, interpreted as an adversarial
game between a generator and a discriminator
functions; and parameterizing the generator and
the discriminator as deep convolutional neural networks. The goal of this paper is to disentangle the
contribution of these two factors to the success
of GANs. In particular, we introduce Generative Latent Optimization (GLO), a framework to
train deep convolutional generators using simple
reconstruction losses. Throughout a variety of
experiments, we show that GLO enjoys many of
the desirable properties of GANs: synthesizing
visually-appealing samples, interpolating meaningfully between samples, and performing linear
arithmetic with noise vectors; all of this without
the adversarial optimization scheme.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) are a powerful framework to learn models
capable of generating natural images. GANs learn these
generative models by setting up an adversarial game between two learning machines. On the one hand, a generator
plays to transform noise vectors into fake samples, which
resemble real samples drawn from a distribution of natural
images. On the other hand, a discriminator plays to distinguish between real and fake samples. During training, the
generator and the discriminator functions are optimized in
turns. First, the discriminator learns to assign high scores
to real samples, and low scores to fake samples. Then, the
generator learns to increase the scores of fake samples, so
1
Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Piotr Bojanowski
<bojanowski@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

as to “fool” the discriminator. After proper training, the
generator is able to produce realistic natural images from
noise vectors.
Recently, GANs have been used to produce high-quality images resembling handwritten digits, human faces, and house
interiors (Radford et al., 2015). Furthermore, GANs exhibit
three strong signs of generalization. First, the generator
translates linear interpolations in the noise space into semantic interpolations in the image space. In other words,
a linear interpolation in the noise space will generate a
smooth interpolation of visually-appealing images. Second,
the generator allows linear arithmetic in the noise space.
Similarly to word embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013), linear
arithmetic indicates that the generator organizes the noise
space to disentangle the nonlinear factors of variation of
natural images into linear statistics. Third, the generator is
able to to synthesize new images that resemble those of the
data distribution. This allows for applications such as image
in-painting (Iizuka et al., 2017) and super-resolution (Ledig
et al., 2016).
Despite their success, training and evaluating GANs is notoriously difficult. The adversarial optimization problem
implemented by GANs is sensitive to random initialization,
architectural choices, and hyper-parameter settings. In many
cases, a fair amount of human care is necessary to find the
correct configuration to train a GAN in a particular dataset.
It is common to observe generators with similar architectures and hyper-parameters to exhibit dramatically different
behaviors. Even when properly trained, the resulting generator may synthesize samples that resemble only a few
localized regions (or modes) of the data distribution (Goodfellow, 2017). While several advances have been made to
stabilize the training of GANs (Salimans et al., 2016), this
task remains more art than science.
The difficulty of training GANs is aggravated by the challenges in their evaluation: since evaluating the likelihood
of a GAN with respect to the data is an intractable problem,
the current gold standard to evaluate the quality of GANs
is to eyeball the samples produced by the generator. This
qualitative evaluation gives little insight on the coverage
of the generator, making the mode dropping issue hard to
measure. The evaluation of discriminators is also difficult,
since their visual features do not always transfer well to

