Semi-Supervised Learning on Data Streams via Temporal Label Propagation

Tal Wagner 1 Sudipto Guha 2 Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan 2 Nina Mishra 2

Abstract
We consider the problem of labeling points on a
fast-moving data stream when only a small number of labeled examples are available. In our
setting, incoming points must be processed efficiently and the stream is too large to store in its
entirety. We present a semi-supervised learning
algorithm for this task. The algorithm maintains a
small synopsis of the stream which can be quickly
updated as new points arrive, and labels every
incoming point by provably learning from the
full history of the stream. Experiments on real
datasets validate that the algorithm can quickly
and accurately classify points on a stream with a
small quantity of labeled examples.

1. Introduction
In many real situations, unlabeled data is readily available,
whereas labeled data tends to be of a smaller size. This
motivates semi-supervised learning (SSL), which aims to
make heavy use of a large amount of unlabeled data along
with a limited amount of labeled data. For this problem,
the celebrated paper due to (Zhu et al., 2003a) provided a
principled offline approach with excellent results in practice.
Their algorithm casts the problem as label propagation on a
graph, where the nodes represent both labeled and unlabeled
data points, and the weight of an edge reflects similarity
between its endpoints. The labels are spread in the graph
by a random walk process that moves through the unlabeled
nodes until reaching a labeled node. The labeling computed
by this process is known as the harmonic solution.
In this paper, we consider the case where the data arrives in a
high-throughput stream, such as an electrocardiogram signal
or a video feed. The goal is to label each point upon arrival
as quickly as possible, ideally by means of semi-supervised
learning over all of the data seen so far, both labeled and
unlabeled. Example use cases include real-time monitor2

1
CSAIL, MIT. Work done during an internship at Amazon.
Amazon. Correspondence to: Tal Wagner <talw@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

ing of metrics arising from medical patient signals (ECG,
EEG, fall detection), data centers (network, I/O and CPU
utilization), or a camera mounted on a semi-autonomous car
(for road conditions and obstacle detection). In these scenarios, unlabeled data is continuously streaming, but only a
small number of manually labeled examples are provided –
either at the beginning of the stream or as occasional user
feedback. We want algorithms that leverage both inputs and
learn how to classify stream elements, such as ECG arrhythmias, network intrusion alerts or driving conditions. Several
other applications are given in (Goldberg et al., 2008), who
defined a similar model, and in (Krempl et al., 2014).
In practice, this setting requires algorithms that run under
severe time and memory constraints, since the labels are
expected in real-time and the stream is generally too large
to fully store in the memory. This poses a major challenge:
How can we leverage the entire stream history to label a
new point, when we can only store a tiny fraction of it?
Problem Statement. Given a stream x1 , x2 , . . . of interleaved labeled and unlabeled points, and a similarity function between pairs of points, label every incoming point xn
using sublinear time and sublinear space in n.
Our Solution. Our main contribution is Temporal Label
Propagation (TLP), a streaming SSL algorithm which is
theoretically sound and also works well in practice. Its processing time for the nth point on the stream is independent
of n, and its storage space only scales as log n. At the same
time, it provably computes the harmonic solution on a similarity graph that naturally describes the entire stream seen
so far, which we call a temporal vicinity graph. Thus, it
produces labels that utilize all of the labeled and unlabeled
points in the past. In comparison, using a batch (offline)
label propagation algorithm on the same graph would entail
computation and memory requirements that grow at least as
a linear function of the stream length n.
Our Techniques. The algorithm is based on graph reduction tools that originate in the theory of electric networks. The short-circuit operator (Campbell, 1922; Anderson, 1971) is a way to compress a large graph G into
a much smaller graph H, that exposes only pre-specified
nodes of interest called terminals, while preserving some
global properties of G. We choose the terminals as the most
recent points on the stream, including the incoming point

