Celer: a Fast Solver for the Lasso with Dual Extrapolation

Mathurin Massias 1 Alexandre Gramfort 1 Joseph Salmon 2

Abstract
Convex sparsity-inducing regularizations are ubiquitous in high-dimensional machine learning, but
solving the resulting optimization problems can
be slow. To accelerate solvers, state-of-the-art
approaches consist in reducing the size of the optimization problem at hand. In the context of
regression, this can be achieved either by discarding irrelevant features (screening techniques) or
by prioritizing features likely to be included in the
support of the solution (working set techniques).
Duality comes into play at several steps in these
techniques. Here, we propose an extrapolation
technique starting from a sequence of iterates in
the dual that leads to the construction of improved
dual points. This enables a tighter control of optimality as used in stopping criterion, as well as
better screening performance of Gap Safe rules.
Finally, we propose a working set strategy based
on an aggressive use of Gap Safe screening rules.
Thanks to our new dual point construction, we
show significant computational speedups on multiple real-world problems.

1. Introduction
Following the seminal work on the Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996)
(also known as Basis Pursuit (Chen & Donoho, 1995) in
signal processing), convex sparsity-inducing regularizations
have had a major impact on machine learning (Bach et al.,
2012). Now thoroughly analyzed in terms of statistical
efficiency (Bickel et al., 2009), these regularizers yield a
sparse solution, meaning both a more interpretable model,
as well as reduced time for prediction. In machine learning
applications, the default method to optimize such problems
is coordinate descent (Fu, 1998; Friedman et al., 2010).
Since by design only a few features are included in the
1

INRIA, Université Paris-Saclay 2 LTCI, Télécom ParisTech,
Université Paris-Saclay. Correspondence to: Mathurin Massias
<mathurin.massias@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

optimal solution (what we will refer to as the support),
state-of-the-art techniques rely on limiting the size of the
(sub-)problems to consider. To do so, various approaches
can be distinguished: screening techniques (Wang et al.,
2013; Ogawa et al., 2013; Fercoq et al., 2015), following the
seminal work of El Ghaoui et al. (2012), strong rules (Tibshirani et al., 2012) implemented in the GLMNET package
or correlation screening (Xiang & Ramadge, 2012). Similar
techniques discarding gradients have also been considered
in the stochastic gradient descent literature (Vainsencher
et al., 2015; Shibagaki et al., 2016). When a screening rule
guarantees that all discarded features cannot be in the solution, it is called safe. The current state-of-the-art safe
screening rules are the so-called Gap Safe rules (Ndiaye
et al., 2017) relying on duality gap evaluation, which itself
requires to know a suitable dual point.
Alternatively, working sets1 (WS) techniques (Fan et al.,
2008; Boisbunon et al., 2014; Johnson & Guestrin, 2015)
select a subset of important features according to a particular criterion, and approximately solve the subproblem
restricted to these features. A new subset is then defined,
and the procedure is repeated. While screening techniques
start from full problems and prune the feature set, WS techniques rather start with small problems and include more
and more features if needed. For these techniques, duality
can also come into play, both in the stopping criterion of the
subproblem solver, as well as in the WS definition.
The organization of the paper is as follows: in Section 2, we
remind the practical importance of duality for Lasso solvers
and present a technique called dual extrapolation to obtain
better dual points. We also shed some light on the success
of our approach when combined with cyclic coordinate descent by interpreting the latter as Dykstra’s algorithm in the
Lasso dual. In Section 3, we show how dual extrapolation
is well-suited to improve Gap Safe screening. We present
in Section 4 a WS strategy based on an aggressive relaxation of the Gap Safe rules. Experiments in Section 6 show
significant computational speedups on multiple real-world
problems.
1

also called active sets; we choose working because in the
screening literature, active set refers to the non discarded features.

