First Order Generative Adversarial Networks
Calvin Seward 1 2 Thomas Unterthiner 2 Urs Bergmann 1 Nikolay Jetchev 1 Sepp Hochreiter 2

Abstract
GANs excel at learning high dimensional distributions, but they can update generator parameters in
directions that do not correspond to the steepest
descent direction of the objective. Prominent examples of problematic update directions include
those used in both Goodfellow’s original GAN
and the WGAN-GP. To formally describe an optimal update direction, we introduce a theoretical
framework which allows the derivation of requirements on both the divergence and corresponding
method for determining an update direction, with
these requirements guaranteeing unbiased minibatch updates in the direction of steepest descent.
We propose a novel divergence which approximates the Wasserstein distance while regularizing the critic’s first order information. Together
with an accompanying update direction, this divergence fulfills the requirements for unbiased
steepest descent updates. We verify our method,
the First Order GAN, with image generation on
CelebA, LSUN and CIFAR-10 and set a new state
of the art on the One Billion Word language generation task.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) excel at learning generative models of complex distributions, such as images (Radford et al., 2016; Ledig et al.,
2017), textures (Jetchev et al., 2016; Bergmann et al., 2017;
Jetchev et al., 2017), and even texts (Gulrajani et al., 2017;
Heusel et al., 2017).
GANs learn a generative model G that maps samples from
multivariate random noise into a high dimensional space.
The goal of GAN training is to update G such that the
1

Zalando Research, Mühlenstraße 25, 10243 Berlin, Germany
LIT AI Lab & Institute of Bioinformatics, Johannes Kepler
University Linz, Austria. Correspondence to: Calvin Seward
<calvin.seward@zalando.de>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

generative model approximates a target probability distribution. In order to determine how close the generated and
target distributions are, a class of divergences, the so-called
adversarial divergences was defined and explored by (Liu
et al., 2017). This class is broad enough to encompass most
popular GAN methods such as the original GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014), f -GANs (Nowozin et al., 2016), moment
matching networks (Li et al., 2015), Wasserstein GANs (Arjovsky et al., 2017) and the tractable version thereof, the
WGAN-GP (Gulrajani et al., 2017).
GANs learn a generative model with distribution Q by minimizing an objective function τ (PkQ) measuring the similarity between target and generated distributions P and Q.
In most GAN settings, the objective function to be minimized is an adversarial divergence (Liu et al., 2017), where
a critic function is learned that distinguishes between target and generated data. For example, in the classic GAN
(Goodfellow et al., 2014) the critic f classifies data as real
or generated, and the generator G is encouraged to generate
samples that f will classify as real.
Unfortunately in GAN training, the generated distribution
often fails to converge to the target distribution. Many popular GAN methods are unsuccessful with toy examples, for
example failing to generate all modes of a mixture of Gaussians (Srivastava et al., 2017; Metz et al., 2017) or failing to
learn the distribution of data on a one-dimensional line in a
high dimensional space (Fedus et al., 2017). In these situations, updates to the generator don’t significantly reduce
the divergence between generated and target distributions;
if there always was a significant reduction in the divergence
then the generated distribution would converge to the target.
The key to successful neural network training lies in the ability to efficiently obtain unbiased estimates of the gradients
of a network’s parameters with respect to some loss. With
GANs, this idea can be applied to the generative setting.
There, the generator G is parameterized by some values
θ ∈ Rm . If an unbiased estimate of the gradient of the
divergence between target and generated distributions with
respect to θ can be obtained during mini-batch learning,
then SGD can be applied to learn G.
In GAN learning, intuition would dictate updating the generated distribution by moving θ in the direction of steepest descent −∇θ τ (PkQθ ). Unfortunately, −∇θ τ (PkQθ ) is

