oi-VAE: Output Interpretable VAEs for Nonlinear Group Factor Analysis

Samuel K. Ainsworth 1 Nicholas J. Foti 1 Adrian K. C. Lee 2 Emily B. Fox 1

Abstract
Deep generative models have recently yielded encouraging results in producing subjectively realistic samples of complex data. Far less attention has
been paid to making these generative models interpretable. In many scenarios, ranging from scientific applications to finance, the observed variables
have a natural grouping. It is often of interest to
understand systems of interaction amongst these
groups, and latent factor models (LFMs) are an attractive approach. However, traditional LFMs are
limited by assuming a linear correlation structure.
We present an output interpretable VAE (oi-VAE)
for grouped data that models complex, nonlinear
latent-to-observed relationships. We combine a
structured VAE comprised of group-specific generators with a sparsity-inducing prior. We demonstrate that oi-VAE yields meaningful notions of
interpretability in the analysis of motion capture
and MEG data. We further show that in these
situations, the regularization inherent to oi-VAE
can actually lead to improved generalization and
learned generative processes.

1. Introduction
Many datasets of interest in machine learning are comprised of high-dimensional, complex objects. Often, one
is interested in describing these observations using a lowdimensional latent subspace that captures the statistical variations. Such approaches fall under the umbrella of factor
analysis (Bishop, 2016), where we wish to learn a mapping
between the latent and observed spaces. The motivation is
two-fold: (i) factor models provide a compact representation
1

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington 2 Institute for Learning &
Brain Sciences and Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, University of Washington. Correspondence to: Samuel
K. Ainsworth <skainsworth@gmail.com>, Nicholas J. Foti
<nfoti@uw.edu>, Adrian K. C. Lee <akclee@uw.edu>, Emily
B. Fox <ebfox@uw.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

of the data, and (ii) the mapping can be used to describe the
correlation structure of the high-dimensional data. In many
applications, we are particularly interested in mappings that
elucidate interpretable interactions.
The challenge arises from the push and pull between interpretability and expressivity in factor modeling approaches.
Methods emphasizing interpretability have focused primarily on linear models, resulting in lower expressivity. A
popular choice in these settings is to consider sparse linear factor models (Zhao et al., 2016; Carvalho et al., 2008).
However, it is well known that neural (Vejmelka et al., 2010),
genomic (Prill et al., 2010), and financial data (Harvey et al.,
1994), for example, exhibit complex nonlinearities.
Recently, there has been a significant amount of work on expressive models for complex, high dimensional data. In particular, deep generative models (Kingma & Welling, 2013;
Rezende et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Damianou &
Lawrence, 2013) have proven wildly successful in efficiently
modeling complex observations—such as images—as nonlinear mappings of simple latent representations. These
nonlinear maps are based on deep neural networks that parameterize an observation distribution, often referred to as
the generator. We focus on the class of variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2013). Unlike linear
models which posit a latent variable per observation, VAEs
introduce a mapping from observations to a distribution
on the latent space; when parameterized by a deep neural network, this mapping is called the inference network.
The generator and inference network are jointly trained to
minimize a variational objective.
The VAE can be viewed as a nonlinear factor model that
provides a scalable means of learning latent representations.
The focus, however, has primarily been on their use as a
generative mechanism. One shortcoming of the VAE is that,
due to the tangled web of connections between neural network layers, it is not possible to interpret how changes in
the latent code influence changes in the observations—as
in linear latent factor models. For example, imagine you
are trying to synthesize human body poses. One might
hope to have a disentangled representation where a given
latent dimension controls a subset of highly correlated body
parts; unfortunately, the standard VAE cannot yield these
types of interpretations. Another shortcoming of the VAE

