MAGAN: Aligning Biological Manifolds

Matthew Amodio 1 Smita Krishnaswamy 2 1

Abstract
It is increasingly common in many types of natural and physical systems (especially biological
systems) to have different types of measurements
performed on the same underlying system. In
such settings, it is important to align the manifolds arising from each measurement in order
to integrate such data and gain an improved picture of the system; we tackle this problem using
generative adversarial networks (GANs). Recent
attempts to use GANs to find correspondences
between sets of samples do not explicitly perform proper alignment of manifolds. We present
the new Manifold Aligning GAN (MAGAN) that
aligns two manifolds such that related points in
each measurement space are aligned. We demonstrate applications of MAGAN in single-cell biology in integrating two different measurement
types together: cells from the same tissue are
measured with both genomic (single-cell RNAsequencing) and proteomic (mass cytometry) technologies. We show that MAGAN successfully
aligns manifolds such that known correlations between measured markers are improved compared
to other recently proposed models.

1. Introduction
We commonly have samples from a pair of related domains
and want to ask the natural question of how samples from
one relate to samples from the other. Our motivational system for this is two types of measurements on cells sampled
from the same population in a biological system. It is important for the discovery of new biology to integrate these
datasets, which are often generated at great cost and expense. However, a fundamental challenge is that there are
exponentially many possible relationships that could exist
1

Department of Computer Science, Yale University
Department of Genetics, Yale University. Correspondence to:
Matthew Amodio <matthew.amodio@yale.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Figure 1. There are exponentially many mappings that superimpose the two manifolds, fooling a GAN’s discriminator. By aligning the manifolds, we maintain pointwise correspondences.

between the two domains of measurement and the system
must learn a logical way to map between them.
One way to approach this task to use dual GANs mapping
between each domain. The first of these approaches required
supervised paired examples from each domain, an impractical demand for many applications (Isola et al., 2016). Recently, there have been attempts at performing the same task
without the supervision of paired data (Zhu et al., 2017; Yi
et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017). Like these
previous models, MAGAN learns to map between distinct
domains from unsupervised, unpaired data without pretraining. However, unlike them, MAGAN aligns rather than
superimposes the manifolds of the two domains.
We draw the connection between unsupervised domain mapping with dual GANs and the alignment of the domain
manifolds (Domingos, 2012). Much work has framed the
generation problem of GANs as sampling points from this
manifold (Park et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2016). In the dual
GAN framework, each domain’s GAN learns a mapping that
fools a discriminator by generating a point on the other domain’s manifold when given a point on its manifold. There
are exponentially many mappings that produce the same
distribution of outputs from the same distribution of inputs
but do so by mapping different individual input points to
different individual output points. To the GAN’s discriminator, these mappings are identical. But when we interpret the

