RadialGAN: Leveraging multiple datasets to improve target-specific predictive
models using Generative Adversarial Networks

Jinsung Yoon 1 James Jordon 2 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2 3

Abstract
Training complex machine learning models for
prediction often requires a large amount of data
that is not always readily available. Leveraging
these external datasets from related but different
sources is therefore an important task if good predictive models are to be built for deployment in
settings where data can be rare. In this paper we
propose a novel approach to the problem in which
we use multiple GAN architectures to learn to
translate from one dataset to another, thereby allowing us to effectively enlarge the target dataset,
and therefore learn better predictive models than
if we simply used the target dataset. We show the
utility of such an approach, demonstrating that
our method improves the prediction performance
on the target domain over using just the target
dataset and also show that our framework outperforms several other benchmarks on a collection
of real-world medical datasets.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning methods often require large
amounts of data in order to learn the large number of parameters that define them efficiently, this may be because the
model itself is complex (such as a multi-layer perceptron)
and/or because the dimensions of the input data are large
(as is often the case in the medical setting (Alaa et al., 2018;
Yoon et al., 2018b)). On the other hand, large datasets for a
specific task such as counterfactual estimation and survival
analysis may not be readily available (Yoon et al., 2018a;
Lee et al., 2018). Equally, it might be the case that it is
desirable to learn a model that performs well on a specific,
potentially small, sub-population. For example, in the medical setting it is important that models to be deployed for use
1

University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 2 University
of Oxford, UK 3 Alan Turing Institute, UK. Correspondence to:
Jinsung Yoon <jsyoon0823@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

in hospitals perform well on each hospital’s patient population (rather than simply performing well across the entire
population) (Wiens et al., 2014; Lee et al., 2012; Yoon et al.,
2017). Learning an accurate model using the limited data
from a single hospital can be difficult due to the lack of
data and it is therefore important to leverage data from other
hospitals, while avoiding biasing the learned model.
There are two main challenges presented when attempting
to utilize data from multiple sources: feature mismatch and
distribution mismatch. Feature mismatch refers to the fact
that even among datasets drawn from the same field (such
as medicine), the features that are actually recorded for each
dataset may vary. It can often be the case, for example, that
the practices in different hospitals lead to different features
being measured (Yoon et al., 2017). The challenge this
poses is two-fold - we need to deal with the fact that the
”auxiliary” hospitals’ datasets do not contain all the features
that have been measured by the target hospital and moreover
we leverage the information contained in the features that
are measured by the auxiliary hospitals but not the target
hospital.
Distribution mismatch refers to the fact that the patient population across two hospitals may vary. For instance, it may
be the case that hospitals located in wealthier areas serve
wealthier patients and that because of a patient’s wealth,
they are likely to have received a different standard of care
in the past, therefore one might expect that patients in this
hospital are more likely to exhibit “healthier” characteristics,
whereas a hospital in a poorer area is more likely to have
an average patient exhibit “sicker” characteristics. In order
to utilize the datasets from several hospitals to construct
a hospital-specific predictive model, we need to deal with
the distribution mismatch between the source and target
datasets. Otherwise, the learned predictive model will be biased and could perform poorly in the targeted setting. There
is a wealth of literature that focuses solely on this problem,
working under the assumption that all domains contain the
same features. This paper provides a natural solution to
both and is therefore solving a more general problem than
frameworks tackling only distribution mismatch.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for utilizing
datasets from multiple sources to effectively enlarge a target

