Lyapunov Functions for First-Order Methods:
Tight Automated Convergence Guarantees

Adrien Taylor * 1 Bryan Van Scoy * 2 Laurent Lessard * 2 3

Abstract

method, with an energy of zero corresponding to reaching
the optimal solution of (P). The existence of such an energy
function thus provides a straightforward certificate of linear
convergence for the iterative method.

We present a novel way of generating Lyapunov
functions for proving linear convergence rates
of first-order optimization methods. Our approach provably obtains the fastest linear convergence rate that can be verified by a quadratic
Lyapunov function (with given states), and only
relies on solving a small-sized semidefinite program. Our approach combines the advantages of
performance estimation problems (PEP, due to
Drori & Teboulle (2014)) and integral quadratic
constraints (IQC, due to Lessard et al. (2016)),
and relies on convex interpolation (due to Taylor
et al. (2017c;b)).

In this paper, we present an automated way of generating
quadratic Lyapunov functions for certifying linear convergence of first-order iterative methods to solve (P). The
procedure relies on solving a small-sized semidefinite program (SDP) so it is computationally efficient. Moreover,
the procedure is tight, meaning that if the SDP is infeasible,
then no such quadratic Lyapunov function exists.

1. Introduction
In this work, we study first-order methods for solving the
(unconstrained) minimization problem
minimize f (x)
x∈Rd

(P)

Our results unify recent SDP-based works for certifying
convergence of first-order methods, namely: performance
estimation problems (Drori & Teboulle, 2014; Taylor et al.,
2017c) and integral quadratic constraints from robust control (Lessard et al., 2016), using smooth strongly convex
interpolation (Taylor et al., 2017c). These connections are
further discussed in Section 4.3.
1.1. Organization

To solve (P), we consider methods that iteratively update
their estimate of the optimizer using only gradient evaluations. One possibility for proving convergence of such
methods is by finding Lyapunov functions.

The paper is organized as follows. We describe the class of
methods under consideration and basic properties of Lyapunov functions in Sections 2 and 3 respectively. Our main
results are then presented in Section 4, which also features
numerical examples and comparisons to other approaches.
The corresponding proof is presented in Section 5. Finally,
we explore extensions of our approach in Section 6, and
conclude in Section 7.

A Lyapunov function can be interpreted as defining an “energy” that decreases geometrically with each iteration of the

1.2. Preliminaries

where f : Rd → R. In the sequel, we focus on the case
where f is L-smooth and µ-strongly convex, though our
methodology can be adapted to a broader class of problems.

*

Equal contribution 1 INRIA, Département d’informatique
de l’ENS, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research
University, Paris, France 2 Wisconsin Institute for Discovery,
University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
3
Department of Elecrical and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
Correspondence to: Adrien Taylor <adrien.taylor@inria.fr>,
Bryan Van Scoy <vanscoy@wisc.edu>, Laurent Lessard
<laurent.lessard@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

A function f : Rd → R is called L-smooth if its gradient is
Lipschitz continuous with parameter L, i.e.,
k∇f (x) − ∇f (y)k ≤ L kx − yk

for all x, y ∈ Rd . (1)

Furthermore, f is called convex if
f (x) ≥ f (y) + ∇f (y)T (x − y) for all x, y ∈ Rd , (2)
and µ-strongly convex if f (x)− µ2 kxk2 is convex. The set of
L-smooth and µ-strongly convex functions is denoted Fµ,L ,
and we define κ := L
µ , the corresponding condition number.

