ADMM and Accelerated ADMM as Continuous Dynamical Systems

Guilherme França 1 Daniel P. Robinson 1 René Vidal 1

Abstract
Recently, there has been an increasing interest in
using tools from dynamical systems to analyze the
behavior of simple optimization algorithms such
as gradient descent and accelerated variants. This
paper strengthens such connections by deriving
the differential equations that model the continuous limit of the sequence of iterates generated
by the alternating direction method of multipliers,
as well as an accelerated variant. We employ the
direct method of Lyapunov to analyze the stability
of critical points of the dynamical systems and to
obtain associated convergence rates.

1. Introduction
The theory of dynamical systems has been extensively developed since its origins by Poincaré in the late 19th century.
For example, the work of Lyapunov on stability is commonly used in physics, control systems, and other branches
of applied mathematics. However, the connection between
dynamical systems and optimization algorithms has only
recently been studied. The basic idea is that tools from
dynamical systems can be used to analyze the stability and
convergence rates of the continuous limit of the sequence of
iterates generated by optimization algorithms. Prior work
has established these connections for simple optimization algorithms such as gradient descent (GD) and accelerated gradient descent (A-GD). This paper improves upon prior work
by deriving the dynamical systems associated with the continuous limit of two commonly used optimization methods:
the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) and
an accelerated version of ADMM (A-ADMM). Moreover,
this paper analyzes the stability properties of the resulting dynamical systems and derives their convergence rates,
which for ADMM matches the known rate of its discrete
counterpart, and for A-ADMM provides a new result.
1

Mathematical Institute for Data Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD 21218, USA. Correspondence to: Guilherme França <guifranca@jhu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1.1. Related work
Perhaps the simplest connection between an optimization
algorithm and a continuous dynamical system is exhibited
by the GD method. The GD algorithm aims to minimize a
function f : Rn → R via the update
xk+1 = xk − η∇f (xk ),

(1)

where xk denotes the kth solution estimate and η > 0 is
the step size. It is immediate that a continuous limit of the
iterate update (1) leads to the gradient flow
Ẋ = −∇f (X),

(2)

where X = X(t) is the continuous limit of xk and Ẋ ≡
dX
dt denotes its time derivative. It is known that GD has a
convergence rate of O(1/k) for convex functions (Nesterov,
2004). Interestingly, the differential equation (2) also has a
convergence rate of O(1/t), which is consistent with GD.
Nesterov (1983) proposed an accelerated GD algorithm,
henceforth referred to as A-GD, by adding momentum to
the x variables. The update for A-GD may be written as
xk+1 = x̂k − η∇f (x̂k ),
k
(xk+1 − xk ),
x̂k+1 = xk +
k+r

(3a)
(3b)

where r ≥ 3 (r = 3 is the standard choice) and x̂k denotes the kth accelerated vector. It is known that A-GD
has a convergence rate of O(1/k 2 ) for convex functions,
which is known to be optimal in the sense of worst-case
complexity (Nesterov, 2004). Recently, the continuous limit
of A-GD was computed by Su et al. (2016) to be
r
Ẍ + Ẋ + ∇f (X) = 0,
t

(4)

2

where Ẍ ≡ ddtX
2 is the acceleration. By using a Lyapunov
function, it was shown that the convergence rate associated
with (4) is O(1/t2 ) when f is convex (Su et al., 2016),
which matches the known rate of O(1/k 2 ) for A-GD.
To better understand the acceleration mechanism, a variational approach was proposed (Wibisono et al., 2016) for
which the continuous limit of a class of accelerated methods
was obtained using the Bregman Lagrangian; the class of
methods includes A-GD, its non-Euclidean extension, and

