Stochastic Wasserstein Barycenters

Sebastian Claici 1 Edward Chien 1 Justin Solomon 1

Abstract
We present a stochastic algorithm to compute the
barycenter of a set of probability distributions under the Wasserstein metric from optimal transport.
Unlike previous approaches, our method extends
to continuous input distributions and allows the
support of the barycenter to be adjusted in each
iteration. We tackle the problem without regularization, allowing us to recover a much sharper
output. We give examples where our algorithm
recovers a more meaningful barycenter than previous work. Our method is versatile and can be
extended to applications such as generating super
samples from a given distribution and recovering
blue noise approximations.

1. Introduction
Several scenarios in machine learning require summarizing
a collection of probability distributions with shared structure
but individual bias. For instance, multiple sensors might
gather data from the same environment with different noise
distributions; the samples they collect must be assembled
into a single signal. As another example, a dataset might be
split among multiple computers, each of which carries out
MCMC Bayesian inference for a given model; the resulting “subset posterior” latent variable distributions must be
reassembled into a single posterior for the entire dataset. In
each case, the summarized whole can be better than the sum
of its parts: noise in the input distributions cancels when
averaging, while shared structure is reinforced.
The theory of optimal transport (OT) provides a promising and theoretically-justified approach to averaging distributions over a geometric domain. OT equips the space
of measures with a distance metric known as the Wasserstein distance; the average, or barycenter, of a collection
{µj }N
j=1 is then defined as a Fréchet mean minimizing the
1

Computer Science and Artifical Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: Sebastian Claici <sclaici@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

sum of squared Wasserstein distances to the input distributions (Agueh & Carlier, 2011). This mean is aware of the
geometric structure of the underlying space. For example,
the Wasserstein barycenter of two Dirac distributions δx and
δy supported at points x, y ∈ Rn is a single Dirac delta at the
center point δ(x+y)/2 rather than the bimodal superposition
1
2 (δx + δy ) obtained by averaging algebraically.
If the input distributions are discrete, then the Wasserstein
barycenter is computable in polynomial time by solving
a large linear program (Anderes et al., 2016). Adding entropic regularization yields elegant and efficient approximation algorithms (Genevay et al., 2016; Cuturi & Peyré,
2016; Cuturi & Doucet, 2014; Ye et al., 2017). These and
other state-of-the-art methods typically suffer from any of a
few drawbacks, mainly (1) poor behavior as regularization
decreases, (2) required access to the distribution functions
rather than sampling machinery, and/or (3) a fixed discretization on which the input or output distribution is supported,
chosen without knowledge of the barycenter’s structure.
Given sample access to N distributions µj , we propose an
algorithm that iteratively refines an approximation to the
true Wasserstein barycenter. The support of our barycenter
is adjusted in each iteration, adapting to the geometry of
the desired output. Unlike most existing OT algorithms, we
tackle the problem without regularization, yielding a sharp
result. Experiments show that the support of our barycenter is contained (to tolerance) within the support of the
true barycenter even though we use stochastic optimization
rather than computational geometry.

Contributions. We give a straightforward parallelizable
stochastic algorithm to approximate and sample from the
Wasserstein barycenter of a collection of distributions,
which does not rely on regularization to make the problem tractable. We only employ samplers from the input
distributions, and our technique is not restricted to input
or output distributions supported on a fixed set of points.
We verify convergence properties and showcase examples
where our approach is inherently more suitable than competing approaches that require a fixed support.

