Learning to Explore via Meta-Policy Gradient

Tianbing Xu 1 Qiang Liu 2 Liang Zhao 1 Jian Peng 3

Abstract
The performance of off-policy learning, including deep Q-learning and deep deterministic policy
gradient (DDPG), critically depends on the choice
of the exploration strategy. Existing exploration
methods are mostly based on adding noises to the
on-going actor policy and therefore only explore
locally close to what the actor policy dictates. In
this work, we develop a simple meta-policy gradient algorithm that allows us to adaptively learn
the exploration policy in DDPG. Our algorithm
allows us to train flexible exploration behaviors
that are independent of the actor policy, yielding a more global exploration that significantly
accelerates Q-learning. With an extensive study,
we show that our method significantly improves
the sample-efficiency of DDPG on a variety of
reinforcement learning continuous control tasks.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep reinforcement learning (RL) have
demonstrated significant applicability and strong performance in games (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017), continuous control (Lillicrap et al., 2016), and robotics (Levine
et al., 2016). Among them, deep neural networks, such as
convolutional neural networks, are widely used as powerful
functional approximators for extracting useful features and
enabling complex decision making. For instance, in continuous control tasks, a policy that selects actions under certain
state observation can be parameterized with a deep neural
network that takes the current state observation as input and
gives an action or a distribution of action as output. In order
to optimize such policies, various policy gradient methods
(Heess et al., 2017; Mnih et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2015;
2017), including both off-policy and on-policy approaches,
have been proposed. In particular, deterministic policy gradient method (DPG), which extends the discrete Q-learning
1

Baidu Research, Sunnyvale, CA 2 University of Texas at Austin,
TX University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, IL. Correspondence to: Tianbing Xu <xutianbing@baidu.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

algorithm to the continuous action spaces, exploits previous
experience or off-policy data from a replay buffer and often
achieves more desirable sample efficiency compared to most
existing on-policy policy gradient algorithms. In the recent
NIPS 2017 learning to run challenge, the deep deterministic
policy gradient algorithm (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al., 2016), a
variant of DPG, has been applied by almost all top-ranked
teams and achieved a very compelling success in a highdimensional continuous control problem, while on-policy
algorithms, including TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) and
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), performed much worse with
the same amount of data collected.
In contrast to deep Q-learning (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2015)
which only learns a value function on a set of discrete actions, DDPG also parameterizes a deterministic policy to
select a continuous action, thus avoiding the optimization in
or the discretization of the continuous action space. As an
off-policy actor-critic method, DDPG utilizes the Bellman
equation updates for optimizing the value function and the
policy gradient method to optimize the actor policy. Unlike
DQN which often applies epsilon-greedy exploration on a
set of discrete actions, more sophisticated continuous exploration in the high-dimensional continuous action space
is required for DDPG. A common practice of exploration
in DDPG is to add a uncorrelated Gaussian or a correlated
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process (Uhlenbeck & Ornstein,
1993) to the action selected by the deterministic policy. The
data collected by this exploration method is then added to a
replay buffer used for DDPG training. However, in practice,
Gaussian noises may be sub-optimal or misspecified, and
hyper-parameters in the noise process are hard to tune.
In this work, we introduce a meta-learning algorithm to directly learn an exploration policy to collect better experience
data for DDPG training. Instead of using additive noises on
actions, we parameterize a stochastic policy to generate data
to construct the replay buffer for training the deterministic
policy in the DDPG algorithm. This stochastic policy can
be seen as an exploration policy or a teacher policy that
gathers high-quality trajectories that enable better training
of the current deterministic policy and the value function.
To learn the exploration policy, we develop an on-policy policy gradient algorithm based on the training improvement
of the deterministic policy. First, we obtain a collection of
exploration data from the stochastic policy and then apply

