Sound Abstraction and Decomposition of Probabilistic Programs

Steven Holtzen 1 Guy Van den Broeck 1 Todd Millstein 1

Abstract
Probabilistic programming languages are a flexible tool for specifying statistical models, but this
flexibility comes at the expense of efficient analysis. It is currently difficult to compactly represent
the subtle independence properties of a probabilistic program and to exploit independence properties to decompose inference. Classical graphical
model abstractions do capture some properties
of the underlying distribution, enabling inference
algorithms to operate at the level of the graph
topology. However, we observe that graph-based
abstractions are often too coarse to capture interesting properties of programs. We propose a form
of sound abstraction for probabilistic programs
wherein the abstractions are themselves simplified
programs. We provide a theoretical foundation
for these abstractions, as well as an algorithm to
generate them. Experimentally, we also illustrate
the practical benefits of our framework as a tool
to decompose probabilistic program inference.

1. Introduction
Graph-based abstractions of probability distributions such
as Bayesian and Markov networks have played a central role
in the rise of probabilistic machine learning models. Historically, these abstractions have served as both a semantic
and computational tool. Semantically, the topology of the
graph both asserts strong independence assumptions about
the distribution – such as d-separation (Pearl, 1988) – and
provides a scaffolding for specifying the salient quantities
which define the distribution compactly, e.g., in terms of
conditional probabilities. Computationally, the graph is used
to construct efficient inference algorithms such as join-tree
and variable elimination, which abstract away the details of
local factors (Koller & Friedman, 2009; Kschischang et al.,
2006). Sparsity of the graphical model implies conditional
1

University of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to:
Steven Holtzen <sholtzen@cs.ucla.edu>, Guy Van den Broeck
<guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu>, Todd Millstein <todd@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

independences that can speed up inference by factorization;
for example, low-width tree decompositions of the graph
abstraction yield efficient junction trees.
This paper studies the question: when a probability distribution is defined by a probabilistic program, what is a
natural form of abstraction? We identify abstractions that
semantically encode conditional independence assumptions
about the distribution, and computationally help guide the
design of algorithms that decompose inference. Our approach is to automatically generate such an abstraction by
utilizing techniques from the program verification community for analyzing deterministic code. In essence, by using
a generalization of the well-known framework of predicate
abstraction (Graf & Saı̈di, 1997; Ball et al., 2001), we generate abstract probabilistic programs which capture properties
of the original program.
We present a novel notion of distributional soundness which
ensures that the distribution modeled by the abstract probabilistic program is consistent with the distribution of the
concrete probabilistic program. Then, we provide a theory
and methodology for constructing distributionally sound
abstract programs for a wide class of probabilistic programs,
and show that this process can decompose the concrete program by exploiting subtle independence structures such as
context-sensitive and conditional independence (Boutilier
et al., 1996; Pearl, 1988). Finally, we demonstrate the benefits of abstraction by recovering specialized inference procedures on a variety of archetypal statistical models encoded
as probabilistic programs.

2. Motivating Example
Probabilistic programs can exhibit complex structure. In particular, they admit complex operations such as control-flow
logic and numerical manipulation, which entangle random
variables in ways that are difficult to reason about. Consider
Figure 1a, which shows a simple probabilistic program that
combines two random variables via multiplication. We wish
to compute the query Pr(z = 0) on this program. Initially,
this seems to be difficult since the variables x and y are
entangled via multiplication. In a typical probabilistic programming system such as Stan, Psi, or Anglican, this query
would be evaluated by sampling or integration beginning on
Line 1 of the program (Carpenter et al., 2016; Gehr et al.,

