Compressing Neural Networks using the Variational Information Bottleneck

Bin Dai 1 Chen Zhu 2 Baining Guo 3 David Wipf 3

Abstract
Neural networks can be compressed to reduce
memory and computational requirements, or to increase accuracy by facilitating the use of a larger
base architecture. In this paper we focus on pruning individual neurons, which can simultaneously
trim model size, FLOPs, and run-time memory.
To improve upon the performance of existing compression algorithms we utilize the information
bottleneck principle instantiated via a tractable
variational bound. Minimization of this information theoretic bound reduces the redundancy
between adjacent layers by aggregating useful information into a subset of neurons that can be
preserved. In contrast, the activations of disposable neurons are shut off via an attractive form
of sparse regularization that emerges naturally
from this framework, providing tangible advantages over traditional sparsity penalties without
contributing additional tuning parameters to the
energy landscape. We demonstrate state-of-theart compression rates across an array of datasets
and network architectures.

1. Introduction
Although extremely effective across diverse application domains, it is nonetheless well-established that many popular
deep neural network architectures are over-parameterized
even with respect to datasets where predictive performance
is high (Denil et al., 2013). Therefore, accuracy need not
suffer per se, but unnecessarily large computational and
memory footprints are required for practical deployment.
Hence there is tremendous potential to compress trained
networks while preserving the original accuracy. Alternatively, it has also been shown that even if a given network
architecture is not necessarily over-parameterized, a larger
1

Institute for Advanced Study, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, USA 3 Microsoft Research, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Bin Dai <daib13@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Chen Zhu <chenzhu@umd.edu>, David Wipf <davidwip@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

network pruned down to a smaller one of equivalent size
often produces higher accuracy (Lin et al., 2017). Therefore
network compression can potentially boost both efficiency
and accuracy in some sense.
As reviewed in Section 2, a huge number of algorithmic
pipelines have been recently proposed to instantiate some
form of neural network compression; however, there is as
of yet no perfect solution leaving room for new developments. In this paper, we borrow the idea of the information
bottleneck (Tishby et al., 2000; Tishby & Zaslavsky, 2015),
which provides a convenient mechanism for penalizing an
information theoretic measure of redundancy between adjacent network layers which can be subsequently harnessed
for compression.
More specifically, if we interpret these layers as forming a
Markov chain, then typical training involves finding weights
such that the maximal information pertaining to label y
propagates from an input x to the network output. However,
when a so-called information bottleneck is applied, superfluous information related to x but irrelevant for predicting
y can be squeezed from the model layer-by-layer. There are
multiple ways such a bottleneck could be introduced, but
it is most helpful to consider strategies readily amenable to
practical implementation.
To this end, we penalize the inter-layer mutual information
using a variational approximation that both: (i) circumvents
certain intractable integrations via a friendly bound, and
(ii) reduces redundancy by aggregating useless information into certain expendable neurons using a latent sparsitypromotion mechanism. These neurons can naturally be
identified and pruned to both reduce model size, FLOPs,
and the run-time memory footprint. In accomplishing this,
our main contributions are three-fold:
1. Beginning from the information bottleneck principle
and a tractable variational approximation, we design
a well-motivated neural network compression energy
function that requires only a single, unavoidable tuning parameter for managing the compression/accuracy
trade-off. No additional hyper-parameters for describing priors or other special constraints are required.
2. We carefully analyze an emergent tendency to accumulate useful information in a sparse set of neurons,
while pushing the activations of others towards zero.

