Bayesian Quadrature for Multiple Related Integrals

Xiaoyue Xi 1 * François-Xavier Briol 1 2 3 * Mark Girolami 1 2 3

Abstract
Bayesian probabilistic numerical methods are a
set of tools providing posterior distributions on
the output of numerical methods. The use of
these methods is usually motivated by the fact
that they can represent our uncertainty due to incomplete/finite information about the continuous
mathematical problem being approximated. In
this paper, we demonstrate that this paradigm can
provide additional advantages, such as the possibility of transferring information between several
numerical methods. This allows users to represent uncertainty in a more faithful manner and,
as a by-product, provide increased numerical efficiency. We propose the first such numerical
method by extending the well-known Bayesian
quadrature algorithm to the case where we are
interested in computing the integral of several related functions. We then prove convergence rates
for the method in the well-specified and misspecified cases, and demonstrate its efficiency in the
context of multi-fidelity models for complex engineering systems and a problem of global illumination in computer graphics.

function evaluations and therefore are uncertaint about the
value of the integral. The notion of Bayesian probabilistic
numerical method was independently introduced by several
authors (Larkin, 1972; Kadane & Wasilkowski, 1985; Diaconis, 1988; O’Hagan, 1992), but only recently formalised
by (Cockayne et al., 2017).
Apart from the uncertainty quantification property described above, these methods have several other advantages
over “classical” (i.e. non-Bayesian) numerical methods (although some of the classical and Bayesian methods coincide (Diaconis, 1988)). First of all, they allow the user to
formulate all of its prior knowledge in the form of a prior,
making all of the assumptions of the numerical scheme explicit. Second of all, they can allow for coherent propagation of numerical uncertainties through chains of computation; see (Cockayne et al., 2017; Oates et al., 2017a).

1. Introduction

However, one property which has not been studied so far is
the possibility of jointly inferring several quantities of interest. In this paper, we study the problem of numerically
integrating a sequence of functions f1 , . . . , fD (which are
correlated to one another) with respect to some probability
measure Π, and
to build a model for joint
R hence propose
R
inference of f1 dΠ, . . . , fD dΠ. Such a joint model allows for better finite-sample performance, and can also lead
to more refined posterior distributions on each of the individual integrals.

Probabilistic numerics (Hennig et al., 2015) proposes approaching problems of numerical analysis from the point
of view of statistics. In particular, Bayesian probabilistic
numerical methods approach this problem from a Bayesian
point of view, and can provide posterior distributions on the
solutions of numerical problems (e.g. in the case of this paper, the solution of some integral). These posterior distributions represent our epistemic uncertainty about these quantities of interest. In the case of quadrature rules, the uncertainty is due to the fact that we only have a finite number of

To tackle this problem, we extend the well-known Bayesian
quadrature (O’Hagan, 1991) algorithm and study the performance of the proposed methodology from a theoretical
and experimental point of view. In particular, we provide
asymptotic convergence results for the marginal posterior
variance on each of the integrals, both in the case of a well
specified and misspecified prior. We also demonstrate the
performance of our algorithm on some toy problems from
the engineering literature on multi-fidelity models, and on
a challenging problem from the field of computer graphics.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, Imperial
College London 2 Department of Statistics, University of Warwick
3
The Alan Turing Institute for Data Science and AI. Correspondence to: François-Xavier Briol <f-x.briol@warwick.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

2. Methodology
Bayesian Quadrature Let (X , B, Π) be a probability
space and consider some function f : X → R where
X ⊆ Rp , p ∈ N+ . The classical problem of numerical

