Continual Reinforcement Learning with Complex Synapses

Christos Kaplanis 1 2 Murray Shanahan 1 3 Claudia Clopath 2

Abstract
Unlike humans, who are capable of continual
learning over their lifetimes, artificial neural networks have long been known to suffer from a
phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting,
whereby new learning can lead to abrupt erasure
of previously acquired knowledge. Whereas in a
neural network the parameters are typically modelled as scalar values, an individual synapse in
the brain comprises a complex network of interacting biochemical components that evolve at different timescales. In this paper, we show that by
equipping tabular and deep reinforcement learning agents with a synaptic model that incorporates
this biological complexity (Benna & Fusi, 2016),
catastrophic forgetting can be mitigated at multiple timescales. In particular, we find that as well
as enabling continual learning across sequential
training of two simple tasks, it can also be used to
overcome within-task forgetting by reducing the
need for an experience replay database.

1. Introduction
One of the outstanding enigmas in computational neuroscience is how the brain is capable of continual or lifelong
learning (Wixted, 2004), acquiring new memories and skills
very quickly while robustly preserving old ones. Synaptic
plasticity, the ability of the connections between neurons to
change their strength over time, is widely considered to be
the physical basis of learning in the brain and knowledge
is thought to be distributed across neuronal networks, with
individual synapses participating in the storage of several
memories. Given this overlapping nature of memory storage, it would seem that synapses need to be both labile in
response to new experiences and stable enough to retain
1
Department of Computing, Imperial College London
Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College London 3 Google
DeepMind, London. Correspondence to: Christos Kaplanis <christos.kaplanis14@imperial.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

old memories - a paradox often referred to as the stabilityplasticity dilemma (Carpenter & Grossberg, 1987).
Artificial neural networks also have a distributed memory
but, unlike the brain, are prone to catastrophic forgetting
(McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; French, 1999); when trained
on a nonstationary data distribution, such as two distinct
tasks in sequence, a network can quickly forget what it learnt
from earlier data. In reinforcement learning (RL), where
data is typically accumulated online as the agent interacts
with the environment, the distribution of experiences is often
nonstationary over the training of a single task, as well as
across tasks, since (i) experiences are correlated in time and
(ii) the agent’s policy changes as it learns. A typical way
of addressing nonstationarity of data in deep RL is to store
experiences in a replay database and use it to interleave
old data and new data during training (Mnih et al., 2015).
However, this solution does not scale well computationally
as the number of tasks grows and the old data might also
become unavailable at some point. Furthermore, it does not
explain how the brain achieves continual learning, since the
question remains as to how an ever-growing dataset is then
stored without catastrophic forgetting.
One potential answer may arise from the experimental observations that synaptic plasticity occurs at a range of different timescales, including short-term plasticity (Zucker &
Regehr, 2002), long-term plasticity (Bliss & Lømo, 1973)
and synaptic consolidation (Clopath et al., 2008). Intuitively, the slow components to plasticity could ensure that
a synapse retains memory of a long history of its modifications, while the fast components render the synapse highly
adaptable to the formation of new memories, perhaps providing a solution the stability-plasticity dilemma.
In this paper, we explore whether a biologically plausible
synaptic model (Benna & Fusi, 2016), which abstractly
models plasticity over a range of timescales, can be applied to mitigate catastrophic forgetting in a reinforcement
learning context. Our work is intended as a proof of principle for how the incorporation of biological complexity
to an agent’s parameters can be useful in tackling the lifelong learning problem. By running experiments with both
tabular and deep RL agents, we find that the model helps
continual learning across two simple tasks as well as within
a single task, by allaying the necessity of an experience

