Training Neural Machines with Trace-Based Supervision

Matthew B. Mirman 1 Dimitar Dimitrov 1 Pavle Djordjevic 1 Timon Gehr 1 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract
We investigate the effectiveness of trace-based
supervision methods for training existing neural
abstract machines. To define the class of neural
machines amenable to trace-based supervision,
we introduce the concept of a differential neural
computational machine (∂NCM) and show that
several existing architectures (NTMs, NRAMs)
can be described as ∂NCMs. We performed a
detailed experimental evaluation with NTM and
NRAM machines, showing that additional supervision on the interpretable portions of these architectures leads to better convergence and generalization capabilities of the learning phase than
standard training, in both noise-free and noisy
scenarios.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been substantial interest in neural machines that can induce programs from examples (Graves
et al., 2014; Reed & de Freitas, 2016; Graves et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2015; Zaremba & Sutskever, 2015; Kaiser &
Sutskever, 2015; Gaunt et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2015;
Feser et al., 2016; 2015; Frankle et al., 2016; Kurach et al.,
2016; Bošnjak et al., 2017). While significant progress has
been made towards learning interesting algorithms (Graves
et al., 2016), ensuring these machines converge to the desired solution during training is challenging. Interestingly
however, even though they differ architecturally, most of
these machines rely on components (e.g., neural memory)
that are more interpretable than typical neural networks
(e.g., an LSTM). This allows one to provide additional supervision and help bias the learning towards the desired
solution.
In this work, we investigate whether (and by how much)
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich,
Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Matthew B. Mirman
<matthew.mirman@inf.ethz.ch>,
Martin Vechev <martin.vechev@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

additional amounts of supervision provided to these interpretable components during training can improve learning.
The particular type of supervision we consider is partial
trace supervision, providing more detailed information, beyond input-output examples, during learning. To help describe the type of architectures our results apply to, we
introduce the notion of a differential neural computational
machine (∂NCM), a formalism which allows to cleanly
characterize the neural machines that can benefit from any
amount of extra trace-based supervision. We show that common existing architectures such as Neural Turing Machines
(NTMs) and Neural Random Access Machines (NRAMs)
can be described as ∂NCMs. We also explain why other machines such as the Neural Program Interpreter (NPI) (Reed
& de Freitas, 2016) or its recent extensions (e.g., the Neural
Program Lattice, Li et al. (2017)) cannot be instantiated
as a ∂NCM and are thus restricted to require large (and
potentially prohibitive) amounts of supervision.
We performed an extensive evaluation investigating how
partial trace information affects training of both NTMs and
NRAMs. Overall, our experimental results indicate that additional supervision can substantially improve convergence
while leading to better generalization and interpretability,
under both noise-free and noisy supervision scenarios. Interestingly, we also show that on a more complex task, the
NRAM architecture trained with additional supervision can
generalize better than more recent architectures such as the
DNGPU (Freivalds & Liepins, 2017) which are difficult to
interpret and thus, provide additional supervision to.
The work closest to ours is the Differentiable Forth of Bošnjak et al. (2017), which also investigates the effects of extra
supervision. The main difference between the two works is
the kind of supervision provided. In Bošnjak et al. (2017),
the teacher provides a sketch of the program to be learned.
The machine then needs to fill in the holes of the sketch.
In our work, there is no program sketch: the teacher hints
(part of) the operations that the machine should execute in
specific executions (i.e., hints on specific execution traces).
The machine then has to learn these operations. We believe
that both training methods are interesting and worth investigating in the context of neural machines. We also remark
that both methods have already been investigated in the context of traditional (non-neural) programming, for example
by Lau et al. (2003) and Solar-Lezama et al. (2006).

