Towards End-to-End Prosody Transfer
for Expressive Speech Synthesis with Tacotron

RJ Skerry-Ryan 1 Eric Battenberg 1 Ying Xiao 1 Yuxuan Wang 1 Daisy Stanton 1 Joel Shor 1 Ron J. Weiss 1
Rob Clark 1 Rif A. Saurous 1

Abstract
We present an extension to the Tacotron speech
synthesis architecture that learns a latent embedding space of prosody, derived from a reference
acoustic representation containing the desired
prosody. We show that conditioning Tacotron
on this learned embedding space results in synthesized audio that matches the prosody of the
reference signal with fine time detail even when
the reference and synthesis speakers are different.
Additionally, we show that a reference prosody
embedding can be used to synthesize text that
is different from that of the reference utterance.
We define several quantitative and subjective metrics for evaluating prosody transfer, and report
results with accompanying audio samples from
single-speaker and 44-speaker Tacotron models
on a prosody transfer task.

1. Introduction
In order to produce realistic speech, a text-to-speech (TTS)
system must implicitly or explicitly impute many factors that
are not provided by simple text input. Such factors include
the intonation, stress, rhythm and style of the speech, and
are collectively referred to as prosody.
Speech synthesis via text-to-speech is a challenging underdetermined problem, since the meaning expressed by an
utterance is inherently underspecified by the text. For example, the simple statement “The cat sat on the mat.” can be
spoken many different ways. If the statement is the answer
to the question “Where did the cat sit?” the speaker might
stress the word “mat” to indicate that it is the answer to
the question. To express uncertainty in their knowledge,
the speaker may decide to intone the response with a rising
pitch. The question, “Would you like an apple or an orange?”
1

Google, Inc..
Correspondence to:
<rjryan@google.com>.

RJ Skerry-Ryan

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

can also be spoken in multiple ways, indicating information
about the set of objects that exist. If there are only two possible options, the intonation of the final option (“orange”) will
have a declining pitch. If there are a variety of options of
which apple and orange are just two examples, both options
are typically intoned with a rising pitch. The intonation of
these sentences carries meaning about the environment or
context of the question which is unspecified by the text, and
in general, there are any number of such nuances present in
speech that convey information beyond the textual content.
In order to avoid the challenging problem of schematizing
and labeling prosody, we seek methods of modeling prosody
that do not require explicit annotations, and present an architecture for learning a latent prosody representation by
extracting it from the ground truth speech audio. Accordingly, we use a “subtractive” definition of prosody:
Definition. Prosody is the variation in speech signals that
remains after accounting for variation due to phonetics,
speaker identity, and channel effects (i.e. the recording
environment).
This view of prosody is compatible with interpretations of
prosody from previous works (Wagner & Watson, 2010;
Ladd, 2008).
One natural problem that arises from this formulation is
sampling – that is, the challenge of generating diverse and
interesting prosody and output speech even for identical
phonetics, speaker identities, and channel effects. In this
paper, we tackle the more basic problem of constructing a
space that represents prosody. We propose one possible construction of a prosody latent space, and show that we capture
meaningful variation in speech by demonstrating transfer
in this space (i.e., using a latent representation to make one
utterance sound like another): this roughly corresponds to a
“say it like this” task.
The recently proposed Tacotron speech synthesis system
(Wang et al., 2017a) computes its output directly from
graphemes or phonemes, and its prosody model is implicit,
learned from the statistics of the training data alone. It
learns, for example, that an English sentence ending in a
question mark likely has a rising pitch if the question has a

