Escaping Saddles with Stochastic Gradients

Hadi Daneshmand * 1 Jonas Kohler * 1 Aurelien Lucchi 1 Thomas Hofmann 1

Abstract

through a conservative step size (Nesterov, 2013) or via
explicit variance-reduction techniques (Johnson & Zhang,
2013).

We analyze the variance of stochastic gradients
along negative curvature directions in certain nonconvex machine learning models and show that
stochastic gradients exhibit a strong component
along these directions. Furthermore, we show
that - contrary to the case of isotropic noise - this
variance is proportional to the magnitude of the
corresponding eigenvalues and not decreasing in
the dimensionality. Based upon this observation
we propose a new assumption under which we
show that the injection of explicit, isotropic noise
usually applied to make gradient descent escape
saddle points can successfully be replaced by a
simple SGD step. Additionally - and under the
same condition - we derive the first convergence
rate for plain SGD to a second-order stationary
point in a number of iterations that is independent
of the problem dimension.

While the convergence behavior of SGD is well-understood
for convex functions (Bottou, 2010), we are here interested
in the optimization of non-convex functions which pose
additional challenges for optimization in particular due to
the presence of saddle points and suboptimal local minima (Dauphin et al., 2014; Choromanska et al., 2015). For
example, finding the global minimum of even a degree 4
polynomial can be NP-hard (Hillar & Lim, 2013). Instead
of aiming for a global minimizer, a more practical goal is
to search for a local optimum of the objective. In this paper
we thus focus on reaching a second-order stationary point
of smooth non-convex functions. Formally, we aim to find
an (g , h )-second-order stationary point w such that the
following conditions hold:
k∇f (w)k ≤ g

and ∇2 f (w) < −h I,

(2)

where g , h > 0.

1. Introduction
In this paper we analyze the use of gradient descent (GD)
and its stochastic variant (SGD) to minimize objectives of
the form
w∗ = arg min [f (w) := Ez∼P [fz (w)]] ,
w∈Rd

(1)

where f ∈ C 2 (Rd , R) is a not necessarily convex loss function and P is an arbitrary probability distribution.
In the era of big data and deep neural networks, (stochastic) gradient descent is a core component of many training
algorithms (Bottou, 2010). What makes SGD so attractive
is its simplicity, its seemingly universal applicability and
a convergence rate that is independent of the size of the
training set. One specific trait of SGD is the inherent noise,
originating from sampling training points, whose variance
has to be controlled in order to guarantee convergence either
*
Equal contribution 1 ETH, Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Hadi Daneshmand <hadi.daneshmand@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Existing work, such as (Ge et al., 2015; Jin et al., 2017a),
proved convergence to a point satisfying Eq. (2) for modified
variants of gradient descent and its stochastic variant by requiring additional noise to be explicitly added to the iterates
along the entire path (former) or whenever the gradient is
sufficiently small (latter). Formally, this yields the following
update step for the perturbed GD and SGD versions:
PGD: wt+1 = wt − ηt ∇f (wt ) + rζt+1

(3)

PSGD: wt+1 = wt − ηt (∇fz (wt ) + ζt ) ,

(4)

where ζt is typically zero-mean noise sampled uniformly
from a unit sphere.
Isotropic noise The perturbed variants of GD and SGD
in Eqs. (3)-(4) have been analyzed for the case where the
added noise ζt is isotropic (Ge et al., 2015; Levy, 2016; Jin
et al., 2017a) or at least exhibits a certain amount of variance
along all directions in Rd (Ge et al., 2015). As shown in
Table 1, an immediate consequence of such conditions is
that they introduce a dependency on the input dimension
d in the convergence rate. Furthermore, it is unknown as
of today, if this condition is satisfied by the intrinsic noise
of vanilla SGD for any specific class of machine learning

