Augmented CycleGAN: Learning Many-to-Many Mappings
from Unpaired Data

Amjad Almahairi 1 † Sai Rajeswar 1 Alessandro Sordoni 2 Philip Bachman 2 Aaron Courville 1 3

Abstract
Learning inter-domain mappings from unpaired
data can improve performance in structured prediction tasks, such as image segmentation, by reducing the need for paired data. CycleGAN was
recently proposed for this problem, but critically
assumes the underlying inter-domain mapping is
approximately deterministic and one-to-one. This
assumption renders the model ineffective for tasks
requiring flexible, many-to-many mappings. We
propose a new model, called Augmented CycleGAN, which learns many-to-many mappings between domains. We examine Augmented CycleGAN qualitatively and quantitatively on several
image datasets.

1. Introduction
The problem of learning mappings between domains from
unpaired data has recently received increasing attention, especially in the context of image-to-image translation (Zhu
et al., 2017a; Kim et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017). This problem is important because, in some cases, paired information
may be scarce or otherwise difficult to obtain. For example,
consider tasks like face transfiguration (male to female),
where obtaining explicit pairs would be difficult as it would
require artistic authoring. An effective unsupervised model
may help when learning from relatively few paired examples, as compared to training strictly from the paired examples. Intuitively, forcing inter-domain mappings to be
(approximately) invertible by a model of limited capacity
acts as a strong regularizer.
Motivated by the success of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) in image generation (Goodfellow et al., 2014;
Radford et al., 2015), existing unsupervised mapping meth1
Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms (MILA), Canada.
Microsoft Research Montreal, Canada. 3 CIFAR Fellow. † Work
partly done at MSR Montreal. Correspondence to: Amjad Almahairi <amjad.almahairi@umontreal.ca>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

𝐵

𝐴
(a) CycleGAN

𝑍%

𝑍$

𝐴

𝐵

(b) Augmented CycleGAN

Figure 1: (a) Original CycleGAN model. (b) We propose
to learn many-to-many mappings by cycling over the original domains augmented with auxiliary latent spaces. By
marginalizing out auxiliary variables, we can model manyto-many mappings in between the domains.

ods such as CycleGAN (Zhu et al., 2017a) learn a generator
which produces images in one domain given images from
the other. Without the use of pairing information, there
are many possible mappings that could be inferred. To reduce the space of the possible mappings, these models are
typically trained with a cycle-consistency constraint which
enforces a strong connection across domains, by requiring
that mapping an image from the source domain to the target domain and then back to source will result in the same
starting image. This framework has been shown to learn
convincing mappings across image domains and proved successful in a variety of related applications (Tung et al., 2017;
Wolf et al., 2017; Hoffman et al., 2017).
One major limitation of CycleGAN is that it only learns
one-to-one mappings, i.e. the model associates each input
image with a single output image. We believe that most
relationships across domains are more complex, and better characterized as many-to-many. For example, consider
mapping silhouettes of shoes to images of shoes. While the
mapping that CycleGAN learns can be superficially convincing (e.g. it produces a single reasonable shoe with a
particular style), we would like to learn a mapping that can
capture diversity of the output (e.g. produces multiple shoes
with different styles). The limits of one-to-one mappings
are more dramatic when the source domain and target domain substantially differ. For instance, it would be difficult
to learn a CycleGAN model when the two domains are
descriptive facial attributes and images of faces.

