Pseudo-task Augmentation: From Deep Multitask
Learning to Intratask Sharing—and Back
Elliot Meyerson 1 2 Risto Miikkulainen 1 2

Abstract
Deep multitask learning boosts performance by
sharing learned structure across related tasks.
This paper adapts ideas from deep multitask learning to the setting where only a single task is available. The method is formalized as pseudo-task
augmentation, in which models are trained with
multiple decoders for each task. Pseudo-tasks
simulate the effect of training towards closelyrelated tasks drawn from the same universe. In
a suite of experiments, pseudo-task augmentation improves performance on single-task learning
problems. When combined with multitask learning, further improvements are achieved, including state-of-the-art performance on the CelebA
dataset, showing that pseudo-task augmentation
and multitask learning have complementary value.
All in all, pseudo-task augmentation is a broadly
applicable and efficient way to boost performance
in deep learning systems.

1. Introduction
Multitask learning (MTL) (Caruana, 1998) improves performance by leveraging relationships between distinct learning problems. In recent years, MTL has been extended to
deep learning, in which it has improved performance in
applications such as vision (Zhang et al., 2014; Bilen &
Vedaldi, 2016; Misra et al., 2016; Rudd et al., 2016; Lu
et al., 2017; Rebuffi et al., 2017; Yang & Hospedales, 2017),
natural language (Collobert & Weston, 2008; Dong et al.,
2015; Liu et al., 2015a; Luong et al., 2016; Hashimoto et al.,
2017), speech (Huang et al., 2013; Seltzer & Droppo, 2013;
Huang et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2015), reinforcement learning (Devin et al., 2016; Jaderberg et al., 2017b; Teh et al.,
2017), and even seemingly unrelated tasks from disparate
domains (Kaiser et al., 2017; Meyerson & Miikkulainen,
1

The University of Texas at Austin 2 Sentient Technologies, Inc..
Correspondence to: Elliot Meyerson <ekm@cs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

2018). Deep MTL relies on training signals from multiple
datasets to train deep structure that is shared across tasks.
Since the shared structure must support solving multiple
problems, it is inherently more general, which leads to better generalization to holdout data.
This paper adapts ideas from deep MTL to the single-task
learning (STL) case, i.e., when only a single task is available
for training. The method is formalized as pseudo-task augmentation (PTA), in which a single task has multiple distinct
decoders projecting the output of the shared structure to task
predictions. By training the shared structure to solve the
same problem in multiple ways, PTA simulates the effect
of training towards distinct but closely-related tasks drawn
from the same universe. Theoretical justification shows how
training dynamics with multiple pseudo-tasks strictly subsumes training with just one, and a class of algorithms is
introduced for controlling pseudo-tasks in practice.
In an array of experiments, PTA is shown to significantly
improve performance in single-task settings. Although different variants of PTA traverse the space of pseudo-tasks in
qualitatively different ways, they all demonstrate substantial
gains. Experiments also show that when PTA is combined
with MTL, further improvements are achieved, including
state-of-the-art performance on the CelebA dataset. In other
words, although PTA can be seen as a base case of MTL,
PTA and MTL have complementary value in learning more
generalizable models. The conclusion is that pseudo-task
augmentation is an efficient, reliable, and broadly applicable
method for boosting performance in deep learning systems.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 covers background on deep learning methods that
train multiple models; Section 3 introduces the pseudo-task
augmentation framework and practical implementations;
Section 4 describes experimental setups and results; Sections 5 and 6 discuss future work and overall implications.

2. Training Multiple Deep Models
There is a broad range of methods that exploit synergies
across multiple deep models. This section reviews these
methods by classifying them into three types: (1) methods
that jointly train a model for multiple tasks; (2) methods

