Byzantine-Robust Distributed Learning: Towards Optimal Statistical Rates

Dong Yin 1 Yudong Chen 2 Kannan Ramchandran 1 Peter Bartlett 1 3

Abstract
In this paper, we develop distributed optimization algorithms that are provably robust against
Byzantine failures—arbitrary and potentially adversarial behavior, in distributed computing systems, with a focus on achieving optimal statistical
performance. A main result of this work is a
sharp analysis of two robust distributed gradient
descent algorithms based on median and trimmed
mean operations, respectively. We prove statistical error rates for all of strongly convex, nonstrongly convex, and smooth non-convex population loss functions. In particular, these algorithms
are shown to achieve order-optimal statistical error rates for strongly convex losses. To achieve
better communication efficiency, we further propose a median-based distributed algorithm that is
provably robust, and uses only one communication round. For strongly convex quadratic loss,
we show that this algorithm achieves the same optimal error rate as the robust distributed gradient
descent algorithms.

1. Introduction
Many tasks in computer vision, natural language processing
and recommendation systems require learning complex prediction rules from large datasets. As the scale of the datasets
in these learning tasks continues to grow, it is crucial to utilize the power of distributed computing and storage. In such
large-scale distributed systems, robustness and security issues have become a major concern. In particular, individual
computing units—known as worker machines—may exhibit
abnormal behavior due to crashes, faulty hardware, stalled
computation or unreliable communication channels. Security issues are only exacerbated in the so-called Federated
Learning setting, a modern distributed learning paradigm
that is more decentralized, and that uses the data owners’
devices (such as mobile phones and personal computers)
1

Department of EECS, UC Berkeley 2 School of ORIE, Cornell
University 3 Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Dong Yin <dongyin@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

as worker machines (McMahan & Ramage, 2017; Konečnỳ
et al., 2016). Such machines are often more unpredictable,
and in particular may be susceptible to malicious and coordinated attacks.
Due to the inherent unpredictability of this abnormal (sometimes adversarial) behavior, it is typically modeled as Byzantine failure (Lamport et al., 1982), meaning that some
worker machines may behave completely arbitrarily and can
send any message to the master machine that maintains and
updates an estimate of the parameter vector to be learned.
Byzantine failures can incur major degradation in learning
performance. It is well-known that standard learning algorithms based on naive aggregation of the workers’ messages
can be arbitrarily skewed by a single Byzantine-faulty machine. Even when the messages from Byzantine machines
take only moderate values—hence difficult to detect—and
when the number of such machines is small, the performance loss can still be significant. We demonstrate such an
example in our experiments in Section 7.
In this paper, we aim to develop distributed statistical learning algorithms that are provably robust against Byzantine
failures. While this objective is considered in a few recent works (Feng et al., 2014; Blanchard et al., 2017; Chen
et al., 2017), a fundamental problem remains poorly understood, namely the optimal statistical performance of a
robust learning algorithm. A learning scheme in which the
master machine always outputs zero regardless of the workers’ messages, is certainly not affected by Byzantine failures, but it will not return anything statistically useful either.
On the other hand, many standard distributed algorithms
that achieve good statistical performance in the absence of
Byzantine failures, become completely unreliable otherwise.
Therefore, a main goal of this work is to understand the
following questions: what is the best achievable statistical performance while being Byzantine-robust, and how to
design an algorithm that achieves such performance?
To formalize this question, we consider a standard statistical
setting of empirical risk minimization (ERM). Here nm data
points are sampled independently from some distribution
and distributed evenly among m machines, αm of which
are Byzantine. The goal is to learn a parametric model
by minimizing some loss function defined by the data. In
this statistical setting, one expects that the error in learning

