Provable Defenses against Adversarial Examples
via the Convex Outer Adversarial Polytope

Eric Wong 1 J. Zico Kolter 2

Abstract
We propose a method to learn deep ReLU-based
classifiers that are provably robust against normbounded adversarial perturbations on the training
data. For previously unseen examples, the approach is guaranteed to detect all adversarial examples, though it may flag some non-adversarial
examples as well. The basic idea is to consider
a convex outer approximation of the set of activations reachable through a norm-bounded perturbation, and we develop a robust optimization
procedure that minimizes the worst case loss over
this outer region (via a linear program). Crucially, we show that the dual problem to this linear program can be represented itself as a deep
network similar to the backpropagation network,
leading to very efficient optimization approaches
that produce guaranteed bounds on the robust
loss. The end result is that by executing a few
more forward and backward passes through a
slightly modified version of the original network
(though possibly with much larger batch sizes),
we can learn a classifier that is provably robust
to any norm-bounded adversarial attack. We illustrate the approach on a number of tasks to
train classifiers with robust adversarial guarantees (e.g. for MNIST, we produce a convolutional
classifier that provably has less than 5.8% test error for any adversarial attack with bounded `∞
norm less than  = 0.1), and code for all experiments is available at http://github.com/
locuslab/convex_adversarial.

1
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, 15213, USA 2 Computer Science Department,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, 15213, USA. Correspondence to: Eric Wong <ericwong@cs.cmu.edu>, J. Zico
Kolter <zkolter@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Recent work in deep learning has demonstrated the prevalence of adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015), data points fed to a machine learning
algorithm which are visually indistinguishable from “normal” examples, but which are specifically tuned so as to fool
or mislead the machine learning system. Recent history in
adversarial classification has followed something of a virtual
“arms race”: practitioners alternatively design new ways of
hardening classifiers against existing attacks, and then a new
class of attacks is developed that can penetrate this defense.
Distillation (Papernot et al., 2016) was effective at preventing adversarial examples until it was not (Carlini & Wagner,
2017b). There was no need to worry about adversarial examples under “realistic” settings of rotation and scaling (Lu
et al., 2017) until there was (Athalye & Sutskever, 2017).
Nor does the fact that the adversary lacks full knowledge
of the model appear to be a problem: “black-box” attacks
are also extremely effective (Papernot et al., 2017). Even
detecting the presence of adversarial examples is challenging (Metzen et al., 2017; Carlini & Wagner, 2017a), and
attacks are not limited to synthetic examples, having been
demonstrated repeatedly on real-world objects (Sharif et al.,
2016; Kurakin et al., 2016). Somewhat memorably, many of
the adversarial defense papers at the most recent ICLR conference were broken prior to the review period completing
(Athalye et al., 2018).
Given the potentially high-stakes nature of many machine
learning systems, we feel this situation is untenable: the
“cost” of having a classifier be fooled just once is potentially
extremely high, and so the attackers are the de-facto “winners” of this current game. Rather, one way to truly harden
classifiers against adversarial attacks is to design classifiers
that are guaranteed to be robust to adversarial perturbations,
even if the attacker is given full knowledge of the classifier.
Any weaker attempt of “security through obscurity” could
ultimately prove unable to provide a robust classifier.
In this paper, we present a method for training provably
robust deep ReLU classifiers, classifiers that are guaranteed
to be robust against any norm-bounded adversarial perturbations on the training set. The approach also provides a
provable method for detecting any previously unseen adversarial example, with zero false negatives (i.e., the system

