Nonparametric variable importance
using an augmented neural network with multi-task learning

Jean Feng * 1 Brian D. Williamson * 1 Marco Carone 1 2 Noah Simon 1

Abstract
In predictive modeling applications, it is often of
interest to determine the relative contribution of
subsets of features in explaining the variability of
an outcome. It is useful to consider this variable
importance as a function of the unknown, underlying data-generating mechanism rather than the
specific predictive algorithm used to fit the data.
In this paper, we connect these ideas in nonparametric variable importance to machine learning,
and provide a method for efficient estimation of
variable importance when building a predictive
model using a neural network. We show how a
single augmented neural network with multi-task
learning simultaneously estimates the importance
of many feature subsets, improving on previous
procedures for estimating importance. We demonstrate on simulated data that our method is both
accurate and computationally efficient, and apply
our method to both a study of heart disease and
for predicting mortality in ICU patients.

requires a rigorous definition of an estimable variable importance measure, with valid statistical inference for the
true importance of the features under study; this is critical
if we plan to use machine learning-based methods to make
healthcare or resource allocation decisions.
Neural networks have been very effective in complicated
domains (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Mikolov et al., 2013), but
existing variable importance measures for neural networks
(Garson, 1991; Bach et al., 2015) suffer from two major
drawbacks: they (1) are typically defined in terms of the
network parameters, whereas importance is naturally a property of the data-generating mechanism; and (2) do not yield
assessments of variability, as their definitions make classical
statistical analysis difficult.
To address these two issues, we use the model-agnostic
definition of variable importance in Williamson et al. (2017):
given the true joint distribution of outcome Y and features
X1 , ..., Xp , the importance of the feature subset with indices
s ⊆ {1, .., p} is based on the squared difference between
the full and reduced conditional means
2

{E (Y |X1 , ..., Xp ) − E (Y | {Xj : j ∈ {1, ..., p} \ s})} .

1. Introduction
Machine learning-based techniques are increasingly used to
make decisions about allocating scientific resources in HIV
vaccine studies (Rolland & Gilbert, 2012) and to improve
patient care (Avati et al., 2017), among other high-impact
areas of research and practice. Understanding the importance of measured features in prediction may make such
algorithms more interpretable (Guidotti et al., 2018). In
other words, are some features worth focusing on in future
scientific studies? What information is most important for
predicting a patient’s prognosis? Answering these questions
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Biostatistics, University
of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA 2 Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington, USA. Correspondence to: Jean Feng <jeanfeng@uw.edu>, Brian Williamson <brianw26@uw.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

If the squared difference is large on average, then the feature
subset has high importance. If the squared difference is
always zero, then the feature subset has zero importance.
An analysis through influence functions (Bickel et al., 1998)
yields a procedure that results in both a statistically efficient
estimator and an asymptotically valid confidence interval.1
We describe a novel neural network structure and objective
function that efficiently computes this variable importance
measure for many feature subsets. For each feature index
subset s, estimating its importance depends on an estimate
of the reduced conditional mean of Y . Our method simultaneously estimates all required conditional means with a
single neural network by augmenting the input features with
an indicator vector for the subset s. We train the network
by minimizing the multi-task loss of predicting Y given the
feature subsets of interest using stochastic gradient descent.
1
Koh & Liang (2017) use influence functions from a parametric perspective to analyze the dependence of predictions from
neural networks on training observations. Our work uses influence
functions from a semiparametric perspective instead.

