Large-Scale Cox Process Inference using Variational Fourier Features

ST John 1 James Hensman 1

Abstract
Gaussian process modulated Poisson processes
provide a flexible framework for modeling spatiotemporal point patterns. So far this was restricted to one dimension, binning to a predetermined grid, or small data sets of up to a
few thousand data points. Here we introduce Cox
process inference based on Fourier features. This
sparse representation induces global rather than
local constraints on the function space and is computationally efficient. This allows us to formulate
a grid-free approximation that scales well with the
number of data points and the size of the domain.
We demonstrate that this allows MCMC approximations to the non-Gaussian posterior. In practice,
we find that Fourier features have more consistent
optimization behavior than previous approaches.
Our approximate Bayesian method can fit over
100 000 events with complex spatiotemporal patterns in three dimensions on a single GPU.

1. Introduction
Modeling spatiotemporal point patterns is a common task
in geostatistics, for example in ecology and epidemiology
(Diggle et al., 2013; Vanhatalo & Vehtari, 2007). We are
further motivated by modeling events occurring in a city,
e.g., taxi pickups or crime incidents (Flaxman et al., 2018).
Gaussian process (GP) modulated Poisson processes provide a flexible Bayesian model for such data. The model
includes a GP prior over a latent function f (·), which is
related to the rate λ(·) of an inhomogeneous Poisson process through a link function. This is usually taken to be
f (·) = log(λ(·)), resulting in the Log Gaussian Cox process (Møller et al., 1998). These models are computationally
challenging as they are doubly intractable (Murray, 2007).
The likelihood involves an integral of the process over the
1

PROWLER.io, 66-68 Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 1LA,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: ST John <st@prowler.io>,
James Hensman <james@prowler.io>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

spatiotemporal domain, which cannot be computed in general. There are three potential remedies to this issue. First,
the classic approach is to discretize the input domain (see,
e.g., Taylor et al., 2015), assuming that the rate is constant
over each grid cell. However, this discretized structure
scales poorly with the number of grid cells. Second, we
can use a thinning strategy to construct an exact MCMC
sampler (Adams et al., 2009; Gunter et al., 2014), which
demands the inverse link function to be bounded, e.g., sigmoidal. However, this is prohibitively expensive for more
than a few thousand points. Finally, we can use a squareroot link function λ(·) = f (·)2 , as proposed by Lloyd et al.
(2015). Combined with variational inference for the latent
function, this can make the integral tractable. Although their
approach scales linearly with the number of events, it scales
poorly with the size of the domain, especially if the rate
has high variance. Flaxman et al. (2017) make use of the
same link function with a frequentist approach, and Walder
& Bishop (2017) use a Laplace approximation.
In this work we build on Lloyd et al. (2015)’s proposal.
We similarly make use of the square-root link function for
tractability, but introduce several innovations that greatly
improve the practical applicability of the method.
First, we extend the derivation to be able to use the Fourier
representation of the GP proposed by Hensman et al. (2018).
This allows for a choice of kernels in the Matérn family.
Additionally, we show how the posterior process can be
approximated using standard MCMC methods (Hensman
et al., 2015). This allows for flexible representations of the
posterior over functions f (·), and a Bayesian treatment of
the hyperparameters, whereas Lloyd et al. (2015)’s approach
was restricted to a Gaussian approximation for f (·) and
point estimates of the hyperparameters.
Second, we deliver insights and improvements to the model.
The use of a square-root link function can result in nodal
lines: where the latent function f (·) crosses zero, the rate
function λ(·) must approach zero on both sides, resulting
in regions of the posterior that have unsatisfactory artifacts.
In addition, these nodal lines create multiple modes in the
posterior that are hard to sample and difficult to approximate
well with a Gaussian approach. We investigate these effects
and demonstrate how they can be mitigated by suitable
specification of the prior parameters.

