Towards Black-box Iterative Machine Teaching

Weiyang Liu * 1 Bo Dai * 1 Xingguo Li 2 Zhen Liu 1 James M. Rehg 1 Le Song 1 3

Abstract
In this paper, we make an important step towards the black-box machine teaching by considering the cross-space machine teaching, where
the teacher and the learner use different feature
representations and the teacher can not fully observe the learner’s model. In such scenario, we
study how the teacher is still able to teach the
learner to achieve faster convergence rate than the
traditional passive learning. We propose an active
teacher model that can actively query the learner
(i.e., make the learner take exams) for estimating
the learner’s status and provably guide the learner
to achieve faster convergence. The sample complexities for both teaching and query are provided.
In the experiments, we compare the proposed active teacher with the omniscient teacher and verify
the effectiveness of the active teacher model.

1. Introduction
Machine teaching (Zhu, 2015; 2013; Zhu et al., 2018) is
the problem of constructing a minimal dataset for a target
concept such that a student model (i.e., leaner) can learn the
target concept based on this minimal dataset. Recently, machine teaching has been shown very useful in applications
ranging from human computer interaction (Suh et al., 2016),
crowd sourcing (Singla et al., 2014; 2013) to cyber security
(Alfeld et al., 2016; 2017). Besides various applications,
machine teaching also has nice connections with curriculum learning (Bengio et al., 2009; Hinton et al., 2015). In
traditional machine learning, a teacher usually constructs a
batch set of training samples, and provides them to a student
in one shot without further interactions. Then the student
keeps learning from this batch dataset and tries to learn the
target concept. Previous machine teaching paradigm (Zhu,
2013; 2015; Liu et al., 2016) usually focuses on constructing
the smallest such dataset, and characterizing the size of such
dataset, called the teaching dimension of the student model.
3

*
Equal contribution 1 Georgia Tech 2 University of Minnesota
Ant Financial. Correspondence to: W. L. <wyliu@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Common Knowledge
Representation Space

Provide full information
Interact iteratively
Teacher

Provide samples
for this iteration

Iterative Learner

(a) Iterative Machine Teaching

Teacher’s Knowledge
Representation Space

Actively query (exam)

Student’s Knowledge
Representation Space

Provide limited
information
Interact iteratively
Active Teacher

Provide samples
for this iteration

Iterative Learner

(b) Cross-Space Machine Teaching by Active Teacher

Figure 1: Comparison between iterative machine teaching and
cross-space machine teaching by active teacher.

For machine teaching to work effectively in practical scenarios, (Liu et al., 2017a) propose an iterative teaching
framework which takes into consideration that the learner
usually uses iterative algorithms (e.g. gradient descent) to
update the models. Different from the traditional machine
teaching framework where the teacher only interacts with
the student in one-shot, the iterative machine teaching allows the teacher to interact with the student in every single
iteration. It hence shifts the teaching focus from models to
algorithms: the objective of teaching is no longer constructing a minimal dataset in one shot but searching for samples
so that the student learns the target concept in a minimal
number of iterations (i.e., fastest convergence for the student
algorithm). Such a minimal number of iterations is called
the iterative teaching dimension for the student algorithm.
(Liu et al., 2017a) mostly consider the simplest iterative
case where the teacher can fully observe the student. This
case is interesting in theory but too restrictive in practice.
Human teaching is arguably the most realistic teaching scenario in which the learner is completely a black-box to the
teacher. Analogously, the ultimate problem for machine
teaching is how to teach a black-box learner. We call such
problem black-box machine teaching. Inspired by the fact
that the teacher and the student typically represent the same
concept but in different ways, we present a step towards the
black-box machine teaching – cross-space machine teaching, where the teacher i) does not share the same feature
representation with the student, and ii) can not observe the

