Approximate Leave-One-Out for Fast Parameter Tuning in High Dimensions

Shuaiwen Wang * 1 Wenda Zhou * 1 Haihao Lu 2 Arian Maleki 1 Vahab Mirrokni 3

Abstract
Consider the following class of leaning schemes:
Pn
>
β̂ := arg min
j=1 `(xj β; yj ) + λR(β), (1)
β

where xi ∈ Rp and yi ∈ R denote the ith feature and response variable respectively. Let ` and
R be the loss function and regularizer, β denote
the unknown weights, and λ be a regularization
parameter. Finding the optimal choice of λ is a
challenging problem in high-dimensional regimes
where both n and p are large. We propose two
frameworks to obtain a computationally efficient
approximation ALO of the leave-one-out cross
validation (LOOCV) risk for nonsmooth losses
and regularizers. Our two frameworks are based
on the primal and dual formulations of (1). We
prove the equivalence of the two approaches under
smoothness conditions. This equivalence enables
us to justify the accuracy of both methods under
such conditions. We use our approaches to obtain a risk estimate for several standard problems,
including generalized LASSO, nuclear norm regularization, and support vector machines. We
empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our
results for non-differentiable cases.

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation
Consider a standard prediction problem in which a dataset
{(yj , xj )}nj=1 ⊂ R × Rp is employed to learn a model for
inferring information about new datapoints that are yet to
be observed. One of the most popular classes of learning
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, Columbia University, New York, USA 2 Mathematics Department and Operation
Research Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Massachusetts, USA 3 Google Research, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Shuaiwen Wang <sw2853@columbia.edu>, Wenda
Zhou <wz2335@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

schemes, especially in high-dimensional settings, studies
the following optimization problem:
β̂ := arg min
β

n
X

`(x>
j β; yj ) + λR(β),

(2)

j=1

where ` : R2 → R is the loss function, R : Rp → R is
the regularizer, and λ is the tuning parameter that specifies
the amount of regularization. By applying an appropriate
regularizer in (2), we are able to achieve better bias-variance
trade-off and pursue special structures such as sparsity and
low rank structure. However, the performance of such techniques hinges upon the selection of tuning parameters.
The most generally applicable tuning method is cross validation (Stone, 1974). One common choice is k-fold cross
validation, which however presents potential bias issues in
high-dimensional settings where n is comparable to p. For
instance, the phase transition phenomena that happen in
such regimes (Amelunxen et al., 2014; Donoho et al., 2009;
Donoho & Tanner, 2005) indicate that any data splitting may
cause dramatic effects on the solution of (2) (see Figure 1
for an example). Hence, the risk estimates obtained from
k-fold cross validation may not be reliable. The bias issues
of k-fold cross validation may be alleviated by choosing
the number of folds k to be large. However, such schemes
are computationally demanding and may not be useful for
emerging high-dimensional applications. An alternative
choice of cross validation is LOOCV, which is unbiased
in high-dimensional problems. However, the computation
of LOOCV requires training the model n times, which is
unaffordable for large datasets.
The high computational complexity of LOOCV has motivated researchers to propose computationally less demanding approximations of the quantity. Early examples offered
approximations for the case R(β) = 12 kβk22 and the loss
function being smooth (Allen, 1974; O’sullivan et al., 1986;
Le Cessie & Van Houwelingen, 1992; Cawley & Talbot,
2008; Meijer & Goeman, 2013; Opper & Winther, 2000). In
(Beirami et al., 2017), the authors considered such approximations for smooth loss functions and smooth regularizers.
In this line of work, the accuracy of the approximations
was either not studied or was only studied in the n large,
p fixed regime. In a recent paper, (Rad & Maleki, 2018)
employed a similar approximation strategy to obtain approx-

