A Spline Theory of Deep Networks

Randall Balestriero 1

Abstract
We build a rigorous bridge between deep networks (DNs) and approximation theory via spline
functions and operators. Our key result is that a
large class of DNs can be written as a composition
of max-affine spline operators (MASOs), which
provide a powerful portal through which to view
and analyze their inner workings. For instance,
conditioned on the input signal, the output of a
MASO DN can be written as a simple affine transformation of the input. This implies that a DN
constructs a set of signal-dependent, class-specific
templates against which the signal is compared
via a simple inner product; we explore the links to
the classical theory of optimal classification via
matched filters and the effects of data memorization. Going further, we propose a simple penalty
term that can be added to the cost function of any
DN learning algorithm to force the templates to
be orthogonal with each other; this leads to significantly improved classification performance and
reduced overfitting with no change to the DN architecture. The spline partition of the input signal
space opens up a new geometric avenue to study
how DNs organize signals in a hierarchical fashion. As an application, we develop and validate a
new distance metric for signals that quantifies the
difference between their partition encodings.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has significantly advanced our ability to address a wide range of difficult machine learning and signal
processing problems. Today’s machine learning landscape
is dominated by deep (neural) networks (DNs), which are
compositions of a large number of simple parameterized
linear and nonlinear transforms. An all-too-common story
of late is that of plugging a deep network into an application as a black box, training it on copious training data,
1
ECE Department, Rice University, Houston, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Randall B. <randallbalestriero@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Richard G. Baraniuk 1
and then significantly improving performance over classical
approaches.
Despite this empirical progress, the precise mechanisms by
which deep learning works so well remain relatively poorly
understood, adding an air of mystery to the entire field. Ongoing attempts to build a rigorous mathematical framework
fall roughly into five camps: (i) probing and measuring DNs
to visualize their inner workings (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014); (ii)
analyzing their properties such as expressive power (Cohen
et al., 2016), loss surface geometry (Lu & Kawaguchi, 2017;
Soudry & Hoffer, 2017), nuisance management (Soatto &
Chiuso, 2016), sparsification (Papyan et al., 2017), and generalization abilities; (iii) new mathematical frameworks that
share some (but not all) common features with DNs (Bruna
& Mallat, 2013); (iv) probabilistic generative models from
which specific DNs can be derived (Arora et al., 2013; Patel
et al., 2016); and (v) information theoretic bounds (Tishby
& Zaslavsky, 2015).
In this paper, we build a rigorous bridge between DNs and
approximation theory via spline functions and operators.
We prove that a large class of DNs — including convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun, 1998), residual
networks (ResNets) (He et al., 2016; Targ et al., 2016),
skip connection networks (Srivastava et al., 2015), fully
connected networks (Pal & Mitra, 1992), recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) (Graves, 2013), and beyond — can be
written as spline operators. In particular, when these networks employ current standard-practice piecewise-affine,
convex nonlinearities (e.g., ReLU, max-pooling, etc.) they
can be written as the composition of max-affine spline operators (MASOs) (Magnani & Boyd, 2009; Hannah & Dunson,
2013). We focus on such nonlinearities here but note that
our framework applies also to non-piecewise-affine nonlinearities through a standard approximation argument.
The max-affine spline connection provides a powerful portal
through which to view and analyze the inner workings of a
DN using tools from approximation theory and functional
analysis. Here is a summary of our key contributions:
[C1] We prove that a large class of DNs can be written as a
composition of MASOs, from which it follows immediately
that, conditioned on the input signal, the output of a DN is
a simple affine transformation of the input. We illustrate
in Section 4 by deriving a closed-form expression for the

