BOCK : Bayesian Optimization with Cylindrical Kernels

ChangYong Oh 1 Efstratios Gavves 1 Max Welling 1 2

Abstract
A major challenge in Bayesian Optimization is the
boundary issue (Swersky, 2017) where an algorithm spends too many evaluations near the boundary of its search space. In this paper we propose
BOCK, Bayesian Optimization with Cylindrical
Kernels, whose basic idea is to transform the ball
geometry of the search space using a cylindrical
transformation. Because of the transformed geometry, the Gaussian Process-based surrogate model
spends less budget searching near the boundary,
while concentrating its efforts relatively more near
the center of the search region, where we expect
the solution to be located. We evaluate BOCK
extensively, showing that it is not only more accurate and efficient, but it also scales successfully
to problems with a dimensionality as high as 500.
We show that the better accuracy and scalability
of BOCK even allows optimizing modestly sized
neural network layers, as well as neural network
hyperparameters.

1. Introduction
When we talk about stars and galaxies we use parsecs to
describe structures, yet when we discuss the world around us
we use meters. In other words, the natural lengthscale scale
with which we describe the world increases with distance
away from us. We believe this same idea is useful when
performing optimization in high dimensional spaces.
In Bayesian Optimization (or other forms of hyperparameter
optimization) we define a cube or a ball and search for the
solution inside that volume. The origin of that sphere is
special in the sense that this represents the part of space with
the highest probability if finding the solution. Moreover, in
high dimensions, when we move outwards, the amount of
1
QUvA Lab, Informatic Institute, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, Netherlands 2 Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: ChangYong Oh
<C.Oh@uva.nl>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

x1

x*1

x*2 *

*

x2

T(x*1)

*

T(x1)

T(x2)

T(x**2)
Figure 1. Many of the problems in Bayesian Optimization relate to
the boundary issue (too much volume near the boundary (Swersky,
2017)), because of the Euclidean geometry of the search space ball.
Because of the boundary issue, we spend much of the evaluation
budget in a particular region of the search space, the boundaries,
which contradicts our prior assumption that the solution most
likely lies close to the origin. We propose BOCK, whose basic
idea is to apply a cylindrical transformation of the search space
that expands the volume near the ball center while contracting the
volume near the boundaries.

volume contained in an annulus with width δR, A(c; R −
δR, R) = {x|R−δR < kx−ck < R}, grows exponentially
with distance R. As such, if we would spend an equal
amount of time searching each volume element δV , we
would spend all our time at the boundary of our search
region. This effective attraction to the places with more
volume is the equivalent of an ”entropic force” in physics,
and in the case of optimization is highly undesirable, since
we expect the solution at a small radius R.
In this paper we, therefore, reformulate Bayesian Optimization in a transformed space, where a ball, B(x; R) =
{x|kx − ck ≤ R}, is mapped to a cylinder, C(p, q; c, L =
{(r, a)kr ∈ [p, q], kd − ck = L} (see Figure 1). In this way,
every annulus of width δR contains an equal amount of volume for every radius R, and the entropic force pulling the
optimizer to the boundary disappears. We call our method
BOCK, for Bayesian Optimization with Cylindrical Kernel.
We find that our algorithm is able to successfully handle
much higher dimensional problems than standard Bayesian
optimizers. As a result, we manage to not only optimize
modestly sized neural network layers (up to 500 dimensions in our experiments), obtaining solutions competitive
to SGD training, but also hyper-optimize stochastic depth
Resnets (Huang et al., 2016).

