Weakly Consistent Optimal Pricing Algorithms
in Repeated Posted-Price Auctions with Strategic Buyer

Alexey Drutsa 1 2

Abstract
We study revenue optimization learning algorithms for repeated posted-price auctions where a
seller interacts with a single strategic buyer that
holds a fixed private valuation for a good and
seeks to maximize his cumulative discounted surplus. We propose a novel algorithm that never
decreases offered prices and has a tight strategic
regret bound of Θ(log log T ). This result closes
the open research question on the existence of a
no-regret horizon-independent weakly consistent
pricing. We also show that the property of nondecreasing prices is nearly necessary for a weakly
consistent algorithm to be a no-regret one.

1. Introduction
Real-time ad exchanges, search engines, social networks,
and other Internet companies consider revenue maximization as one of the most important directions for development
of their online advertising platforms (Gomes & Mirrokni,
2014; Balseiro et al., 2015; Charles et al., 2016; Agarwal
et al., 2014). A large part of advertisement inventory is sold
via widely applicable second price auctions (He et al., 2013;
Mohri & Medina, 2014), including their generalizations
such as GSP (Varian, 2007; Sun et al., 2014) and VickreyClarke-Groves (VCG) (Varian, 2009; Varian & Harris, 2014)
auctions. The optimization of revenue here is mostly controlled by means of reserve prices, whose proper setting is
studied both by game-theoretical methods (Myerson, 1981;
Krishna, 2009) and by machine learning approaches (Nisan
et al., 2007; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2013; Paes Leme et al.,
2016). A large number of online auctions run, for instance,
by ad exchanges involve only a single advertiser (Amin
et al., 2013; Mohri & Munoz, 2014; Drutsa, 2017), and,
in this case, a second-price auction with reserve is equiva1

2

Yandex, Moscow, Russia Faculty of Mechanics and Mathematics, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia.
Correspondence to: Alexey Drutsa <adrutsa@yandex.ru>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

lent to a posted-price auction (Kleinberg & Leighton, 2003)
where the seller sets a reserve price for a good (for instance,
an ad space) and the buyer decides whether to accept or
reject this price i.e., to bid above or below it).
In this work, we focus on a scenario when the seller repeatedly interacts through a posted-price mechanism with the
same strategic buyer that holds a fixed private valuation for
a good and seeks to maximize his cumulative discounted
surplus (Amin et al., 2013). At each round of this game, the
seller is able to choose the price based on previous decisions
of the buyer: i.e., she applies a deterministic online learning
algorithm, which is announced to the buyer in advance. The
seller’s goal is to maximize her cumulative revenue over a
finite time horizon T , which is generally reduced to regret
minimization1 . Thus, the seller seeks for a no-regret pricing
algorithm, i.e., the one with a sublinear regret on T (Mohri
& Munoz, 2014; Amin et al., 2014; Chen & Wang, 2016).
For this setting, the algorithm PRRFES with tight strategic
regret bound of Θ(log log T ) was recently proposed (Drutsa,
2017). This algorithm is horizon-independent and rightconsistent (i.e., it never proposes prices lower than earlier
accepted ones). However, its key drawback is its ability to
decrease an offered price after its rejection, but then to propose higher prices than rejected one in subsequent rounds
(not satisfying thus the left consistency). Such a behavior of
the algorithm may be confusing for a buyer: he may doubt
that the announced algorithm is used by the seller2 . The full
consistency (both right, and left) is thus quite welcome. Formally, there does not exist a no-regret horizon-independent
consistent algorithm (Drutsa, 2017). But, it is still an open
question whether there exists a weakly consistent algorithm
with these properties. Weak consistency is a slightly relaxed
variant of consistency and means, in particular, that, once
the seller decreases a price after a rejection, the future prices
will never exceed the rejected one.
In our study, we propose a novel algorithm that never decreases offered prices and can be applied against strategic
buyers with a tight regret bound of Θ(log log T ) (Th. 1).
1

We study the worst-case regret minimization following (Kleinberg & Leighton, 2003; Mohri & Munoz, 2014; Drutsa, 2017).
2
See Appendix C in Supp.Mat. for an example from practice.

