Differentiable plasticity: training plastic neural networks with
backpropagation

Thomas Miconi 1 Jeff Clune 1 Kenneth O. Stanley 1

Abstract
How can we build agents that keep learning from
experience, quickly and efficiently, after their initial training? Here we take inspiration from the
main mechanism of learning in biological brains:
synaptic plasticity, carefully tuned by evolution
to produce efficient lifelong learning. We show
that plasticity, just like connection weights, can
be optimized by gradient descent in large (millions of parameters) recurrent networks with Hebbian plastic connections. First, recurrent plastic
networks with more than two million parameters
can be trained to memorize and reconstruct sets
of novel, high-dimensional (1,000+ pixels) natural images not seen during training. Crucially,
traditional non-plastic recurrent networks fail to
solve this task. Furthermore, trained plastic networks can also solve generic meta-learning tasks
such as the Omniglot task, with competitive results and little parameter overhead. Finally, in
reinforcement learning settings, plastic networks
outperform a non-plastic equivalent in a maze exploration task. We conclude that differentiable
plasticity may provide a powerful novel approach
to the learning-to-learn problem.

1. Introduction: the problem of “learning to
learn”
Many of the recent spectacular successes in machine learning involve learning one complex task very well, through
extensive training over thousands or millions of training
examples (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016). After learning is complete, the agent’s
knowledge is fixed and unchanging; if the agent is to be
applied to a different task, it must be re-trained (fully or partially), again requiring a very large number of new training
1
Uber AI Labs. Correspondence to: Thomas Miconi <tmiconi@uber.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

examples. By contrast, biological agents exhibit a remarkable ability to learn quickly and efficiently from ongoing
experience: animals can learn to navigate and remember the
location of (and quickest way to) food sources, discover and
remember rewarding or aversive properties of novel objects
and situations, etc. – often from a single exposure.
Endowing artificial agents with lifelong learning abilities
is essential to allowing them to master environments with
changing or unpredictable features, or specific features that
are unknowable at the time of training. For example, supervised learning in deep neural networks can allow a neural
network to identify letters from a specific, fixed alphabet
to which it was exposed during its training; however, autonomous learning abilities would allow an agent to acquire
knowledge of any alphabet, including alphabets that are
unknown to the human designer at the time of training.
An additional benefit of autonomous learning abilities is
that in many tasks (e.g. object recognition, maze navigation,
etc.), the bulk of fixed, unchanging structure in the task can
be stored in the fixed knowledge of the agent, leaving only
the changing, contingent parameters of the specific situation
to be learned from experience. As a result, learning the
actual specific instance of the task at hand (that is, the actual
latent parameters that do vary across multiple instances of
the general task) can be extremely fast, requiring only few
or even a single experience with the environment.
Several meta-learning methods have been proposed to train
agents to learn autonomously (reviewed shortly). However,
unlike in current approaches, in biological brains long-term
learning is thought to occur (Martin et al., 2000; Liu et al.,
2012) primarily through synaptic plasticity – the strengthening and weakening of connections between neurons as
a result of neural activity, as carefully tuned by evolution
over millions of years to enable efficient learning during
the lifetime of each individual. While multiple forms of
synaptic plasticity exist, many of them build upon the general principle known as Hebb’s rule: if a neuron repeatedly
takes part in making another neuron fire, the connection
between them is strengthened (often roughly summarized
as “neurons that fire together, wire together”) (Hebb, 1949).
Designing neural networks with plastic connections has long

