Graph Networks as Learnable Physics Engines for Inference and Control

Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez 1 Nicolas Heess 1 Jost Tobias Springenberg 1 Josh Merel 1 Martin Riedmiller 1
Raia Hadsell 1 Peter Battaglia 1

Abstract
Understanding and interacting with everyday
physical scenes requires rich knowledge about
the structure of the world, represented either implicitly in a value or policy function, or explicitly in a transition model. Here we introduce a
new class of learnable models—based on graph
networks—which implement an inductive bias
for object- and relation-centric representations of
complex, dynamical systems. Our results show
that as a forward model, our approach supports
accurate predictions from real and simulated data,
and surprisingly strong and efficient generalization, across eight distinct physical systems which
we varied parametrically and structurally. We
also found that our inference model can perform
system identification. Our models are also differentiable, and support online planning via gradientbased trajectory optimization, as well as offline
policy optimization. Our framework offers new
opportunities for harnessing and exploiting rich
knowledge about the world, and takes a key step
toward building machines with more human-like
representations of the world.

1. Introduction
Many domains, such as mathematics, language, and physical
systems, are combinatorially complex. The possibilities
scale rapidly with the number of elements. For example, a
multi-link chain can assume shapes that are exponential in
the number of angles each link can take, and a box full of
bouncing balls yields trajectories which are exponential in
the number of bounces that occur. How can an intelligent
agent understand and control such complex systems?
A powerful approach is to represent these systems in terms
1

DeepMind, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez <alvarosg@google.com>, Peter Battaglia
<peterbattaglia@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Pendulum

Cartpole

Acrobot

Cheetah

Walker2d

JACO

Swimmer6

Real JACO
Sample 1

Sample 2

Figure 1. (Top) Our experimental physical systems. (Bottom) Samples of parametrized versions of these systems (see videos: link).

of objects2 and their relations, applying the same objectwise computations to all objects, and the same relation-wise
computations to all interactions. This allows for combinatorial generalization to scenarios never before experienced,
whose underlying components and compositional rules are
well-understood. For example, particle-based physics engines make the assumption that bodies follow the same dynamics, and interact with each other following similar rules,
e.g., via forces, which is how they can simulate limitless
scenarios given different initial conditions.
Here we introduce a new approach for learning and controlling complex systems, by implementing a structural inductive bias for object- and relation-centric representations.
Our approach uses “graph networks” (GNs), a class of neural networks that can learn functions on graphs (Scarselli
et al., 2009b; Li et al., 2015; Battaglia et al., 2016; Gilmer
et al., 2017). In a physical system, the GN lets us represent
2
“Object” here refers to entities generally, rather than physical
objects exclusively.

