Policy Optimization with Demonstrations

Bingyi Kang 1 Zequn Jie 2 Jiashi Feng 1

Abstract
Exploration remains a signiﬁcant challenge to reinforcement learning methods, especially in environments where reward signals are sparse. Recent
methods of learning from demonstrations have
shown to be promising in overcoming exploration
difﬁculties but typically require considerable highquality demonstrations that are difﬁcult to collect. We propose to effectively leverage available
demonstrations to guide exploration through enforcing occupancy measure matching between the
learned policy and current demonstrations, and
develop a novel Policy Optimization from Demonstration (POfD) method. We show that POfD induces implicit dynamic reward shaping and brings
provable beneﬁts for policy improvement. Furthermore, it can be combined with policy gradient methods to produce state-of-the-art results, as
demonstrated experimentally on a range of popular benchmark sparse-reward tasks, even when
the demonstrations are few and imperfect.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) solves sequential decision
making problems based on the experiences collected by
interacting with environments. Thanks to the advances in
deep learning, various neural network powered RL methods
have made signiﬁcant progress for multiple applications,
including Atari games (Mnih et al., 2015; Van Hasselt et al.,
2016; Mnih et al., 2016), robot locomotion tasks (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017) and the game of Go (Silver et al.,
2016; 2017). However, exploration problems, that how to
gain more experience with novel strategies to improve the
performance in the long run, are still challenging in deep
RL methods. When the reward signals are sparse and rare,
existing methods still struggle to explore effectively to learn
meaningful policies. This is because most of them rely
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Tencent AI Lab, China. Correspondence to: Bingyi Kang <kang@u.nus.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

on heuristic exploration strategies, e.g., -greedy for value
based methods (Van Hasselt et al., 2016) and noise-based
exploration for policy gradient methods (Sutton et al., 2000),
which are undirected and incapable of ﬁnding interesting
states explicitly.
Some recent works (Nair et al., 2017; Houthooft et al., 2016;
Plappert et al., 2017; Pathak et al., 2017) have been devoted
to tackling the exploration problems in RL. They are basically rooted in the following two ideas. 1) Reshape the
original reward function by encouraging the agent to visit
states never seen before, driven by intrinsic curiosity (Pathak
et al., 2017) or information gain (Houthooft et al., 2016).
2) Use demonstration trajectories sampled from an expert
policy to guide the learning procedure, by either putting
the demonstrations into a replay memory (Nair et al., 2017;
Hester et al., 2017; Večerı́k et al., 2017) or using them to pretrain the policy in a supervised manner (Silver et al., 2016).
Learning from demonstrations has shown promising performance in overcoming exploration difﬁculties in sparsereward environments. However, existing schemes cannot
fully leverage the power of the demonstration data, limited
by only treating them in the same way as self-generated data,
and usually require a tremendous number of high-quality
demonstrations which are difﬁcult to collect at scale.
To address this problem, we propose to combine above
two ideas by developing a principled method that rewards
demonstration-like actions more during interaction with
environments, which thus encourages exploration for meaningful states when feedback is sparse. The intuition is that,
when the reward signal is not available, the agent should
mimic the demonstrated behavior in early learning stages
for exploration. After acquiring sufﬁcient skills, the agent
can explore new states on its own. This is actually a dynamic intrinsic reward mechanism that can be introduced
for reshaping native rewards in RL. To this end, we propose
a novel Policy Optimization from Demonstration (POfD)
method, which can acquire knowledge from demonstration
data to boost exploration, even though the data are scarce
and imperfect. We realize our idea with three technical novelties. 1) We reformulate the policy optimization objective
by adding a demonstration-guided exploration term, which
measures the divergence between the current policy and
the expert one, forcing expert-alike exploration. We theoretically analyze the beneﬁts brought by POfD to vanilla

