Bucket Renormalization for Approximate Inference

Sungsoo Ahn 1 Michael Chertkov 2 3 Adrian Weller 4 5 Jinwoo Shin 1 6

Abstract
Probabilistic graphical models are a key tool in
machine learning applications. Computing the
partition function, i.e., normalizing constant, is a
fundamental task of statistical inference but it is
generally computationally intractable, leading to
extensive study of approximation methods. Iterative variational methods are a popular and successful family of approaches. However, even state of
the art variational methods can return poor results
or fail to converge on difficult instances. In this
paper, we instead consider computing the partition function via sequential summation over variables. We develop robust approximate algorithms
by combining ideas from mini-bucket elimination
with tensor network and renormalization group
methods from statistical physics. The resulting
“convergence-free” methods show good empirical performance on both synthetic and real-world
benchmark models, even for difficult instances.

1. Introduction
Graphical Models (GMs) express the factorization of the
joint multivariate probability distribution over subsets of
variables via graphical relations among them. They have
played an important role in many fields, including computer vision (Freeman et al., 2000), speech recognition
(Bilmes, 2004), social science (Scott, 2017) and deep learning (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006). Given a GM, computing the partition function Z (the normalizing constant)
is the essence of other statistical inference tasks such as
marginalization and sampling. The partition function can
be calculated efficiently in tree-structured GMs through an
1

School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, South
Korea 2 Theoretical Division, T-4 & Center for Nonlinear Studies,
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
3
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, 143026 Moscow,
Russia 4 University of Cambridge, UK 5 The Alan Turing Institute,
UK 6 AITrics, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Jinwoo
Shin <jinwoos@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

iterative (dynamic programming) algorithm eliminating, i.e.
summing up, variables sequentially. In principle, the elimination strategy extends to arbitrary loopy graphs, but the
computational complexity is exponential in the tree-width,
e.g., the junction-tree method (Shafer & Shenoy, 1990). Formally, the computation task is #P-hard even to approximate
(Jerrum & Sinclair, 1993).
Variational approaches are often the most popular practical
choice for approximate computation of the partition function. They map the counting problem into an approximate
optimization problem stated over a polynomial (in the graph
size) number of variables. The optimization is typically
solved iteratively via a message-passing algorithm, e.g.,
mean-field (Parisi, 1988), belief propagation (Pearl, 1982),
tree-reweighted (Wainwright et al., 2005), or gauges and/or
re-parametrizations (Ahn et al., 2017; 2018 (accepted to
appear). Lack of accuracy control and difficulty in forcing
convergence in an acceptable number of steps are, unfortunately, typical for hard GM instances. Markov chain
Monte Carlo methods (e.g., see Alpaydin, 2014) are also
popular to approximate the partition function, but typically
suffer, even more than variational methods, from slow convergence/mixing.
Approximate elimination is a sequential method to estimate
the partition function. Each step consists of summation
over variables followed by (or combined with) approximation of the resulting complex factors. Notable flavors of
this method include truncation of the Fourier coefficients
(Xue et al., 2016), approximation by random mixtures of
rank-1 tensors (Wrigley et al., 2017), and arguably the most
popular, elimination over mini-buckets (Dechter & Rish,
2003; Liu & Ihler, 2011). One advantage of the mini-bucket
elimination approach is the ability to control the trade-off
between computational complexity and approximation quality by adjusting an induced-width parameter. Note that
analogous control in variational methods, such as varying
region sizes in generalized belief propagation (Yedidia et al.,
2001), typically results in much more complicated optimization formulations to solve. Another important advantage
of mini-bucket elimination is that it is always guaranteed
to terminate and, usually, it does so quickly. This is in
contrast to iterative message-passing implementations of
variational methods which can be notoriously slow on difficult instances.

