JointGAN: Multi-Domain Joint Distribution Learning with
Generative Adversarial Nets
Yunchen Pu 1 Shuyang Dai 2 Zhe Gan 3 Weiyao Wang 2 Guoyin Wang 2 Yizhe Zhang 3 Ricardo Henao 2
Lawrence Carin 2

Abstract
A new generative adversarial network is developed for joint distribution matching. Distinct from
most existing approaches, that only learn conditional distributions, the proposed model aims to
learn a joint distribution of multiple random variables (domains). This is achieved by learning
to sample from conditional distributions between
the domains, while simultaneously learning to
sample from the marginals of each individual domain. The proposed framework consists of multiple generators and a single softmax-based critic,
all jointly trained via adversarial learning. From
a simple noise source, the proposed framework
allows synthesis of draws from the marginals, conditional draws given observations from a subset of
random variables, or complete draws from the full
joint distribution. Most examples considered are
for joint analysis of two domains, with examples
for three domains also presented.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) have emerged as a powerful framework for modeling
the draw of samples from complex data distributions. When
trained on datasets of natural images, significant progress
has been made on synthesizing realistic and sharp-looking
images (Radford et al., 2016). Recent work has also extended the GAN framework for the challenging task of text
generation (Yu et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017b). However, in its standard form, GAN models distributions in one
domain, i.e., for a single random variable.
This work was done when Yunchen Pu, Zhe Gan and Yizhe
Zhang were Ph.D. students at Duke University. 1 Facebook,
Menlo Park, CA, USA 2 Duke University, Durham, NC,
USA 3 Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Yunchen Pu <pyc40@fb.com>, Shuyang Dai
<shuyang.dai@duke.edu>, Zhe Gan <zhe.gan@microsoft.com>,
Lawrence Carin <lcarin@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

There has been recent interest in employing GAN ideas to
learn conditional distributions for two random variables.
This setting is of interest when one desires to synthesize
(or infer) one random variable given an instance of another
random variable. Example applications include generative
models with (stochastic) latent variables (Mescheder et al.,
2017; Tao et al., 2018), and conditional data synthesis (Isola
et al., 2017; Reed et al., 2016), when both domains consist
of observed pairs of random variables.
In this paper we focus on learning the joint distribution of
multiple random variables using adversarial training. For
the case of two random variables, conditional GAN (Mirza
& Osindero, 2014) and Triangle GAN (Gan et al., 2017a)
have been utilized for this task in the case that paired
data are available. Further, adversarially learned inference
(ALI) (Dumoulin et al., 2017; Donahue et al., 2017) and CycleGAN (Zhu et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2017; Yi et al., 2017)
were developed for unsupervised learning, where the twoway mappings between two domains are learned without
any paired data. These models are unified as the joint distribution matching problem by Li et al. (2017a). However,
in all previous approaches the joint distributions are not
fully learned, i.e., the model only learns to sample from the
conditional distributions, assuming access to the marginal
distributions, which are typically instantiated as empirical
samples from each individual domain (see Figure 1(b) for
illustration). Therefore, only conditional data synthesis can
be achieved due to the lack of a learned sample mechanism
for the marginals.
It is desirable to build a generative-model learning framework from which one may sample from a fully-learned joint
distribution. We design a new GAN framework that learns
the joint distribution by decomposing it into the product of a
marginal and a conditional distribution(s), each learned via
adversarial training (see Figure 1(c) for illustration). The
resulting model may then be employed in several distinct applications: (i) synthesis of draws from any of the marginals;
(ii) synthesis of draws from the conditionals when other
random variables are observed, i.e., imputation; (iii) or we
may simultaneously draw all random variables from the
joint distribution.

