Fixing a Broken ELBO

Alexander A. Alemi 1 Ben Poole 2 * Ian Fischer 1 Joshua V. Dillon 1 Rif A. Saurous 1 Kevin Murphy 1

Abstract
Recent work in unsupervised representation learning has focused on learning deep directed latentvariable models. Fitting these models by maximizing the marginal likelihood or evidence is typically intractable, thus a common approximation
is to maximize the evidence lower bound (ELBO)
instead. However, maximum likelihood training
(whether exact or approximate) does not necessarily result in a good latent representation, as we
demonstrate both theoretically and empirically.
In particular, we derive variational lower and upper bounds on the mutual information between
the input and the latent variable, and use these
bounds to derive a rate-distortion curve that characterizes the tradeoff between compression and
reconstruction accuracy. Using this framework,
we demonstrate that there is a family of models
with identical ELBO, but different quantitative
and qualitative characteristics. Our framework
also suggests a simple new method to ensure that
latent variable models with powerful stochastic
decoders do not ignore their latent code.

1. Introduction
Learning a “useful” representation of data in an unsupervised way is one of the “holy grails” of current machine learning research. A common approach to this
problem is to fit a latent variable model of the form
p(x, z|θ) = p(z|θ)p(x|z, θ) to the data, where x are the
observed variables, z are the hidden variables, and θ are
the parameters. We usually fit such models by minimizing
L(θ) = KL[p̂(x) || p(x|θ)], which is equivalent to maximum likelihood training. If this is intractable, we may
instead maximize a lower bound on this quantity, such as
the evidence lower bound (ELBO), as is done when fitting
variational autoencoder (VAE) models (Kingma & Welling,
*

Work done during an internship at DeepMind. 1 Google AI
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Alexander A. Alemi
<alemi@google.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

2014; Rezende et al., 2014). Alternatively, we can consider other divergence measures, such as the reverse KL,
L(θ) = KL[p(x|θ) || p̂(x)], as is done when fitting certain
kinds of generative adversarial networks (GANs). However,
the fundamental problem is that these loss functions only
depend on p(x|θ), and not on p(x, z|θ). Thus they do not
measure the quality of the representation at all, as discussed
in (Huszár, 2017; Phuong et al., 2018). In particular, if
we have a powerful stochastic decoder p(x|z, θ), such as
an RNN or PixelCNN, a VAE can easily ignore z and still
obtain high marginal likelihood p(x|θ), as noticed in (Bowman et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2017). Thus obtaining a good
ELBO (and more generally, a good marginal likelihood) is
not enough for good representation learning.
In this paper, we argue that a better way to assess the value
of representation learning is to measure the mutual information I between the observed X and the latent Z. In
general, this quantity is intractable to compute, but we can
derive tractable variational lower and upper bounds on it.
By varying I, we can tradeoff between how much the data
has been compressed vs how much information we retain.
This can be expressed using the rate-distortion or RD curve
from information theory, as we explain in section 2. This
framework provides a solution to the problem of powerful
decoders ignoring the latent variable which is simpler than
the architectural constraints of (Chen et al., 2017), and more
general than the “KL annealing” approach of (Bowman
et al., 2016). This framework also generalizes the β-VAE
approach used in (Higgins et al., 2017; Alemi et al., 2017).
In addition to our unifying theoretical framework, we empirically study the performance of a variety of different VAE
models — with both “simple” and “complex” encoders, decoders, and priors — on several simple image datasets in
terms of the RD curve. We show that VAEs with powerful
autoregressive decoders can be trained to not ignore their
latent code by targeting certain points on this curve. We
also show how it is possible to recover the “true generative
process” (up to reparameterization) of a simple model on
a synthetic dataset with no prior knowledge except for the
true value of the mutual information I (derived from the
true generative model). We believe that information constraints provide an interesting alternative way to regularize
the learning of latent variable models.

