TAPAS: Tricks to Accelerate (encrypted) Prediction As a Service

Amartya Sanyal 1 2 Matt J. Kusner 2 3 Adrià Gascón 2 3 Varun Kanade 1 2

Abstract
Machine learning methods are widely used for a
variety of prediction problems. Prediction as a
service is a paradigm in which service providers
with technological expertise and computational
resources may perform predictions for clients.
However, data privacy severely restricts the applicability of such services, unless measures to
keep client data private (even from the service
provider) are designed. Equally important is to
minimize the amount of computation and communication required between client and server.
Fully homomorphic encryption offers a possible
way out, whereby clients may encrypt their data,
and on which the server may perform arithmetic
computations. The main drawback of using fully
homomorphic encryption is the amount of time
required to evaluate large machine learning models on encrypted data. We combine ideas from the
machine learning literature, particularly work on
binarization and sparsification of neural networks,
together with algorithmic tools to speed-up and
parallelize computation using encrypted data.

1. Introduction
Applications using machine learning techniques have exploded during the recent years, with “deep learning” techniques being applied on a wide variety of tasks that had
hitherto proved challenging. Training highly accurate machine learning models requires large quantities of (high quality) data, technical expertise and computational resources.
An important recent paradigm is prediction as a service,
whereby a service provider with expertise and resources
can make predictions for clients. However, this approach
requires trust between service provider and client; there
are several instances where clients may be unwilling or
unable to provide data to service providers due to privacy
1

University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 2 The Alan Turing Institute,
London, UK 3 University of Warwick, Coventry, UK. Correspondence to: Amartya Sanyal <amartya.sanyal@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

concerns. Examples include assisting in medical diagnoses
(Kononenko, 2001; Blecker et al., 2017), detecting fraud
from personal finance data (Ghosh & Reilly, 1994), and detecting online communities from user data (Fortunato, 2010).
The ability of a service provider to predict on encrypted data
can alleviate concerns of data leakage.
The framework of fully homomorphic encryption (FHE)
is ideal for this paradigm. Fully homomorphic encryption
schemes support arbitrary computations to be performed directly on encrypted data without prior decryption. The first
fully homomorphic encryption system was developed just
10 years ago by Gentry (2009), after being an open question
for 30 years (Rivest et al., 1978). Since then several other
schemes have been proposed (Gentry et al., 2012; 2013;
Brakerski & Vaikuntanathan, 2014; Ducas & Micciancio,
2015; Chillotti et al., 2016). However, without significant
changes to machine learning models and improved algorithmic tools, homomorphic encryption does not scale to
real-world machine learning applications.
Indeed, already there have been several recent works trying
to accelerate predictions of machine learning models on
fully homomorphic encrypted data. In general, the approach
has been to approximate all or parts of a machine learning
model to accommodate the restrictions of an FHE framework. Often, certain kind of FHE schemes are preferred
because they allow for “batched” parallel encrypted computations, called SIMD operations (Smart & Vercauteren,
2014). This technique is exemplified by the CryptoNets
model (Gilad-Bachrach et al., 2016). While these models
allow for high-throughput (via SIMD), they are not particularly suited for the prediction as a service framework for
individual users, as single predictions are slow. Further,
because they employ a leveled homomorphic encryption
scheme, they are unable to perform many nested multiplications, a requirement for state-of-the-art deep learning
models (He et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2017).
Our solution demonstrates that existing work on Binary
Neural Networks (BNNs) (Kim & Smaragdis, 2015; Courbariaux et al., 2016) can be adapted to produce efficient and
highly accurate predictions on encrypted data. We show
that a recent FHE encryption scheme (Chillotti et al., 2016)
which only supports operations on binary data can be leveraged to compute all of the operations of BNNs. To do so,

