Improved Regret Bounds for Thompson Sampling
in Linear Quadratic Control Problems

Marc Abeille 1 Alessandro Lazaric 2

Abstract
Thompson sampling (TS) is an effective approach
to trade off exploration and exploration in reinforcement learning. Despite its empirical success
and recent advances, its theoretical analysis is
often limited to the Bayesian setting, finite stateaction spaces, or finite-horizon problems. In this
paper, we study an instance of TS in the challenging setting of the infinite-horizon linear quadratic
(LQ) control, which models problems with continuous state-action variables, linear dynamics,
and quadratic cost. In particular, we analyze the
regret in the frequentist sense (i.e., for a fixed
unknown environment) in one-dimensional
sys√
tems. We derive the first O( T ) frequentist regret bound for this problem, thus significantly improving the O(T 2/3 ) bound of Abeille & Lazaric
(2017) and matching the frequentist performance
derived by Abbasi-Yadkori & Szepesvári (2011)
for an optimistic approach and the Bayesian result of Ouyang et al. (2017). We obtain this result by developing a novel bound on the regret
due to policy switches, which holds for LQ systems of any dimensionality and it allows updating
the parameters and the policy at each step, thus
overcoming previous limitations due to lazy updates. Finally, we report numerical simulations
supporting the conjecture that our result extends
to multi-dimensional systems.

1. Introduction
Designing algorithms to properly trade off exploring an unknown environment and exploiting the estimated optimal
control policy, is one of the most important challenges towards scaling reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto,
1998) to problems with large or continuous state and action spaces. The exploration-exploitation dilemma in RL
1
Criteo, Paris, France 2 Facebook AI Research, Paris, France.
Correspondence to: Marc Abeille <m.abeille@criteo.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

has been mostly addressed following two main approaches:
optimism-in-face-of-uncertainty (OFU) and Thompson sampling (TS) (also referred to as posterior-sampling in RL,
PSRL (Strens, 2000)). Following the OFU approach (see
e.g., Jaksch et al., 2010), we first construct the set of admissible environments whose parameters are within confidence
intervals constructed on the samples collected so far. Then
the optimal policy w.r.t. the optimistic admissible environment (i.e., the one maximizing the optimal value function)
is executed. PSRL is a Bayesian algorithm that executes the
optimal policy w.r.t. a environment drawn at random from
the posterior computed from a given prior and the samples
observed so far. The flexibility of applying PSRL to any
parametric MDP (as soon as sampling from a posterior can
be done efficiently) and the difficulty of deriving tight confidence intervals and computing the optimistic policy in OFU,
often make PSRL the more effective approach. Empirical
evidence of the performance of PSRL ranges from multiarmed bandit (Chapelle & Li, 2011) to RL with linear and
non-linear function approximation (Osband et al., 2016b;a).
On the theoretical side, several results exist on PSRL in
the episodic setting under the regret framework, where the
cumulative reward collected by the learning agent is compared to the performance of the optimal policy. Given the
Bayesian nature of PSRL, its regret is often analyzed in
expectation w.r.t. the prior over the environments (i.e., the
so-called Bayesian regret). Osband et al. (2013) proved
the first
√ regret bound for PSRL in finite MDPs of order
O(S AT ). The more general setting of learning in parameterized MDPs is studied in (Osband & Van Roy, 2014),
where it is shown that the regret of PSRL depends on the
dimensionality of the space of parameters rather than its
cardinality. Osband & Roy (2016) showed how leveraging
over posterior sampling in PSRL actually leads to improved
regret bounds w.r.t. OFU in finite MDPs. Finally, Gopalan
& Mannor (2015) proved regret bounds in a slightly more
general non-episodic setting under the assumption that the
MDP is ergodic and an initial state is positive recurrent under any policy. While these results match the frequentist
bounds of OFU, when moving from the episodic to infinite
horizon setting the results of TS are still limited. While most
of the results for OFU hold in both cases (see e.g. (Bartlett
& Tewari, 2009; Jaksch et al., 2010; Abbasi-Yadkori &

