Dependent Relational Gamma Process Models for Longitudinal Networks

Sikun Yang 1 Heinz Koeppl 1

Abstract
A probabilistic framework based on the covariatedependent relational gamma process is developed
to analyze relational data arising from longitudinal networks. The proposed framework characterizes networked nodes by nonnegative nodegroup memberships, which allow each node to
belong to multiple latent groups simultaneously,
and encodes edge probabilities between each pair
of nodes using a Bernoulli Poisson link to the
embedded latent space. Within the latent space,
our framework models the birth and death dynamics of individual groups via a thinning function.
Our framework also captures the evolution of individual node-group memberships over time using
gamma Markov processes. Exploiting the recent
advances in data augmentation and marginalization techniques, a simple and efficient Gibbs sampler is proposed for posterior computation. Experimental results on a simulation study and three realworld temporal network data sets demonstrate the
model’s capability, competitive performance and
scalability compared to state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The study of relational data arising from various networks
including social, biological and physical networks is becoming increasingly important due to the emergence of massive
relational data collected from these domains. Many efforts
have been dedicated to develop statistical models in terms of
community detection and missing link prediction for analyzing relational data arising from static networks, where either
a single snapshot of the network of interest or an aggregated
network over time is presented; see (Goldenberg et al., 2010)
for a review of the literature. However, network data, such
1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany. Correspondence to: Sikun Yang <sikun.yang@bcs.tu-darmstadt.de>, Heinz
Koeppl <heinz.koeppl@bcs.tu-darmstadt.de>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

as friendships or interactions in a social network, is often
dynamic since the relations among the entities within the
network may appear or disappear over time (Mucha et al.,
2010). Accordingly, the latent groups composed of those
temporally connected entities also form and decay over time.
Hence, appropriate models are needed to enable a better
understanding of the formation and evolution of dynamic
networks (Phan & Airoldi, 2015).
A probabilistic framework is proposed to model such dynamic networks by assuming the network of interest is composed of a set of latent groups. Each node of the observed
network is hence associated with a time-dependent memberships vector that governs its involvement in multiple groups
and interactions with other nodes. The node-group memberships are assumed to be gamma distributed, thus, naturally
nonnegative real-valued. Moreover, to capture time-evolving
interactions between groups of nodes, we model the birth
and death dynamics of individual groups explicitly via a
dependent relational gamma process (dRGaP). The ideal
number of latent groups can be adaptively learned from data
via the shrinkage mechanism of the dRGaP.
Explicitly modelling group birth/death dynamics can be useful in many applications. For instance, latent groups in a
network of military disputes between countries could mean
alliances such as NATO coordinating collective defence
to attacks by external forces (Schein et al., 2016a). These
groups can be born and die afterwards. For example, the
Warsaw Pact was established during the Cold War and dissolved in later years. We demonstrate that our model can
discover interpretable latent structure on a real network of
military interstate disputes (Ghosn et al., 2004) that agrees
with our knowledge of international relations (Section 5).
Furthermore, it is reasonable to model the time-evolving
memberships of each individual node to interpret its joining
and withdrawing behavior to these groups. Hence, we capture the dynamics of individual node-group memberships
evolving over time via gamma Markov processes.
In contrast to dynamic network modelling using logistic
or probit mapping functions (Foulds et al., 2011; Heaukulani et al., 2013; Durante et al., 2014a), we leverage the
Bernoulli-Poisson link (BPL) function (Dunson & Herring,
2005; Zhou, 2015) to generate edges from the latent space
representation, which makes the computational cost of our

