Accelerating Natural Gradient with
Higher-Order Invariance
Yang Song 1 Jiaming Song 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
An appealing property of the natural gradient is
that it is invariant to arbitrary differentiable reparameterizations of the model. However, this invariance property requires infinitesimal steps and
is lost in practical implementations with small but
finite step sizes. In this paper, we study invariance properties from a combined perspective of
Riemannian geometry and numerical differential
equation solving. We define the order of invariance of a numerical method to be its convergence
order to an invariant solution. We propose to use
higher-order integrators and geodesic corrections
to obtain more invariant optimization trajectories.
We prove the numerical convergence properties
of geodesic corrected updates and show that they
can be as computational efficient as plain natural
gradient. Experimentally, we demonstrate that
invariance leads to faster optimization and our
techniques improve on traditional natural gradient
in deep neural network training and natural policy
gradient for reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
Non-convex optimization is a key component of the success
of deep learning. Current state-of-the-art training methods
are usually variants of stochastic gradient descent (SGD),
such as AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011), RMSProp (Hinton
et al., 2012) and Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015). While generally effective, performance of those first-order optimizers
is highly dependent on the curvature of the optimization
objective. When the Hessian matrix of the objective at the
optimum has a large condition number, the problem is said
to have pathological curvature (Martens, 2010; Sutskever
1
Computer Science Department, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Yang Song <yangsong@cs.stanford.edu>, Jiaming Song <tsong@cs.stanford.edu>, Stefano Ermon <ermon@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

et al., 2013), and first-order methods will have trouble in
making progress. The curvature, however, depends on how
the model is parameterized. There may be some equivalent way of parameterizing the same model which has
better-behaved curvature and is thus easier to optimize with
first-order methods. Model reparameterizations, such as
good network architectures (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014;
He et al., 2016) and normalization techniques (LeCun et al.,
2012; Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015; Salimans & Kingma, 2016)
are often critical for the success of first-order methods.
The natural gradient (Amari, 1998) method takes a different
perspective to the same problem. Rather than devising a
different parameterization for first-order optimizers, it tries
to make the optimizer itself invariant to reparameterizations
by directly operating on the manifold of probabilistic models. This invariance, however, only holds in the idealized
case of infinitesimal steps, i.e., for continuous-time natural gradient descent trajectories on the manifold (Ollivier,
2013; 2015). Practical implementations with small but finite
step size (learning rate) are only approximately invariant.
Inspired by Newton-Raphson method, the learning rate of
natural gradient method is usually set to values near 1 in
real applications (Martens, 2010; 2014), leading to potential
loss of invariance.
In this paper, we investigate invariance properties within
the framework of Riemannian geometry and numerical differential equation solving. We observe that both the exact
solution of the natural gradient dynamics and its approximation obtained with Riemannian Euler method (Bielecki,
2002) are invariant. We propose to measure the invariance
of a numerical scheme by studying its rate of convergence
to those idealized truly invariant solutions. It can be shown
that the traditional natural gradient update (based on the
forward Euler method) converges in first order. For improvement, we first propose to use a second-order Runge-Kutta
integrator. Additionally, we introduce corrections based
on the geodesic equation. We argue that the Runge-Kutta
integrator converges to the exact solution in second order,
and the method with geodesic corrections converges to the
Riemannian Euler method in second order. Therefore, all
the new methods have higher order of invariance, and experiments verify their faster convergence in deep neural

