A Boo(n) for Evaluating Architecture Performance

Ondrej Bajgar 1 Rudolf Kadlec 1 Jan Kleindienst 1

Abstract
We point out important problems with the common practice of using the best single model performance for comparing deep learning architectures,
and we propose a method that corrects these flaws.
Each time a model is trained, one gets a different result due to random factors in the training
process, which include random parameter initialization and random data shuffling. Reporting the
best single model performance does not appropriately address this stochasticity. We propose a
normalized expected best-out-of-n performance
(Boon ) as a way to correct these problems.

1. Introduction
Replicating results in deep learning research is often hard.
This harms their usefulness to industry, leads to a waste of
effort by other researchers, and limits the scientific value of
such results.
One reason is that many papers provide information insufficient for replication. Details of the experimental setup can
significantly influence the results (Henderson et al., 2018;
Fokkens et al., 2013; Raeder et al., 2010), so the details
should be provided at least in appendices, ideally alongside
the source code, as was strongly emphasized e.g. by Ince et
al. (2012).
However, an important second factor hinders replicability:
most deep learning training methods are inherently stochastic. This randomness usually comes from random data
ordering in stochastic gradient descent and from random parameter initialization, though there can be additional sources
of randomness such as dropout or gradient noise. Consequently, even if we fix the model architecture and the experimental setup (including the hyperparameters), we obtain a
different result each time we run an experiment. Statistical
techniques are needed to handle this variability. However,
1

IBM Watson, Prague AI Research & Development Lab.
RK has since moved to Deepmind. Correspondence to: Ondrej
Bajgar < ondrej@bajgar.org >.
Originally published in the Proceedings of the 35 th International
Conference on Machine Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80,
2018. Copyright 2018 by the author(s).

in deep learning research, they are heavily underused. What
is usually done instead?
Most empirical deep learning papers simply report the performance of the best single model (sometimes calling it just
"single model" performance). We will later show this is the
case at least for some sub-domains. Given the result stochasticity, such method is statistically flawed. The best model
performance is not robust under experiment replication, and
its expected value improves with an increasing number of
experiments performed, among other problems. Since many
deep learning publications largely ignore these issues, we
dedicate the first part of this article to explaining them in
some detail, and later run experiments to quantify them.
Appropriate statistical techniques are hence necessary for
evaluating (and comparing) the performance of machine
learning (ML) architectures. Some well-developed methods
exist for such comparisons (a great introduction is given
for instance by Cohen (1995)). However, most existing
methods focus on comparing the mean performance. This
may be one of the reasons why statistical methods are being
underused, since mean may be unattractive to researchers in
certain situations.
There are multiple possible reasons for this. The one that
we do consider sound1 is that when deploying models in
practice, it is often natural to train multiple instances of a
model and then deploy the best one to production based on
a validation set evaluation.2 Underperforming models can
be discarded, so the final deployed model does come from
1
Other reasons why researchers resort to the best performance
as opposed to the mean may come from the current highly competitive atmosphere in the field with (possibly excessive) focus on performance on standard datasets (see Church (2017) or Sculley et al.
(2018) for further discussion), which may motivate researchers to
publish only their best results. Also, statistically sound estimation
of performance does require repeatedly re-running experiments,
which does incur additional cost, which researchers may prefer to
invest in additional model tuning, especially in the present situation
where reviewers seem not to require statistically sound evaluation
of models and on the other hand may favour high-performing models. Of course, these motives should instead give place to effort to
do good science, as opposed to a race on standard benchmarks.
2
In some applications there is focus on speed of training and on
reducing computational costs – there it does make sense to focus
on the performance of the typical model as opposed to the best out
of n, so the use of mean or median is appropriate.

