Nearly Optimal Robust Subspace Tracking

Praneeth Narayanamurthy 1 Namrata Vaswani 1

Abstract
Robust subspace tracking (RST) can be simply
understood as a dynamic (time-varying) extension of robust PCA. More precisely, it is the problem of tracking data lying in a fixed or slowlychanging low-dimensional subspace while being
robust to sparse outliers. This work develops
a recursive projected compressive sensing algorithm called “Nearly Optimal RST (NORST)”,
and obtains one of the first guarantees for it.
We show that NORST provably solves RST under weakened standard RPCA assumptions, slow
subspace change, and a lower bound on (most)
outlier magnitudes. Our guarantee shows that
(i) NORST is online (after initialization) and
enjoys near-optimal values of tracking delay,
lower bound on required delay between subspace
change times, and of memory complexity; and
(ii) it has a significantly improved worst-case
outlier tolerance compared with all previous robust PCA or RST methods without requiring any
model on how the outlier support is generated.

1. Introduction
According to its modern definition (Candès et al., 2011),
robust PCA (RPCA) is the problem of decomposing a data
matrix into the sum of a low-rank matrix (true data) and a
sparse matrix (outliers). The column space of the low-rank
matrix then gives the desired principal subspace (PCA solution). A common application is in video analytics in separating a video into a slow-changing background image sequence (modeled as a low-rank matrix) and a foreground
image sequence consisting of moving objects or people
(sparse) (Candès et al., 2011). Many fast and provably
correct RPCA approaches have appeared in recent years:
PCP (Candès et al., 2011; Chandrasekaran et al., 2011; Hsu
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Iowa
State University, USA. Correspondence to: Namrata Vaswani
<namrata@iastate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

et al., 2011), AltProj (Netrapalli et al., 2014), RPCA-GD
(Yi et al., 2016), NO-RMC (Cherapanamjeri et al., 2016).
Robust Subspace Tracking (RST) can be simply interpreted
as a dynamic (time-varying) extension of RPCA. It assumes that the true data lie in a low-dimensional subspace
that can change with time, albeit slowly. The goal is to
track this changing subspace over time in the presence of
sparse outliers. The offline version of this problem can
be called dynamic (or time-varying) RPCA. RST requires
the tracking delay to be small, while dynamic RPCA does
not. Time-varying subspaces is a more appropriate model
for long data sequences, e.g., long surveillance videos.
The reason is, if one tries to use a single lower dimensional subspace to represent the entire data sequence, the
required dimension may end up being quite large. Short
tracking delays are critical for applications where realtime or near real-time estimates are needed, e.g., videobased surveillance/tracking, or detecting dynamic social
network anomalies (Ozdemir et al., 2017). While standard
RPCA has been extensively studied in recent years, there
is much lesser work on provable dynamic RPCA or RST
and only includes original-ReProCS (Qiu et al., 2014; Lois
& Vaswani, 2015; Zhan et al., 2016), modified-PCP (Zhan
& Vaswani, 2015), and simple-ReProCS (Narayanamurthy
& Vaswani, 2018a). Another related approach that comes
with a partial guarantee1 is ORPCA (Feng et al., 2013).
Modeling subspace change.
All existing guarantees
for subspace tracking algorithms (except our previous RST
work mentioned above) assume the statistically stationary
setting of data being generated from a single unknown subspace; and almost all of them are partial guarantees. All
work on subspace tracking without outliers, and with or
without missing data, e.g, (Yang, 1995; Chi et al., 2013;
Zhang & Balzano, 2016) is in this category.
On the other hand, the most general (nonstationary) model
that allows the subspace to change at each time is not even
identifiable since at least r data points are needed to compute an r-dimensional subspace even in the ideal setting of
no noise or missing entries. When the data is noisy, missing or outlier corrupted, even more data points are needed.
Since only one data vector comes in at each time t, the only
way to ensure this is to assume that the subspace remains
1

Needs assumptions on intermediate algorithm estimates.

