Candidates vs. Noises Estimation for Large Multi-Class Classification Problem

Lei Han 1 Yiheng Huang 1 Tong Zhang 1

Abstract
This paper proposes a method for multi-class classification problems, where the number of classes
K is large. The method, referred to as Candidates
vs. Noises Estimation (CANE), selects a small
subset of candidate classes and samples the remaining classes. We show that CANE is always
consistent and computationally efficient. Moreover, the resulting estimator has low statistical
variance approaching that of the maximum likelihood estimator, when the observed label belongs
to the selected candidates with high probability.
In practice, we use a tree structure with leaves as
classes to promote fast beam search for candidate
selection. We further apply the CANE method
to estimate word probabilities in learning large
neural language models. Extensive experimental
results show that CANE achieves better prediction
accuracy over the Noise-Contrastive Estimation
(NCE), its variants and a number of the state-ofthe-art tree classifiers, while it gains significant
speedup compared to standard O(K) methods.

1. Introduction
In practice one often encounters multi-class classification
problem with a large number of classes. For example, applications in image classification (Russakovsky et al., 2015)
and language modeling (Mikolov et al., 2010) usually have
tens to hundreds of thousands of classes. Under such cases,
training the standard softmax logistic or one-against-all models becomes impractical.
One promising way to handle the large class size is to use
sampling. In language models, a commonly adopted technique is Noise-Contrastive Estimation (NCE) (Gutmann
& Hyvärinen, 2012). This method is originally proposed
1
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China.
Correspondence
to: Lei Han <lxhan@tencent.com>, Yiheng Huang <arnoldhuang@tencent.com>, Tong Zhang <tongzhang@tongzhangml.org>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

for estimating probability densities and has been applied
to various language modeling situations, such as learning
word embeddings, context generation and neural machine
translation (Mnih & Teh, 2012; Mnih & Kavukcuoglu, 2013;
Vaswani et al., 2013; Sordoni et al., 2015). NCE reduces
the problem of multi-class classification to binary classification problem, which discriminates between a target class
distribution and a noise distribution and a few noise classes
are sampled as a representation of the entire noise space. In
general, the noise distribution is given a priori. For example,
a power-raised unigram distribution has been shown to be
effective in language models (Mikolov et al., 2013; Ji et al.,
2015; Mnih & Teh, 2012). Recently, some variants of NCE
have been proposed. The Negative Sampling (Mikolov et al.,
2013) is a simplified version of NCE that ignores the numerical probabilities in the distributions and discriminates
between only the target class and noise samples; the One
vs. Each (Titsias, 2016) solves a very similar problem motivated by bounding the softmax logistic log-likelihood. Two
other variants, BlackOut (Ji et al., 2015) and complementary
sum sampling (Botev et al., 2017), employ parametric forms
of the noise distribution and use sampled noises to approximate the normalization factor. In summary, NCE and its
variants use (only) the observed class versus the noises; by
sampling the noises, these methods avoid the costly computation of the normalization factor to achieve fast training
speed. In this paper, we will generalize the idea by using
a subset of classes (which can be automatically learned),
called candidate classes, against the remaining noise classes.
Compared to NCE, this approach can significantly improve
the statistical efficiency when the true class belongs to the
candidate classes with high probability.
Another type of popular methods for large class space is the
tree structured classifier (Beygelzimer et al., 2009; Bengio
et al., 2010; Deng et al., 2011; Choromanska & Langford,
2015; Daume III et al., 2017; Jernite et al., 2017). In these
methods, a tree structure is defined over the classes which
are treated as leaves. Each internal node of the tree is assigned with a local classifier, routing the examples to one
of its descendants. Decisions are made from the root until
reaching a leaf. Then, the multi-class classification problem
is reduced to solving a number of small local models defined
by a tree, which typically admits a logarithmic complexity
on the total number of classes. Generally, tree classifiers

