Adversarial Attack on Graph Structured Data

Hanjun Dai 1 Hui Li 2 Tian Tian 3 Xin Huang 2 Lin Wang 2 Jun Zhu 3 Le Song 1 2

Abstract
Deep learning on graph structures has shown
exciting results in various applications. However,
few attentions have been paid to the robustness
of such models, in contrast to numerous research
work for image or text adversarial attack and
defense. In this paper, we focus on the adversarial attacks that fool deep learning models by
modifying the combinatorial structure of data.
We first propose a reinforcement learning based
attack method that learns the generalizable attack
policy, while only requiring prediction labels from
the target classifier. We further propose attack
methods based on genetic algorithms and gradient
descent in the scenario where additional prediction
confidence or gradients are available. We use both
synthetic and real-world data to show that, a family
of Graph Neural Network models are vulnerable
to these attacks, in both graph-level and node-level
classification tasks. We also show such attacks
can be used to diagnose the learned classifiers.

1. Introduction
Graph structure plays an important role in many real-world
applications. Representation learning on the structured data
with deep learning methods has shown promising results in
various applications, including drug screening (Duvenaud
et al., 2015), protein analysis (Hamilton et al., 2017),
knowledge graph completion (Trivedi et al., 2017), etc..
Despite the success of deep graph networks, the lack of interpretability and robustness of these models make it risky for
some financial or security related applications. As analyzed
in Akoglu et al. (2015), the graph information is proven
to be important in the area of risk management. A graph
sensitive evaluation model will typically take the user-user
relationship into consideration: a user who connects with
many high-credit users may also have high credit. Such
heuristics learned by the deep graph methods would often
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Ant Financial
Tsinghua University.
Correspondence to: Hanjun Dai
<hanjundai@gatech.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

yield good predictions, but could also put the model in a risk.
A criminal could try to disguise himself by connecting other
people using Facebook or Linkedin. Such ‘attack’ to the
credit prediction model is quite cheap, but the consequence
could be severe. Due to the large number of transactions
happening every day, even if only one-millionth of the
transactions are fraudulent, fraudsters can still obtain a huge
benefit. However, few attentions have been put on domains
involving graph structures, despite the recent advances in
adversarial attacks and defenses for other domains like images (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and text (Jia & Liang, 2017).
So in this paper, we focus on the graph adversarial attack for
a set of graph neural network(GNN) (Scarselli et al., 2009)
models. These are a family of supervised (Dai et al., 2016)
models that have achieved state-of-the-art results in many
transductive tasks (Kipf & Welling, 2016) and inductive
tasks (Hamilton et al., 2017). Through experiments in both
node classification and graph classification problems, we will
show that the adversarial samples do exist for such models.
And the GNN models can be quite vulnerable to such attacks.
However, effectively attacking graph structures is a nontrivial problem. Different from images where the data is continuous, the graphs are discrete. Also the combinatorial nature of the graph structures makes it much more difficult than
text. Inspired by the recent advances in combinatorial optimization (Bello et al., 2016; Dai et al., 2017), we propose a reinforcement learning based attack method that learns to modify the graph structure with only the prediction feedback from
the target classifier. The modification is done by sequentially
add or drop edges from the graph. A hierarchical method is
also used to decompose the quadratic action space, in order to
make the training feasible. Figure 1 illustrates this approach.
We show that such learned agent can also propose adversarial
attacks for new instances without access to the classifier.
Several different adversarial attack settings are considered in
our paper. When more information from the target classifier
is accessible, a variant of the gradient based method and a
genetic algorithm based method are also presented. Here
we mainly focus on the following three settings:
• white box attack (WBA): in this case, the attacker is
allowed to access any information of the target classifier,
including the prediction, gradient information, etc..
• practical black box attack (PBA): in this case, only the
prediction of the target classifier is available. When the
prediction confidence is accessible, we denote this setting

