Autoregressive Convolutional Neural
Networks for Asynchronous Time Series

Mikołaj Bińkowski 1 2 Gautier Marti 2 3 Philippe Donnat 2

Abstract

neural networks (CNNs), (Lecun et al., 1998) in modeling
the conditional mean of the distribution of future observations; in other words, the problem of autoregression. We
focus on time series with multivariate and noisy signals. In
particular, we work with financial data which has received
limited public attention from the deep learning community
and for which nonparametric methods are not commonly
applied. Financial time series are particularly challenging
to predict due to their low signal-to-noise ratio (cf. applications of Random Matrix Theory in econophysics (Laloux
et al., 2000; Bun et al., 2017)) and heavy-tailed distributions
(Cont, 2001). Moreover, the predictability of financial market returns remains an open problem and is discussed in
many publications (cf. efficient market hypothesis of Fama
(1970)).

We propose Significance-Offset Convolutional
Neural Network, a deep convolutional network
architecture for regression of multivariate asynchronous time series. The model is inspired by
standard autoregressive (AR) models and gating
mechanisms used in recurrent neural networks. It
involves an AR-like weighting system, where the
final predictor is obtained as a weighted sum of
adjusted regressors, while the weights are datadependent functions learnt through a convolutional network. The architecture was designed
for applications on asynchronous time series and
is evaluated on such datasets: a hedge fund proprietary dataset of over 2 million quotes for a
credit derivative index, an artificially generated
noisy autoregressive series and UCI household
electricity consumption dataset. The proposed architecture achieves promising results as compared
to convolutional and recurrent neural networks.

1. Introduction
Time series forecasting is focused on modeling the predictors of future values of time series given their past. As in
many cases the relationship between past and future observations is not deterministic, this amounts to expressing the
conditional probability distribution as a function of the past
observations:
p(Xt+d |Xt , Xt−1 , . . .) = f (Xt , Xt−1 , . . .).

(1)

This forecasting problem has been approached almost independently by econometrics and machine learning communities.
In this paper we examine the capabilities of convolutional
1

Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, London, UK 2 Hellebore Capital Limited, London, UK 3 Laboratoire
d’informatique, Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France. Correspondence to: Mikołaj Bińkowski <mikbinkowski at gmail dot
com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

A common situation with financial data is that the same signal (e.g. value of an asset) is observed from different sources
(e.g. financial news, analysts, portfolio managers in hedge
funds, market-makers in investment banks) in asynchronous
moments of time. Each of these sources may have a different
bias and noise with respect to the original signal that needs
to be recovered (cf. time series in Figure 1). Moreover, these
sources are usually strongly correlated and lead-lag relationships are possible (e.g. a market-maker with more clients
can update its view more frequently and precisely than one
with fewer clients). Therefore, the significance of each of
the available past observations might be dependent on some
other factors that can change in time. Hence, the traditional
econometric models such as AR, VAR, VARMA (Hamilton, 1994) might not be sufficient. Yet their relatively good
performance motivates coupling such linear models with
deep neural networks that are capable of learning highly
nonlinear relationships.
For these reasons, we propose Significance-Offset Convolutional Neural Network, a Convolutional Network extension of standard autoregressive models (Sims, 1972; 1980)
equipped with a nonlinear weighting mechanism, and provide empirical evidence on its competitiveness with multilayer CNNs, recurrent Long-Short Term Memory network
(LSTM, Hochreiter & Schmidhuber (1997)) and Phased
LSTM (Neil et al., 2016). The mechanism is inspired by the
gating systems that proved successful in recurrent neural

