Learning Implicit Generative Models with the Method of Learned Moments
Suman Ravuri 1 Shakir Mohamed 1 Mihaela Rosca 1 Oriol Vinyals 1

Abstract
We propose a method of moments (MoM) algorithm for training large-scale implicit generative
models. Moment estimation in this setting encounters two problems: it is often difficult to define the millions of moments needed to learn the
model parameters, and it is hard to determine
which properties are useful when specifying moments. To address the first issue, we introduce a
moment network, and define the moments as the
network’s hidden units and the gradient of the network’s output with respect to its parameters. To
tackle the second problem, we use asymptotic theory to highlight desiderata for moments – namely
they should minimize the asymptotic variance of
estimated model parameters – and introduce an
objective to learn better moments. The sequence
of objectives created by this Method of Learned
Moments (MoLM) can train high-quality neural
image samplers. On CIFAR-10, we demonstrate
that MoLM-trained generators achieve significantly higher Inception Scores and lower Fréchet
Inception Distances than those trained with gradient penalty-regularized and spectrally-normalized
adversarial objectives. These generators also
achieve nearly perfect Multi-Scale Structural Similarity Scores on CelebA, and can create highquality samples of 128×128 images.

1. Introduction
The method of moments (MoM) is an ancient principle of
learning (Pearson, 1893; 1936). At its heart lies a simple
procedure: given a model with parameters θ, estimate θ such
that the moments — or more generally feature averages —
of the model match those of the data. While the technique
is simple and yields consistent estimators under weak conditions, other properties of the moment estimator are less
desirable. Moment estimators are often biased, sometimes
1
DeepMind London, N1C 4AG, UK . Correspondence to:
Suman Ravuri <ravuris@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

lie outside the parameter space (such as negative probabilities), and, unless the model is in an exponential family, are
less statistically efficient than maximum likelihood estimators. It is perhaps this last property that has relegated the
method of moments to a niche technique.
There are, however, situations in which moment estimation is preferable to maximum likelihood estimation (MLE).
One is when MLE is more computationally challenging
than MoM. For example, one can scale training of Latent
Dirichlet Allocation to large datasets by moment estimation using the first three order moments (Anandkumar et al.,
2012a). Second, for latent variable models more generally,
maximum likelihood estimation using the EM algorithm
results in a local optimum, while MoM enjoys stronger formal guarantees (Anandkumar et al., 2012b). Finally, one
can use moment estimation to determine model parameters
in settings where likelihoods are unnatural. Instrumental
variable estimation, an example of MoM, is used to learn
parameters in supply and demand models (Wright, 1928).
We study another scenario: when data come from unknown
or difficult-to-capture likelihood models. Data such as images, speech, or music often arise from complicated distributions, and for image data in particular, models based on
likelihoods often yield low-quality samples. Researchers
interested in generating more realistic samples have shifted
their efforts to training neural network samplers with alternative losses. They have studied training these implicit
generative models with the Wasserstein distance (Arjovsky
et al., 2017), Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) (Li et al.,
2015; Dziugaite et al., 2015; Sutherland et al., 2016), and
other divergences (Nowozin et al., 2016; Mao et al., 2016).
While direct minimization of these distances or divergences
– namely Wasserstein (Salimans et al., 2018), and MMD (Li
et al., 2015; Dziugaite et al., 2015), Cramér (Bellemare et al.,
2017) – in pixel space has led to poor sample quality, indirect minimization using adversarial training (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) dramatically improves samples.
We pursue an alternative strategy: we explicitly define our
moments and train them so that the moment estimators are
statistically efficient. This choice creates two practical problems. The first is that traditional neural samplers, such as
Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial Networks (DCGANs) (Radford et al., 2015), have millions of parameters,
and typically one needs at least one moment per parameter

