Structured Output Learning with Abstention: Application to Accurate Opinion
Prediction
Alexandre Garcia 1 Slim Essid 1 Chloé Clavel 1 Florence d’Alché-Buc 1

Abstract
Motivated by Supervised Opinion Analysis, we
propose a novel framework devoted to Structured
Output Learning with Abstention (SOLA). The
structure prediction model is able to abstain from
predicting some labels in the structured output
at a cost chosen by the user in a flexible way.
For that purpose, we decompose the problem into
the learning of a pair of predictors, one devoted
to structured abstention and the other, to structured output prediction. To compare fully labeled training data with predictions potentially
containing abstentions, we define a wide class of
asymmetric abstention-aware losses. Learning is
achieved by surrogate regression in an appropriate
feature space while prediction with abstention is
performed by solving a new pre-image problem.
Thus, SOLA extends recent ideas about Structured Output Prediction via surrogate problems
and calibration theory and enjoys statistical guarantees on the resulting excess risk. Instantiated
on a hierarchical abstention-aware loss, SOLA is
shown to be relevant for fine-grained opinion mining and gives state-of-the-art results on this task.
Moreover, the abstention-aware representations
can be used to competitively predict user-review
ratings based on a sentence-level opinion predictor.

1. Introduction
Up until recent years, opinion analysis in reviews has been
commonly handled as a supervised polarity (positive vs.
negative) classification problem. However, understanding
the grounds on which an opinion is formed is of highest
interest for decision makers. Aligned with this goal, the
emerging field of aspect-based sentiment analysis (Pontiki
1
LTCI, Telecom ParisTech, Paris, France. Correspondence to:
Alexandre Garcia <algarcia@enst.fr>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

et al., 2016) has evolved towards a more involved machine
learning task where opinions are considered to be structured
objects—typically hierarchical structures linking polarities
to aspects and relying on different units of analysis (i.e.
sentence-level and review-level) as in (Marcheggiani et al.,
2014). While this problem has attracted a growing attention
from the structured output prediction community, it has also
raised an unprecedented challenge: the human interpretation
of opinions expressed in the reviews is subjective and the
opinion aspects and their related polarities are sometimes
expressed in an ambiguous way and difficult to annotate
(Clavel & Callejas, 2016; Marcheggiani et al., 2014). In this
context, the prediction error should be flexible and should
integrate this subjectivity so that, for example, mistakes on
one aspect do not interfere with the prediction of polarity.
In order to address this issue, we propose a novel framework
called Structured Output Learning with Abstention (SOLA)
which allows for abstaining from predicting parts of the
structure, so as to avoid providing erroneous insights about
the object to be predicted, therefore increasing reliability.
The new approach extends the principles of learning with abstention recently introduced for binary classification (Cortes
et al., 2016) and generalizes surrogate least-square loss approaches to Structured Output Prediction recently studied
in (Brouard et al., 2016; Ciliberto et al., 2016; Osokin et al.,
2017). The main novelty comes from the introduction of an
asymmetric loss, based on embeddings of desired outputs
and outputs predicted with abstention in the same space.
Interestingly, similarly to the case of Output Kernel Regression (Brouard et al., 2016) and appropriate inner productbased losses (Ciliberto et al., 2016), the approach relies
on a simple surrogate formulation, namely a least-squares
formulation followed by the resolution of a new pre-image
problem. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2
introduces the problem to solve and the novel framework,
SOLA. Section 3 provides statistical guarantees about the
excess risk in the framework of Least Squares Surrogate
Loss while section 4 is devoted to the pre-image developed
for hierarchical output structures. Section 5 presents the
numerical experiments and Section 6 draws a conclusion.

