Deep Predictive Coding Network for Object Recognition

Haiguang Wen 1 Kuan Han 1 Junxing Shi 1 Yizhen Zhang 1 Eugenio Culurciello 1 2 Zhongming Liu 1 2

Abstract
Based on the predictive coding theory in neuroscience, we designed a bi-directional and recurrent neural net, namely deep predictive coding
networks (PCN), that has feedforward, feedback,
and recurrent connections. Feedback connections
from a higher layer carry the prediction of its
lower-layer representation; feedforward connections carry the prediction errors to its higher-layer.
Given image input, PCN runs recursive cycles of
bottom-up and top-down computation to update
its internal representations and reduce the difference between bottom-up input and top-down prediction at every layer. After multiple cycles of
recursive updating, the representation is used for
image classification. With benchmark datasets
(CIFAR-10/100, SVHN, and MNIST), PCN was
found to always outperform its feedforward-only
counterpart: a model without any mechanism for
recurrent dynamics, and its performance tended
to improve given more cycles of computation over
time. In short, PCN reuses a single architecture
to recursively run bottom-up and top-down processes to refine its representation towards more
accurate and definitive object recognition.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) have achieved great
success in image recognition. Classical CNN models, e.g.
AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), VGG (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014), GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al., 2015), ResNet
(He et al., 2016a), have improved the performance in computer vision, while these models generally become deeper
and wider by using more layers (He et al., 2016a) or/and filters (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016). Despite various ways
of architectural reconfiguration, these models all scale up
from the same principle of computation: extracting image
1

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University 2 Weldon School of Biomedical Engineering, Purdue University. Correspondence to: Zhongming Liu <zmliu@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

features by a feedforward pass through stacks of convolutional layers.
Although it is inspired by hierarchical processing in biological visual systems (Hubel & Wiesel, 1968), CNN differs
from the brain in many aspects. Unlike CNN, the brain
achieves robust visual perception by using feedforward,
feedback and recurrent connections (Felleman & Van, 1991).
Information is processed not only through a bottom-up pathway running from lower to higher visual areas, but also
through a top-down pathway running in the opposite direction. Such bi-directional processes enable humans to perform a wide range of visual tasks, including object recognition. For human vision, feedforward processing is essential
to rapid recognition (Serre et al., 2007), e.g. when visual input is too brief to recruit feedback and recurrent processing
(Thorpe et al., 1996). However, feedback processing improves object recognition and enables cognitive processes to
influence perception (Wyatte et al., 2014). In neuroscience,
the interplay between feedforward and feedback processes is
described by hierarchical predictive coding (Rao & Ballard,
1999; Friston & Kiebel, 2009; Bastos et al., 2012; Clark,
2013). It states that the feedback connections from a higher
visual area to a lower visual area carry predictions of lowerlevel neural activities; feedforward connections carry the
errors between the predictions and the actual lower-level
activities. As a result, the brain dynamically updates its
representations to progressively refine its perceptual and
behavioral decisions.
Based on this brain theory, we designed a bi-directional
and recurrent neural net (i.e. PCN). Given image input to
PCN, it runs recursive cycles of bottom-up and top-down
computation to update its internal representations towards
minimization of the residual error between bottom-up input
and top-down prediction at every layer in the network. Using predictive coding as its computational mechanism, PCN
differs from feedforward-only CNNs that currently dominate computer vision. It is a model with dynamics that uses
recursive and bi-directional computation to extract better
representations of the input such that the input is predictable
by the internal representation. When it is unfolded in time,
PCN runs a longer cascade of nonlinear transformations by
running more cycles of bottom-up and top-down computation through the same architecture without adding more
layers, units, or connections.

