Dynamical Isometry and a Mean Field Theory of RNNs:
Gating Enables Signal Propagation in Recurrent Neural Networks
Minmin Chen * 1 Jeffrey Pennington * 2 Samuel S. Schoenholz * 2

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks have gained
widespread use in modeling sequence data
across various domains. While many successful
recurrent architectures employ a notion of
gating, the exact mechanism that enables such
remarkable performance is not well understood.
We develop a theory for signal propagation in
recurrent networks after random initialization
using a combination of mean field theory and
random matrix theory. To simplify our discussion,
we introduce a new RNN cell with a simple gating
mechanism that we call the minimalRNN and
compare it with vanilla RNNs. Our theory allows
us to define a maximum timescale over which
RNNs can remember an input. We show that
this theory predicts trainability for both recurrent
architectures. We show that gated recurrent
networks feature a much broader, more robust,
trainable region than vanilla RNNs, which corroborates recent experimental findings. Finally,
we develop a closed-form critical initialization
scheme that achieves dynamical isometry in both
vanilla RNNs and minimalRNNs. We show that
this results in significantly improved training
dynamics. Finally, we demonstrate that the
minimalRNN achieves comparable performance
to its more complex counterparts, such as LSTMs
or GRUs, on a language modeling task.

1. Introduction
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Rumelhart et al., 1986;
Elman, 1990) have found widespread use across a variety of domains from language modeling (Mikolov et al.,
2010; Kiros et al., 2015; Jozefowicz et al., 2016) and machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2014) to speech recogni*
Equal contribution 1 Google 2 Google Brain. Correspondence
to: Minmin Chen <minminc@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

tion (Graves et al., 2013) and recommendation systems (Hidasi et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2017). However, RNNs as
originally proposed are difficult to train and are rarely used
in practice. Instead, variants of RNNs - such as Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) networks (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) (Chung
et al., 2014) - that feature various forms of “gating” perform
significantly better than their vanilla counterparts. Often,
these models must be paired with techniques such as normalization layers (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015b; Ba et al., 2016)
and gradient clipping (Pascanu et al., 2013) to achieve good
performance.
A rigorous explanation for the remarkable success of gated
recurrent networks remains illusive (Jozefowicz et al., 2015;
Greff et al., 2017). Recent work (Collins et al., 2016) provides empirical evidence that the benefits of gating are
mostly rooted in improved trainability rather than increased
capacity or expressivity. The problem of disentangling trainability from expressivity is widespread in machine learning
since state-of-the-art architectures are nearly always the
result of sparse searches in high dimensional spaces of hyperparameters. As a result, we often mistake trainability
for expressivity. Seminal early work (Glorot & Bengio;
Bertschinger et al.) showed that a major hindrance to trainability was the vanishing and exploding of gradients.
Recently, progress has been made in the feed-forward setting (Schoenholz et al., 2017; Pennington et al., 2017;
Yang & Schoenholz, 2017) by developing a theory of
both the forward-propagation of signal and the backwardpropagation of gradients. This theory is based on studying
neural networks whose weights and biases are randomly
distributed. This is equivalent to studying the behavior of
neural networks after random initialization or, equivalently,
to studying the prior over functions induced by a particular
choice of hyperparameters (Lee et al., 2017). It was shown
that randomly initialized neural networks are trainable if
three conditions are satisfied: (1) the size of the output of
the network is finite for finite inputs, (2) the output of the
network is sensitive to changes in the input, and (3) gradients neither explode nor vanish. Moreover, neural networks
achieving dynamical isometry, i.e. having input-output Jacobian matrices that are well-conditioned, were shown to

