The Hidden Vulnerability of Distributed Learning in Byzantium

El Mahdi El Mhamdi 1 Rachid Guerraoui 1 Sébastien Rouault 1

Abstract
While machine learning is going through an era
of celebrated success, concerns have been raised
about the vulnerability of its backbone: stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Recent approaches
have been proposed to ensure the robustness of
distributed SGD against adversarial (Byzantine)
workers sending poisoned gradients during the
training phase. Some of these approaches have
been proven Byzantine–resilient: they ensure the
convergence of SGD despite the presence of a
minority of adversarial workers. We show in this
paper that convergence is not enough. In high
dimension d  1, an adversary can build on
the loss function’s non–convexity to make SGD
converge to ineffective models. More precisely,
we bring to light that existing Byzantine–resilient
schemes leave a margin of poisoning√
of Ω(f (d)),
where f (d) increases at least like d. Based
on this leeway, we build a simple attack, and
experimentally show its strong to utmost effectivity on CIFAR–10 and MNIST. We introduce
Bulyan, and prove it significantly reduces the at√
tacker’s leeway to a narrow O(1/ d ) bound. We
empirically show that Bulyan does not suffer the
fragility of existing aggregation rules and, at a
reasonable cost in terms of required batch size,
achieves convergence as if only non–Byzantine
gradients had been used to update the model.

1. Introduction
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), is arguably the backbone of the most successful machine learning methods (LeCun et al., 2015; Abadi et al., 2016; Dean et al., 2012; Bottou, 1998). Gradient Descent (GD), the underlying principle of SGD, is so straightforward that, as sometimes said,
“Newton could have invented it in his time”. In particular, GD relies on a simple observation: given a function
1
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: (without
space) <firstname.lastname@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Q, depending on a parameter x, if one keeps updating x in
the opposite direction of the gradient of Q, with reasonably
small, but not too small (Bottou, 1998) steps, x eventually
reaches the global minimum if Q is convex or, if Q is not
convex1 , reach a region where Q is either flat or in some local minima. SGD is the lightweight version of GD, where
a sample is drawn at random to estimate the gradient of Q.
Beyond image recognition or video labeling for social
networks, SGD–based machine learning is venturing into
safety–critical applications, like health–care (Holzinger,
2016) and transportation (Bojarski et al., 2016). Meanwhile, a growing body of work, coined Adversarial Machine Learning (Biggio & Roli, 2017; Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Gilmer et al., 2018; Kumar et al., 2017) is unveiling serious vulnerabilities in some of the most performing
algorithms. Essentially, the general effort towards robust
ML is conducted against three kinds of attacks: poisoning ones (Biggio & Laskov, 2012; Koh & Liang, 2017)
where an adversary injects poisoned data during the training phase, exploratory attacks, where a curious attacker attempts to infer privacy–sensitive information, and evasion
attacks, where attackers try to fool an already trained model
with adversarial inputs. The three fronts are complementary and each kind of attack poses a challenge on its own.
In the context of poisoning attacks, an emerging line of
research looks at robustness through the lenses of (distributed) optimization (Chen et al., 2017; Su, 2017; Blanchard et al., 2017). Interestingly, SGD can be proven to
converge despite the presence of a (bounded) number of
adversaries. The general recipe is to find a robust estimator for the gradient in the presence of adversaries, and to
prefer that estimator over a mere linear combination of the
provided gradients (Dean et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2015),
known for not being robust (Rousseeuw, 1985).
To scale, ML implementations are distributed (Abadi et al.,
2016; Dean et al., 2012): several workers collaborate to
compute a gradient, aggregated by a parameter server (Li
et al., 2014a;b). In this context, robustness is even more
important. A bias in the gradient estimation may not only
come from poor sampling or noisy data, but also from
Byzantine (adversarial) workers (Lamport et al., 1982).
1
In practically interesting cases such as neural networks, Q is
far from being convex (Choromanska et al., 2015a;b).

