The Well-Tempered Lasso

Yuanzhi Li 1 Yoram Singer 1 2

Abstract
We study the complexity of the entire regularization path for least squares regression with 1-norm
penalty, known as the Lasso. Every regression
parameter in the Lasso changes linearly as a function of the regularization value. The number of
changes is regarded as the Lasso’s complexity.
Experimental results using exact path following
exhibit polynomial complexity of the Lasso in
the problem size. Alas, the path complexity of
the Lasso on artificially designed regression problems is exponential. We use smoothed analysis as
a mechanism for bridging the gap between worst
case settings and the de facto low complexity. Our
analysis assumes that the observed data has a tiny
amount of intrinsic noise. We then prove that the
Lasso’s complexity is polynomial in the problem
size.

1. Introduction
In high dimensional learning problems, a sparse solution is
often desired as it has better generalization and interpretation. In order to promote sparse solutions, a regularization
term that penalizes for the 1-norm of the vector of parameters is often augmented to an empirical loss term. In regression problems, the empirical loss amounts to sum of the
squared differences between the linear predictions and true
targets. The task of linear regression with 1-norm penalty is
known as Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996). To obtain meaningful
solutions for the Lasso, it is required to pick a good value of
the `1 regularizer. To automatically choose the best regularization value, algorithms that calculate all possible solutions
were developed (Efron et al., 2004; Osborne et al., 2000;
Tibshirani & Taylor, 2012).
These algorithms find the solution set for all possible regularization values, commonly referred to as the entire reg1 Department

of Computer Science, Princeton University 2 Googol Brain.
Correspondence to: Yuanzhi Li
<yuanzhil@cs.princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

ularization path. The algorithms typically built upon the
property that the Lasso regularization path is piecewise linear in the constituents of solution vector. As a result, their
running times are also governed by the total number of linear segments. While experiments with real datasets suggest
that the number of linear segments is in practice linear in
the dimension of the problem (Rosset & Zhu, 2007), worst
case settings (Mairal & Yu, 2012) can yield to exponentially
many linear segments. The construction of exponentially
complex regression problems of (Mairal & Yu, 2012) stands
in stark contrast to the aforementioned methods. Provably
polynomial path complexity has so far derived in vastly
more restricted settings, such as the one described in (Dubiner & Singer, 2011).
We bridge the gap between the de facto complexity of the
regularization path in real problems and the worst case analysis of the number of linear segments. We show that under
fairly general models, the complexity of the entire regularization path is guaranteed to be polynomial in the dimension
of the problem. As an important observation, settings which
attain the worst case complexity of the regularization path
often exhibit fragile algebraic structure. In contrast, natural datasets often comes with noise, which renders those
highly frail structures improbable. This approach is called
the smoothed analysis, introduced by the seminal paper
of (Spielman & Teng, 2009).
The core of smoothed analysis is the assumption that the
input data is subjected to a small intrinsic noise. Such noise
may come from uncertainty in the physical measurements
when collecting the data, irrational decisions in human feedback, or simply the rounding errors in the computation
process used for obtaining the data. In this model, we let
X ∈ Rn×d denote the data matrix where n is the number
of observations is d is the dimension (number of free parameters). Smoothed analysis assumptions implies that X
is the sum of Xh , an unknown fixed matrix, and G, which
consists of i.i.d. random samples from a normal distribution
with a zero mean and low variance, X = Xh + G. In this
view, the data is neither completely random nor completely
arbitrary. The smoothed complexity of the problem is measured as the expected complexity taken over the random
choices of G. Using this framework, it was proved that the
smoothed running time of the simplex, k-means, and the
Perceptron algorithm (Spielman & Teng, 2001; Arthur et al.,

