Variational Network Inference: Strong and Stable with Concrete Support

Amir Dezfouli 1 2 Edwin V. Bonilla 1 Richard Nock 3

Abstract
Traditional methods for the discovery of latent
network structures are limited in two ways: they
either assume that all the signal comes from the
network (i.e. there is no source of signal outside
the network) or they place constraints on the network parameters to ensure model or algorithmic
stability. We address these limitations by proposing a model that incorporates a Gaussian process
prior on a network-independent component and
formally proving that we get algorithmic stability for free, while providing a novel perspective
on model stability as well as robustness results
and precise intervals for key inference parameters.
We show that, on three applications, our approach
outperforms previous methods consistently.

1. Introduction
Networks represent the elements of a system and their interconnectedness as a set of nodes and arcs (connections)
between them. Applications of network analysis range from
biological systems such as gene regulatory networks and
brain connectivity networks, to social networks and interactions between financial indices.
When dealing with continuous observations, a commonly
used framework for this purpose is linear causal models
(Bollen, 1989; Pearl, 2000; Spirtes et al., 2000), in which
the data-generation process is defined such that the observations from each node are a linear combination of the
observations from other nodes and additive noise with – typically – a constant mean and variance. Hence, temporal
variations in the observations from a node are either associated to the other nodes in the network, or to the changes
in latent confounders; i.e., in the absence of any change
in these two components, observations from a node are asUNSW, Sydney. 2 Started work at Data61. 3 Data61, the Australian National University and the University of Sydney. Correspondence to: Amir Dezfouli <akdezfuli@gmail.com>.

sumed to follow the noise distribution and thus unaffected
by the time-varying signals that come from outside the network. This comes as a significant limitation for real-world
problems where observations from a node can also follow a
network-independent trend. For example, when considering
property prices in the suburbs of a city, some of them can
follow a decreasing/increasing trend over time, essentially
independent of other suburbs.
Our first contribution overcomes this limitation. We
propose a network-structure discovery model that generalizes linear causal models by incorporating a networkindependent component for each node, which is determined by a Gaussian process (GP) prior capturing the
inter-dependencies between observations over time. Consequently, the output of a node is now given by a sum of
the network-independent component and a (noisy) linear
combination of the observations from the other nodes. Our
model considers the parameters of this linear combination
(which determine the structure of the network) as random
variables. This modeling approach provides a more flexible
data-generation process due to the non-parametric nature
of the GP prior but, of course, raises the question of what
algorithms can be used to learn such more general models.
Our second contribution provides an answer to this question, including an efficient variational inference approach
for the posterior over the network-dependent parameters.
A key part relies on showing that, by marginalizing the latent functions corresponding to the network-independent
components, our approach is closely related to multi-task
GP models under a product covariance (Bonilla et al., 2008;
Rakitsch et al., 2013). This allows us to exploit properties of
Kronecker products in order to compute the marginal likelihood (conditioned on the network parameters) efficiently.
We estimate the posterior over the network-dependent parameters building upon recent breakthroughs in variational
inference (Rezende et al., 2014; Kingma & Welling, 2014;
Maddison et al., 2016).

1

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Computational efficiency is not the only concern of previous
popular approaches: all rely on more or less stringent assumptions to make sure that parameters do not deviate from
a prescribed, finite regime. In short, “There is a stability
caveat to retrieve the network”. What finiteness is related

