Fast Information-theoretic Bayesian Optimisation

Binxin Ru 1 Mark McLeod 1 Diego Granziol 1 Michael A. Osborne 1 2

Abstract
Information-theoretic Bayesian optimisation techniques have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in tackling important global optimisation
problems. However, current information-theoretic
approaches require many approximations in implementation, introduce often-prohibitive computational overhead and limit the choice of kernels
available to model the objective. We develop a
fast information-theoretic Bayesian Optimisation
method, FITBO, that avoids the need for sampling the global minimiser, thus significantly reducing computational overhead. Moreover, in
comparison with existing approaches, our method
faces fewer constraints on kernel choice and enjoys the merits of dealing with the output space.
We demonstrate empirically that FITBO inherits the performance associated with informationtheoretic Bayesian optimisation, while being even
faster than simpler Bayesian optimisation approaches, such as Expected Improvement.

1. Introduction
Optimisation problems arise in numerous fields ranging
from science and engineering to economics and management (Brochu et al., 2010). In classical optimisation
tasks, the objective function is usually known and cheap to
evaluate (Hennig and Schuler, 2012). However, in many
situations, we face another type of tasks for which the
above assumptions do not apply. For example, in the cases
of clinical trials, financial investments or constructing a
sensor network, it is very costly to draw a sample from
the latent function underlying the real-world processes
(Brochu et al., 2010). The objective functions in such type
1
Department of Engineering Science, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK 2 Mind Foundry Ltd., Oxford. Correspondence to:
Binxin Ru <robin@robots.ox.ac.uk>,
Mark McLeod <mark.mcleod@magd.ox.ac.uk>, Diego
Granziol <diego@robots.ox.ac.uk>, Michael A. Osborne
<mosb@robots.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

of problems are generally non-convex and their closed-form
expressions and derivatives are unknown (Shahriari et al.,
2016). Bayesian optimisation is a powerful tool to tackle
such optimisation challenges (Brochu et al., 2010).
A core step in Bayesian optimisation is to define an
acquisition function which uses the available observations
effectively to recommend the next query location (Shahriari
et al., 2016). There are many types of acquisition functions
such as Probability of Improvement (PI) (Kushner, 1964),
Expected Improvement (EI) (Močkus et al., 1978; Jones
et al., 1998) and Gaussian Process Upper Confidence Bound
(GP-UCB) (Srinivas et al., 2009). The most recent type is
based on information theory and offers a new perspective to
efficiently select the sequence of sampling locations based
on entropy of the distribution over the unknown minimiser
x∗ (Shahriari et al., 2016). The information-theoretic
approaches guide our evaluations to locations where we
can maximise our learning about the unknown minimum
rather than to locations where we expect to obtain lower
function values (Hennig and Schuler, 2012). Such methods
have demonstrated impressive empirical performance and
tend to outperform traditional methods in tasks with highly
multimodal and noisy latent functions.
One popular information-based acquisition function
is Predictive Entropy Search (PES) (Villemonteix et al.,
2009; Hennig and Schuler, 2012; Hernández-Lobato et al.,
2014) . However, it is very slow to evaluate in comparison
with traditional methods like EI, PI and GP-UCB and
faces serious constraints in its application. For example,
the implementation of PES requires the first and second
partial derivatives as well as the spectral density of the
Gaussian process kernel function (Hernández-Lobato
et al., 2014; Requeima, 2016). This limits our kernel
choices. Moreover, PES deals with the input space, thus
less efficient in higher dimensional problems (Wang
and Jegelka, 2017). The more recent methods such as
Output-space Predictive Entropy Search (OPES) (Hoffman
and Ghahramani, 2015) and Max-value Entropy Search
(MES) (Wang and Jegelka, 2017) improve on PES by
focusing on the information content in output space instead
of input space. However, current entropy search methods,
whether dealing with the minimiser or the minimum value,
all involve two separate sampling processes : 1) sampling

