Meta-Learning by Adjusting Priors
Based on Extended PAC-Bayes Theory

Ron Amit 1 Ron Meir 1

Abstract
In meta-learning an agent extracts knowledge
from observed tasks, aiming to facilitate learning of novel future tasks. Under the assumption
that future tasks are ‘related’ to previous tasks, the
accumulated knowledge should be learned in a
way which captures the common structure across
learned tasks, while allowing the learner sufficient
flexibility to adapt to novel aspects of new tasks.
We present a framework for meta-learning that is
based on generalization error bounds, allowing
us to extend various PAC-Bayes bounds to metalearning. Learning takes place through the construction of a distribution over hypotheses based
on the observed tasks, and its utilization for learning a new task. Thus, prior knowledge is incorporated through setting an experience-dependent
prior for novel tasks. We develop a gradient-based
algorithm which minimizes an objective function derived from the bounds and demonstrate
its effectiveness numerically with deep neural networks. In addition to establishing the improved
performance available through meta-learning, we
demonstrate the intuitive way by which prior information is manifested at different levels of the
network.

1. Introduction
Learning from examples is the process of inferring a general rule from a finite set of examples. It is well known
in statistics (e.g., Devroye et al. (1996)) that learning cannot take place without prior assumptions. Recent work in
deep neural networks has achieved significant success in
using prior knowledge in the implementation of structural
1

The Viterbi Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Technion Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence
to: Ron Amit <ronamit@campus.technion.ac.il>, Ron Meir
<rmeir@ee.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

constraints, e.g., convolutions and weight sharing (LeCun
et al., 2015). However, often the relevant prior information
for a given task is not clear, and there is a need for building it through learning from previous interactions with the
world. Learning from previous experience can take several
forms: Continual Learning (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017) - a
learning agent is trained on a sequence of tasks, aiming to
solve the current task while maintaining good performance
on previous tasks. Multi-Task Learning (Caruana, 1997) a learning agent learns how to solve several observed tasks,
while exploiting their shared structure. Domain Adaptation (Ben-David et al., 2010) - a learning agent solves a
‘target’ learning task using ‘source’ tasks (both are observed,
but usually the target is predominantly unlabeled). We work
within the framework of Meta-Learning / Learning-toLearn / Inductive Transfer (Thrun & Pratt, 1997; Vilalta
& Drissi, 2002) 1 in which a ‘meta-learner’ extracts knowledge from several observed tasks to facilitate the learning of
new tasks by a ‘base-learner’ (see Figure 1). In this setup the
meta-learner must generalize from a finite set of observed
tasks. The performance is evaluated when learning related
new tasks (which are unavailable to the meta-learner) .
As a motivational example, consider the case in which a
meta-learner observes many image classification tasks of
natural images, and uses a CNN to learn each task. The
meta-learner might learn a prior which fixes the lower layers of the network to extract generic image features, but
allows variation in the higher layers to adapt to new classes.
Thus, new tasks can be learned using fewer examples than
learning from scratch (e.g., Yosinski et al. (2014)). Generally, other scenarios might instead benefit from sharing
other parts of the network (e.g., Yin & Pan (2017)). In
our framework the prior is automatically inferred from the
observed tasks, rather than being manually inserted by the
algorithm designer.
The notion of ‘task-environment’ was formulated by Baxter (2000). In analogy to the standard single-task learning
where data is sampled from an unknown distribution, Baxter
1

In our setting all observed tasks are available simultaneously
to the meta-learner. The setting in which task are observed sequentially is often termed as Lifelong Learning (Thrun, 1996; Alquier
et al., 2017)

