GraphRNN: Generating Realistic Graphs with Deep Auto-regressive Models

Jiaxuan You * 1 Rex Ying * 1 Xiang Ren 2 William L. Hamilton 1 Jure Leskovec 1

Abstract
Modeling and generating graphs is fundamental
for studying networks in biology, engineering,
and social sciences. However, modeling complex distributions over graphs and then efficiently
sampling from these distributions is challenging
due to the non-unique, high-dimensional nature of
graphs and the complex, non-local dependencies
that exist between edges in a given graph. Here we
propose GraphRNN, a deep autoregressive model
that addresses the above challenges and approximates any distribution of graphs with minimal
assumptions about their structure. GraphRNN
learns to generate graphs by training on a representative set of graphs and decomposes the graph generation process into a sequence of node and edge
formations, conditioned on the graph structure
generated so far. In order to quantitatively evaluate the performance of GraphRNN, we introduce
a benchmark suite of datasets, baselines and novel
evaluation metrics based on Maximum Mean Discrepancy, which measure distances between sets
of graphs. Our experiments show that GraphRNN
significantly outperforms all baselines, learning to
generate diverse graphs that match the structural
characteristics of a target set, while also scaling
to graphs 50× larger than previous deep models.

1. Introduction and Related Work
Generative models for real-world graphs have important
applications in many domains, including modeling physical and social interactions, discovering new chemical and
molecular structures, and constructing knowledge graphs.
Development of generative graph models has a rich history,
and many methods have been proposed that can generate
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90007. Correspondence to: Jiaxuan You <jiaxuan@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

graphs based on a priori structural assumptions (Newman,
2010). However, a key open challenge in this area is developing methods that can directly learn generative models from
an observed set of graphs. Developing generative models
that can learn directly from data is an important step towards improving the fidelity of generated graphs, and paves
a way for new kinds of applications, such as discovering
new graph structures and completing evolving graphs.
In contrast, traditional generative models for graphs (e.g.,
Barabási-Albert model, Kronecker graphs, exponential random graphs, and stochastic block models) (Erdős & Rényi,
1959; Leskovec et al., 2010; Albert & Barabási, 2002;
Airoldi et al., 2008; Leskovec et al., 2007; Robins et al.,
2007) are hand-engineered to model a particular family of
graphs, and thus do not have the capacity to directly learn
the generative model from observed data. For example, the
Barabási-Albert model is carefully designed to capture the
scale-free nature of empirical degree distributions, but fails
to capture many other aspects of real-world graphs, such as
community structure.
Recent advances in deep generative models, such as variational autoencoders (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014) and
generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014), have made important progress towards generative
modeling for complex domains, such as image and text data.
Building on these approaches a number of deep learning
models for generating graphs have been proposed (Kipf
& Welling, 2016; Grover et al., 2017; Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2018; Li et al., 2018). For example, Simonovsky
& Komodakis 2018 propose a VAE-based approach, while
Li et al. 2018 propose a framework based upon graph neural
networks. However, these recently proposed deep models are either limited to learning from a single graph (Kipf
& Welling, 2016; Grover et al., 2017) or generating small
graphs with 40 or fewer nodes (Li et al., 2018; Simonovsky
& Komodakis, 2018)—limitations that stem from three fundamental challenges in the graph generation problem:
• Large and variable output spaces: To generate a graph
with n nodes the generative model has to output n2 values
to fully specify its structure. Also, the number of nodes
n and edges m varies between different graphs and a
generative model needs to accommodate such complexity
and variability in the output space.

