On the Theory of Variance Reduction for Stochastic Gradient Monte Carlo

Niladri S. Chatterji 1 Nicolas Flammarion 2 Yi-An Ma 2 Peter L. Bartlett 2 3 Michael I. Jordan 2 3

Abstract
We provide convergence guarantees in Wasserstein distance for a variety of variance-reduction
methods: SAGA Langevin diffusion, SVRG
Langevin diffusion and control-variate underdamped Langevin diffusion. We analyze these
methods under a uniform set of assumptions on
the log-posterior distribution, assuming it to be
smooth, strongly convex and Hessian Lipschitz.
This is achieved by a new proof technique combining ideas from finite-sum optimization and the
analysis of sampling methods. Our sharp theoretical bounds allow us to identify regimes of interest
where each method performs better than the others. Our theory is verified with experiments on
real-world and synthetic datasets.

1. Introduction
One of the major themes in machine learning is the use of
stochasticity to obtain procedures that are computationally efficient and statistically calibrated. There are two very
different ways in which this theme has played out—one frequentist and one Bayesian. On the frequentist side, gradientbased optimization procedures are widely used to obtain
point estimates and point predictions, and stochasticity is
used to bring down the computational cost by replacing expensive full-gradient computations with unbiased stochasticgradient computations. On the Bayesian side, posterior
distributions provide information about uncertainty in estimates and predictions, and stochasticity is used to represent
those distributions in the form of Monte Carlo (MC) samples. Despite the different conceptual frameworks, there
are overlapping methodological issues. In particular, Monte
Carlo sampling must move from an out-of-equilibrium configuration towards the posterior distribution and must do
so quickly, and thus optimization ideas are relevant. Frequentist inference often involves sampling and resampling,
1

Department of Physics, 2 Division of Computer Science,
Department of Statistics, University of California Berkeley. Correspondence to: Niladri S. Chatterji <chatterji@berkeley.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

so that efficient approaches to Monte Carlo sampling are
relevant.
Variance control has been a particularly interesting point of
contact between the two frameworks. In particular, there
is a subtlety in the use of stochastic gradients for optimization: Although the per-iteration cost is significantly lower
by using stochastic gradients; extra variance is introduced
into the sampling procedure at every step so that the total number of iterations is required to be larger. A natural
question is whether there is a theoretically-sound way to
manage this tradeoff. This question has been answered affirmatively in a seminal line of research (Schmidt et al., 2017;
Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2013; Johnson & Zhang, 2013) on
variance-controlled stochastic optimization. Theoretically
these methods enjoy the best of the gradient and stochastic gradient worlds—they converge at the fast rate of full
gradient methods while making use of cheaply-computed
stochastic gradients.
A parallel line of research has ensued on the Bayesian
side in a Monte Carlo sampling framework. In particular, stochastic-gradient Markov chain Monte Carlo (SGMCMC) algorithms have been proposed in which approximations to Langevin diffusions make use of stochastic gradients instead of full gradients (Welling & Teh, 2011). There
have been a number of theoretical results that establish mixing time bounds for such Langevin-based sampling methods
when the posterior distribution is well behaved (Dalalyan,
2017a; Durmus & Moulines, 2017; Cheng & Bartlett, 2017;
Dalalyan & Karagulyan, 2017). Such results have set the
stage for the investigation of variance control within the SGMCMC framework (Dubey et al., 2016; Durmus et al., 2016;
Bierkens et al., 2016; Baker et al., 2017; Nagapetyan et al.,
2017; Chen et al., 2017). Currently, however, the results of
these investigations are inconclusive. (Dubey et al., 2016)
obtain mixing time guarantees for SAGA Langevin diffusion and SVRG Langevin diffusion (two particular variancereduced sampling methods) under the strong assumption
that the log-posterior has the norm of its gradients uniformly bounded by a constant. Another approach that has been
explored involves calculating the mode of the log posterior
to construct a control variate for the gradient estimate (Baker et al., 2017; Nagapetyan et al., 2017), an approach that
makes rather different assumptions. Indeed, the experimental results from these two lines of work are contradictory,

