An Optimal Control Approach to Deep Learning and
Applications to Discrete-Weight Neural Networks

Qianxiao Li 1 Shuji Hao 1

Abstract
Deep learning is formulated as a discrete-time
optimal control problem. This allows one to characterize necessary conditions for optimality and
develop training algorithms that do not rely on gradients with respect to the trainable parameters. In
particular, we introduce the discrete-time method
of successive approximations (MSA), which is
based on the Pontryagin’s maximum principle,
for training neural networks. A rigorous error estimate for the discrete MSA is obtained, which
sheds light on its dynamics and the means to stabilize the algorithm. The developed methods are
applied to train, in a rather principled way, neural
networks with weights that are constrained to take
values in a discrete set. We obtain competitive performance and interestingly, very sparse weights in
the case of ternary networks, which may be useful
in model deployment in low-memory devices.

1. Introduction
The problem of training deep feed-forward neural networks is often studied as a nonlinear programming problem (Bazaraa et al., 2013; Bertsekas, 1999; Kuhn & Tucker,
2014)
min J(θ)
θ

where θ represents the set of trainable parameters and J is
the empirical loss function. In the general unconstrained
case, necessary optimality conditions are given by the condition ∇θ J(θ ∗ ) = 0 for an optimal set of training parameters
θ ∗ . This is largely the basis for (stochastic) gradient-descent
based optimization algorithms in deep learning (Robbins &
Monro, 1951; Duchi et al., 2011; Zeiler, 2012; Kingma &
Ba, 2014). When there are additional constraints, e.g. on
the trainable parameters, one can instead employ projected
1
Institute of High Performance Computing, Singapore. Correspondence to: Qianxiao Li <liqix@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

versions of the above algorithms. More broadly, necessary
conditions for optimality can be derived in the form of the
Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions (Kuhn & Tucker, 2014).
Such approaches are quite general and typically do not rely
on the structures of the objectives encountered in deep learning. However, in deep learning, the objective function J
often has a specific structure; It is derived from feeding
a batch of inputs recursively through a sequence of trainable transformations, which can be adjusted so that the final
outputs are close to some fixed target set. This process
resembles an optimal control problem (Bryson, 1975; Bertsekas, 1995; Athans & Falb, 2013) that originates from the
study of the calculus of variations.
In this paper, we exploit this optimal control viewpoint of
deep learning. First, we introduce the discrete-time Pontryagin’s maximum principle (PMP) (Halkin, 1966), which
is an extension the central result in optimal control due to
Pontryagin and coworkers (Boltyanskii et al., 1960; Pontryagin, 1987). This is an alternative set of necessary conditions
characterizing optimality, and we discuss the extent of its validity in the context of deep learning. Next, we introduce the
discrete method of successive approximations (MSA) based
on the PMP to optimize deep neural networks. A rigorous
error estimate is proved that elucidates the dynamics of the
MSA, and aids us in designing optimization algorithms under rather general conditions. We apply our method to train
a class of unconventional networks, i.e. those with discretevalued weights, to illustrate the usefulness of this approach.
In the process, we discover that in the case of ternary networks, our training algorithm obtains trained models that
are very sparse, which is an attractive feature in practice.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Sec. 2, we
introduce the optimal control viewpoint and the discretetime Pontryagin’s maximum principle. We then introduce
the method of successive approximation in Sec. 3 and prove
our main estimate, Theorem 2. In Sec. 4, we derive algorithms based on the developed theory to train binary and
ternary neural networks. Finally, we end with a discussion
on related work and a conclusion in Sec. 5 and 6 respectively. Various details on proofs and algorithms are provided
in Appendix A-D, which also contains a link to a software
implementation of our algorithms that reproduces all exper-

