MSplit LBI: Realizing Feature Selection and Dense Estimation Simultaneously
in Few-shot and Zero-shot Learning

Bo Zhao † 1 Xinwei Sun † 2 Yanwei Fu ‡ 3 4 Yuan Yao ‡ 5 Yizhou Wang 1

Abstract
It is one typical and general topic of learning a good embedding model to efficiently
learn the representation coefficients between two
spaces/subspaces. To solve this task, L1 regularization is widely used for the pursuit of feature
selection and avoiding overfitting, and yet the
sparse estimation of features in L1 regularization
may cause the underfitting of training data. L2
regularization is also frequently used, but it is a biased estimator. In this paper, we propose the idea
that the features consist of three orthogonal parts,
namely sparse strong signals, dense weak signals
and random noise, in which both strong and weak
signals contribute to the fitting of data. To facilitate such novel decomposition, MSplit LBI is
for the first time proposed to realize feature selection and dense estimation simultaneously. We
provide theoretical and simulational verification
that our method exceeds L1 and L2 regularization,
and extensive experimental results show that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance in
the few-shot and zero-shot learning.

1. Introduction
This paper discusses the problem of learning representation
coefficients between two spaces/subspaces. This is one typical and general research topic that can be used in various
tasks, such as learning feature embedding in Few-shot learn†
Equal contribution
Nat’l Eng. Lab. for Video Technology; Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE); Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai; Sch’l of EECS, Peking University. Deepwise Inc.
2
Sch’l of Mathematical Science, Peking University. Deepwise Inc.
3
Sch’l of Data Science, Fudan University. 4 AITrics Inc.
5
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology; Peking University.
‡Correspondence to: Yanwei Fu <yanweifu@fudan.edu.cn>, Yuan
Yao <yuany@ust.hk>.
1

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

ing (FSL) and capturing relational structures in Zero-Shot
Learning (ZSL) (Palatucci et al. (2009)). In particular, FSL
(Fei-Fei et al. (2006)) aims to learn new concepts with only
few training samples, while ZSL tends to learn new concepts
without any training samples. The semantic spaces such as
attributes Lampert et al. (2013), textual descriptions Ba et al.
(2015) and word vectors Fu and Sigal (2016) are served as
the auxiliary knowledge to assist the ZSL. This paper concerns the FSL and ZSL in transfer learning scenario. The
data in the source domain is abundant to train the feature extractors (e.g., deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
Krizhevsky et al. (2012); Simonyan and Zisserman (2014);
Szegedy et al. (2016); He et al. (2016)); and the data in the
target are very limited to learn/fine-tune a deep model.
The natural solutions of FSL and ZSL are to learn the linear
embedding models, which can map the image features to
the label space (FSL) (or semantic space (ZSL)). To efficiently learn such a linear model, L1 or L2 penalty terms are
frequently applied to regularize the weights of embedding
models. In particular, the L1 regularization can capture the
strong and sparse signals in the embedding weights, which
is also a process of feature selection. Nevertheless, the
feature selection property of L1 penalty suffers from two
problems. 1) the inaccurate estimation of strong signals if irrepresentable condition does not hold Zhao and Yu (2006a);
2) the underfitting of training data due to the ignorance of
weak signals from the embedding / relational weights. In
contrast, L2 penalty yet does a proportional shrinkage of
feature dimension, and thus it may introduce the bias in
learning the embedding model. However, in real-world applications, it is of equal importance to do both the feature
selection and well data-fitting. For example, in Text Classification (Forman (2003)), Bioinformatics (Saeys et al. (2007))
and Neuroimaging Analysis (Sun et al. (2017)), researchers
need to fit the training data well; and meantime, select a
few strong signals (features) which are comprehensible for
human beings.
In this paper, we propose that the embedding features consist of random noise, sparse strong signals and dense weak
signals. In Sec. 3.2, the MSplit LBI is for the first time
proposed to facilitate the decomposition of features. Particularly, in our linear embedding models, the MSplit LBI

