Approximation Algorithms for Cascading Prediction Models

Matthew Streeter 1

Abstract
We present an approximation algorithm that
takes a pool of pre-trained models as input and
produces from it a cascaded model with similar
accuracy but lower average-case cost. Applied
to state-of-the-art ImageNet classification models, this yields up to a 2x reduction in floating
point multiplications, and up to a 6x reduction
in average-case memory I/O. The auto-generated
cascades exhibit intuitive properties, such as using lower-resolution input for easier images and
requiring higher prediction confidence when using a computationally cheaper model.

1. Introduction
In any machine learning task, some examples are harder
than others, and intuitively we should be able to get away
with less computation on easier examples. Doing so has
the potential to reduce serving costs in the cloud as well
as energy usage on-device, which is important in a wide
variety of applications (Guan et al., 2017).
Following the tremendous empirical success of deep learning, much recent work has focused on making deep neural networks adaptive, typically via an end-to-end training
approach in which the network learns to make exampledependent decisions as to which computations are performed during inference. At the same time, recent work on
neural architecture search has demonstrated that optimizing
over thousands of candidate model architectures can yield
results that improve upon state-of-the-art architectures designed by humans (Zoph et al., 2017). It is natural to think
that combining these ideas should lead to even better results, but how best to do so remains an open problem.
One of the motivations for our work is that for many problems, there are order-of-magnitude differences between the
cost of a reasonably accurate model and that of a model
1

Google Research. Correspondence to: Matthew Streeter
<mstreeter@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

with state-of-the-art accuracy. For example, the most accurate NasNet model achieves 82.7% accuracy on ImageNet using 23 billion multiplies per example, while a MobileNet model achieves 70.6% accuracy with only 569 million multiplies per example (Howard et al., 2017; Zoph
et al., 2017). If we could identify the images on which the
smaller model’s prediction is (with high probability) no less
accurate than the larger one’s, we could use fewer multiplications on those images without giving up much accuracy.
In this work, we present a family of algorithms that can be
used to create a cascaded model with the same accuracy as
a specified reference model, but potentially lower averagecase cost, where cost is user-defined. This family is defined
by a meta-algorithm with various pluggable components.
In its most basic instantiation, the algorithm takes a pool of
pre-trained models as input and produces a cascaded model
in two steps:
1. It equips each model with a set of possible rules for returning “don’t know” (denoted ⊥) on examples where
it is not confident. Each (model, rule) combination is
called an abstaining model.
2. It selects a sequence of abstaining models to try, in
order, when making a prediction (stopping once we
find a model that does not return ⊥).
We also present instantiations of the meta-algorithm that
generate new prediction models on-the-fly, either using
lightweight training of ensemble models or a full architecture search. We also discuss a variant that produces an
adaptive policy tree rather than a fixed sequence of models.
An important feature of our algorithms is that they scale
efficiently to a large number of models and (model, rule)
combinations. They also allow for computations performed
by one stage of the cascade to be re-used in later stages
when possible (e.g., if two successive stages of the cascade
are neural networks that share the same first k layers).

2. Abstaining models
Our cascade-generation algorithm requires as input a set of
abstaining models, which are prediction models that return
“don’t know” (denoted ⊥) on certain examples. For classification problems, such models are known as classifiers

