Learning unknown ODE models with Gaussian processes

Markus Heinonen * 1 2 Çagatay Yıldız * 1 Henrik Mannerström 1 Jukka Intosalmi 1 Harri Lähdesmäki 1

Abstract

variate ordinary differential functions:

In conventional ODE modelling coefficients of an
equation driving the system state forward in time
are estimated. However, for many complex systems it is practically impossible to determine the
equations or interactions governing the underlying dynamics. In these settings, parametric ODE
model cannot be formulated. Here, we overcome
this issue by introducing a novel paradigm of nonparametric ODE modelling that can learn the underlying dynamics of arbitrary continuous-time
systems without prior knowledge. We propose to
learn non-linear, unknown differential functions
from state observations using Gaussian process
vector fields within the exact ODE formalism. We
demonstrate the model’s capabilities to infer dynamics from sparse data and to simulate the system forward into future.

ẋ(t) =

dx(t)
= f (x(t))
dt

where x(t) ∈ X = RD is the state vector of a Ddimensional dynamical system at time t, and the ẋ(t) ∈
Ẋ = RD is the first order time derivative of x(t) that drives
the state x(t) forward, and where f : RD → RD is the
vector-valued derivative function. The ODE solution is determined by
Z t
x(t) = x0 +
f (x(τ ))dτ,
(2)
0

where we integrate the system state from an initial state
x(0) = x0 for time t forward. We assume that f (·) is completely unknown and we only observe one or several multivariate time series Y = (y1 , . . . , yN )T ∈ RN ×D obtained
from an additive noisy observation model at observation
time points T = (t1 , . . . , tN ) ∈ RN ,
y(t) = x(t) + εt ,

1. Introduction
Dynamical systems modelling is a cornerstone of experimental sciences. In biology, as well as in physics and chemistry, modelers attempt to capture the dynamical behavior
of a given system or a phenomenon in order to improve its
understanding and make predictions about its future state.
Systems of coupled ordinary differential equations (ODEs)
are undoubtedly the most widely used models in science.
Even simple ODE functions can describe complex dynamical behaviours (Hirsch et al., 2004). Typically, the dynamics
are firmly grounded in physics with only a few parameters
to be estimated from data. However, equally ubiquitous
are the cases where the governing dynamics are partially or
completely unknown.
We consider the dynamics of a system governed by multi*

Equal contribution 1 Aalto University, Finland 2 Helsinki Institute of Information Technology HIIT, Finland. Correspondence to:
Markus Heinonen <markus.o.heinonen@aalto.fi>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

(1)

(3)

where εt ∼ N (0, Ω) follows a stationary zero-mean multivariate Gaussian distribution with diagonal noise variances
2
Ω = diag(ω12 , . . . , ωD
). The observation time points do
not need to be equally spaced. Our task is to learn the differential function f (·) given observations Y , with no prior
knowledge of the ODE system.
There is a vast literature on conventional ODEs (Butcher,
2016) where a parametric form for function f (x; θ, t)
is assumed to be known, and its parameters θ are subsequently optimised with least squares or Bayesian approach, where the expensive forward solution xθ (ti ) =
R ti
f (x(τ ); θ, t)dτ is required to evaluate the system re0
sponses xθ (ti ) from parameters θ against observations
y(ti ). To overcome the computationally intensive forward
solution, a family of methods denoted as gradient matching (Varah, 1982; Ellner et al., 2002; Ramsay et al., 2007)
have proposed to replace the forward solution by matching
f (yi ) ≈ ẏi to empirical gradients ẏi of the data instead,
which do not require the costly integration step. Recently
several authors have proposed embedding a parametric differential function within a Bayesian or Gaussian process
(GP) framework (Graepel, 2003; Calderhead et al., 2008;

