Asynchronous Byzantine Machine Learning (the case of SGD)

Georgios Damaskinos 1 El Mahdi El Mhamdi 1 Rachid Guerraoui 1 Rhicheek Patra 1 Mahsa Taziki 1

Abstract
Asynchronous distributed machine learning solutions have proven very effective so far, but always assuming perfectly functioning workers. In
practice, some of the workers can however exhibit Byzantine behavior, caused by hardware failures, software bugs, corrupt data, or even malicious attacks. We introduce Kardam, the first
distributed asynchronous stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm that copes with Byzantine
workers. Kardam consists of two complementary components: a filtering and a dampening
component. The first is scalar-based and ensures
resilience against 13 Byzantine workers. Essentially, this filter leverages the Lipschitzness of
cost functions and acts as a self-stabilizer against
Byzantine workers that would attempt to corrupt
the progress of SGD. The dampening component
bounds the convergence rate by adjusting to stale
information through a generic gradient weighting
scheme. We prove that Kardam guarantees almost
sure convergence in the presence of asynchrony
and Byzantine behavior, and we derive its convergence rate. We evaluate Kardam on the CIFAR100 and EMNIST datasets and measure its overhead with respect to non Byzantine-resilient solutions. We empirically show that Kardam does
not introduce additional noise to the learning procedure but does induce a slowdown (the cost of
Byzantine resilience) that we both theoretically
and empirically show to be less than f /n, where
f is the number of Byzantine failures tolerated
and n the total number of workers. Interestingly,
we also empirically observe that the dampening
component is interesting in its own right for it
enables to build an SGD algorithm that outperforms alternative staleness-aware asynchronous
competitors in environments with honest workers.
1
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: (without
spaces) <firstname.lastname@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
To keep up with the amount of data available today and the
corresponding increasing demand for resources, machine
learning (ML) practitioners rely on large scale distributed
systems (Dean et al., 2012; Abadi et al., 2016; Li et al.,
2013; 2014b;a; Ho et al., 2013; Cui et al., 2016). Most of
these systems make use of the same work-horse optimization algorithm: stochastic gradient descent (SGD), typically
following the parameter server scheme (Li et al., 2014a;b).
The computation is divided into epochs, i.e., model (parameter vector) updates. The server gathers gradients from the
workers and employs them to perform a single model update, then broadcasts the new model to every worker for
computing new gradients (based on random data samples).
To be practical, a distributed ML solution should not assume that all workers perform perfectly well. Some arbitrary behavior of at least a fraction of the workers should
be tolerated. The Byzantine failure model (Lamport et al.,
1982) offers an elegant abstraction to reason about problems
of adversarial machine learning. In particular, a Byzantine
behavior can be due to a crash, a software bug, a stale local view of a model, a corrupt piece of data, or worse, to
attackers that benefit from a security flaw in a device and
compromise its behavior. The Byzantine model encompasses the problem of poisoning attacks (Biggio & Laskov,
2012; Muñoz-González et al., 2017; Kurakin et al., 2016).
For instance, a group of adversarial (Byzantine) workers
could bias the gradient estimator and prevent convergence
by sending corrupt gradients. Byzantine-resilient (or simply
Byzantine) ML solutions are very appealing for they do not
make any assumption on the behavior of Byzantine workers.
A few Byzantine distributed ML solutions have been recently proposed (Blanchard et al., 2017; Su, 2017; El
Mhamdi et al., 2018). All however assume a restrictive
synchronous model. In each epoch, (1) all (honest) workers
are supposed to use the exact same model to compute the
gradient, and (2) the parameter server waits for a quorum of
workers before aggregating their gradients. When networks
are asynchronous, exhibiting heterogeneous (sometimes arbitrary) communication delays, synchronous solutions inevitably lead to slow convergence.
Asynchronous SGD algorithms, on the other hand, enable
huge performance benefits despite heterogeneous communi-

