Fast Approximate Spectral Clustering for Dynamic Networks

Lionel Martin 1 Andreas Loukas 1 Pierre Vandergheynst 1

Abstract
Spectral clustering is a widely studied problem,
yet its complexity is prohibitive for dynamic
graphs of even modest size. We claim that it
is possible to reuse information of past cluster
assignments to expedite computation. Our approach builds on a recent idea of sidestepping the
main bottleneck of spectral clustering, i.e., computing the graph eigenvectors, by a polynomialbased randomized sketching technique. We show
that the proposed algorithm achieves clustering
assignments with quality approximating that of
spectral clustering and that it can yield significant
complexity benefits when the graph dynamics are
appropriately bounded. In our experiments, our
method clusters 30k node graphs 3.9× faster in
average and deviates from the correct assignment
by less than 0.1%.

1. Introduction
Spectral clustering (SC) is one of the most utilized methods for clustering multivariate data (Von Luxburg, 2007;
Fortunato, 2010). However, because of its inherent dependence on the spectrum of some large graph, SC is computationally expensive. Let n and k be the number of nodes
and clusters, respectively. Clustering a graph takes O(n3 )
operations if a full eigendecomposition is performed and
O(kn2 ) if the Lanczos method is used. This has motivated
a surge of research focusing in reducing its complexity,
for example using matrix sketching (Fowlkes et al., 2004;
Li et al., 2011; Gittens et al., 2013), coarsening (Loukas
and Vandergheynst, 2018), and compressive sampling (Ramasamy and Madhow, 2015; Tremblay et al., 2016), attaining a complexity reduction by roughly a factor of n.
Yet, computation is still an issue for dynamic networks,
where the edge set is a function of time. Temporal dynamics constitute an important aspect of many network datasets
1

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Lionel Martin <lionel.martin@epfl.ch>, Andreas Loukas <andreas.loukas@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

and should be taken into account in the algorithmic design and analysis. Unfortunately, SC is poorly suited to
this setting as eigendecomposition –its main computational
bottleneck– has to be recomputed from scratch whenever
the graph is updated, or at least periodically (Ning et al.,
2007). This is a missed opportunity since the clustering assignments of many real networks change slowly with time,
suggesting that successive algorithmic runs wastefully repeat similar computations.
This paper proposes an algorithm that reuses information of
past cluster assignments to expedite computation. Different
from previous work on dynamic clustering, our objective is
not to improve the clustering quality, e.g., by enforcing a
temporal-smoothness hypothesis (Chakrabarti et al., 2006;
Chi et al., 2007) or by using tensor decompositions (Gauvin
et al., 2014; Tu et al., 2016). Similar to recent work by
(Dhanjal et al., 2014), we focus entirely on reducing the
complexity while producing assignments that are provably
close to those of SC.
Our work starts from the recent idea of sidestepping eigendecomposition by utilizing as features random vectors
filtered by Chebyshev polynomials of the graph Laplacian (Tremblay et al., 2016). We notice that, in the dynamic
setting, there are ample opportunities to reuse information
from previous cluster assignments, both in terms of approximating the k-th eigenvalue (a necessary step of Chebyshev
filter design), as well as in terms of computing the features
themselves. When the consecutive graphs are appropriately
similar, these ideas lead to complexity reductions.
Concretely, we provide the following contributions:
1. In Section 3 we refine the analysis of compressive spectral clustering (CSC) presented in (Tremblay et al., 2016).
Our goal is to move from assertions about feature approximation to guarantees about the quality of the solution of
CSC itself. We prove that w.h.p. the quality of the√clustering assignments of CSC and SC differ by O(2k/ d), and
thus d ∝ k 2 filtered vectors are sufficient to obtain a good
approximation. Importantly, our analysis does not make
restricting assumptions about the graph structure, such as
assuming a stochastic block model (Pydi and Dukkipati,
2017).
2. In Section 4, we focus on dynamic graphs and propose
dynamic CSC (dCSC), an algorithm that reuses informa-

