Rates of Convergence of Spectral Methods for Graphon Estimation

Jiaming Xu 1

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of estimating the
graphon function – a generative mechanism for
a class of random graphs that are useful approximations to real networks. Specifically, a graph
of n vertices is generated such that each pair of
two vertices i and j are connected independently
with probability ρn × f (xi , xj ), where xi is the
unknown d-dimensional label of vertex i, f is an
unknown symmetric function, and ρn , assumed
to be Ω(log n/n), is a scaling parameter characterizing the graph sparsity. The task is to estimate
graphon f given the graph. Recent studies have
identified the minimax optimal estimation error
rate for d = 1. However, there exists a wide
gap between the known error rates of polynomialtime estimators and the minimax optimal error
rate. We improve on the previously known error
rates of polynomial-time estimators, by analyzing a spectral method, namely universal singular
value thresholding (USVT) algorithm. When f
belongs to either Hölder or Sobolev space with
smoothness index α, we show the error rates of
USVT are at most (nρ)−2α/(2α+d) . These error
rates approach the minimax optimal error rate
log(nρ)/(nρ) proved in prior work for d = 1,
as α increases, i.e., f becomes smoother. Furthermore, when f is analytic with infinitely many
times differentiability, we show the error rate of
USVT is at most logd (nρ)/(nρ). When f is a
step function which corresponds to the stochastic
block model with k blocks for some k, the error
rate of USVT is at most k/(nρ), which is larger
than the minimax optimal error rate by at most
a multiplicative factor k/ log k. This coincides
with the computational gap observed in community detection. A key ingredient of our analysis is
to derive the eigenvalue decaying rate of the edge
probability matrix using piecewise polynomial
1
The Fuqua School of Business, Duke University, Durham, NC,
USA.. Correspondence to: J. Xu <jiaming.xu868@duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

approximations of the graphon function f .

1. Introduction
Many modern systems and datasets can be represented as
networks with vertices denoting the objects and edges (possibly weighted or labelled) encoding their interactions. Examples include online social networks such as Facebook friendship network, biological networks such as protein-protein
interaction networks, and recommender systems such as
movie rating datasets. A key task in network analysis is to
estimate the underlying network generating mechanism, i.e.,
how the edges are formed in a network. It is useful for many
important applications such as studying network evolution
over time (Pensky, 2016), predicting missing links in networks (Miller et al., 2009; Airoldi et al., 2013; Gao et al.,
2016), learning hidden user prefererences in recommender
systems (Song et al., 2016), and correcting errors in crowdsourcing systems (Lee & Shah, 2017). However, in practice
we usually observe only a very small fraction of edge connections in these networks, which obscures the underlying
network generating mechanism. For example, around 80%
of the molecular interactions in cells of Yeast (Yu et al.,
2008) are unknown. In Netflix movie dataset, about 99%
of movie ratings are missing and the observed ratings are
noisy.
In this paper, we are interested in understanding when and
how the underlying network generating mechanism can
be efficiently inferred from a partial observation of a network. We assume the network is generated according to
the graphon model (Lovász & Szegedy, 2006). Concretely,
given n vertices, the edges are generated independently,
connecting each pair of two distinct vertices i and j with a
probability
Mij = f (xi , xj ),

(1)

where xi ∈ X is the latent feature vector of vertex i that
captures various characteristics of vertex i; f : X × X →
[0, 1] is a symmetric function called graphon. We assume no
self loop and set Mii = 0 for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. We further assume
the feature vectors xi ’s are drawn i.i.d. from a measurable
space X according to a probability distribution µ.
Graphon model captures a key characteristic of real networks, that is, the edge connections are dependent on latent

