Learning Memory Access Patterns

Milad Hashemi 1 Kevin Swersky 1 Jamie A. Smith 1 Grant Ayers 2 * Heiner Litz 3 * Jichuan Chang 1
Christos Kozyrakis 2 Parthasarathy Ranganathan 1

Abstract
The explosion in workload complexity and the
recent slow-down in Moore’s law scaling call
for new approaches towards efficient computing.
Researchers are now beginning to use recent advances in machine learning in software optimizations, augmenting or replacing traditional heuristics and data structures. However, the space of
machine learning for computer hardware architecture is only lightly explored. In this paper, we
demonstrate the potential of deep learning to address the von Neumann bottleneck of memory
performance. We focus on the critical problem of
learning memory access patterns, with the goal
of constructing accurate and efficient memory
prefetchers. We relate contemporary prefetching
strategies to n-gram models in natural language
processing, and show how recurrent neural networks can serve as a drop-in replacement. On a
suite of challenging benchmark datasets, we find
that neural networks consistently demonstrate superior performance in terms of precision and recall. This work represents the first step towards
practical neural-network based prefetching, and
opens a wide range of exciting directions for machine learning in computer architecture research.

1. Introduction
The proliferation of machine learning, and more recently
deep learning, in real-world applications has been made
possible by an exponential increase in compute capabilities,
largely driven by advancements in hardware design. To
maximize the effectiveness of a given design, computer architecture often involves the use of prediction and heuristics.
Prefetching is a canonical example of this, where instruc*
Equal contribution 1 Google 2 Stanford University 3 University
of California, Santa Cruz.
Correspondence to: Milad
Hashemi <miladh@google.com>, Kevin Swersky <kswersky@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

tions or data are brought into much faster storage well in
advance of their required usage.
Prefetching addresses a critical bottleneck in von Neumann
computers: computation is orders of magnitude faster than
accessing memory. This problem is known as the memory
wall (Wulf & McKee, 1995), and modern applications can
spend over 50% of all compute cycles waiting for data to
arrive from memory (Kozyrakis et al., 2010; Ferdman et al.,
2012; Kanev et al., 2015). To mitigate the memory wall,
microprocessors use a hierarchical memory system, with
small and fast memory close to the processor (i.e., caches),
and large yet slower memory farther away. Prefetchers
predict when to fetch what data into cache to reduce memory
latency, and the key towards effective prefetching is to attack
the difficult problem of predicting memory access patterns.
Predictive optimization such as prefetching is one form of
speculation. Modern microprocessors leverage numerous
types of predictive structures to issue speculative requests
with the aim of increasing performance. Historically, most
predictors in hardware are table-based. That is, future events
are expected to correlate with past history tracked in lookup
tables (implemented as memory arrays). These memory
arrays are sized based on the working set, or amount of
information that the application actively uses. However, the
working sets of modern datacenter workloads are orders
of magnitude larger than those of traditional workloads
such as SPEC CPU2006 and continue to grow (Ayers et al.,
2018; Ferdman et al., 2012; Gutierrez et al., 2011; Hashemi
et al., 2016). This trend poses a significant challenge, as
prediction accuracy drops sharply when the working set is
larger than the predictive table. Scaling predictive tables
with fast-growing working sets is difficult and costly for
hardware implementation.
Neural networks have emerged as a powerful technique to
address sequence prediction problems, such as those found
in natural language processing (NLP) and text understanding (Bengio et al., 2003; Mikolov et al., 2010; 2013). Simple perceptrons have even been deployed in hardware (e.g.,
SPARC T4 processor (Golla & Jordan, 2011)), to handle
branch prediction (Jiménez & Lin, 2001). Yet, exploring the
effectiveness of sequential learning algorithms in microarchitectural designs is still an open area of research.

