Adafactor: Adaptive Learning Rates with Sublinear Memory Cost

Noam Shazeer 1 Mitchell Stern 1 2

Abstract
In several recently proposed stochastic optimization methods (e.g. RMSProp, Adam, Adadelta),
parameter updates are scaled by the inverse
square roots of exponential moving averages of
squared past gradients. Maintaining these perparameter second-moment estimators requires
memory equal to the number of parameters. For
the case of neural network weight matrices, we
propose maintaining only the per-row and percolumn sums of these moving averages, and estimating the per-parameter second moments based
on these sums. We demonstrate empirically that
this method produces similar results to the baseline. Secondly, we show that adaptive methods
can produce larger-than-desired updates when the
decay rate of the second moment accumulator is
too slow. We propose update clipping and a gradually increasing decay rate scheme as remedies.
Combining these methods and dropping momentum, we achieve comparable results to the published Adam regime in training the Transformer
model on the WMT 2014 English-German machine translation task, while using very little auxiliary storage in the optimizer. Finally, we propose
scaling the parameter updates based on the scale
of the parameters themselves.

1. Introduction and Background
Gradient-based optimization forms the backbone of most
modern approaches used to train deep neural networks.
One of the simplest methods is stochastic gradient descent
(SGD), wherein steps are taken along the direction of the
negative gradient of the loss function evaluated on a minibatch. Building on this foundation, a variety of adaptive
gradient-based methods have been proposed in which the
gradient is divided by the componentwise square root of a
1

Google Brain, Mountain View, California, USA 2 University of
California, Berkeley, California, USA. Correspondence to: Noam
Shazeer <noam@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

vector summarizing the history of squared gradients, usually
obtained through summation as in Adagrad (Duchi et al.,
2011) or exponential averaging as in RMSProp (Tieleman &
Hinton, 2012), Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015), and Adadelta
(Zeiler, 2012). On convex problems, several of these methods offer theoretical advantages over SGD when gradients
are sparse. While convergence guarantees have not yet been
provided in the dense, non-convex setting in which most
neural network training takes place, practitioners have nevertheless found these methods to empirically outperform
SGD across a variety of domains.
The superior performance of these methods does come at a
cost. Recent improvements in the computational capacity
needed to train neural networks with larger numbers of parameters have far outstripped improvements in the memory
capacity required to store those parameters during training.
This has led to memory usage becoming an important constraint on model size. Adaptive optimization algorithms
exacerbate this problem by requiring additional memory for
extra accumulators, such as those required for momentum
and per-coordinate gradient scaling. For example, Adam
(Kingma & Ba, 2015) keeps two additional values for each
parameter, tripling the memory requirements.
We propose a way to reduce memory usage while retaining
the empirical benefits of adaptivity by maintaining a factored representation of the squared gradient accumulator
across training steps. Specifically, by tracking moving averages of the row and column sums of the squared gradients
for matrix-valued variables, we are able to reconstruct a
low-rank approximation of the exponentially smoothed accumulator at each training step that is optimal with respect to
the generalized Kullback-Leibler divergence. For an n × m
matrix, this reduces the memory requirements from O(nm)
to O(n + m). We demonstrate empirically using Adam on a
large-scale machine translation task known for its expensive
models that our approach achieves comparable performance
to that obtained using full accumulators.
Beyond this, we also investigate another issue related to
Adam of recent interest. To further reduce memory requirements, we would like to run Adam without momentum,
eliminating an additional auxiliary value per model parameter. But without making any other changes, eliminating
momentum can cause training instability. We identify out-

