Stein Variational Message Passing for Continuous Graphical Models

Dilin Wang* 1 Zhe Zeng* 2 Qiang Liu 1

Abstract
We propose a novel distributed inference algorithm for continuous graphical models, by
extending Stein variational gradient descent
(SVGD) (Liu & Wang, 2016) to leverage the
Markov dependency structure of the distribution
of interest. Our approach combines SVGD with
a set of structured local kernel functions defined
on the Markov blanket of each node, which alleviates the curse of high dimensionality and simultaneously yields a distributed algorithm for
decentralized inference tasks. We justify our
method with theoretical analysis and show that
the use of local kernels can be viewed as a new
type of localized approximation that matches the
target distribution on the conditional distributions of each node over its Markov blanket. Our
empirical results show that our method outperforms a variety of baselines including standard
MCMC and particle message passing methods.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic graphical models, such as Markov random
fields (MRFs) and Bayesian networks, provide a powerful framework for representing complex stochastic dependency structures between a large number of random effects
(Pearl, 1988; Lauritzen, 1996). A key challenge, however,
is to develop computationally efficient inference algorithms
to approximate important integral quantities related to distributions of interest. Variational message passing methods, notably belief propagation (Pearl, 1988; Yedidia et al.,
2003), provide one of the most powerful frameworks for
approximate inference in graphical models (Wainwright &
Jordan, 2008). In addition to accurate approximation, message passing algorithms perform inference in a distributed
fashion by passing messages between variable nodes to
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, The
University of Texas at Austin 2 School of Mathematical Sciences, Zhejiang University. Correspondence to: Dilin Wang
<dilin@cs.utexas.edu>, Qiang Liu <lqiang@cs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

propagate uncertainty, well suited for decentralized inference tasks such as sensor network localization (e.g., Ihler
et al., 2005).
Unfortunately, standard belief propagation (BP) is best applicable only to discrete or Gaussian variable models. Significant additional challenges arise when applying BP to
continuous, non-Gaussian graphical models, because the
exact BP updates involve intractable integration. As a result, the existing continuous variants of BP require additional particles or non-parametric approximation (e.g., Ihler et al., 2005; Ihler & McAllester, 2009; Sudderth et al.,
2010; Song et al., 2011), which deteriorates the accuracy
and stability. Another key aspect that was not well discussed in the literature is that the traditional continuous
BP methods are gradient-free, in that they do not use the
gradient of the density function. Although this makes the
methods widely applicable, their performance can be significantly improved by incorporating the gradient information whenever available.
Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) (Liu & Wang,
2016) is a recent particle-based variational inference algorithm that combines the advantages of variational inference
and particle-based methods, and efficiently leverages the
gradient information for continuous inference. Unlike traditional variational inference that constructs parametric approximation of the target distribution by minimizing KL
divergence, SVGD directly approximates the target distribution with a set of particles, which is iteratively updated
following a velocity field that decreases the KL divergence
with the fastest speed among all possible velocity fields in
a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) of a positive
definite kernel. This makes SVGD inherit the theoretical
consistency of particle methods (Liu, 2017), while obtaining the fast practical convergence thanks to its deterministic
updates. The goal of this work is to adapt SVGD for distributed inference of continuous graphical models.
In principle, one can directly apply SVGD to continuous
graphical models. However, standard SVGD does not yield
a distributed message passing like BP, because its update
involves a kernel function, which is defined on all the variable dimensions, introducing additional dependency beyond the Markov blanket of the graphical model of interest.
In addition, the use of the global kernel function on all the

