Bayesian Uncertainty Estimation for Batch Normalized Deep Networks

Mattias Teye 1 2 * Hossein Azizpour 1 * Kevin Smith 1 3

Abstract
We show that training a deep network using batch
normalization is equivalent to approximate inference in Bayesian models. We further demonstrate that this finding allows us to make meaningful estimates of the model uncertainty using conventional architectures, without modifications to the network or the training procedure. Our approach is thoroughly validated by
measuring the quality of uncertainty in a series
of empirical experiments on different tasks. It
outperforms baselines with strong statistical significance, and displays competitive performance
with recent Bayesian approaches.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has dramatically advanced the state of the
art in a number of domains. Despite their unprecedented
discriminative power, deep networks are prone to make
mistakes. Nevertheless, they can already be found in settings where errors carry serious repercussions such as autonomous vehicles (Chen et al., 2016) and high frequency
trading. We can soon expect automated systems to screen
for various types of cancer (Esteva et al., 2017; Shen, 2017)
and diagnose biopsies (Djuric et al., 2017). As autonomous
systems based on deep learning are increasingly deployed
in settings with the potential to cause physical or economic
harm, we need to develop a better understanding of when
we can be confident in the estimates produced by deep networks, and when we should be less certain.
Standard deep learning techniques used for supervised
learning lack methods to account for uncertainty in the
model. This can be problematic when the network encounters conditions it was not exposed to during training,
*
Co-first authorship 1 School of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden 2 Current address: Electronic Arts, SEED, Stockholm, Sweden. This work was carried out at Budbee AB.
3
Science for Life Laboratory. Correspondence to: Kevin Smith
<ksmith@kth.se>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

or if the network is confronted with adversarial examples
(Goodfellow et al., 2014). When exposed to data outside
the distribution it was trained on, the network is forced to
extrapolate, which can lead to unpredictable behavior.
If the network can provide information about its uncertainty in addition to its point estimate, disaster may be
avoided. In this work, we focus on estimating such predictive uncertainties in deep networks (Figure 1).
The Bayesian approach provides a theoretical framework
for modeling uncertainty (Ghahramani, 2015), which has
prompted several attempts to extend neural networks (NN)
into a Bayesian setting. Most notably, Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) have been studied since the 1990’s (Neal,
2012), but do not scale well and struggle to compete with
modern deep learning architectures. Recently, (Gal &
Ghahramani, 2015) developed a practical solution to obtain
uncertainty estimates by casting dropout training in conventional deep networks as a Bayesian approximation of a
Gaussian Process (its correspondence to a general approximate Bayesian model was shown in (Gal, 2016)). They
showed that any network trained with dropout is an approximate Bayesian model, and uncertainty estimates can
be obtained by computing the variance on multiple predictions with different dropout masks.
The inference in this technique, called Monte Carlo
Dropout (MCDO), has an attractive quality: it can be applied to any pre-trained networks with dropout layers. Uncertainty estimates come (nearly) for free. However, not all
architectures use dropout, and most modern networks have
adopted other regularization techniques. Batch normalization (BN), in particular, has become widespread thanks to
its ability to stabilize learning with improved generalization
(Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015).
An interesting aspect of BN is that the mini-batch statistics used for training each iteration depend on randomly
selected batch members. We exploit this stochasticity and
show that training using batch normalization, like dropout,
can be cast as an approximate Bayesian inference. We
demonstrate how this finding allows us to make meaningful estimates of the model uncertainty in a technique we
call Monte Carlo Batch Normalization (MCBN) (Figure 1).
The method we propose can be applied to any network using standard batch normalization.

