Mitigating Bias in Adaptive Data Gathering via Differential Privacy

Seth Neel 1 Aaron Roth 2

Abstract
Data that is gathered adaptively — via bandit algorithms, for example — exhibits bias. This is
true both when gathering simple numeric valued data — the empirical means kept track of
by stochastic bandit algorithms are biased downwards — and when gathering more complicated
data — running hypothesis tests on complex data
gathered via contextual bandit algorithms leads
to false discovery. In this paper, we show that this
problem is mitigated if the data collection procedure is differentially private. This lets us both
bound the bias of simple numeric valued quantities (like the empirical means of stochastic bandit algorithms), and correct the p-values of hypothesis tests run on the adaptively gathered data.
Moreover, there exist differentially private bandit
algorithms with near optimal regret bounds: we
apply existing theorems in the simple stochastic
case, and give a new analysis for linear contextual bandits. We complement our theoretical results with experiments validating our theory1 .

1. Introduction
Many modern data sets consist of data that is gathered
adaptively: the choice of whether to collect more data
points of a given type depends on the data already collected. For example, it is common in industry to conduct
“A/B” tests to make decisions about many things, including
ad targeting, user interface design, and algorithmic modifications, and this A/B testing is often conducted using “bandit learning algorithms” (Bubeck et al., 2012), which adaptively select treatments to show to users in an effort to find
the best treatment as quickly as possible. Similarly, sequen1
Department of Statistics, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Seth Neel <sethneel93@gmail.com>, Aaron Roth <aaroth@cis.upenn.edu>.

tial clinical trials may halt or re-allocate certain treatment
groups due to preliminary results, and empirical scientists
may initially try and test multiple hypotheses and multiple
treatments, but then decide to gather more data in support
of certain hypotheses and not others, based on the results
of preliminary statistical tests.
Unfortunately, as demonstrated by (Nie et al., 2017), the
data that results from adaptive data gathering procedures
will often exhibit substantial bias. As a result, subsequent
analyses that are conducted on the data gathered by adaptive procedures will be prone to error, unless the bias is
explicitly taken into account. This can be difficult. (Nie
et al., 2017) give a selective inference approach: in simple stochastic bandit settings, if the data was gathered by a
specific stochastic algorithm that they design, they give an
MCMC based procedure to perform maximum likelihood
estimation to recover de-biased estimates of the underlying distribution means. In this paper, we give a related,
but orthogonal approach whose simplicity allows for a substantial generalization beyond the simple stochastic bandits
setting. We show that in very general settings, if the data is
gathered by a differentially private procedure, then we can
place strong bounds on the bias of the data gathered, without needing any additional de-biasing procedure. Via elementary techniques, this connection implies the existence
of simple stochastic bandit algorithms with nearly optimal
worst-case regret bounds, with very strong bias guarantees. By leveraging existing connections between differential privacy and adaptive data analysis (Dwork et al., 2015c;
Bassily et al., 2016; Rogers et al., 2016), we can extend the
generality of our approach to bound not just bias, but to
correct for effects of adaptivity on arbitrary statistics of the
gathered data. Since the data being gathered will generally
be useful for some as yet unspecified scientific analysis,
rather than just for the narrow problem of mean estimation,
our technique allows for substantially broader possibilities
compared to past approaches.
1.1. Our Results
This paper has three main contributions:

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).
1
This extended abstract is missing many details, proofs, and
results that can be found in the full version (Neel & Roth, 2018).

1. Using elementary techniques, we provide explicit
bounds on the bias of empirical arm means maintained by bandit algorithms in the simple stochastic

