Kernelized Synaptic Weight Matrices

Lorenz K. Muller 1 Julien N.P. Martel 1 Giacomo Indiveri 1

Abstract
In this paper we introduce a novel neural network architecture, in which weight matrices are
reparametrized in terms of low-dimensional vectors, interacting through kernel functions. A layer
of our network can be interpreted as introducing a (potentially infinitely wide) linear layer between input and output. We describe the theory
underpinning this model and validate it with concrete examples, exploring how it can be used to
impose structure on neural networks in diverse
applications ranging from data visualization to
recommender systems. We achieve state-of-theart performance in a collaborative filtering task
(MovieLens).

1. Introduction
Neural Networks have a large number of free parameters
and often training algorithms need to choose between a
range of near optimal value assignments for those parameters. This choice can be difficult, because optimality with
respect to a training set does not guarantee good behavior
on unseen, similar data (especially when there are many
free parameters). This defines overfitting. To address this
problem, regularization techniques are widely used in Neural Network optimization to help training procedures find
generalizable solutions.
In this paper, we show that by expressing the weights of
a neural network layer as the kernel interaction of lowdimensional vectors of free parameters, we can embed
the weight matrix of a layer in some (potentially highdimensional) feature-space; the embedding is controlled
by the choice of the kernel function. This technique provides a structural way to regularize weight matrices.
1
Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zurich and ETH
Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Lorenz K. Muller
<lorenz@ini.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 35𝑡ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1.1. Related Work
There exist many approaches that reparametrize the weight
matrix of a neural network. (Schmidhuber, 1997) and
(Gomez & Schmidhuber, 2005) learned weights for a neural
network by training either small programs or another neural
network respectively to generate them. The approach of
training a neural network to generate weights for another
network can take many forms and reoccurs for example in
the work of (Stanley et al., 2009; Ha et al., 2016; Fernando
et al., 2016). In (Koutnik et al., 2010) the weight matrix of
a neural network is decomposed by a discrete cosine transform (DCT) and learning is performed directly on the DCT
parameters. Several recent papers propose different types of
reparameterizations using various forms of matrix product
decomposition (Denil et al., 2013; Moczulski et al., 2015;
Tai et al., 2015).
Many methods have been proposed to ensure that at end of
the training of a neural network the weights fulfill some
desired properties: Weight-decay (or 𝐿2 regularization)
(Krogh & Hertz, 1992) makes large entries in the weight matrix costly, encouraging ‘simple’ models; drop-out (Srivastava et al., 2014) (the inclusion of multiplicative Bernoulli
noise) performs model averaging for appropriate network
architectures, prevents co-adaptation of different weights,
and can be interpreted as letting networks approximate deep
Gaussian processes (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016); low-rank decomposition of weight matrices (Sainath et al., 2013) (analogous to separable convolutions in ConvNets (Jaderberg
et al., 2014)) is primarily used for computational speed-up
and memory footprint reduction, but also has a regularizing
effect. As we shall see in this work, low-rank decomposition
is a special case of the method we propose in this paper.
In contrast to these approaches, our method allows the imposition of low-dimensional structure onto the network. We
will show on several examples that the low dimensional
embedding of the network weights does not only reduce the
number of free parameters in a network, but has the advantage of increasing its interpretability as well as allowing for
structural regularization.
1.2. Core Idea
Instead of assigning an individual, free weight-parameter
between each input and output neuron of a neural network

