Computational Optimal Transport: Complexity by Accelerated Gradient
Descent Is Better Than by Sinkhorn’s Algorithm

Pavel Dvurechensky 1 Alexander Gasnikov 2 3 4 Alexey Kroshnin 2 3 4

Abstract
We analyze two algorithms for approximating the
general optimal transport (OT) distance between
two discrete distributions of size n, up to accuracy ε. For the first algorithm, which is based
on the celebrated Sinkhorn’s
algorithm, we prove
 2
n
e
the complexity bound O ε2 arithmetic operati1

ons . For the second one, which is based on our
novel Adaptive Primal-Dual Accelerated Gradient
Descent (APDAGD) algorithm,
prove the
n 9/4 we
o
n
n2
e
complexity bound O min
arithmeε , ε2
tic operations. Both bounds have better dependenceon 
ε than the state-of-the-art result given
n2
e
by O ε3 . Our second algorithm not only has
better dependence on ε in the complexity bound,
but also is not specific to entropic regularization
and can solve the OT problem with different regularizers.2

1. Introduction
Optimal transport (OT) distances between probability measures or histograms, including the earth mover’s distance
(Werman et al., 1985; Rubner et al., 2000) and MongeKantorovich or Wasserstein distance (Villani, 2008), play
an increasing role in different machine learning tasks, such
as unsupervised learning (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Bigot et al.,
2017), semi-supervised learning (Solomon et al., 2014),
1
Weierstrass Institute for Applied Analysis and Stochastics, Berlin, Germany 2 National Research University Higher
School of Economics, Moscow, Russian Federation 3 Moscow
Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Moscow Region, Russia 4 Institute for Information Transmission Problems
RAS, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to: Pavel Dvurechensky
<pavel.dvurechensky@wias-berlin.de>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).
1e
O hides polylogarithmic factors (ln n)c , c > 0.
2
Full version of the paper is also available as (Dvurechensky
et al., 2018). Code is available at https://github.com/
chervud/AGD-vs-Sinkhorn.

clustering (Ho et al., 2017), text classification (Kusner et al.,
2015), as well as in image retrieval, clustering and classification (Rubner et al., 2000; Cuturi, 2013; Sandler &
Lindenbaum, 2011), statistics (Ebert et al., 2017; Panaretos & Zemel, 2016), and other applications (Kolouri et al.,
2017).
Our focus in this paper is on the computational aspects of
OT distances for the case of two discrete probability measures with support of equal3 size n. The state-of-the-art
approach (Cuturi, 2013) for this setting is to apply Sinkhorn’s algorithm to the entropy-regularized OT optimization
problem. As it was recently shown in (Altschuler et al.,
2017), this approach allows
 to find an ε-approximation for
e n32 arithmetic operations. In terms
an OT distance in O
ε
of the dependence on n, this result improves on the come 3 ) achieved by the network simplex method or
plexity O(n
interior point methods (Pele & Werman, 2009), applied directly to the OT optimization problem, which is a linear
program (Kantorovich, 1942). Nevertheless, the cubic dependence on ε prevents approximating OT distances with
good accuracy.
On the other hand, in image color transfer (Pitié et al., 2007)
or domain adaptation (Courty et al., 2017) not only the
OT distance, but also the optimal transportation plan is of
interest. Recent works (Essid & Solomon, 2017; Blondel
et al., 2017) observe that entropic regularization of the OT
problem leads to a dense transportation plan, which is in
contrast to the sparse transportation plan obtained by solving
the unregularized OT problem. Motivated by this observation, they study general regularization by a strongly convex
function, e.g. squared euclidean norm, and show that this
leads to a sparse transportation plan. In this situation, Sinkhorn’s algorithm becomes inapplicable since it is specific to
entropic regularization.
Our goal in this paper is, first, to obtain better than stateof-the-art complexity bounds for approximating the OT distance and, second, propose a flexible algorithm for solving
the OT problem with different types of regularization.
3

This is done for simplicity and all the results easily generalize
to the case of measures with different support size.

