Best Arm Identification in Linear Bandits
with Linear Dimension Dependency

Chao Tao 1 Saúl A. Blanco 1 Yuan Zhou 1 2 3

Abstract
We study the best arm identification problem in
linear bandits, where the mean reward of each arm
depends linearly on an unknown d-dimensional
parameter vector θ, and the goal is to identify the
arm with the largest expected reward. We first design and analyze a novel randomized θ estimator
based on the solution to the convex relaxation of
an optimal G-allocation experiment design problem. Using this estimator, we describe an algorithm whose sample complexity depends linearly
on the dimension d, as well as an algorithm with
sample complexity dependent on the reward gaps
of the best d arms, matching the lower bound
arising from the ordinary top-arm identification
problem. We finally compare the empirical performance of our algorithms with other state-of-theart algorithms in terms of both sample complexity
and computational time.

1. Introduction
The stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problems are
an important framework that not only addresses the fundamental trade-off between exploration and exploitation in
sequential experiments, but also crystallizes the challenge
of efficiently gathering information before committing to
a final decision. Many authors have investigated the pure
exploration form of the problem with N independent arms,
e.g., to identify the best arm (top arm) ((Carpentier & Locatelli, 2016; Chen et al., 2017b; Even-Dar et al., 2006;
Jamieson et al., 2014; Karnin et al., 2013; Kaufmann et al.,
2016)) as well as identifying the set of best (top) K arms
under different metrics ((Bubeck et al., 2013; Chen et al.,
1
Department of Computer Science, Indiana University at
Bloomington, Indiana, USA 2 Institute for Theoretical Computer
Science, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai,
China 3 Department of Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, USA.
Correspondence to: Yuan Zhou <yzhoucs@iu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

2017a; 2014; Kalyanakrishnan & Stone, 2010; Zhou et al.,
2014)).
In this paper, we study the top arm identification problem in
the stochastic linear bandit setting, introduced and studied
in (Auer, 2002; Soare et al., 2014) 1 . In the linear bandit
setting, instead of having N independent arms, each of the
N arms is associated with a d-dimensional attribute vector,
and the expected reward is the linear combination of its
own attribute vector and an unknown global vector θ. Each
pull of an arm reports a stochastic reward centered at its
expectation, and the goal is to pull as few times as possible
to identify the arm with the highest expected reward. Due
to the linear structure of the problem, pulling each arm
reveals information about the global vector θ and therefore,
indirectly, about the expected reward of other arms.
Linear bandit problems find many applications in practice.
For example, in online advertising, suppose the goal is to select an advertisement from a pool to maximize the likelihood
for a group of unknown audience to click. The likelihood
can usually be approximated by a linear function of logical
combinations of various attributes associated with the audience and the ads (such as age, sex, the domain, keywords, ad
genres, etc.). Now the linear top-arm identification directly
addresses this problem if each ad is abstracted to be an arm
with the known attribute vector. While the regret analysis of
the exploration-and-exploitation linear bandit problem has
been extensively studied (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Li
et al., 2010; 2017), this paper studies the pure-exploration
scenario and is devoted to showing a fixed-confidence algorithm with the optimal sample complexity.
Problem formulation. We are given a set of N arms
X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN }. Each arm is associated with a
d-dimensional attribute vector and we overload the notation
by using xi ∈ Rd to denote the vector for the arm xi . We
assume kxi k2 ≤ 1 for all arms. We also assume w.l.o.g.
that the rank of X is exactly d (otherwise we can project the
set of vectors to a smaller-dimensional space).
There is an unknown global vector θ ∈ Rd with kθk2 ≤ L.
Each pull of arm xi reports a stochastic reward xT
i θ +
where  is an independent κ-subgaussian noise (see Sec1
Very recently, the problem was also studied independently
in (Xu et al., 2018).

