Learning Localized Spatio-Temporal Models From Streaming Data

Muhammad Osama 1 Dave Zachariah 1 Thomas Schön 1

Abstract
We address the problem of predicting spatiotemporal processes with temporal patterns that
vary across spatial regions, when data is obtained as a stream. That is, when the training
dataset is augmented sequentially. Specifically,
we develop a localized spatio-temporal covariance model of the process that can capture spatially varying temporal periodicities in the data.
We then apply a covariance-fitting methodology
to learn the model parameters which yields a predictor that can be updated sequentially with each
new data point. The proposed method is evaluated using both synthetic and real climate data
which demonstrate its ability to accurately predict data missing in spatial regions over time.

1. Introduction
Many real-world processes of interest, ranging from climate variables to brain signals, are spatio-temporal in nature, cf. Cressie & Wikle (2011). That is, they can be described as a random quantity that varies over some fixed
spatial and temporal domain. Suppose we obtain n training
points from a real-valued spatio-temporal process,

Dn = (s1 , t1 , y1 ), . . . , (sn , tn , yn ) ,
where yi denotes the quantity of interest observed at the
ith training point, with spatial coordinate si and time ti .
For notational convenience, let (s, t, y) denote an unobserved test point in space-time where y is unknown. Then
a common goal is to predict y in unobserved space-time regions (s, t) using Dn . Specifically, certain spatial regions
may have limited data coverage over extended periods of
time, as illustrated in Figure 1. In real-world applications,
Dn need not be gathered in a single batch but obtained in
parts over time from various sensors, stations, satellites,
*

Equal contribution 1 Uppsala University, Sweden. Correspondence to: Muhammad Osama <muhammad.osama@it.uu.se>,
Dave Zachariah <dave.zachariah@it.uu.se>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

s

t
Figure 1. Example of training points (dots) in Dn over a bounded
space-time domain S × T with one spatial dimension. Note that
the sampling pattern may be irregular and that it is not possible to
provide complete spatial coverage at all times. A typical problem
is to predict the process in unobserved regions (shaded).

etc. That is, the dataset is augmented sequentially, i.e.,
n = 1, 2, . . . , N . In these streaming data scenarios, we
are interested in continuous refinement of the prediction of
y at (s, t) as new data is augmented into Dn+1 .
The unknown data-generating process is often assumed to
belong to a class of data models indexed by a parameter
θ. Each model θ in the class yields a predictor ybθ (s, t)
of y at test point (s, t). A specific set of model paramb is learned using Dn . Examples of commonly
eters θ
used model classes include Gaussian Processes (GP) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006), spatio-temporal random effects
models (Cressie et al., 2010), dynamic factor analysis models (Lopes et al., 2008; Fox & Dunson, 2015), spatial random effect models extended to incorporate time as an additional dimension (Zammit-Mangion & Cressie, 2017) (cf.
related work section below). For many spatio-temporal applications, the model class should be capable of expressing
temporal patterns that change across different spatial regions. Moreover, for streaming data scenarios, the learned
b and the resulting predictor ybb(s, t) should be
parameter θ
θ
updated in a sequential manner.
Our contribution in this paper is two-fold:
• we develop a non-stationary, localized covariance
model capable of capturing temporal patterns that
change across space, as illustrated in Figure 2 below.
• we show how to sequentially learn the covariance
model parameters and update the predictor from
streaming spatio-temporal data, with a runtime that is
linear in n.

