Asynchronous Decentralized Parallel Stochastic Gradient Descent

Xiangru Lian 1 * Wei Zhang 2 * Ce Zhang 3 Ji Liu 4 1

Abstract
Most commonly used distributed machine learning
systems are either synchronous or centralized asynchronous. Synchronous algorithms like AllReduceSGD perform poorly in a heterogeneous environment, while asynchronous algorithms using a parameter server suffer from 1) communication bottleneck at parameter servers when workers are many,
and 2) significantly worse convergence when the
traffic to parameter server is congested. Can we
design an algorithm that is robust in a heterogeneous environment, while being communication efficient and maintaining the best-possible convergence
rate? In this paper, we propose an asynchronous
decentralized stochastic gradient decent algorithm
(AD-PSGD) satisfying all above expectations. Our
theoretical analysis
√ shows AD-PSGD converges at
the optimal O(1/ K) rate as SGD and has linear
speedup w.r.t. number of workers. Empirically, ADPSGD outperforms the best of decentralized parallel SGD (D-PSGD), asynchronous parallel SGD (APSGD), and standard data parallel SGD (AllReduceSGD), often by orders of magnitude in a heterogeneous environment. When training ResNet-50 on ImageNet with up to 128 GPUs, AD-PSGD converges
(w.r.t epochs) similarly to the AllReduce-SGD, but
each epoch can be up to 4-8× faster than its synchronous counterparts in a network-sharing HPC environment.

1

Introduction

It often takes hours to train large deep learning tasks such
as ImageNet, even with hundreds of GPUs (Goyal et al.,
2017). At this scale, how workers communicate becomes a
crucial design choice. Most existing systems such as Ten*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester 2 IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
3
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich 4 Tencent AI
lab, Seattle, USA. Correspondence to: Xiangru Lian <admin@mail.xrlian.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Figure 1. Centralized network and decentralized network.

S-PSGD (Ghadimi et al., 2016)
A-PSGD (Lian et al., 2015)
AllReduce-SGD (Luehr, 2016)
D-PSGD (Lian et al., 2017)
AD-PSGD (this paper)

Communication complexitya
(n.t./n.h.)
Long (O(n)/O(n))
Long (O(n)/O(n))
Medium (O(1)/O(n))
Short (O(deg(G))/O(deg(G)))
Short (O(deg(G))/O(deg(G)))

Idle time
Long
Short
Long
Long
Short

a
n.t. means number of gradients/models transferred at the busiest worker per n (minibatches of) stochastic gradients updated.
n.h. means number of handshakes at the busiest worker per n
(minibatches of) stochastic gradients updated.

Table 1. Comparison of different distributed machine learning algorithms on a network graph G. Long idle time means in each iteration the whole system needs to wait for the slowest worker. Short
idle time means the corresponding algorithm breaks this synchronization per iteration. Note that if G is a ring network as required
in AllReduce-SGD, O(deg(G)) = O(1).

sorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016), MXNet (Chen et al., 2015),
and CNTK (Seide and Agarwal, 2016) support two communication modes: (1) synchronous communication via parameter servers or AllReduce, or (2) asynchronous communication via parameter servers. When there are stragglers
(i.e., slower workers) in the system, which is common especially at the scale of hundreds devices, asynchronous approaches are more robust. However, most asynchronous
implementations have a centralized design, as illustrated in
Figure 1(a) — a central server holds the shared model for
all other workers. Each worker calculates its own gradients
and updates the shared model asynchronously. The parameter server may become a communication bottleneck and
slow down the convergence. We focus on the question: Can
we remove the central server bottleneck in asynchronous
distributed learning systems while maintaining the best possible convergence rate?
Recent work (Lian et al., 2017) shows that synchronous de-

