Parameterized Algorithms for the Matrix Completion Problem

Robert Ganian 1 Iyad Kanj 2 Sebastian Ordyniak 3 Stefan Szeider 1

Abstract
We consider two matrix completion problems, in
which we are given a matrix with missing entries
and the task is to complete the matrix in a way
that (1) minimizes the rank, or (2) minimizes the
number of distinct rows. We study the parameterized complexity of the two aforementioned
problems with respect to several parameters of interest, including the minimum number of matrix
rows, columns, and rows plus columns needed to
cover all missing entries. We obtain new algorithmic results showing that, for the bounded domain
case, both problems are fixed-parameter tractable
with respect to all aforementioned parameters. We
complement these results with a lower-bound result for the unbounded domain case that rules out
fixed-parameter tractability w.r.t. some of the parameters under consideration.

1. Introduction
Problem Definition and Motivation. We consider the matrix completion problem, in which we are given a matrix M
(over some field that we also refer to as the domain of the
matrix) with missing entries, and the goal is to complete the
entries of M so that to optimize a certain measure. There is
a wealth of research on this fundamental problem (Candès
& Plan, 2010; Candès & Recht, 2009; Candès & Tao, 2010;
Elhamifar & Vidal, 2013; Hardt et al., 2014; Fazel, 2002;
Keshavan et al., 2010a;b; Recht, 2011; Saunderson et al.,
2016) due to its ubiquitous applications in recommender
systems, machine learning, sensing, computer vision, data
science, and predictive analytics, among others. In these
areas, the matrix completion problem naturally arises after
*

Equal contribution 1 Algorithms and Complexity Group,
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria 2 School of Computing, DePaul
University, Chicago, USA 3 Algorithms Group, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK. Correspondence to: Robert Ganian <rganian@gmail.com>, Iyad Kanj <ikanj@cdm.depaul.edu>, Sebastian Ordyniak <sordyniak@gmail.com>, Stefan Szeider <stefan@szeider.net>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

observing a sample from the set of entries of a low-rank
matrix, and attempting to recover the missing entries with
the goal of optimizing a certain measure. In this paper, we
focus our study on matrix completion with respect to two
measures (considered separately): (1) minimizing the rank
of the completed matrix, and (2) minimizing the number of
distinct rows of the completed matrix.
The first problem we consider—matrix completion
w.r.t. rank minimization—has been extensively studied, and
is often referred to as the low-rank matrix completion problem (Candès & Plan, 2010; Candès & Recht, 2009; Candès
& Tao, 2010; Hardt et al., 2014; Fazel, 2002; Keshavan
et al., 2010a;b; Recht, 2011; Saunderson et al., 2016). A celebrated application of this problem lies in the recommender
systems area, where it is known as the Netflix problem (net).
In this user-profiling application, an entry of the input matrix represents the rating of a movie by a user, where some
entries could be missing. The goal is to predict the missing
entries so that the rank of the complete matrix is minimized.
The low-rank matrix completion problem is known to be
NP-hard, even when the matrix is over the field GF(2) (i.e.,
each entry is 0 or 1), and the goal is to complete the matrix into one of rank 3 (Peeters, 1996). A significant body
of work on the low-rank matrix completion problem has
centered around proving that, under some feasibility assumptions, the matrix completion problem can be solved
efficiently with high probability (Candès & Recht, 2009;
Recht, 2011). These feasibility assumptions are: (1) low
rank; (2) incoherence; and (3) randomness (Hardt et al.,
2014). Hardt et al. (2014) argue that feasibility assumption
(3), which states that the subset of determined entries in the
matrix is selected uniformly at random and has a large (sampling) density, is very demanding. In particular, they justify
that in many applications, such as the Netflix problem, it is
not possible to arbitrarily choose which matrix entries are
determined and which are not, as those may be dictated by
outside factors. The low-rank matrix completion problem
also has other applications in the area of wireless sensor
networks. In one such application, the goal is to reconstruct
a low-dimensional geometry describing the locations of the
sensors based on local distances sensed by each sensor; this
problem is referred to as TRIANGULATION FROM INCOM PLETE DATA (Candès & Recht, 2009). Due to its inherent
hardness, the low-rank matrix completion problem has also

