CoVeR: Learning Covariate-Specific Vector Representations with Tensor
Decompositions

Kevin Tian * 1 Teng Zhang * 2 James Zou 3

Abstract
Word embedding is a useful approach to capture co-occurrence structures in large text corpora.
However, in addition to the text data itself, we often have additional covariates associated with individual corpus documents—e.g. the demographic
of the author, time and venue of publication—and
we would like the embedding to naturally capture
this information. We propose CoVeR, a new tensor decomposition model for vector embeddings
with covariates. CoVeR jointly learns a base embedding for all the words as well as a weighted
diagonal matrix to model how each covariate affects the base embedding. To obtain author or
venue-specific embedding, for example, we can
then simply multiply the base embedding by the
associated transformation matrix. The main advantages of our approach are data efficiency and
interpretability of the covariate transformation.
Our experiments demonstrate that our joint model
learns substantially better covariate-specific embeddings compared to the standard approach of
learning a separate embedding for each covariate using only the relevant subset of data, as well
as other related methods. Furthermore, CoVeR
encourages the embeddings to be “topic-aligned”
in that the dimensions have specific independent
meanings. This allows our covariate-specific embeddings to be compared by topic, enabling downstream differential analysis. We empirically evaluate the benefits of our algorithm on datasets, and
demonstrate how it can be used to address many
natural questions about covariate effects.
Accompanying code to this paper can be found at
http://github.com/kjtian/CoVeR.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 2 Department of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University 3 Department of Biomedical Data
Science Stanford University. Correspondence to: Kevin Tian <kjtian@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The use of factorizations of co-occurrence statistics in learning low-dimensional representations of words is an area that
has received a large amount of attention in recent years, perhaps best represented by how widespread algorithms such
as GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) and Word2Vec (Mikolov
et al., 2013) are in downstream applications. In particular,
suppose we have a set of words i ∈ [n], where n is the size
of the vocabulary. The aim is to, for a fixed dimensionality
d, assign a vector vi ∈ Rd to each word in the vocabulary
in a way that preserves semantic structure.
In many settings, we have a corpus with additional covariates on individual documents. For example, we might have
news articles from both conservative and liberal-leaning
publications, and using the same word embedding for all
the text can lose interesting information. Furthermore, we
suggest that there are meaningful semantic relationships
that can be captured by exploiting the differences in these
conditional statistics. To this end, we propose the following
two key questions that capture the problems that our work
addresses, and for each, we give a concrete motivating example of a problem in the semantic inference literature that
it encompasses.
Question 1: How can we leverage conditional cooccurrence statistics to capture the effect of a covariate
on word usage?
A simple example of a covariate one may wish to condition on is the document the writing came from (i.e. for a
group of books, learn a set of word embeddings for each
book). There are many natural ways to capture the effect of
this conditioning; we choose to do so by representing the
covariate as a vector. It is interesting to see if the resulting
vectors cluster by author, for example. An example application is addressing the question: did William Shakespeare
truly write all the works credited to him, or have there been
other “ghostwriters” who have contributed to the Shakespeare canon? This is the famous Shakespeare authorship
question, for which historians have proposed various candidates as the true authors of particular plays or poems (Hope,
1994). If the latter scenario is the case, what in particular
distinguishes the writing style of one candidate from an-

