Extreme Learning to Rank via Low Rank Assumption

Minhao Cheng 1 Ian Davidson 1 Cho-Jui Hsieh 1 2

Abstract
We consider the setting where we wish to perform
ranking for hundreds of thousands of users which
is common in recommender systems and web
search ranking. Learning a single ranking function is unlikely to capture the variability across
all users while learning a ranking function for
each person is time-consuming and requires large
amounts of data from each user. To address this
situation, we propose a Factorization RankSVM
algorithm which learns a series of k basic ranking functions and then constructs for each user
a local ranking function that is a combination of
them. We develop a fast algorithm to reduce the
time complexity of gradient descent solver by exploiting the low-rank structure, and the resulting
algorithm is much faster than existing methods.
Furthermore, we prove that the generalization error of the proposed method can be significantly
better than training individual RankSVMs. Finally, we present some interesting patterns in the
principal ranking functions learned by our algorithms.

1. Introduction
Learning a ranking function based on pairwise comparisons has been studied extensively in recent years, with
many successful applications in building search engines and
other information retrieval tasks. Given a set of training instances with features x1 , ..., xn and pairwise comparisons,
the goal is to find the optimal decision function f (·) such
that f (xi ) > f (xj ) if i is preferred over j. This is usually referred to as a learning-to-rank problem, and several
algorithms have been proposed, including RankSVM (Herbrich et al., 1999), gradient boosting decision tree (Li et al.,
2007), and many others (Cao et al., 2007; Yue et al., 2007;
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California Davis, USA. 2 Department of Statistics, University of California Davis, USA . Correspondence to: Minhao Cheng
<mhcheng@ucdavis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Negahban et al., 2012; Wauthier et al., 2013).
However, in many modern applications, a single global
ranking is not sufficient to represent the variety of individual
users preferences. For example, in movie ranking systems, it
is preferable to learn an individual ranking function for each
user since users’ tastes can vary largely. The issue also arises
in many other applications such as product recommendation,
and personalized web search ranking.
Motivated by these real scenarios, we consider the problem of learning hundreds of thousands of ranking functions
jointly, one for each user. Our target problem is different
from collaborative ranking and BPR (Rendle et al., 2009;
Wu et al., 2017a) since they only aim to recover ranking
over existing items without using item features, while our
goal is to obtain the ranking functions (taking item features
as input) that can generalize to unseen items. This is also
different from existing work on learning multiple ranking
functions (i.e. (Qian et al., 2014)) because in that setting
they are learning only several ranking functions. Here we
focus on problems where the number of ranking functions T
is very large (e.g.,100K) but the amount of data to learn each
ranking function is limited. The naive extensions of learning
to rank algorithms fail since the training time grows dramatically, and also due to the over-fitting problem because of
insufficient number of pairs for training.
To resolve this dilemma, we propose the Factorization
RankSVM model for learning multiple ranking functions
jointly. The main idea is to assume the T ranking functions
can be represented by a dictionary of k ranking functions
with k  T . In the linear RankSVM case, this assumption
implies a low-rank structure when we stack all the T linear
hyper-planes together into a matrix. By exploiting this low
rank structure, our algorithm can be efficient for both time
and sample complexity.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose the Factorization RankSVM model for
learning a large number of different ranking functions
on different sets of data simultaneously. By exploiting
the low-rank structure, we show that the gradient can be
calculated very efficiently, and the resulting algorithm
can scale to problems with large number of tasks.
• We derive the generalization error bound of our model,

