Anonymous Walk Embeddings

Sergey Ivanov 1 2 Evgeny Burnaev 1

Abstract
The task of representing entire graphs has seen a
surge of prominent results, mainly due to learning
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on graphstructured data. While CNNs demonstrate stateof-the-art performance in graph classification task,
such methods are supervised and therefore steer
away from the original problem of network representation in task-agnostic manner. Here, we
coherently propose an approach for embedding
entire graphs and show that our feature representations with SVM classifier increase classification
accuracy of CNN algorithms and traditional graph
kernels. For this we describe a recently discovered graph object, anonymous walk, on which we
design task-independent algorithms for learning
graph representations in explicit and distributed
way. Overall, our work represents a new scalable
unsupervised learning of state-of-the-art representations of entire graphs.

1. Introduction
A wide range of real world applications deal with network
analysis and classification tasks. An ease of representing
data with graphs makes them very valuable asset in any data
mining toolbox; however, the complexity of working with
graphs led researchers to seek for new ways of representing and analyzing graphs, of which network embeddings
have become broadly popular due to their success in several
machine learning areas such as graph classification (Cai
et al., 2017), visualization (Cao et al., 2016), and pattern
recognition (Monti et al., 2017).
Essentially, network embeddings are vector representations
of graphs that capture local and global traits and, as a consequence, are more suitable for standard machine learning
techniques such as SVM that works on numerical vectors
1

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia 2 Criteo Research, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Sergey
Ivanov <sergei.ivanov@skolkovotech.ru>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

rather than graph structures. Ideally, a practitioner would
like to have a polynomial-time algorithm that can convert
different graphs into different feature vectors. However,
such algorithm would be capable of deciding whether two
graphs are isomorphic (Gärtner et al., 2003), for which currently only quasipolynomial-time algorithm exists (Babai,
2016). Hence, there are fundamental challenges in the design of polynomial-time algorithm for network-to-vector
conversion. Instead, a lot of research was devoted to the
question of designing network embedding models that are
computationally efficient and preserve similarity between
graphs.
Broadly speaking, network embeddings come from one of
the two buckets, either based on engineered graph features
or driven by training on graph data. Feature-based methods
traditionally appeared in graph kernel setting (Vishwanathan
et al., 2010), where each graph is decomposed into discrete
components, distribution of which is used as a vector representation of a graph (Haussler, 1999). Importantly, general
concept of feature-based methods implies ad-hoc knowledge
about the data at hand. For example, Random Walk kernel
(Vishwanathan et al., 2010) assumes that graph realization
originates from the types of random walks a graph has,
whereas for Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) kernel (Shervashidze
et al., 2011) the insight is in subtree patterns of a graph. For
high-dimensional graph embeddings feature-based methods
produce sparse solution as only few substructures are common across graphs. This is known as diagonal dominance
(Yanardag & Vishwanathan, 2015), a situation when a graph
representation is only similar to itself, but not to any other
graph.
On the other hand, data-driven approach learns network
embeddings by optimizing some form of objective function defined on graph data. Deep Graph Kernels (DGK)
(Yanardag & Vishwanathan, 2015), for example, learns a
positive semidefinite matrix that weights the relationship
between graph substructures, while Patchy-San (PSCN)
(Niepert et al., 2016) constructs locally connected neighborhoods for training a convolutional neural network on.
Data-driven approach implies learning distributed graph
representations that have demonstrated promising classification results (Niepert et al., 2016; Tixier et al., 2017).
Our approach. We propose to use a natural graph object

