WSNet: Compact and Efficient Networks Through Weight Sampling

Xiaojie Jin 1 2 Yingzhen Yang 2 Ning Xu 2 Jianchao Yang 3 Nebojsa Jojic 4 Jiashi Feng 1 Shuicheng Yan 5 1

Abstract
We present a new approach and a novel architecture, termed WSNet, for learning compact and efficient deep neural networks. Existing approaches
conventionally learn full model parameters independently and then compress them via ad hoc
processing such as model pruning or filter factorization. Alternatively, WSNet proposes learning
model parameters by sampling from a compact set
of learnable parameters, which naturally enforces
parameter sharing throughout the learning process.
We demonstrate that such a novel weight sampling
approach (and induced WSNet) promotes both
weights and computation sharing favorably. By
employing this method, we can more efficiently
learn much smaller networks with competitive
performance compared to baseline networks with
equal numbers of convolution filters. Specifically,
we consider learning compact and efficient 1D
convolutional neural networks for audio classification. Extensive experiments on multiple audio
classification datasets verify the effectiveness of
WSNet. Combined with weight quantization, the
resulted models are up to 180× smaller and theoretically up to 16× faster than the well-established
baselines, without noticeable performance drop.

1. Introduction
Despite remarkable successes in various applications, deep
neural networks (DNNs) usually suffer following two problems that stem from their inherent huge parameter space.
First, most of state-of-the-art deep architectures are prone to
over-fitting even when trained on large datasets (Simonyan
& Zisserman, 2015; Szegedy et al., 2015). Secondly, DNNs
usually consume large amount of storage memory and energy (Han et al., 2016), which makes it difficult to use them
1
National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Snap Inc. Research, Los Angeles, USA 3 Bytedance Inc., Menlo Park, USA
4
Microsoft Research, Redmond, USA 5 360 AI Institute, Beijing,
China. Correspondence to: Xiaojie Jin <xjjin0731@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

in devices with limited memory and power (such as portable
devices or chips). Different from most existing works (Han
et al., 2015; Li et al., 2017; Jaderberg et al., 2014; Lebedev
et al., 2014; Hinton et al., 2015) on model compression
and acceleration that ignore the strong dependencies among
weights and learn filters independently based on existing
network architectures, this paper proposes to explicitly enforce the parameter sharing among filters to more effectively
learn compact and efficient deep networks.
In this paper, we propose a Weight Sampling deep neural network (i.e. WSNet) to significantly reduce both the
model size and computation cost, achieving more than 100×
smaller size and up to 16× speedup at negligible performance drop or even achieving better performance than the
baseline (i.e. conventional networks that learn filters independently). Specifically, WSNet is parameterized by layerwise condensed filters from which each filter participating in
actual convolutions can be directly sampled, in both spatial
and channel dimensions. Since condensed filters have significantly fewer parameters than independently trained filters
as in conventional CNNs, learning by sampling from them
makes WSNet a more compact model compared to conventional CNNs. In addition, to reduce the ubiquitous computational redundancy in convolving the overlapped filters and
input patches, we propose an integral image based method
to dramatically reduce the computation cost of WSNet in
both training and inference. The integral image method is
also advantageous because it enables weight sampling with
different filter size and minimizes computational overhead
to enhance the learning capability of WSNet.
In order to demonstrate the efficacy of WSNet, we conduct extensive experiments on challenging audio classification tasks. On each test dataset, including ESC-50 (Piczak,
2015a), UrbanSound8K (Salamon et al., 2014), DCASE
(Stowell et al., 2015) and MusicDet200K (a self-collected
dataset, as detailed in Section 4), WSNet significantly reduces the model size of the baseline by 100× with comparable or even higher classification accuracy. When compressing more than 180×, WSNet is only subject to negligible accuracy drop. At the same time, WSNet significantly
reduces the computation cost (up to 16×). Such results
strongly establish the capability of WSNet to learn compact
and efficient networks. Last but not the least, we provide
an intuitive method to extend WSNet from 1D CNNs to

