Representation Tradeoffs for Hyperbolic Embeddings

Frederic Sala 1 Christopher De Sa 2 Albert Gu 1 Christopher Ré 1

Abstract

for trees—even using an unbounded number of dimensions.

Hyperbolic embeddings offer excellent quality
with few dimensions when embedding hierarchical data structures. We give a combinatorial construction that embeds trees into hyperbolic space
with arbitrarily low distortion without optimization. On WordNet, this algorithm obtains a meanaverage-precision of 0.989 with only two dimensions, outperforming existing work by 0.11 points.
We provide bounds characterizing the precisiondimensionality tradeoff inherent in any hyperbolic
embedding. To embed general metric spaces, we
propose a hyperbolic generalization of multidimensional scaling (h-MDS). We show how to perform exact recovery of hyperbolic points from
distances, provide a perturbation analysis, and
give a recovery result that enables us to reduce dimensionality. Finally, we extract lessons from the
algorithms and theory above to design a scalable
PyTorch-based implementation that can handle
incomplete information.

Many graphs, such as complex networks (Krioukov et al.,
2010), the Internet (Krioukov et al., 2009), and social networks (Verbeek & Suri, 2016), are known to have tree-like or
hyperbolic structure and thus befit hyperbolic embeddings.
Indeed, recent works show that hyperbolic representations
are suitable for many hierarchies (e.g. the question answering (Q/A) system HyperQA in Tay et al. (2018), vertex
classifiers in Chamberlain et al. (2017), and link prediction
(Nickel & Kiela, 2017)). However, the optimization problems underlying the embedding techniques in these works
are challenging, motivating us to seek fundamental insights
and to understand the subtle tradeoffs involved.

1. Introduction
Recently, hyperbolic embeddings have been proposed as
a way to capture hierarchy information for network and
natural language processing tasks (Nickel & Kiela, 2017;
Chamberlain et al., 2017). This approach is an exciting way
to fuse structural information (for example, from knowledge
graphs or synonym hierarchies) with the continuous representations favored by modern machine learning methods.
To understand the intuition behind hyperbolic embeddings’
superior capacity, note that trees can be embedded with
arbitrarily low distortion into the Poincaré disk, a twodimensional model of hyperbolic space (Sarkar, 2011). In
contrast, Bourgain’s theorem (Linial et al., 1995) shows that
Euclidean space cannot achieve comparably low distortion
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University. Correspondence to: Frederic Sala <fredsala@stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

We begin by considering the case where we are given an
input graph that is a tree or nearly tree-like, and our goal is
to produce a low-dimensional hyperbolic embedding that
preserves all distances. This leads to a simple combinatorial
strategy that directly places points instead of minimizing a
surrogate loss function. It is both fast (nearly linear time)
and has formal quality guarantees. The approach proceeds
in two phases: we (1) produce an embedding of a graph into
a weighted tree, and (2) embed that tree into the hyperbolic
disk. In particular, we consider an extension of an elegant
embedding of trees into the Poincaré disk by Sarkar (2011)
and work on low-distortion graph embeddings into tree
metrics (Abraham et al., 2007). For trees, this approach has
nearly perfect quality. On the WordNet hypernym graph
reconstruction, it obtains a nearly perfect mean average
precision (MAP) of 0.989 using just 2 dimensions. The best
published numbers for WordNet in Nickel & Kiela (2017)
range between 0.823 and 0.87 for 5 to 200 dimensions.
We analyze this construction to extract fundamental tradeoffs. One tradeoff involves the embedding dimension, the
properties of the graph, and the number of bits of precision used to represent components of embedded points—an
important hidden cost. We show that for a fixed precision,
the dimension required scales linearly with the length of
the longest path. On the other hand, the dimension scales
logarithmically with the maximum degree of the tree. This
suggests that hyperbolic embeddings should have high quality on hierarchies like WordNet but require large dimensions
or high precision on graphs with long chains.
To understand how hyperbolic embeddings perform for met-

