Fast Maximization of Non-Submodular, Monotonic Functions on the Integer
Lattice
Alan Kuhnle 1 J. David Smith 1 Victoria G. Crawford 1 My T. Thai 1

Abstract
The optimization of submodular functions on the
integer lattice has received much attention recently, but the objective functions of many applications are non-submodular. We provide two
approximation algorithms for maximizing a nonsubmodular function on the integer lattice subject to a cardinality constraint; these are the first
algorithms for this purpose that have polynomial
query complexity. We propose a general framework for influence maximization on the integer
lattice that generalizes prior works on this topic,
and we demonstrate the efficiency of our algorithms in this context.

1. Introduction
As a natural extension of finite sets S (equivalently,
{0, 1}S ), optimization of discrete functions on the integer
lattice NS has received attention recently (Alon et al., 2012;
Demaine et al., 2014; Soma & Yoshida, 2015). As an example, consider the placement of sensors in a water network (Krause et al., 2008a); in the set version, each sensor
takes a value in {0, 1}, which corresponds to whether the
sensor was placed. In the lattice version (Soma & Yoshida,
2015), each sensor has a power level in {0, . . . , b} ⊆ N, to
which the sensitivity of the sensor is correlated. As a second example, consider the influence maximization problem (Kempe et al., 2003); instead of the binary seeding of
a user, the lattice version enables partial incentives or discounts to be used (Demaine et al., 2014).
Although many results from the optimization of submodular set functions have been generalized to the integer lattice (Soma & Yoshida, 2015; 2016; Ene & Nguyen, 2016),
many objective functions arising from applications are not
submodular (Bian et al., 2017b; Lin et al., 2017; Das &
1

University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida. Correspondence to: Alan Kuhnle <kuhnle@ufl.edu>, My T. Thai
<mythai@ufl.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Kempe, 2011; Horel & Singer, 2016). In this work, we
consider maximization subject to a cardinality constraint
(MCC), where the function f to be maximized may be nonsubmodular. Let k ∈ N (the budget), b ∈ (N ∪ {∞})S (the
box), and let f : {x ∈ NS : x ≤ b} → R+ (the objective)
be a non-negative and monotonic1 function with f (0) = 0.
Then determine
max f (w),
(MCC)
kwk1 ≤k

where w = (ws )s∈S ∈ NS , kwk1 =

P

s∈S |ws |.

Since the integer lattice may be represented as a multiset of size k|S|, one may use results for Problem MCC
with non-submodular set functions. In particular, the tight
ratio α1 (1 − e−αγs ) of the standard greedy algorithm by
Bian et al. (2017b), where α, γs are discussed below, applies with the lattice adaptation of the standard greedy algorithm (StandardGreedy) given in Alg. 1. However, this approach requires Ω(|S|k) queries of f , which is not polynomial in the input2 size O(|S| log k). Even for applications
with set functions, Ω(|S|k) queries may be prohibitive, and
researchers (Leskovec et al., 2007; Mirzasoleiman et al.,
2015; Badanidiyuru & Vondrák, 2014) have sought ways
to speed up the StandardGreedy algorithm. Unfortunately,
these approaches rely upon the submodularity of f , and
there has been no analogous effort for non-submodular
functions.
To quantify the non-submodularity of a lattice function f ,
we generalize the following quantities defined for set functions to the lattice: (1) the diminishing-return (DR) ratio γd
of f (Lehmann et al., 2006), (2) the weak DR ratio γs of f
(Das & Kempe, 2011), and (3) the generalized curvature α
of f (Bian et al., 2017b). Our main contributions are:
• To speed up StandardGreedy (Alg. 1), we adapt
the threshold greedy framework of Badanidiyuru &
Vondrák (2014) to non-submodular functions; this
yields an algorithm (ThresholdGreedy, Alg. 2)
with approximation ratio (1 − e−γd γs − η), for
1

for all v ≤ w (coordinate-wise), f (v) ≤ f (w)
The input is considered to be the vector b of length n = |S|
and the number k represented in log k bits (w.l.o.g. each component of b is at most k); the function is regarded as an oracle and
hence does not contribute to input size.
2

