Differentiable Abstract Interpretation for Provably Robust Neural Networks

Matthew Mirman 1 Timon Gehr 1 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract
We introduce a scalable method for training robust
neural networks based on abstract interpretation.
We present several abstract transformers which
balance efficiency with precision and show these
can be used to train large neural networks that are
certifiably robust to adversarial perturbations.

1. Introduction
Neural networks are increasingly gaining importance in
critical areas such as facial recognition and autonomous
driving. Szegedy et al. (2013) discovered that even welltrained neural networks can misclassify inputs which are
seemingly identical to correctly classified ones. Further,
such adversarial examples have been constructed physically
(Athalye & Sutskever, 2017; Evtimov et al., 2017) as well
as in black-box settings (Papernot et al., 2016; 2017).
Gu & Rigazio (2014) provided an early technique for defending against adversarial examples based on adding concrete noise to the training set and removing it statistically.
Goodfellow et al. (2014) showed an adversarial attack which
generated examples that were misclassified on a wide array of networks, and then demonstrated a defense against
this attack, based on explicit training against perturbations
generated by the attack. Madry et al. (2018) improved on
this style of defense by showing that training against an
optimal attack would provide a defense against non-optimal
attacks as well. While this technique was highly effective in
experiments, Carlini et al. (2017) demonstrated an attack for
the safety-critical problem of ground-truthing, where this
defense in fact occasionally exacerbated the problem.
As heuristic defenses are insufficient to ensure safety, works
such as Gehr et al. (2018) provided methods for certifying
local robustness properties of neural networks. Kolter &
Wong (2017) demonstrated the first defense against adver1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich,
Switzerland.
Correspondence to:
Matthew Mirman
<matthew.mirman@inf.ethz.ch>, Martin Vechev <martin.vechev@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

sarial attacks which provides certificates proving that none
of the training examples could be adversarially permuted, as
well as bounds on the capability of an adversary to influence
performance on a test set. This method is based on computing an overapproximation to the adversarial polytope,
which describes the set of possible neural network outputs
given the region of possible inputs. However, this approach
incurs significant accuracy and scalability overheads. Recent work by Raghunathan et al. (2018) provides certifiable
robustness, but only for neural networks consisting of two
layers. Thus, developing techniques to train large neural networks that can be automatically certified free of robustness
violations remains a fundamental challenge.
Abstract Interpretation for Training Neural Networks
We address the above challenge by leveraging the classic
framework of abstract interpretation (Cousot & Cousot,
1977), a general theory for approximating a potentially infinite set of behaviors with a finite representation. This
theory has been widely used over the last 40 years to build
large-scale automatic code analyzers (Blanchet et al., 2003).
We show how to bridge abstract interpretation and gradientbased optimization and how to apply these concepts to train
larger networks. Concretely, we compute an approximation
to the adversarial polytope and use this approximation as
part of our loss function, effectively training the network
on entire regions of the input space at once. This abstract
loss has the advantage of being optimizable via standard
techniques such as gradient descent and, as we demonstrate,
networks trained in this manner are more provably robust.
Main Contributions Our main contributions are:
• A new method for training neural networks based on
abstract interpretation (Sections 2 and 5).
• Novel abstract transformers for the zonotope domain
which are parallelizable and suited for differentiation
and gradient descent (Sections 3 and 4).
• A complete implementation of the method in a system
called D IFF AI1 together with an extensive evaluation
on a range of datasets and architectures. Our results
show that D IFF AI improves provability of robustness
and scales to large networks (Section 6).
1

Available at: http://diffai.ethz.ch

