Selecting Representative Examples for Program Synthesis

Yewen Pu 1 Zachery Miranda 1 Armando Solar-Lezama 1 Leslie Pack Kaelbling 1

Abstract
Program synthesis is a class of regression problems where one seeks a solution, in the form of
a source-code program, mapping the inputs to
their corresponding outputs exactly. Due to its
precise and combinatorial nature, program synthesis is commonly formulated as a constraint satisfaction problem, where input-output examples
are encoded as constraints and solved with a constraint solver. A key challenge of this formulation
is scalability: while constraint solvers work well
with a few well-chosen examples, a large set of examples can incur significant overhead in both time
and memory. We describe a method to discover
a subset of examples that is both small and representative: the subset is constructed iteratively,
using a neural network to predict the probability
of unchosen examples conditioned on the chosen
examples in the subset, and greedily adding the
least probable example. We empirically evaluate
the representativeness of the subsets constructed
by our method, and demonstrate such subsets can
significantly improve synthesis time and stability.

dataset, such that it is sufficient to specify a correct program,
yet small enough to encode efficiently.
There are two key ingredients to a synthesis problem: a
domain specific language (DSL for short) and a specification. The DSL defines a space of candidate programs which
serve as the model class. The specification is commonly
expressed as a set of input-output examples which the candidate program needs to fit exactly. The DSL restricts the
structure of the programs in such a way that it is impossible to fit the input-output examples in an ad-hoc fashion:
This structure aids generalization to an unseen input despite
fitting the training examples exactly.
Given the precise and combinatorial nature of synthesis,
gradient-descent based approaches perform poorly and an
explicit search over the solution space is required (Gaunt
et al., 2016). For this reason, synthesis is commonly casted
as a constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) (Solar-Lezama,
2013; Jha et al., 2010). In such a setting, the DSL and its
execution can be thought of as a parametrized function F ,
which is encoded as a logical formula. Its parameters s ∈ S
correspond to different instantiations of programs within
the DSL, and the input-output examples D are expressed as
constraints which the instantiated program needs to satisfy,
namely, producing the correct output on a given input.

1. Introduction
Program synthesis (or synthesis for short) is a special class
of regression problems where rather than minimizing the
error on an example dataset, one seeks an exact fit of the
examples in the form of a program. Applications include
synthesizing database relations (Singh et al., 2017), inferring excel-formulas (Gulwani et al., 2012), and compilation
(Phothilimthana et al., 2016). The synthesized programs are
complex, consisting of branches and loops. Recent efforts
(Ellis et al., 2015; Singh et al., 2017) show an interest in
applying the synthesis technique to large sets of examples,
but scalability remains a challenge. We present a method
that selects a small representative subset of examples from a
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Yewen Pu <yewenpu@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

∃s ∈ S.

^

F (xi ; s) = yi .

(xi ,yi )∈D

The encoded formula is then given to a constraint solver
such as Z3 (de Moura & Bjørner, 2008), which solves the
constraint problem, producing a set of valid parameter values for s. These values are then used to instantiate the DSL
into a concrete, executable program.
A key challenge of framing a synthesis problem as a CSP
is that of scalability. While solvers have powerful heuristics to efficiently prune and search the constrained search
space, constructing and maintaining the symbolic formula
over a large number of constraints constitutes a serious overhead1 . Developers of synthesis systems put significant effort
into simplifying and rewriting the constraint formula into
1

However, if the solver does manage to construct and maintain all the constraints, solving the constraints can be fast as the
constraints allow the solver to prune the search space.

