To Understand Deep Learning We Need to Understand Kernel Learning†

Mikhail Belkin 1 Siyuan Ma 1 Soumik Mandal 1

Abstract
Generalization performance of classifiers in deep
learning has recently become a subject of intense
study. Deep models, which are typically heavily over-parametrized, tend to fit the training data
exactly. Despite this “overfitting”, they perform
well on test data, a phenomenon not yet fully
understood. The first point of our paper is that
strong performance of overfitted classifiers is not
a unique feature of deep learning. Using six realworld and two synthetic datasets, we establish experimentally that kernel machines trained to have
zero classification error or near zero regression error (interpolation) perform very well on test data.
We proceed to give a lower bound on the norm of
zero loss solutions for smooth kernels, showing
that they increase nearly exponentially with data
size. None of the existing bounds produce nontrivial results for interpolating solutions. We also
show experimentally that (non-smooth) Laplacian
kernels easily fit random labels, a finding that parallels results recently reported for ReLU neural
networks. In contrast, fitting noisy data requires
many more epochs for smooth Gaussian kernels.
Similar performance of overfitted Laplacian and
Gaussian classifiers on test, suggests that generalization is tied to the properties of the kernel function rather than the optimization process. Some
key phenomena of deep learning are manifested
similarly in kernel methods in the modern “overfitted” regime. The combination of the experimental and theoretical results presented in this paper
indicates a need for new theoretical ideas for understanding properties of classical kernel methods. We argue that progress on understanding
† See full version of this paper at arxiv.org/abs/1802.01396.
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. Correspondence to: Mikhail Belkin <mbelkin@cse.ohio-state.edu>,
Siyuan Ma <masi@cse.ohio-state.edu>, Soumik Mandal <mandal.32@buckeyemail.osu.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

deep learning will be difficult until more tractable
“shallow” kernel methods are better understood.

1

Introduction

The key question in supervised machine learning is that of
generalization. How will a classifier trained on a certain data
set perform on unseen data? A typical theoretical setting
for addressing this question is Empirical Risk Minimization
(ERM) (Vapnik, 1995). Given data {(x i , yi ), i = 1, . . . , n}
sampled from a probability distribution P on Ω × {−1, 1},
a class of functions H : Ω → R and a loss function l, ERM
finds a minimizer of the empirical loss:
X
f ∗ = arg min Lemp (f ) := arg min
l(f (x i ), yi )
f ∈H

f ∈H

i

Most approaches work by controlling and analyzing the
capacity/complexity of the space H. Many mathematical measures of function space complexity exist, including
VC and fat shattering dimensions, Rademacher complexity,
covering numbers (see, e.g., (Anthony & Bartlett, 2009)).
These analyses generally yield bounds on the generalization gap, i.e., the difference between the empirical and expected loss of classifiers. Typically, it is shown that the
generalization gap tends to zero at a certain rate as the number of points n becomes large. For example, many of the
classical bounds on the generalization
pgap are of the form
|E[l(f ∗ (x ), y)] − Lemp (f ∗ )| < O∗ ( c/n), where c is a
measure of complexity of H, such as VC-dimension. Other
methods, closely related to ERM, include regularization to
control bias/variance (complexity) trade-off for parameter
choice, and result in similar bounds. Closely related implicit
regularization methods, such as early stopping for gradient
descent (Yao et al., 2007; Raskutti et al., 2014; Camoriano
et al., 2016), provide regularization by limiting the amount
of computation, thus aiming to achieve better performance
at a lower computational cost. All of these approaches suggest trading off accuracy (in terms of some loss function)
on the training data to get performance guarantees on the
unseen test data.
In recent years we have seen impressive progress in supervised learning due, in particular, to deep neural architectures.
These networks employ large numbers of parameters, often
exceeding the size of training data by several orders of magnitude (Canziani et al., 2016). This over-parametrization

