Learning Maximum-A-Posteriori Perturbation Models for Structured
Prediction in Polynomial Time
Asish Ghoshal 1 Jean Honorio 1

Abstract
MAP perturbation models have emerged as a powerful framework for inference in structured prediction. Such models provide a way to efficiently
sample from the Gibbs distribution and facilitate
predictions that are robust to random noise. In
this paper, we propose a provably polynomial time
randomized algorithm for learning the parameters
of perturbed MAP predictors. Our approach is
based on minimizing a novel Rademacher-based
generalization bound on the expected loss of a perturbed MAP predictor, which can be computed
in polynomial time. We obtain conditions under which our randomized learning algorithm can
guarantee generalization to unseen examples.

1. Introduction
Structured prediction can be thought of as a generalization of binary classification to structured outputs, where
the goal is to jointly predict several dependent variables.
Predicting complex, structured data is of great significance
in various application domains including computer vision
(e.g., image segmentation, multiple object tracking), natural
language processing (e.g., part-of-speech tagging, named
entity recognition) and computational biology (e.g. protein
structure prediction). However, unlike binary classification,
structured prediction presents a set of unique computational
and statistical challenges. The chief being that the number of structured outputs is exponential in the input size.
For instance, in translation tasks, the number of parse trees
of a sentence is exponential in the length of the sentence.
Second, it is very common in such domains to have very
few training examples as compared to the size of the output space thereby making generalization to unseen inputs
difficult.
1

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN - 47906. Correspondence to: Asish Ghoshal
<aghoshal@purdue.edu>, Jean Honorio <jhonorio@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

The key computational challenge in structured prediction
stems from the inference problem, where a decoder, parameterized by a vector w of weights, predicts (or decodes) the
latent structured output y given an observed input x. With
the exception of a few special cases, the general inference
problem in structured prediction is intractable. For instance
in many cases the inference problem reduces to the maximum acyclic subgraph problem which is NP-hard and hard
to approximate to within a factor of 1/2 of the optimal solution (Guruswami et al., 2008), or cardinality-constrained
submodular maximization, which is also NP-hard and hard
to compute a solution better than the (1 1/")-approximate
solution returned by a greedy algorithm (Nemhauser et al.,
1978). The learning problem, where the goal is to learn the
parameter w of the decoder from a set of labeled training
instances, and which involves solving the inference problem
as a subroutine, is therefore intractable for all but a few
special cases. Hardness of max-margin learning (SVM) was
shown by (Sontag et al., 2010).
Hardness results notwithstanding, various methods — which
are worst-case exponential-time — have been developed
over the last decade for predicting structured data including
conditional random fields (Lafferty et al., 2001), and maxmargin approaches (Taskar et al., 2003), to name a few. In
these approaches, learning the parameter w of the decoder
involves minimizing a loss function L(w, S) over a data set
S of m training pairs {(xi , yi )}m
i=1 . One could also take
a Bayesian approach and learn a posterior distribution Q
over decoder parameters w by minimizing the Gibbs loss
Ew⇠Q [L(w, S)]. McAllester (McAllester, 2007) showed,
using the PAC-Bayesian framework, that the commonly
used max-margin loss (Taskar et al., 2003) upper bounds
the expected Gibbs loss over the data distribution, upto
statistical error. Therefore, minimizing the max-margin loss
provides a principled way for learning the parameters of a
structured decoder. More recently, (Honorio & Jaakkola,
2016) showed that minimizing a surrogate randomized loss,
where the max-margin loss is computed over a small number
of randomly sampled structured outputs, also bounds the
Gibbs loss from above upto statistical error.
The above can be thought of as weight based perturbation
models. The perturb-and-MAP framework introduced by

