Variable Selection via Penalized Neural Network: a Drop-Out-One Loss
Approach

Mao Ye * 1 Yan Sun * 1

Abstract
We propose a variable selection method for high
dimensional regression models, which allows for
complex, nonlinear, and high-order interactions
among variables. The proposed method approximates this complex system using a penalized neural network and selects explanatory variables by
measuring their utility in explaining the variance
of the response variable. This measurement is
based on a novel statistic called Drop-Out-One
Loss. The proposed method also allows (overlapping) group variable selection. We prove that
the proposed method can select relevant variables
and exclude irrelevant variables with probability
one as the sample size goes to infinity, which is
referred to as the Oracle Property. Experimental
results on simulated and real world datasets show
the efficiency of our method in terms of variable
selection and prediction accuracy.

1. Introduction
Variable selection is an important task in high dimensional
statistics and plays a critical role in many areas such as
genomics, genetics and machine learning. Most previous
topics on variable selection in high dimensional regression
assume that the regression function has some restricted structures such as linearity (Tibshirani, 1996; Fan & Li, 2001;
Yuan & Lin, 2006; Fan & Lv, 2008), additivity (Ravikumar
et al., 2007; Huang et al., 2010; Fan et al., 2011; Chouldechova & Hastie, 2015), or limited order of interaction among
explanatory variables (Lin et al., 2006; Bien et al., 2013).
However, recent literature (Jönsson et al., 2010; Curtis et al.,
2012) suggests that in real world data, unknown, complex,
and nonlinear relationships may exist among response and
explanatory variables. Thus, the assumptions of these meth*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. Correspondence to: Mao Ye
<ye207@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

ods may be too restricted. It is therefore of interest to develop a variable selection technique that can accommodate
more flexible regression models.
Our method is motivated by a fundamental idea in a variable selection theory called feature screening (Fan et al.,
2011; He et al., 2013; Chang et al., 2013; Cui et al., 2015).
It selects variables according to the utility of a single explanatory variable in explaining the response variable. For
example, (Fan et al., 2011) selects explanatory variable xj
if E(fj2 (xj )) is relatively large, where fj (xj ) = E(y | xj ),
the projection of y onto xj . However, the success of this
method relies on whether the utility of an explanatory variable can be correctly measured using a marginal regression
(which is why additional assumptions such as additivity
are often required). In the situation where the regression
function is complex, and high-order interactions among variables exist, marginal regression becomes inappropriate to
measure the utility. To address the aforementioned problem,
we propose a novel approach to measure the utility of an
explanatory variable based on the “drop-out-one difference
of empirical loss” or Drop-Out-One Loss for simplification.
Our method first fits a lower bound model using all explanatory variables and then drops out one explanatory variable
without refitting. This variable is eliminated if the change in
empirical loss is small. We choose neural network as a tool
to approximate the system for its universal approximation
property (Raghu et al., 2017). The neural network is penalized to avoid overfitting. Additionally, our method allows
us to incorporate grouping information of variables into the
selection procedure.

2. Problem Formulation
Consider the following nonparametric regression model
y = f ∗ (x) + ε, where y ∈ R, x ∈ Rp , ε is random noise independent of x and has mean zero. The
aim is to recover the mapping f ∗ , given n i.i.d. training samples (x(i) , y (i) )i=1,...,n . In this paper, we allow
p = O(exp (nl )), where l ∈ (0, 1). Let xj be the j-th
feature or variable of x. For this small n large p problem, a sparsity assumption is usually required. That is,
f ∗ (x) depends on x only through {xj : j ∈ S}, where
S ⊂ {1, 2, ..., p} is an index set of variables and |S|, the

