Accurate Inference for Adaptive Linear Models

Yash Deshpande 1 Lester Mackey 2 Vasilis Syrgkanis 2 Matt Taddy 2 3

Abstract

the sample (yi , xi )i≤n is not completely randomized but
rather adaptively chosen. By adaptive, we mean that the
choice of the data point (yi , xi ) is guided from inferences
on past data (yj , xj )j<i . Consider the following sequential
paradigms:

Estimators computed from adaptively collected
data do not behave like their non-adaptive
brethren. Rather, the sequential dependence of
the collection policy can lead to severe distributional biases that persist even in the infinite
data limit. We develop a general method – W decorrelation – for transforming the bias of adaptive linear regression estimators into variance.
The method uses only coarse-grained information about the data collection policy and does not
need access to propensity scores or exact knowledge of the policy. We bound the finite-sample
bias and variance of the W -estimator and develop asymptotically correct confidence intervals
based on a novel martingale central limit theorem. We then demonstrate the empirical benefits
of the generic W -decorrelation procedure in two
different adaptive data settings: the multi-armed
bandit and the autoregressive time series.

1. Multi-armed bandits: This class of sequential decision making problems captures the classical ‘exploration versus exploitation’ tradeoff. At each time i,
the experimenter chooses an ‘action’ xi from a set
of available actions X and accrues a reward R(yi )
where (yi , xi ) follow the model (1). Here the experimenter must balance the conflicting goals of learning
about the underlying model (i.e., β) for better future
rewards, while still accruing reward in the current time
step.
2. Active learning: Acquiring labels yi is potentially
costly, and the experimenter aims to learn with as few
outcomes as possible. At time i, based on prior data
(yj , xj )j≤i−1 the experimenter chooses a new data
point xi to label based on its value in learning.

1. Introduction
Consider a dataset of n sample points (yi , xi )i≤n where yi
represents an observed outcome and xi ∈ Rp an associated vector of covariates. In the standard linear model, the
outcomes and covariates are related through a parameter β:
yi = hxi , βi + εi .

(1)

In this model, the ‘noise’ term εi represents inherent variation in the sample, or the variation that is not captured in
the model. Parametric models of the type (1) are a fundamental building block in many machine learning problems.
A common additional assumption is that the covariate vector xi for a given datapoint i is independent of the other
sample point outcomes (yj )j6=i and the inherent variation
(εj )j∈[n] . This paper is motivated by experiments where
1

Department of Mathematics, MIT 2 Microsoft Research New
England 3 Booth School of Business, University of Chicago. Correspondence to: Yash Deshpande <yash@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

3. Time series analysis: Here, the data points (yi , xi )
are naturally ordered in time, with (yi )i≤n denoting a
time series and the covariates xi include observations
from the prior time points.
Here, time induces a natural sequential dependence across
the samples. In the first two instances, the actions or policy
of the experimenter are responsible for creating such dependence. In the case of time series data, this dependence
is endogenous and a consequence of the modeling. A common feature, however, is that the choice of the design or sequence (xi )i≤n is typically not made for inference on the
model after the data collection is completed. This does not,
of course, imply that accurate estimates on the parameters
β cannot be made from the data. Indeed, it is often the case
that the sample is informative enough to extract consistent
estimators of the underlying parameters. Indeed, this is often crucial to the success of the experimenter’s policy. For
instance, ‘regret’ in sequential decision-making or risk in
active learning are intimately connected with the accurate
estimation of the underlying parameters (Castro & Nowak,
2008; Audibert & Bubeck, 2009; Bubeck et al., 2012; Rusmevichientong & Tsitsiklis, 2010) . Our motivation is the

