The Mirage of Action-Dependent Baselines in Reinforcement Learning

George Tucker 1 Surya Bhupatiraju 1 2 Shixiang Gu 1 3 4 Richard E. Turner 3 Zoubin Ghahramani 3 5
Sergey Levine 1 6

Abstract
Policy gradient methods are a widely used class
of model-free reinforcement learning algorithms
where a state-dependent baseline is used to reduce
gradient estimator variance. Several recent papers
extend the baseline to depend on both the state and
action and suggest that this significantly reduces
variance and improves sample efficiency without
introducing bias into the gradient estimates. To
better understand this development, we decompose the variance of the policy gradient estimator
and numerically show that learned state-actiondependent baselines do not in fact reduce variance over a state-dependent baseline in commonly
tested benchmark domains. We confirm this unexpected result by reviewing the open-source code
accompanying these prior papers, and show that
subtle implementation decisions cause deviations
from the methods presented in the papers and
explain the source of the previously observed empirical gains. Furthermore, the variance decomposition highlights areas for improvement, which
we demonstrate by illustrating a simple change to
the typical value function parameterization that
can significantly improve performance.

1. Introduction
Model-free reinforcement learning (RL) with flexible function approximators, such as neural networks (i.e., deep reinforcement learning), has shown success in goal-directed
sequential decision-making problems in high dimensional
state spaces (Mnih et al., 2015; Schulman et al., 2015b;
Lillicrap et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016). Policy gradient methods (Williams, 1992; Sutton et al., 2000; Kakade,
2002; Peters & Schaal, 2006; Silver et al., 2014; Schulman
1
Google Brain, USA 2 Work was done during the Google AI Residency. 3 University of Cambridge, UK 4 Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems, Germany 5 Uber AI Labs, USA 6 UC Berkeley,
USA. Correspondence to: George Tucker <gjt@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

et al., 2015a; 2017) are a class of model-free RL algorithms
that have found widespread adoption due to their stability
and ease of use. Because these methods directly estimate
the gradient of the expected reward RL objective, they exhibit stable convergence both in theory and practice (Sutton
et al., 2000; Kakade, 2002; Schulman et al., 2015a; Gu
et al., 2017b). In contrast, methods such as Q-learning lack
convergence guarantees in the case of nonlinear function
approximation (Sutton & Barto, 1998).
On-policy Monte-Carlo policy gradient estimates suffer
from high variance, and therefore require large batch sizes
to reliably estimate the gradient for stable iterative optimization (Schulman et al., 2015a). This limits their applicability to real-world problems, where sample efficiency
is a critical constraint. Actor-critic methods (Sutton et al.,
2000; Silver et al., 2014) and λ-weighted return estimation (Tesauro, 1995; Schulman et al., 2015b) replace the
high variance Monte-Carlo return with an estimate based
on the sampled return and a function approximator. This
reduces variance at the expense of introducing bias from
the function approximator, which can lead to instability and
sensitivity to hyperparameters. In contrast, state-dependent
baselines (Williams, 1992; Weaver & Tao, 2001) reduce
variance without introducing bias. This is desirable because
it does not compromise the stability of the original method.
Gu et al. (2017a); Grathwohl et al. (2018); Liu et al. (2018);
Wu et al. (2018) present promising results extending the
classic state-dependent baselines to state-action-dependent
baselines. The standard explanation for the benefits of such
approaches is that they achieve large reductions in variance (Grathwohl et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018), which translates to improvements over methods that only condition the
baseline on the state. This line of investigation is attractive,
because by definition, baselines do not introduce bias and
thus do not compromise the stability of the underlying policy gradient algorithm, but still provide improved sample
efficiency. In other words, they retain the advantages of the
underlying algorithms with no unintended side-effects.
In this paper, we aim to improve our understanding of stateaction-dependent baselines and to identify targets for further
unbiased variance reduction. Toward this goal, we present
a decomposition of the variance of the policy gradient esti-

