MISSION: Ultra Large-Scale Feature Selection using Count-Sketches

Amirali Aghazadeh * 1 Ryan Spring * 2 Daniel LeJeune 3 Gautam Dasarathy 3 Anshumali Shrivastava 2
Richard G. Baraniuk 3

Abstract
Feature selection is an important challenge in machine learning. It plays a crucial role in the explainability of machine-driven decisions that are
rapidly permeating throughout modern society.
Unfortunately, the explosion in the size and dimensionality of real-world datasets poses a severe challenge to standard feature selection algorithms. Today, it is not uncommon for datasets to
have billions of dimensions. At such scale, even
storing the feature vector is impossible, causing
most existing feature selection methods to fail.
Workarounds like feature hashing, a standard approach to large-scale machine learning, helps with
the computational feasibility, but at the cost of losing the interpretability of features. In this paper,
we present MISSION, a novel framework for ultra
large-scale feature selection that performs stochastic gradient descent while maintaining an efficient
representation of the features in memory using a
Count-Sketch data structure. MISSION retains the
simplicity of feature hashing without sacrificing
the interpretability of the features while using only
O(log2 p) working memory. We demonstrate that
MISSION accurately and efficiently performs feature selection on real-world, large-scale datasets
with billions of dimensions.

1. Introduction
Feature selection is an important step in extracting interpretable patterns from data. It has numerous applications in
a wide range of areas, including natural-language processing, genomics, and chemistry. Suppose that there are n or*
These authors contributed equally and are listed alphabetically 1 Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, California 2 Department of Computer Science, Rice University, Houston, Texas 3 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas. Correspondence to:
Anshumali Shrivastava <anshumali@rice.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

dered pairs (Xi , yi )i∈[n] , where Xi ∈ Rp are p-dimensional
feature vectors, and yi ∈ R are scalar outputs. Feature selection aims to identify a small subset of features (coordinates
of the p-dimensional feature vector) that best models the
relationship between the data Xi and the output yi .
A significant complication that is common in modern engineering and scientific applications is that the feature space
p is ultra high-dimensional. For example, Weinberger introduced a dataset with 16 trillion (p = 1013 ) unique features
(Weinberger et al., 2009). A 16 trillion dimensional feature vector (of double 8 bytes) requires 128 terabytes of
working memory. Problems from modern genetics are even
more challenging. A particularly useful way to represent
a long DNA sequence is by a feature vector that counts
the occurrence frequency of all length-K sub-strings called
K-mers. This representation plays an important role in
large-scale regression problems in computational biology
(Wood & Salzberg, 2014; Bray et al., 2015; Vervier et al.,
2016; Aghazadeh et al., 2016). Typically, K is chosen to
be larger than 12, and these strings are composed of all
possible combinations of 16 characters ({A, T, C, G} in addition to 12 wild card characters). In this case, the feature
vector dimension is p = 1612 = 248 . A vector of size 248
single-precision variables requires approximately 1 petabyte
of space!
For ultra large-scale feature selection problems, it is impossible to run standard explicit regularization-based methods
like `1 -regularization (Shalev-Shwartz & Tewari, 2011; Tan
et al., 2014) or to select hyperparameters with a constrained
amount of memory (Langford et al., 2009). This is not surprising, because these methods are not scalable in terms
of memory and computational time (Duchi et al., 2008).
Another important operational concern is that most datasets
represent features in the form of strings or tokens. For example, with DNA or n-gram datasets, features are represented
by strings of characters. Even in click-through data (McMahan et al., 2013), features are indexed by textual tokens.
Observe that mapping each of these strings to a vector component requires maintaining a dictionary whose size equals
the length of the feature vector. As a result, one does not
even have the capability to create a numerical exact vector
representation of the features.

