Detecting and Correcting for Label Shift with Black Box Predictors
Zachary C. Lipton * 1 2 Yu-Xiang Wang * 2 3 Alexander J. Smola 2

Abstract
Faced with distribution shift between training and
test set, we wish to detect and quantify the shift,
and to correct our classifiers without test set labels.
Motivated by medical diagnosis, where diseases
(targets), cause symptoms (observations), we focus on label shift, where the label marginal p(y)
changes but the conditional p(x|y) does not. We
propose Black Box Shift Estimation (BBSE) to
estimate the test distribution p(y). BBSE exploits
arbitrary black box predictors to reduce dimensionality prior to shift correction. While better
predictors give tighter estimates, BBSE works
even when predictors are biased, inaccurate, or uncalibrated, so long as their confusion matrices are
invertible. We prove BBSE’s consistency, bound
its error, and introduce a statistical test that uses
BBSE to detect shift. We also leverage BBSE
to correct classifiers. Experiments demonstrate
accurate estimates and improved prediction, even
on high-dimensional datasets of natural images.

1. Introduction
Assume that in August we train a pneumonia predictor. Our
features consist of chest X-rays administered in the previous
year (distribution P ) and the labels binary indicators of
whether a physician diagnoses the patient with pneumonia.
We train a model f to predict pneumonia given an X-ray
image. Assume that in the training set .1% of patients
have pneumonia. We deploy f in the clinic and for several
months, it reliably predicts roughly .1% positive.
Fast-forward to January (distribution Q): Running f on the
last week’s data, we find that 5% of patients are predicted
to have pneumonia! Because f remains fixed, the shift must
owe to a change in the marginal p(x), violating the familiar
*

Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
PA 2 Amazon AI, Palo Alto, CA 3 UC Santa Barbara, CA. Correspondence to: Zachary C. Lipton <zlipton@cmu.edu >, YuXiang Wang <yuxiangw@amazon.com>, Alexander J. Smola
<smola@amazon.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

iid assumption. Absent familiar guarantees, we wonder: Is
f still accurate? What’s the real current rate of pneumonia?
Shouldn’t our classifier, trained under an obsolete prior,
underestimate pneumonia when uncertain? Thus, we might
suspect that the real prevalence is greater than 5%.
Given only labeled training data, and unlabeled test data,
we desire to: (i) detect distribution shift, (ii) quantify it, and
(iii) correct our model to perform well on the new data.
Absent assumptions on how p(y, x) changes, the task is
impossible. However, under assumptions about what P and
Q have in common, we can still make headway. Two candidates are covariate shift (where p(y|x) does not change) and
label shift (where p(x|y) does not change). Schölkopf et al.
(2012) observe that covariate shift corresponds to causal
learning (predicting effects), and label shift to anticausal
learning (predicting causes).
We focus on label shift, motivated by diagnosis (diseases
cause symptoms) and recognition tasks (objects cause sensory observations). During a pneumonia outbreak, p(y|x)
(e.g. flu given cough) might rise but the manifestations of
the disease p(x|y) might not change. Formally, under label
shift, we can factorize the target distribution as
q(y, x) = q(y)p(x|y).
By contrast, under the covariate shift assumption, q(y, x) =
q(x)p(y|x), e.g. the distribution of radiologic findings
p(x) changes, but the conditional probability of pneumonia
p(y|x) remains constant. To see how this can go wrong,
consider: what if our only feature were cough? Normally,
cough may not (strongly) indicate pneumonia. But during an
epidemic, P(pneumonia|cough) might go up substantially.
Despite its importance, label shift is comparatively underinvestigated: perhaps because given samples from both p(x)
and q(x), quantifying q(x)/p(x) is more intuitive.
We introduce Black Box Shift Estimation (BBSE) to estimate label shift using a black box predictor f . BBSE estimates the ratios wl = q(yl )/p(yl ) for each label l, requiring
only that the expected confusion matrix is invertible 1 . We
estimate ŵ by solving a linear system Ax = b where A is
the confusion matrix of f estimated on training data (from
1
For degenerate confusion matrices, a variant using soft predictions may be preferable.

