Learning to Search with MCTSnets

Arthur Guez * 1 Théophane Weber * 1 Ioannis Antonoglou 1 Karen Simonyan 1
Oriol Vinyals 1 Daan Wierstra 1 Rémi Munos 1 David Silver 1

Abstract
Planning problems are among the most important and well-studied problems in artificial intelligence. They are most typically solved by tree
search algorithms that simulate ahead into the future, evaluate future states, and back-up those evaluations to the root of a search tree. Among these
algorithms, Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) is
one of the most general, powerful and widely
used. A typical implementation of MCTS uses
cleverly designed rules, optimised to the particular characteristics of the domain. These rules
control where the simulation traverses, what to
evaluate in the states that are reached, and how
to back-up those evaluations. In this paper we
instead learn where, what and how to search. Our
architecture, which we call an MCTSnet, incorporates simulation-based search inside a neural network, by expanding, evaluating and backing-up
a vector embedding. The parameters of the network are trained end-to-end using gradient-based
optimisation. When applied to small searches
in the well-known planning problem Sokoban,
the learned search algorithm significantly outperformed MCTS baselines.

1. Introduction
Many success stories in artificial intelligence are based on
the application of powerful tree search algorithms to challenging planning problems (Samuel, 1959; Knuth & Moore,
1975; Jünger et al., 2009). It has been well documented that
planning algorithms can be highly optimised by tailoring
them to the domain (Schaeffer, 2000). For example, the
performance can often be dramatically improved by modifying the rules that select the trajectory to traverse, the states
to expand, the evaluation function by which performance
*
Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence
to: A. Guez and T. Weber <{aguez, theophane}@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

is measured, and the backup rule by which those evaluations are propagated up the search tree. Our contribution
is a new search algorithm in which all of these steps can
be learned automatically and efficiently. Our work fits into
a more general trend of learning differentiable versions of
algorithms.
One particularly powerful and general method for planning
is Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) (Coulom, 2006; Kocsis
& Szepesvári, 2006), as used in the recent AlphaGo program
(Silver et al., 2016). A typical MCTS algorithm consists of
several phases. First, it simulates trajectories into the future,
starting from a root state. Second, it evaluates the performance of leaf states - either using a random rollout, or using
an evaluation function such as a ’value network’. Third, it
backs-up these evaluations to update internal values along
the trajectory, for example by averaging over evaluations.
We present a neural network architecture that includes the
same processing stages as a typical MCTS, but inside the
neural network itself, as a dynamic computational graph.
The key idea is to represent the internal state of the search,
at each node, by a memory vector. The computation of
the network proceeds forwards from the root state, just like
a simulation of MCTS, using a simulation policy based
on the memory vector to select the trajectory to traverse.
The leaf state is then processed by an embedding network
to initialize the memory vector at the leaf. The network
proceeds backwards up the trajectory, updating the memory
at each visited state according to a backup network that
propagates from child to parent. Finally, the root memory
vector is used to compute an overall prediction of value or
action.
The major benefit of our planning architecture, compared
to more traditional planning algorithms, is that it can be
exposed to gradient-based optimisation. This allows us to
replace every component of MCTS with a richer, learnable
equivalent — while maintaining the desirable structural
properties of MCTS such as the use of a model, iterative
local computations, and structured memory. We jointly
train the parameters of the evaluation network, backup network and simulation policy so as to optimise the overall
predictions of the MCTS network (MCTSnet). The majority of the network is fully differentiable, allowing for

