CRAFTML, an Efficient Clustering-based Random
Forest for Extreme Multi-label Learning

Wissam Siblini 1 2 Pascale Kuntz 1 Frank Meyer 2

Abstract
Extreme Multi-label Learning (XML) considers
large sets of items described by a number of labels that can exceed one million. Tree-based
methods, which hierarchically partition the problem into small scale sub-problems, are particularly promising in this context to reduce the learning/prediction complexity and to open the way
to parallelization. However, the current best approaches do not exploit tree randomization which
has shown its efficiency in random forests and
they resort to complex partitioning strategies. To
overcome these limits, we here introduce a new
random forest based algorithm with a very fast
partitioning approach called CRAFTML. Experimental comparisons on nine datasets from the
XML literature show that it outperforms the other
tree-based approaches. Moreover with a parallelized implementation reduced to five cores, it is
competitive with the best state-of-the-art methods
which run on one hundred-core machines.

1. Introduction
Multi-label classification has received a tremendous attention in the last decade and recently, stimulated by real-life
applications involving large datasets (e.g. image (Partalas
et al., 2015) and text (Deng et al., 2009) annotation and
product recommendation (McAuley et al., 2015)), it has
been extended to problems where the number of labels can
exceed one million (Agrawal et al., 2013). In this new context, called eXtreme Multi-label Learning (XML), most of
the classical algorithms face scalability issues (Weston et al.,
2013) or performance degradation. In an attempt to overcome these challenges, researchers have recently explored
three directions: (i) using optimization tricks such as pri1

Computer Science Laboratory of Nantes (LS2N), France
Orange Labs Lannion, France. Correspondence to: Wissam Siblini <wissam.siblini@univ-nantes.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

mal/dual conversion or sparsification (Yen et al., 2016) and
parallelization on supercomputers (Babbar & Schölkopf,
2017; Yen et al., 2017), (ii) reducing the data dimensionality for solving a smaller size problem with a classical
approach (Yu et al., 2014; Bhatia et al., 2015) or (iii) hierarchically partitioning the initial problem into small scale
sub-problems (Jasinska et al., 2016; Jain et al., 2016). The
tree-based decomposition of the third approach has several
advantages. It can exploit a hierarchical structuration of the
problem either hidden in the mass of data or available for
users like the hierarchy of the Wikipedia Article Categories
(Partalas et al., 2015) or the ImageNet tags (Deng et al.,
2009). Moreover, by decomposing learning into subtasks,
it reduces the learning/prediction complexity and opens the
way to parallelization. Finally, its sequence of successive
decisions allows a great expressivity.
Motivated by those properties, we here present a novel
fast and accurate tree-based approach called CRAFTML
(Clustering-based RAndom Forest of predictive Trees for
extreme Multi-label Learning). Similarly to PFastReXML
(Jain et al., 2016) which is among the best tree-based approaches for XML, CRAFTML is a forest of decision trees
trained with the supervision of the labels where the splitting
conditions are based on all the features. But CRAFTML
has two major differences with PFastReXML: (i) it exploits
a random forest strategy which not only randomly reduces
both the feature and the label spaces to obtain diversity
but also replaces random selections with random projections to preserve more information; (ii) it uses a novel lowcomplexity splitting strategy which avoids the resolution
of a multi-objective optimization problem at each node.
Numerical experiments on nine datasets from the XML
literature show that CRAFTML outperforms the existing
XML tree-based approaches with a lower training time and
a smaller memory size. Moreover, it has relevant advantages
over the most accurate methods today (DISMEC (Babbar
& Schölkopf, 2017) and PPDSparse (Yen et al., 2017)): its
model size is smaller and its training/prediction complexities are much lower. Experiments confirm that CRAFTML
remains competitive with these approaches which both run
on one hundred-core machines. In addition, with a parallelized implementation on a five-core machine, the training
time of CRAFTML becomes lower than the training time

