Nonparametric Regression with Comparisons:
Escaping the Curse of Dimensionality with Ordinal Information

Yichong Xu 1 Hariank Muthakana 1 Sivaraman Balakrishnan 2 Artur Dubrawski 3 Aarti Singh 1

Abstract
In supervised learning, we leverage a labeled
dataset to design methods for function estimation.
In many practical situations, we are able to obtain
alternative feedback, possibly at a low cost. A
broad goal is to understand the usefulness of, and
to design algorithms to exploit, this alternative
feedback. We focus on a semi-supervised setting
where we obtain additional ordinal (or comparison) information for potentially unlabeled samples. We consider ordinal feedback of varying
qualities where we have either a perfect ordering
of the samples, a noisy ordering of the samples or
noisy pairwise comparisons between the samples.
We provide a precise quantification of the usefulness of these types of ordinal feedback in nonparametric regression, showing that in many cases
it is possible to accurately estimate an underlying
function with a very small labeled set, effectively
escaping the curse of dimensionality. We develop
an algorithm called Ranking-Regression (R2 ) and
analyze its accuracy as a function of size of the
labeled and unlabeled datasets and various noise
parameters. We also present lower bounds, that
establish fundamental limits for the task and show
that R2 is optimal in a variety of settings. Finally,
we present experiments that show the efficacy
of R2 and investigate its robustness to various
sources of noise and model-misspecification.

1. Introduction
Classical nonparametric regression is centered around the
development and analysis of methods that use labeled observations, {(X1 , y1 ), . . . , (Xn , yn )}, where (Xi , yi ) ∈
1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 2 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 3 Auton Lab,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to:
Yichong Xu <yichongx@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Rd × R, in various tasks of estimation and inference. Nonparametric methods are appealing in practice owing to their
flexibility, and the relatively weak a-priori structural assumptions that they impose on the unknown regression function.
However, the price we pay is that nonparametric methods
typically require a large amount of labeled data, scaling exponentially with the dimension, to estimate complex target
functions – the so-called curse of dimensionality. This has
motivated research on structural constraints – for instance,
sparsity or manifold constraints – as well as research on
active learning and semi-supervised learning where labeled
samples are used judiciously. We consider a complementary approach, motivated by applications in material science,
crowdsourcing, and healthcare, where we are able to supplement a small labeled dataset with a potentially larger dataset
of ordinal information. Such ordinal information is obtained
either in the form of a (noisy) ranking of unlabeled points
or in the form of (noisy) pairwise comparisons between
function values at unlabeled points.
In crowdsourcing we rely on human labeling effort, and in
many cases humans are able to provide more accurate ordinal feedback with substantially less effort (see for instance
(Tsukida & Gupta, 2011; Shah et al., 2015)). We investigate
a task of this flavor in Section 6. In material synthesis the
broad goal is to design complex new materials and machine
learning approaches are gaining popularity (Xue et al., 2016;
Faber et al., 2016). Typically given a setting of input parameters (temperature, pressure etc.) we are able to perform a
synthesis experiment and measure the quality of resulting
synthesized material. Understanding this quality landscape
is essentially a task of high-dimensional function estimation.
Synthesis experiments can be costly and material scientists
when presented with pairs of input parameters are often
able to cheaply provide noisy comparative assessments of
synthesis quality. Similarly, in clinical settings, precise assessment of an individual patient’s health readings can be
difficult, expensive and/or risky, but comparing the relative
status of two patients may be relatively easy and accurate. In
each of these settings, it is important to develop methods for
function estimation that combine standard supervision with
(potentially) cheaper and abundant ordinal or comparative
supervision.

