Local Private Hypothesis Testing: Chi-Square Tests

Marco Gaboardi 1 Ryan Rogers 2

Abstract
The local model for differential privacy is emerging as the reference model for practical applications of collecting and sharing sensitive information while satisfying strong privacy guarantees. In
the local model, there is no trusted entity which
is allowed to have each individual’s raw data as
is assumed in the traditional curator model. Individuals’ data are usually perturbed before sharing
them. We explore the design of private hypothesis
tests in the local model, where each data entry is
perturbed to ensure the privacy of each participant.
Specifically, we analyze locally private chi-square
tests for goodness of fit and independence testing.

1. Introduction
Hypothesis testing is a widely applied statistical tool used to
test whether given models should be rejected, or not, based
on sampled data from a population. Hypothesis testing was
initially developed for scientific and survey data, but today
it is also an essential tool to test models over collections of
social network, mobile, and crowdsourced data (American
Statistical Association, 2014; Hunter et al., 2008; Steele
et al., 2017). Collected data samples may contain highly
sensitive information about the subjects, and the privacy of
individuals can be compromised when the results of a data
analysis are released. A way to address this concern is by developing new techniques to support privacy-preserving data
analysis. Among the different approaches, differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006b) has emerged as a viable solution:
it provides strong privacy guarantees and it allows to release
accurate statistics. A standard way to achieve differential
privacy is by injecting some statistical noise in the computation of the data analysis. When the noise is carefully
chosen, it helps to protect the individual privacy without
compromising the utility of the data analysis. Several recent
works have studied differentially private hypothesis tests
*

Equal contribution 1 University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Marco Gaboardi <gaboardi@buffalo.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

that can be used in place of the standard, non-private hypothesis tests (Uhler et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2014; Sheffet, 2015;
Karwa & Slavković, 2016; Wang et al., 2015; Gaboardi
et al., 2016; Kifer & Rogers, 2017; Cai et al., 2017). These
tests work in the curator model of differential privacy. In
this model, the data is centrally stored and the curator carefully injects noise in the computation of the data analysis in
order to satisfy differential privacy.
In this work we instead address the local model of privacy,
formally introduced by Raskhodnikova et al. (2008). The
first differentially private algorithm called randomized response – in fact it predates the definition of differential
privacy by more than 40 years – guarantees differential privacy in the local model (Warner, 1965). In this model, there
is no trusted centralized entity that is responsible for the
noise injection. Instead, each individual adds enough noise
to guarantee differential privacy for their own data, which
provides a stronger privacy guarantee than the curator model.
The data analysis is then run over the collection of the individually sanitized data. The local model of differential
privacy is a convenient model for several applications: for
example it is used to collect statistics about the activity of
the Google Chrome Web browser users (Erlingsson et al.,
2014), and to collect statistics about the typing patterns of
Apple’s iPhone users (Apple Press Info, 2016). Despite
these applications, the local model has received far less attention than the centralized curator model. This is in part
due to the more firm requirements imposed by this model,
which make the design of effective data analysis harder.
Our main contribution is in designing chi-square hypothesis
tests for the local model of differential privacy. Similar to
previous works we focus on goodness of fit and independence hypothesis tests. Most of the private chi-square tests
proposed so far are based on mechanisms that add noise in
some form to the aggregate data, e.g. the cells of the contingency tables, or the resulting chi-square statistics value.
These approaches cannot be used in the local model, since
noise needs to be added at the individual’s data level. We
then consider instead general privatizing techniques in the
local model, and we study how to build new hypothesis
tests with them. Each test we present is characterized by a
specific local model mechanism. The main technical challenge for designing each test is to create statistics, which
incorporate the local model mechanisms, that converge as

