Programmatically Interpretable Reinforcement Learning

Abhinav Verma 1 Vijayaraghavan Murali 1 Rishabh Singh 2 Pushmeet Kohli 3 Swarat Chaudhuri 1

Abstract
We present a reinforcement learning framework,
called Programmatically Interpretable Reinforcement Learning (P IRL), that is designed to generate interpretable and verifiable agent policies.
Unlike the popular Deep Reinforcement Learning (D RL) paradigm, which represents policies
by neural networks, P IRL represents policies using a high-level, domain-specific programming
language. Such programmatic policies have the
benefits of being more easily interpreted than neural networks, and being amenable to verification
by symbolic methods. We propose a new method,
called Neurally Directed Program Search (N DPS),
for solving the challenging nonsmooth optimization problem of finding a programmatic policy
with maximal reward. N DPS works by first learning a neural policy network using D RL, and then
performing a local search over programmatic policies that seeks to minimize a distance from this
neural “oracle”. We evaluate N DPS on the task of
learning to drive a simulated car in the T ORCS carracing environment. We demonstrate that N DPS
is able to discover human-readable policies that
pass some significant performance bars. We also
show that P IRL policies can have smoother trajectories, and can be more easily transferred to environments not encountered during training, than
corresponding policies discovered by D RL.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (D RL) has had a massive impact on the field of machine learning and has led to remarkable successes in the solution of many challenging
tasks (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; 2017). While
neural networks have been shown to be very effective in
learning good policies, the expressivity of these models
1
Rice University 2 Google Brain 3 Deepmind. Correspondence
to: Abhinav Verma <averma@rice.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

makes them difficult to interpret or to be checked for consistency for some desired properties, and casts a cloud over the
use of such representations in safety-critical applications.
Motivated to overcome this problem, we propose a learning
framework, called Programmatically Interpretable Reinforcement Learning (P IRL)1 , that is based on the idea of
learning policies that are represented in a human-readable
language. The P IRL framework is parameterized on a highlevel programming language for policies. A problem instance in P IRL is similar to a one in traditional R L, but also
includes a (policy) sketch that syntactically defines a set of
programmatic policies in this language. The objective is to
find a program in this set with maximal long-term reward.
Intuitively, the policy programming language and the sketch
characterize what we consider “interpretable”. In addition to
interpretability, the syntactic restriction on policies has three
key benefits. First, the language can be used to implicitly
encode the learner’s inductive bias that will be used for
generalization. Second, the language can allow effective
pruning of undesired policies to make the search for a good
policy more efficient. Finally, it allows us to use symbolic
program verification techniques to formally reason about
the learned policies and check consistency with correctness
properties. At the same time, policies in P IRL can have rich
semantics, for example allowing actions to depend on events
far back in history.
A key technical challenge in P IRL is that the space of policies permitted in an instance can be vast and nonsmooth,
making optimization extremely challenging. To address
this, we propose a new algorithm called Neurally Directed
Program Synthesis (N DPS). The algorithm first uses D RL to
compute a neural policy network that has high performance,
but may not be expressible in the policy language. This
network is then used to direct a local search over programmatic policies. In each iteration of this search, we maintain
a set of “interesting” inputs, and update the program so as to
minimize the distance between its outputs and the outputs
of the neural policy (an “oracle”) on these inputs. The set of
interesting inputs is updated as the search progresses. This
strategy, inspired by imitation learning (Ross et al., 2011;
Schaal, 1999), allows us to perform direct policy search in a
highly nonsmooth policy space.
1

P IRL is pronounced Pi-R-L (as in π-R L)

