INSPECTRE: Privately Estimating the Unseen

Jayadev Acharya * 1 Gautam Kamath * 2 Ziteng Sun * 1 Huanyu Zhang * 1

Abstract
We develop differentially private methods for estimating various distributional properties. Given a
sample from a discrete distribution p, some functional f , and accuracy and privacy parameters α
and ε, the goal is to estimate f (p) up to accuracy α, while maintaining ε-differential privacy
of the sample. We prove almost-tight bounds on
the sample size required for this problem for several functionals of interest, including support size,
support coverage, and entropy. We show that the
cost of privacy is negligible in a variety of settings, both theoretically and experimentally. Our
methods are based on a sensitivity analysis of several state-of-the-art methods for estimating these
properties with sublinear sample complexities.

1. Introduction
How can we infer a distribution given a sample from it?
If data is in abundance, the solution may be simple – the
empirical distribution will approximate the true distribution.
However, challenges arise when data is scarce in comparison to the size of the domain, and especially when we wish
to quantify “rare events.” This is frequently the case: for
example, it has recently been observed that there are several
very rare genetic mutations which occur in humans, and we
wish to know how many such mutations exist (Keinan &
Clark, 2012; Tennessen et al., 2012; Nelson et al., 2012).
Many of these mutations have only been seen once, and we
can infer that there are many which have not been seen at all.
Over the last decade, a large body of work has focused on
developing theoretically sound and effective tools for such
settings (Orlitsky et al., 2016) and references therein, including the problem of estimating the frequency distribution of
*
Equal contribution 1 ECE, Cornell University, Ithaca, New
York, USA 2 EECS & CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to:
Jayadev Acharya <acharya@cornell.edu>, Gautam Kamath
<g@csail.mit.edu>, Ziteng Sun <zs335@cornell.edu>, Huanyu
Zhang <hz388@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

rare genetic variations (Zou et al., 2016).
However, in many settings where one wishes to perform
statistical inference, data may contain sensitive information
about individuals. For example, in medical studies, where
the data may contain individuals’ health records and whether
they carry some disease which bears a social stigma. Alternatively, one can consider a map application which suggests
routes based on aggregate positions of individuals, which
contains delicate information including users’ residence
data. In these settings, it is critical that our methods protect
sensitive information contained in the dataset. This does not
preclude our overall goals of statistical analysis, as we are
trying to infer properties of the population p, and not the
samples which are drawn from said population.
That said, without careful experimental design, published
statistical findings may be prone to leaking sensitive information about the sample. As a notable example, it was
recently shown that one can determine the identity of some
individuals who participated in genome-wide association
studies (Homer et al., 2008). This realization has motivated
a surge of interest in developing data sharing techniques with
an explicit focus on maintaining privacy of the data (Johnson & Shmatikov, 2013; Uhler et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2014;
Simmons et al., 2016).
Privacy-preserving computation has enjoyed significant
study in a number of fields, including statistics and almost
every branch of computer science, including cryptography,
machine learning, algorithms, and database theory – see,
e.g., (Dalenius, 1977; Adam & Worthmann, 1989; Agrawal
& Aggarwal, 2001; Dinur & Nissim, 2003; Dwork, 2008;
Dwork & Roth, 2014) and references therein. Perhaps the
most celebrated notion of privacy, proposed by theoretical
computer scientists, is differential privacy (Dwork et al.,
2006). Informally, an algorithm is differentially private if
its outputs on neighboring datasets (differing in a single
element) are statistically close (for a more precise definition, see Section 2). Differential privacy has become the
standard for theoretically-sound data privacy, leading to its
adoption by several large technology companies, including Google and Apple (Erlingsson et al., 2014; Differential
Privacy Team, Apple, 2017).
Our focus in this paper is to develop tools for privately
performing several distribution property estimation tasks. In

