GEP-PG: Decoupling Exploration and Exploitation
in Deep Reinforcement Learning Algorithms

Cédric Colas 1 Olivier Sigaud 1 2 Pierre-Yves Oudeyer 1

Abstract
In continuous action domains, standard deep reinforcement learning algorithms like DDPG suffer
from inefficient exploration when facing sparse
or deceptive reward problems. Conversely, evolutionary and developmental methods focusing
on exploration like Novelty Search, QualityDiversity or Goal Exploration Processes explore
more robustly but are less efficient at fine-tuning
policies using gradient-descent. In this paper, we
present the GEP - PG approach, taking the best of
both worlds by sequentially combining a Goal Exploration Process and two variants of DDPG. We
study the learning performance of these components and their combination on a low dimensional
deceptive reward problem and on the larger HalfCheetah benchmark. We show that DDPG fails
on the former and that GEP - PG improves over the
best DDPG variant in both environments.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms combine function approximation based on deep neural networks with RL.
Outstanding results have been obtained recently by such
systems in problems with either large discrete state and
action sets (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016) or continuous state and action domains (Lillicrap et al., 2015).
These results have attracted considerable attention on these
techniques in the last two years, with the emergence of
several competitive algorithms like PPO (Schulman et al.,
2017), ACKTR (Wu et al., 2017), ACER (Wang et al., 2016)
and Q - PROP (Gu et al., 2016), as well as easily accessible
benchmarks (Brockman et al., 2016; Machado et al., 2017b)
to perform thorough comparative evaluations (Duan et al.,
2016; Islam et al., 2017; Henderson et al., 2017).
1

INRIA, Flowers Team, Bordeaux, France 2 Sorbonne University, ISIR, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Cédric Colas
<cedric.colas@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Deep RL algorithms generally consist in applying Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) to the weights of neural networks representing the policy and an eventual critic, so as
to minimize some reward-related cost function. The good
performance of these methods mainly comes from the high
sample efficiency of SGD, the gradient with respect to the
network parameters being analytically available. To deal
with the exploration-exploitation trade-off (Sutton & Barto,
1998), a deep RL algorithm uses its current policy to select
the best action (exploitation), and adds random noise to
explore (action perturbation). This could be a simple Gaussian noise or a more advanced Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU)
correlated noise process in the case of Deep Deterministic
Policy Gradient DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2015) or a random
selection of suboptimal actions in the case of DQN (Mnih
et al., 2015). This approach may not be efficient enough in
the case of RL problems with multi-dimensional continuous
actions where exploration can be particularly challenging
(e.g. in robotics).
Recently, a family of evolutionary computation techniques
has emerged as a convincing competitor of deep RL in the
continuous action domain (Salimans et al., 2017; Conti et al.,
2017; Petroski Such et al., 2017). These techniques perform
policy search directly in the policy parameter space, classifying them as “parameter perturbation” methods. These
methods benefit from more focus on exploration, especially
for problems with rare or deceptive rewards and continuous action spaces, as illustrated by many papers on Novelty Search (Lehman & Stanley, 2011; Conti et al., 2017),
Quality-Diversity (Pugh et al., 2015; Cully & Demiris, 2017)
and curiosity-driven learning (Baranes & Oudeyer, 2013;
Forestier et al., 2017). Besides, policy parameter perturbation is generally considered superior to action perturbation
in policy search (Stulp & Sigaud, 2013). But, as they do
not rely on analytical gradient computations, these methods
are generally less sample efficient than SGD-based methods
(Salimans et al., 2017).
To summarize, deep RL methods are generally more efficient than evolutionary methods once they are fine-tuning
a solution that is already close to the optimum, but their
exploration might prove inefficient in problems with flat or
deceptive gradients.

