Near Optimal Frequent Directions for Sketching Dense and Sparse Matrices

Zengfeng Huang 1

Abstract
n×d

Given a large matrix A ∈ R
, we consider the
problem of computing a sketch matrix B ∈ R`×d
which is significantly smaller than but still well
approximates A. We are interested in minimizing
the covariance error kAT A − B T Bk2 . We consider the problems in the streaming model, where
the algorithm can only make one pass over the
input with limited working space. The popular
Frequent Directions algorithm of (Liberty, 2013)
and its variants achieve optimal space-error tradeoff. However, whether the running time can be
improved remains an unanswered question. In
this paper, we almost settle the time complexity of this problem. In particular, we provide
new space-optimal algorithms with faster running
times. Moreover, we also show that the running
times of our algorithms are near-optimal unless
the state-of-the-art running time of matrix multiplication can be improved significantly.

1. Introduction
For large-scale matrix computations, exact algorithms are often too slow, so a large body of works focus on designing fast
randomized approximation algorithms. To speedup the computation, matrix sketching is a commonly used technique,
e.g. (Sarlos, 2006; Clarkson & Woodruff, 2013; Avron et al.,
2013; Chierichetti et al., 2017). In real-world applications,
the data often arrives in a streaming fashion and it is often
impractical or impossible to store the entire data set in the
main memory.
In this paper, we study online streaming algorithms for maintaining matrix sketches with small covariance errors. In the
streaming model, the rows of the input matrix arrive one at
a time; the algorithm is only allowed to make one pass over
the stream with severely limited working space, which is required to maintain a sketch continuously. This problem has
1
School of Data Science, Fudan University, China. Correspondence to: Zengfeng Huang <huangzf@fudan.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

received lots of attention recently (Liberty, 2013; Ghashami
& Phillips, 2014; Woodruff, 2014; Ghashami et al., 2016;
Wei et al., 2016).
The popular Frequent Directions algorithms (Liberty, 2013;
Ghashami et al., 2016) achieve optimal tradeoff between
space usage and approximation error (Woodruff, 2014),
which have found lots of applications in online learning,
e.g., (Boutsidis et al., 2015; Karnin & Liberty, 2015; Leng
et al., 2015; Huang & Kasiviswanathan, 2015; Luo et al.,
2016; Calandriello et al., 2017), and other problems (Song
et al., 2015; Ye et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2016). However,
it is unclear whether their running times can be improved;
one might hope to get linear (in sparsity) time algorithms,
which is possible for many matrix problems, e.g. (Clarkson & Woodruff, 2013). This paper is motivated by the
following question:
• Is there an input sparsity time Frequent Directions,
which achieves the same optimal space-error tradeoff ?
1.1. Problem definitions
Given a matrix A ∈ Rn×d , we want to compute a much
smaller matrix B ∈ R`×d , which has low covariance error,
i.e., kAT A − B T Bk2 .
Definition 1 (Covariance Sketch). For any 0 < α < 1, and
integer 0 ≤ k ≤ rank(A), we will call B an (α, k)-covsketch of A, if the covariance error1
kAT A − B T Bk2 ≤ αkA − [A]k k2F .

(1)

Here k · k2 and k · kF are the spectral norm and Frobenius
norm of matrices; [A]k is the best rank-k approximation to
k
A. We will use πB
(A) to denote the projection of A on the
k
top-k singular vectors of B, i.e. πB
(A) = AV V T , where
the columns of V are the top-k right singular vectors of B.
Definition 2 (Projection error). The projection error of B
k
with respect to A is defined as kA − πB
(A)k2F .
k
Note πB
(A) is a rank-k matrix, thereby the projection error
is at least kA−[A]k k2F . It is proved in (Ghashami & Phillips,
2014) that one can obtain relative projection error from
small covariance error. We include a proof of the next
lemma in the supplementary material.
1

for k = 0, we define [A]0 = 0

