Spatio-temporal Bayesian On-line Changepoint Detection with Model Selection

1. Introduction
Real-world spatio-temporal processes are often poorly modelled by standard inference methods that assume stationarity
in time and space. A variety of techniques have been developed for modelling non-stationarity in time via changepoints
(CP S), ranging from methods for Gaussian Processes (GP S)
(Garnett et al., 2009), the Lasso (Lin et al., 2017) or the
Ising model (Fazayeli & Banerjee, 2016) over approaches
using density ratio estimation (Liu et al., 2013) and kernelbased methods exploiting M-statistics (Li et al., 2015) to
framing CP detection as time series clustering (Khaleghi
& Ryabko, 2014). In contrast, CP inference allowing for
non-stationarity in space (Herlands et al., 2016) has received
comparatively little attention.

10

PE

0
2
0

P(m|y)

Bayesian On-line Changepoint Detection is extended to on-line model selection and nonstationary spatio-temporal processes. We propose spatially structured Vector Autoregressions
(VAR S) for modelling the process between
changepoints (CP S) and give an upper bound on
the approximation error of such models. The
resulting algorithm performs prediction, model
selection and CP detection on-line. Its time complexity is linear and its space complexity constant,
and thus it is two orders of magnitudes faster than
its closest competitor. In addition, it outperforms
the state of the art for multivariate data.

1

run length

Abstract

Value

Jeremias Knoblauch 1 Theodoros Damoulas 1 2 3

0

0

100

AR(2)
AR(3)
VAR4(2)
VAR8(1)

200
0

100
-1000

200

300
-99

400
-89

500
0

Figure 1. Bayesian On-line Changepoint Detection with Model
Selection (BOCPDMS): Panel 1: Artificial data across times
1 − 500 for a regular spatial grid with 4- and 8-neighbourhood
dependency structure as in Fig. 2, Panel 2: prediction error (black)
and variance (gray). Panel 3: Model posteriors p(mt |y 1:t ). Panel
4: log run-length distribution (grayscale), its maximum (red) and
MAP segmentation of CP S and models in corresponding colors.

an inference procedure for on-line prediction, model selection and CP detection, see Fig. 1. Our construction
exploits that both algorithms use Product Partition Models
(Barry & Hartigan, 1992), which assume independence of
parameters conditional on the CP S and independence of
observations conditional on these parameters.

1
Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, UK
Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, UK
3
The Alan Turing Institute for Data Science & AI, UK. Correspondence to: Jeremias Knoblauch <j.knoblauch@warwick.ac.uk>.

Our method can be seen as modified on-line version of Xuan
& Murphy (2007). In their method, inference is off-line,
the model universe M is built during execution and multivariate dependencies are restricted to decomposable graph.
In contrast, our procedure specifies M before execution,
but runs on-line and does not restrict dependencies. The
closest competing on-line procedure in the literature thus far
is the work of Saatçi et al. (2010), which develops Gaussian
Process (GP) CP models for Bayesian On-line Changepoint
Detection (BOCPD). Though our results suggest that parametric models may be preferable to GP models, the latter
can still be integrated into our method as elements of the
model universe M without any further modifications.

A version of this paper appeared in the Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Stockholm, Sweden,
PMLR 80, 2018.

In summary, we make three contributions: Firstly, we substantially augment the existing work on BOCPD by allowing
for model uncertainty. Unlike previous extensions of the al-

We offer the first on-line solution to this problem by modeling non-stationarity in both space and time. CP S are used
to model non-stationarity in time, and the use of spatially
structured Bayesian Vector Autoregressions (SSBVAR) circumvents the assumption of stationarity in space. We unify
Adams & MacKay (2007) and Fearnhead & Liu (2007) into
2

