Learning to Speed Up Structured Output Prediction

Xingyuan Pan 1 Vivek Srikumar 1

Abstract
Predicting structured outputs can be computationally onerous due to the combinatorially large output spaces. In this paper, we focus on reducing the
prediction time of a trained black-box structured
classifier without losing accuracy. To do so, we
train a speedup classifier that learns to mimic a
black-box classifier under the learning-to-search
approach. As the structured classifier predicts
more examples, the speedup classifier will operate
as a learned heuristic to guide search to favorable
regions of the output space. We present a mistake bound for the speedup classifier and identify
inference situations where it can independently
make correct judgments without input features.
We evaluate our method on the task of entity and
relation extraction and show that the speedup classifier outperforms even greedy search in terms of
speed without loss of accuracy.

1. Introduction
Many natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision problems necessitate predicting structured outputs such
as labeled sequences, trees or general graphs (Smith, 2010;
Nowozin & Lampert, 2011). Such tasks require modeling both input-output relationships and the interactions between predicted outputs to capture correlations. Across the
various structured prediction formulations (Lafferty et al.,
2001; Taskar et al., 2003; Chang et al., 2012), prediction
requires solving inference problems by searching for scoremaximizing output structures. The search space for inference is typically large (e.g., all parse trees), and grows with
input size. Exhaustive search can be prohibitive and standard alternatives are either: (a) perform exact inference with
a large computational cost or, (b) approximate inference to
sacrifice accuracy in favor of time.
1

School of Computing, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah,
USA. Correspondence to: Xingyuan Pan <xpan@cs.utah.edu>,
Vivek Srikumar <svivek@cs.utah.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

In this paper, we focus on the computational cost of inference. We argue that naturally occurring problems have
remarkable regularities across both inputs and outputs, and
traditional formulations of inference ignore them. For example, parsing an n-word sentence will cost a standard
head-driven lexical parser O(n5 ) time. Current practice in
NLP is to treat each new sentence as a fresh discrete optimization problem and pay the computational price each
time. However, this practice is not only expensive, but also
wasteful! We ignore the fact that slight changes to inputs
often do not change the output, or even the sequence of steps
taken to produce it. Moreover, not all outputs are linguistically meaningful structures; as we make more predictions,
we should be able to learn to prune the output space.
The motivating question that drives our work is: Can we
design inference schemes that learn to make a trained structured predictor faster without sacrificing output quality?
After training, the structured classifier can be thought as a
black-box. Typically, once deployed, it is never modified
over its lifetime of classifying new examples. Subsequently,
we can view each prediction of the black-box classifier as
an opportunity to learn how to navigate the output space
more efficiently. Thus, if the classifier sees a previously encountered situation, it could make some decisions without
needless computations.
We formalize this intuition by considering the trained models as solving arbitrary integer linear programs (ILPs) for
combinatorial inference. We train a second, inexpensive
speedup classifier which acts as a heuristic for a searchbased inference algorithm that mimics the more expensive
black-box classifier. The speedup heuristic is a function that
learns regularities among predicted structures. We present a
mistake bound algorithm that, over the classifier’s lifetime,
learns to navigate the feasible regions of the ILPs. By doing
so, we can achieve a reduction in inference time.
We further identify inference situations where the learned
speedup heuristic alone can correctly label parts of the outputs without computing the corresponding input features. In
such situations, the search algorithm can safely ignore parts
of inputs if the corresponding outputs can be decided based
on the sub-structures constructed so far. Seen this way, the
speedup classifier can be seen as a statistical cache of past
decisions made by the black-box classifier.

