Parallel Bayesian Network Structure Learning

Tian Gao* 1 Dennis Wei* 1

Abstract
Recent advances in Bayesian Network (BN) structure learning have focused on local-to-global
learning, where the graph structure is learned via
one local subgraph at a time. As a natural progression, we investigate parallel learning of BN structures via multiple learning agents simultaneously,
where each agent learns one local subgraph at a
time. We find that parallel learning can reduce the
number of subgraphs requiring structure learning
by storing previously queried results and communicating (even partial) results among agents. More
specifically, by using novel rules on query subset
and superset inference, many subgraph structures
can be inferred without learning. We provide a
sound and complete parallel structure learning
(PSL) algorithm, and demonstrate its improved
efficiency over state-of-the-art single-thread learning algorithms.

1. Introduction
Bayesian networks (BN) are widely used in machine learning applications (Ott et al., 2004; Spirtes et al., 1999). The
structure of a BN takes the form of a directed acyclic graph
(DAG) and plays a vital part in applications such as causal
inference. Many algorithms for learning BN structures
from data have been developed, including score-based and
constraint-based approaches (Chickering, 2002; Koivisto &
Sood, 2004; Silander & Myllymaki, 2006; Jaakkola et al.,
2010; Cussens, 2011; Yuan & Malone, 2013).
To alleviate the NP-hard complexity (Chickering et al.,
2012) of learning a BN structure all at once, i.e. globally,
both local and local-to-global learning approaches have been
proposed (Niinimaki & Parviainen, 2012; Gao et al., 2017).
Instead of operating on the full DAG search space over
all variables, local and local-to-global methods limit the
size of the space by learning local structures over smaller
*
Equal contribution 1 IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY
10598 USA. Correspondence to: Tian Gao <tgao@us.ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

sets of variables. Here, local structures usually refer to
the parent-child (PC) set or the Markov Blanket (MB) set
(Pearl, 1988) of one or more nodes in a DAG. Local learning algorithms (Koller & Sahami, 1996; Tsamardinos et al.,
2003; Fu & Desmarais, 2008) focus on a specific target
variable and iteratively query other variables to learn the
local structure around the target, either its PC set, MB set,
or both. Many local learning algorithms have shown promising performance in practice (Aliferis et al., 2010). Using
learned local structures, some prior works have taken the
next step of combining them into a global structure. Several
researchers (Margaritis & Thrun, 1999; Pellet & Ellisseeff,
2008) have proposed algorithms that first identify the MBs
of some nodes in the graph and then connect the MBs in a
maximally consistent way to learn the global structure of
the BN. This approach has the benefit of improving the efficiency of exact structure learning for graphs with favorable
neighbor structures (Gao et al., 2017), as at each step only a
small number of variables is expected to be used.
In this paper, we consider the problem of learning a BN
structure using multiple local learning agents at the same
time. Each agent follows a local learning approach as described above. A naive solution would be to learn the local
structure of each node using a separate agent, and then
combine these local structures after learning. Given the
parallel paradigm however, a more sophisticated approach
would allow communication among agents both during and
after each round of local structure learning. We address
the question of how to maximize computational savings
using such communication. In particular, we find that by
tracking the query sets generated during local learning as
well as the non-edges that are learned, the graphs that would
result from structure learning on some future query sets can
instead be more efficiently inferred from this history. We introduce two such inference rules: query subset and superset
inference, and propose a sound and complete parallel BN
structure learning (PSL) algorithm. The number of structure learning function calls saved by subset and superset
inference is analyzed. We demonstrate that the proposed
algorithm could lead to very significant savings compared
to single-thread baseline methods such as graph growing SL
algorithm (GGSL) (Gao et al., 2017).
Our approach is fundamentally different from and complementary to existing parallel algorithms for global BN

