Information Theoretic Guarantees for Empirical Risk Minimization
with Applications to Model Selection and Large-Scale Optimization

Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin 1

Abstract
In this paper, we derive bounds on the mutual information of the empirical risk minimization (ERM) procedure for both 0-1 and stronglyconvex loss classes. We prove that under the Axiom of Choice, the existence of an ERM learning rule with a vanishing mutual information is
equivalent to the assertion that the loss class has
a finite VC dimension, thus bridging information
theory with statistical learning theory. Similarly,
an asymptotic bound on the mutual information
is established for strongly-convex loss classes in
terms of the number of model parameters. The
latter result rests on a central limit theorem (CLT)
that we derive in this paper. In addition, we use
our results to analyze the excess risk in stochastic
convex optimization and unify previous works.
Finally, we present two important applications.
First, we show that the ERM of strongly-convex
loss classes can be trivially scaled to big data using a naïve parallelization algorithm with provable
guarantees. Second, we propose a simple information criterion for model selection and demonstrate experimentally that it outperforms the popular Akaike’s information criterion (AIC) and
Schwarz’s Bayesian information criterion (BIC).

1. Introduction
Learning via the empirical risk minimization (ERM) of
stochastic loss is a ubiquitous framework that has been
widely applied in machine learning and statistics. It is often
regarded as the default strategy to use, due to its simplicity,
generality, and statistical efficiency (Shalev-Shwartz et al.,
2009; Koren & Levy, 2015; Vapnik, 1999; Shalev-Shwartz
& Ben-David, 2014). Given a fixed hypothesis space H,
1

Saudi Aramco,
Dhahran 31311,
Saudi Arabia.
Correspondence to:
Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin
<ibrahim.alabdulmohsin@kaust.edu.sa>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

a domain Z, and a loss function on the product space f :
H × Z → R, the ERM learning rule selects the hypothesis
ĥ that minimizes the empirical risk:
m
n
o
1 X
ĥ = arg min FS (h) =
f (h, zi ) ,
(1)
h∈H
m i=1
where S = (z1 , . . . , zm ) ∈ Z m is a sample of m observations drawn i.i.d. from some unknown probability distribution D. To simplify notation, we omit the dependence of
ĥ on the sample S. By contrast, the true risk minimizer is
denoted h? :
n
o
h? = arg min F (h) = Ez∼D [f (h, z)] .
(2)
h∈H

Hence, learning via ERM is justified if and only if F (ĥ) ≤
F (h? ) + , for some provably small .
In some applications, such as classification, the stochastic
loss of interest is often the 0-1 loss. However, minimizing the 0-1 loss is, in general, computationally intractable
even for simple hypothesis spaces, such as linear classifiers (Feldman et al., 2009). To circumvent this difficulty,
a convex, surrogate loss is used instead, which is justified
by consistency results when the loss is calibrated (Bartlett
et al., 2006). When the stochastic loss is convex, ERM has
occasionally been referred to by various names in the literature, such as stochastic convex optimization and stochastic
average approximation (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2009; Feldman, 2016). Examples of the latter framework include least
squares, logistic regression, and SVM.
In the literature, several approaches have been proposed for
analyzing the generalization risk and, consequently, the consistency of empirical risk minimization. The most dominant
approach is uniform convergence, with seminal results for
0-1 loss classes dating to the early work of Vapnik and Chervonenkis in the 1970s (Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014;
Abu-Mostafa et al., 2012; Vapnik, 1999). The Fundamental Theorem of Statistical Learning states that a hypothesis
space H is agnostic PAC-learnable via ERM if and only if
it is PAC-learnable at all, and that this occurs if and only
if H has a finite VC dimension (Shalev-Shwartz & BenDavid, 2014). This elegant characterization shows that the
generalization risk for 0-1 loss classes can be bounded by
computing their VC dimensions.

