On the Limitations of First-Order Approximation in GAN Dynamics
Jerry Li 1 Aleksander M ˛
adry 1 John Peebles 1 Ludwig Schmidt 1

Abstract
While Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
have demonstrated promising performance on
multiple vision tasks, their learning dynamics are
not yet well understood, both in theory and in
practice. To address this issue, we study GAN
dynamics in a simple yet rich parametric model
that exhibits several of the common problematic
convergence behaviors such as vanishing gradients, mode collapse, and diverging or oscillatory
behavior. In spite of the non-convex nature of our
model, we are able to perform a rigorous theoretical analysis of its convergence behavior. Our
analysis reveals an interesting dichotomy: a GAN
with an optimal discriminator provably converges,
while first order approximations of the discriminator steps lead to unstable GAN dynamics and
mode collapse. Our result suggests that using first
order discriminator steps (the de-facto standard in
most existing GAN setups) might be one of the
factors that makes GAN training challenging in
practice.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have recently
been proposed as a novel framework for learning generative
models (Goodfellow et al., 2014). In a nutshell, the key idea
of GANs is to learn both the generative model and the loss
function at the same time. The resulting training dynamics
are usually described as a game between a generator (the
generative model) and a discriminator (the loss function).
The goal of the generator is to produce realistic samples that
fool the discriminator, while the discriminator is trained to
distinguish between the true training data and samples from
the generator. GANs have shown promising results on a
variety of tasks, and there is now a large body of work that
explores the power of this framework (Goodfellow, 2017).
Unfortunately, reliably training GANs is a challenging prob1

MIT. Correspondence to: Jerry Li <jerryzli@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

lem that often hinders further research and applicability in
this area. Practitioners have encountered a variety of obstacles in this context such as vanishing gradients, mode
collapse, and diverging or oscillatory behavior (Goodfellow, 2017). At the same time, the theoretical underpinnings
of GAN dynamics are not yet well understood. To date,
there were no convergence proofs for GAN models, even in
very simple settings. As a result, the root cause of frequent
failures of GAN dynamics in practice remains unclear.
In this paper, we take a first step towards a principled understanding of GAN dynamics. Our general methodology
is to propose and examine a problem setup that exhibits all
common failure cases of GAN dynamics while remaining
sufficiently simple to allow for a rigorous analysis. Concretely, we introduce and study the GMM-GAN: a variant
of GAN dynamics that captures learning a mixture of two
univariate Gaussians. We first show experimentally that
standard gradient dynamics of the GMM-GAN often fail to
converge due to mode collapse or oscillatory behavior. Interestingly, this also holds for techniques that were recently
proposed to improve GAN training such as unrolled GANs
(Metz et al., 2017). In contrast, we then show that GAN
dynamics with an optimal discriminator do converge, both
experimentally and provably. To the best of our knowledge,
our theoretical analysis of the GMM-GAN is the first global
convergence proof for parametric and non-trivial GAN dynamics.
Our results show a clear dichotomy between the dynamics
arising from applying simultaneous gradient descent and
the one that is able to use an optimal discriminator. The
GAN with optimal discriminator provably converges from
(essentially) any starting point. On the other hand, the simultaneous gradient GAN empirically often fails to converge,
even when the discriminator is allowed many more gradient
steps than the generator. These findings go against the common wisdom that first order methods are sufficiently strong
for all deep learning applications. By carefully inspecting
our models, we are able to pinpoint some of the causes of
this, and we highlight a phenomena we call discriminator
collapse which often causes first order methods to fail in
our setting.

