Limits of Estimating Heterogeneous Treatment Effects:
Guidelines for Practical Algorithm Design

Ahmed M. Alaa 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2 3

Abstract
Estimating heterogeneous treatment effects from
observational data is a central problem in many
domains. Because counterfactual data is inaccessible, the problem differs fundamentally from
supervised learning, and entails a more complex set of modeling choices. Despite a variety of recently proposed algorithmic solutions,
a principled guideline for building estimators of
treatment effects using machine learning algorithms is still lacking. In this paper, we provide
such guidelines by characterizing the fundamental limits of estimating heterogeneous treatment
effects, and establishing conditions under which
these limits can be achieved. Our analysis reveals
that the relative importance of the different aspects of observational data vary with the sample
size. For instance, we show that selection bias
matters only in small-sample regimes, whereas
with a large sample size, the way an algorithm
models the control and treated outcomes is what
bottlenecks its performance. Guided by our analysis, we build a practical algorithm for estimating
treatment effects using a non-stationary Gaussian processes with doubly-robust hyperparameters. Using a standard semi-synthetic simulation
setup, we show that our algorithm outperforms
the state-of-the-art, and that the behavior of existing algorithms conforms with our analysis.

1. Introduction
The problem of estimating heterogeneous (individualized)
causal effects of a treatment from observational data is central in many application domains, including public health
and drug development (Foster et al., 2011), computational
1

University of California, Los Angeles, USA 2 University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK 3 Alan Turing Institute, London, UK. Correspondence to: Ahmed M. Alaa <ahmedmalaa@ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

advertising (Bottou et al., 2013), and social sciences (Xie
et al., 2012). The increasing availability of observational
data in all these domains has encouraged the development
of various machine learning algorithms tailored for inferring treatment effects using observational data (e.g. (Li
& Fu, 2017; Wager & Athey, 2017; Shalit et al., 2017;
Alaa & van der Schaar, 2017)). Due to the peculiarity of
the treatment effect estimation problem, these algorithms
needed to address various modeling aspects that are foreign to standard supervised learning setups; such aspects
include ways to handle sample selection bias (Heckman,
1977), and ways to model treated and untreated data points.
Despite a variety of recent algorithmic approaches, principled guidelines for model design are lacking.
In this paper, we identify guiding principles for designing
practical treatment effect estimation algorithms in the context of Bayesian nonparametric inference, and propose one
an algorithm that follows these guidelines. We set these
guidelines by characterizing the fundamental limits of estimating treatment effects, and studying the impact of various common modeling choices on the achievability of those
limits. In what follows, we provide a brief technical background for the treatment effect estimation problem, along
with a summary of our contributions.
1.1. Background and Summary of Contributions
Our analysis hinges on the Rubin-Neyman potential outcomes model (Rubin, 2005). That is, we consider an observational dataset with a population of subjects, where each
subject i is endowed with a d-dimensional feature Xi ∈ X .
We assume that X = [0, 1]d , but most of our results hold
for general compact metric spaces (bounded, closed sets
in Rd ). A treatment assignment indicator Wi ∈ {0, 1} is
associated with subject i; Wi = 1 if the treatment under
study was applied to subject i, and Wi = 0 otherwise.
Subject i’s responses with and without the treatment (the
potential outcomes) are denoted as Yi(1) and Yi(0) , respectively. Treatments are assigned to subjects according to an
underlying policy that depends on the subjects’ features,
i.e. Wi ̸⊥⊥ Xi . This dependence is quantified via the conditional distribution p(x) = P(Wi = 1|Xi = x), also known
as the propensity score of subject i (Rosenbaum & Rubin,

