Pathwise Derivatives Beyond the Reparameterization Trick

Martin Jankowiak * 1 Fritz Obermeyer * 1

Abstract

We revisit the class of gradient estimators popularized in
(Kingma & Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014; Titsias &
Lázaro-Gredilla, 2014), which go under the name of the
pathwise derivative or the reparameterization trick. While
this class of gradient estimators is not applicable to all
choices of probability distribution qθ (z), empirically it has
been shown to yield suitably low variance in many cases of
practical interest and thus has seen wide use. We show that
the pathwise derivative in the literature is in fact a particular instance of a continuous family of gradient estimators.
Drawing a connection to tangent fields in the field of optimal
transport,1 we show that one can define a unique pathwise
gradient that is optimal in the sense of optimal transport.
For the purposes of this paper, we will refer to these optimal
gradients as OMT (optimal mass transport) gradients.

We observe that gradients computed via the reparameterization trick are in direct correspondence
with solutions of the transport equation in the formalism of optimal transport. We use this perspective to compute (approximate) pathwise gradients
for probability distributions not directly amenable
to the reparameterization trick: Gamma, Beta, and
Dirichlet. We further observe that when the reparameterization trick is applied to the Choleskyfactorized multivariate Normal distribution, the
resulting gradients are suboptimal in the sense of
optimal transport. We derive the optimal gradients and show that they have reduced variance in
a Gaussian Process regression task. We demonstrate with a variety of synthetic experiments and
stochastic variational inference tasks that our pathwise gradients are competitive with other methods.

1. Introduction
Maximizing objective functions via gradient methods is
ubiquitous in machine learning. When the objective function L is defined as an expectation of a (differentiable) test
function fθ (z) w.r.t. a probability distribution qθ (z),
L = Eqθ (z) [fθ (z)]

(1)

computing exact gradients w.r.t. the parameters θ is often
unfeasible so that optimization methods must instead make
due with stochastic gradient estimates. If the gradient estimator is unbiased, then stochastic gradient descent with an
appropriately chosen sequence of step sizes can be shown
to have nice convergence properties (Robbins & Monro,
1951). If, however, the gradient estimator exhibits large
variance, stochastic optimization algorithms may be impractically slow. Thus it is of general interest to develop gradient
estimators with reduced variance.
*
Equal contribution 1 Uber AI Labs, San Francisco, USA. Correspondence to: <jankowiak@uber.com>, <fritzo@uber.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

The resulting geometric picture is particularly intriguing in
the case of multivariate distributions, where each choice
of gradient estimator specifies a velocity field on the sample space. To make this picture more concrete, in Figure 1
we show the velocity fields that correspond to two different gradient estimators for the off-diagonal element of the
Cholesky factor parameterizing a bivariate Normal distribution. We note that the velocity field that corresponds to the
reparameterization trick has a large rotational component
that makes it suboptimal in the sense of optimal transport. In
Sec. 7 we show that this suboptimality can result in reduced
performance when fitting a Gaussian Process to data.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2 we
provide a brief overview of stochastic gradient variational
inference. In Sec. 3 we show how to compute pathwise gradients for univariate distributions. In Sec. 4 we expand our
discussion of pathwise gradients to the case of multivariate
distributions, introduce the connection to the transport equation, and provide an analytic formula for the OMT gradient
in the case of the multivariate Normal. In Sec. 5 we discuss
how we can compute high precision approximate pathwise
gradients for the Gamma, Beta, and Dirichlet distributions.
In Sec. 6 we place our work in the context of related research. In Sec. 7 we demonstrate the performance of our
gradient estimators with a variety of synthetic experiments
and experiments on real world datasets. Finally, in Sec. 8
we conclude with a discussion of directions for future work.
1

See (Villani, 2003; Ambrosio et al., 2008) for a review.

