Hierarchical Text Generation and Planning for Strategic Dialogue

Denis Yarats * 1 Mike Lewis * 1

Abstract
End-to-end models for goal-orientated dialogue
are challenging to train, because linguistic and
strategic aspects are entangled in latent state vectors. We introduce an approach to learning representations of messages in dialogues by maximizing the likelihood of subsequent sentences
and actions, which decouples the semantics of
the dialogue utterance from its linguistic realization. We then use these latent sentence representations for hierarchical language generation,
planning and reinforcement learning. Experiments show that our approach increases the endtask reward achieved by the model, improves the
effectiveness of long-term planning using rollouts, and allows self-play reinforcement learning
to improve decision making without diverging
from human language. Our hierarchical latentvariable model outperforms previous work both
linguistically and strategically.

1. Introduction
Word-by-word approaches to text generation have been
successful in many tasks. However, they have limitations
in under-constrained generation settings, such as dialogue
response or summarization, where models have significant
freedom in the semantics of the text to generate. In such
cases, models are prone to overly generic responses that
may be valid but suboptimal (Li et al., 2015; 2016; Das
et al., 2017). Further, such models are uninterpretable and
somewhat intellectually dissatisfying because they do not
cleanly distinguish between the semantics of language and
its surface realization. Entangling form and meaning is
problematic for reinforcement learning, where backpropagating caused by semantic decisions can adversely affect
the linguistic quality of text (Lewis et al., 2017), and for
candidate generation for longterm planning, as linguistically diverse text may lack semantic diversity.
*
Equal contribution 1 Facebook AI Research, Menlo Park, CA.
Correspondence to: Denis Yarats <denisy@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

We focus on negotiation dialogues, where the text generated by the model has consequences than can be easily
measured. Substitutions of similar words (for example substituting a ”one” for a ”two”) can have a large impact on
the end-task reward achieved by a dialogue agent. We use
a hierarchical generation approach for a strategic dialogue
agent, where the agent first samples a short-term plan in
the form of a latent sentence representation. The agent
then conditions on this plan during generation, allowing
precise and consistent generation of text to achieve a shortterm goal. Doing so, we aim to disentangle the concepts of
”what to say” and ”how to say it”. To do this, we introduce a method for learning discrete latent representations
of sentences based on their effect on the continuation of
the dialogue.
Recent work has explored hierarchical generation of dialogue responses, where a latent variable zt is inferred to
maximize the likelihood of a message xt , given previous
messages x0:t−1 ≡ (x0 , . . . , xt−1 ) (Serban et al., 2016a;c;
Wen et al., 2017; Cao & Clark, 2017), which has the effect
of clustering similar message strings. Our approach differs in that the latent variable zt is optimized to maximize
the likelihood of messages and actions of the continuation
of the dialogue, but not the message xt itself. Hence, zt
learns to represent xt ’s effect on the dialogue, but not the
words of xt .The distinction is important because messages
with similar words can have very different semantics; and
conversely the same meaning can be conveyed with different sentences. We show empirically and through human
evaluation that our method leads both to better perplexities
and end task rewards, and qualitatively that our representations group sentences that are more semantically coherent
but linguistically diverse.
We use our message representations to improve the strategic decision making of our dialogue agent. We improve the
model’s ability to plan ahead by creating a set of semantically diverse candidate messages by sampling distinct zt ,
and then use rollouts to identify the an expected reward for
each. We also apply reinforcement learning based on the
end-task reward. Previous work has found that RL can adversely effect the fluency of the language generated by the
model We instead show that simply fine-tuning the parameters for choosing zt allows the model to substantially improve its rewards while maintaining human-like language.

