Gradient descent with identity initialization
efficiently learns positive definite linear transformations
by deep residual networks

Peter L. Bartlett 1 David P. Helmbold 2 Philip M. Long 3

Abstract
We analyze algorithms for approximating a function f (x) = Φx mapping <d to <d using deep
linear neural networks, i.e. that learn a function h
parameterized by matrices Θ1 , ..., ΘL and defined
by h(x) = ΘL ΘL−1 ...Θ1 x. We focus on algorithms that learn through gradient descent on the
population quadratic loss in the case that the distribution over the inputs is isotropic. We provide
polynomial bounds on the number of iterations for
gradient descent to approximate the least squares
matrix Φ, in the case where the initial hypothesis
Θ1 = ... = ΘL = I has excess loss bounded
by a small enough constant. On the other hand,
we show that gradient descent fails to converge
for Φ whose distance from the identity is a larger
constant, and we show that some forms of regularization toward the identity in each layer do not
help. If Φ is symmetric positive definite, we show
that an algorithm that initializes Θi = I learns an
-approximation of f using a number of updates
polynomial in L, the condition number of Φ, and
log(d/). In contrast, we show that if the least
squares matrix Φ is symmetric and has a negative
eigenvalue, then all members of a class of algorithms that perform gradient descent with identity
initialization, and optionally regularize toward the
identity in each layer, fail to converge. We analyze an algorithm for the case that Φ satisfies
u> Φu > 0 for all u, but may not be symmetric.
This algorithm uses two regularizers: one that
maintains the invariant u> ΘL ΘL−1 ...Θ1 u > 0
for all u, and another that “balances” Θ1 , ..., ΘL
so that they have the same singular values.
1

UC Berkeley 2 UC Santa Cruz 3 Google. Correspondence
to: Peter L. Bartlett <peter@berkeley.edu>, David P. Helmbold
<dph@soe.ucsc.edu>, Philip M. Long <plong@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Residual networks (He et al., 2016) are deep neural networks
in which, roughly, subnetworks determine how a feature
transformation should differ from the identity, rather than
how it should differ from zero. After enabling the winning
entry in the ILSVRC 2015 classification task, they have
become established as a central idea in deep networks.
Hardt & Ma (2017) provided a theoretical analysis that shed
light on residual networks. They showed that (a) any linear
transformation with a positive determinant and a bounded
condition number can be approximated by a “deep linear
network” of the form f (x) = ΘL ΘL−1 ...Θ1 x, where, for
large L, each layer Θi is close to the identity, and (b) for
networks that compose near-identity transformations this
way, if the excess loss is large, then the gradient is steep.
Bartlett et al. (2018a) extended both results to the nonlinear
case, showing that any smooth, bi-Lipschitz map can be
represented as a composition of near-identity functions, and
that a suboptimal loss in a composition of near-identity
functions implies that the functional gradient of the loss with
respect to a function in the composition cannot be small.
These results are interesting because they suggest that, in
many cases, this non-convex objective may be efficiently
optimized through gradient descent if the layers stay close
to the identity, possibly with the help of a regularizer.
This paper describes and analyzes such algorithms for linear
regression with d input variables and d response variables
with respect to the quadratic loss, the same setting analyzed
by Hardt and Ma. We abstract away sampling issues by
analyzing an algorithm that performs gradient descent with
respect to the population loss. We focus on the case that the
distribution on the input patterns is isotropic. (The data may
be transformed through a preprocessing step to satisfy this
constraint.)
The traditional analysis of convex optimization algorithms
(see Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004) provides a bound in terms
of the quality of the initial solution, together with bounds
on the eigenvalues of the Hessian of the loss. For the nonconvex problem of this paper, we show that if gradient
descent starts at the identity in each layer, and if the excess

