Dynamic Evaluation of Neural Sequence Models

Ben Krause 1 Emmanuel Kahembwe 1 Iain Murray 1 Steve Renals 1

Abstract
We explore dynamic evaluation, where sequence
models are adapted to the recent sequence history
using gradient descent, assigning higher probabilities to re-occurring sequential patterns. We
develop a dynamic evaluation approach that outperforms existing adaptation approaches in our
comparisons. We apply dynamic evaluation to
outperform all previous word-level perplexities
on the Penn Treebank and WikiText-2 datasets
(achieving 51.1 and 44.3 respectively) and all previous character-level cross-entropies on the text8
and Hutter Prize datasets (achieving 1.19 bits/char
and 1.08 bits/char respectively).

1. Introduction
Sequence generation and prediction tasks span many modes
of data, ranging from audio and language modelling, to
more general timeseries prediction tasks. Applications of
such models include speech recognition, machine translation, dialogue generation, speech synthesis, forecasting, and
music generation. Neural networks can be applied to these
tasks by predicting sequence elements one-by-one, conditioning on the history, thus forming an autoregressive model.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs), including long-short term memory
(LSTM) networks (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) in
particular, have achieved many successes at these tasks.
However, in their basic form, these models have a limited
ability to adapt to recently observed parts of a sequence.
Many sequences contain repetition; a pattern that occurs
once is more likely to occur again. For instance, a word
that occurs once in a document is much more likely to occur
again. A sequence of handwriting will generally stay in
the same handwriting style. A sequence of speech will
generally stay in the same voice. Although RNNs have
a hidden state that can summarize the recent past, they
1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh. Correspondence to: Ben Krause <ben.krause@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

have been shown to have problems learning to reproduce
sequence elements (Marcus, 2001; Prickett, 2017). In the
case of RNN language modelling, augmenting a model with
a simple unigram cache improves perplexity (Grave et al.,
2017), demonstrating that RNNs have difficulty using the
recent frequency of words in a sequence. Models such
as pointer networks (Vinyals et al., 2015), copy nets (Gu
et al., 2016), pointer-sentinel RNNs (Merity et al., 2017)
and the neural cache method (Grave et al., 2017) allow
inputs to be used directly as outputs, thus enabling them
to more naturally handle “direct repetitions” in a sequence,
where a symbol repeats itself. However, such approaches do
not model “indirect repetitions”, when a synonym or word
related to a recently-occurring word appears. More broadly,
it is desirable for an adaptive model to be able to capture
deeper regularities such as topic or style.
This paper examines dynamic evaluation (Mikolov et al.,
2010; Mikolov, 2012; Graves, 2013), which adapts models to recent sequences using gradient descent, as a way
to model re-occurring sequential patterns. Previous work
using dynamic evaluation did not explore or describe its
methodology in depth, and had mixed results. In contrast,
our work develops a method and tuning procedure to consistently obtain strong results (Section 5), and uses this
approach to outperform previously reported results in word
and character-level language modelling (Section 7). Furthermore, we design a method to dramatically reduce the
number of adaptation parameters in dynamic evaluation,
making it practical in a wider range of settings (Section 6).
We analyse the performance of dynamic evaluation over
varying time-scales and distribution shifts, and demonstrate
that dynamically evaluated models can generate conditional
samples that repeat many patterns from the conditioning
data (Section 7.4). Finally, we show that dynamic evaluation can generalize to related words, giving it the potential
to model indirect repetitions in sequences (Section 7.5).

2. Motivation
Generative models can assign a probability to a sequence
x1:T = {x1 , . . . , xT } by factorizing it as

P (x1:T ) = P (x1 )

T
Y
t=2

P (xt |x1:t−1 ).

(1)

