WHInter: A Working set algorithm for High-dimensional
sparse second order Interaction models.

Marine Le Morvan 1 2 3 Jean-Philippe Vert 1 2 3 4

Abstract
Learning sparse linear models with two-way interactions is desirable in many application domains
such as genomics. `1 -regularised linear models
are popular to estimate sparse models, yet standard implementations fail to address specifically
the quadratic explosion of candidate two-way interactions in high dimensions, and typically do not
scale to genetic data with hundreds of thousands
of features. Here we present WHInter, a working
set algorithm to solve large `1 -regularised problems with two-way interactions for binary design
matrices. The novelty of WHInter stems from
a new bound to efficiently identify working sets
while avoiding to scan all features, and on fast
computations inspired from solutions to the maximum inner product search problem. We apply
WHInter to simulated and real genetic data and
show that it is more scalable and two orders of
magnitude faster than the state of the art.

1. Introduction
In application domains where the number of features exceeds the number of available samples, sparsity-inducing
regularisers have a long history of success. Genomic prediction of complex phenotypes, biomedical imaging, astronomy or finance are a few examples. In particular the
least squares with `1 regularisation, known as the LASSO
(Tibshirani, 1996), has been extensively studied. It enjoys
desirable statistical properties, since the number of samples
required for exact support recovery of a sparse model scales
as the logarithm of the number of features, under some
1
MINES ParisTech, PSL Research University, CBIO-Centre for
Computational Biology, 75006 Paris, France 2 Institut Curie, PSL
Research University, 75005 Paris, France 3 INSERM, U900, 75005
Paris, France 4 Ecole Normale Supérieure, Department of Mathematics and Applications, 75005 Paris, France. Correspondence to:
Jean-Philippe Vert <jean-philippe.vert@mines-paristech.fr>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

assumptions (Wainwright, 2009). It also enjoys practical advantages, notably the interpretability of the learned models
and the availability of fast solvers.
Indeed, a lot of research effort has been devoted to accelerating solvers for sparsity constrained problems in high
dimension. A central idea is to exploit the sparsity of the
solution to develop algorithms that do not spend too much
time on optimising coefficients that will end up being 0. For
example, safe screening rules identify features which are
guaranteed to be inactive at the optimum so that their corresponding coefficients can be safely zeroed and set aside
from the pool of coefficients to update (El Ghaoui et al.,
2012; Xiang et al., 2011; Xiang & Ramadge, 2012; Fercoq
et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2013; Raj et al., 2016). Dynamic
screening rules (Bonnefoy et al., 2015) such as the GAP
safe rules (Fercoq et al., 2015) are particularly useful since
more and more coefficients can be safely zeroed while the
solver approaches the optimal solution. In spite of this, safe
rules tend to be conservative, thereby limiting the potential speed-up. To remedy this drawback, new working set
heuristics have been proposed. Working set algorithms enjoy great success in practice, as exemplified by the popular
GLMNET package (Friedman et al., 2010). They iteratively
solve subproblems, either problems restricted to a subset
of features in the primal or to a subset of constraints in the
dual, until convergence. Working set methods allow to focus
coefficient updates on a set of features which can be significantly smaller than that yielded by safe rules. However
this comes at a cost, that of checking the optimality conditions for all features at each iteration. BLITZ (Johnson &
Guestrin, 2015) is a recently proposed working set algorithm
that has been shown to have state-of-the-art performance
for `1 regularised problems. Interestingly, the choice of the
working sets in BLITZ can be seen as an aggressive use
of the GAP safe rules (as noted in Massias et al., 2017)
where the size of the working set is chosen to maximise
the progress towards convergence. BLITZ can therefore be
combined with the GAP safe rules (or the FLEX constraint
elimination according to Johnson et al. terminology) at no
cost. A direct comparison between BLITZ and the GAP
safe rules by Ndiaye et al. (2017) illustrates the effectiveness
of the working set approach. Further developments have
also focused on coordinate descent (CD) to avoid wasteful

