Learning Deep ResNet Blocks Sequentially using Boosting Theory

Furong Huang 1 Jordan T. Ash 2 John Langford 3 Robert E. Schapire 3

Abstract
We prove a multi-channel telescoping sum boosting theory for the ResNet architectures which simultaneously creates a new technique for boosting over features (in contrast to labels) and provides a new algorithm for ResNet-style architectures. Our proposed training algorithm, BoostResNet, is particularly suitable in non-differentiable
architectures. Our method only requires the relatively inexpensive sequential training of T “shallow ResNets”. We prove that the training error
decays exponentially with the depth T if the weak
module classifiers that we train perform slightly
better than some weak baseline. In other words,
we propose a weak learning condition and prove
a boosting theory for ResNet under the weak
learning condition. A generalization error bound
based on margin theory is proved and suggests
that ResNet could be resistant to overfitting using
a network with l1 norm bounded weights.

1. Introduction
Why do residual neural networks (ResNets) (He et al., 2016)
and the related highway networks (Srivastava et al., 2015)
work? And if we study closely why they work, can we come
up with new understandings of how to train them and how
to define working algorithms?
Deep neural networks have elicited breakthrough successes
in machine learning, especially in image classification and
object recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Sermanet et al.,
2013; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014)
in recent years. As the number of layers increases, the
nonlinear network becomes more powerful, deriving richer
features from input data. Empirical studies suggest that challenging tasks in image classification (He et al., 2015; Ioffe
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland; 2 Department of Computer Science, Princeton University; 3 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Furong Huang
<furongh@cs.umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

& Szegedy, 2015; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; Szegedy
et al., 2015) and object recognition (Girshick, 2015; Girshick et al., 2014; He et al., 2014; Long et al., 2015; Ren
et al., 2015) often require “deep” networks, consisting of
tens or hundreds of layers. Theoretical analyses have further
justified the power of deep networks (Mhaskar & Poggio,
2016) compared to shallow networks.
However, deep neural networks are difficult to train despite
their intrinsic representational power. Stochastic gradient
descent with back-propagation (BP) (LeCun et al., 1989)
and its variants are commonly used to solve the non-convex
optimization problems. A major challenge that exists for
training both shallow and deep networks is vanishing or
exploding gradients (Bengio et al., 1994; Glorot & Bengio,
2010). Recent works have proposed normalization techniques (Glorot & Bengio, 2010; LeCun et al., 2012; Ioffe
& Szegedy, 2015; Saxe et al., 2013) to effectively ease the
problem and achieve convergence. In training deep networks, however, a surprising training performance degradation is observed (He & Sun, 2015; Srivastava et al., 2015;
He et al., 2016): the training performance degrades rapidly
with increased network depth after some saturation point.
This training performance degradation is representationally
surprising as one can easily construct a deep network identical to a shallow network by forcing any part of the deep
network to be the same as the shallow network with the
remaining layers functioning as identity maps. He et al. (He
et al., 2016) presented a residual network (ResNet) learning
framework to ease the training of networks that are substantially deeper than those used previously. And they explicitly
reformulate the layers as learning residual functions with
reference to the layer inputs by adding identity loops to the
layers. It is shown in (Hardt & Ma, 2016) that identity loops
ease the problem of spurious local optima in shallow networks. Srivastava et al. (Srivastava et al., 2015) introduce a
novel architecture that enables the optimization of networks
with virtually arbitrary depth through the use of a learned
gating mechanism for regulating information flow.
Empirical evidence overwhelmingly shows that these deep
residual networks are easier to optimize than non-residual
ones. Can we develop a theoretical justification for this
observation? And does that justification point us towards
new algorithms with better characteristics?

