Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?

Lars Mescheder 1 Andreas Geiger 1 2 Sebastian Nowozin 3

Abstract
Recent work has shown local convergence of
GAN training for absolutely continuous data and
generator distributions. In this paper, we show
that the requirement of absolute continuity is necessary: we describe a simple yet prototypical
counterexample showing that in the more realistic case of distributions that are not absolutely
continuous, unregularized GAN training is not
always convergent. Furthermore, we discuss regularization strategies that were recently proposed
to stabilize GAN training. Our analysis shows
that GAN training with instance noise or zerocentered gradient penalties converges. On the
other hand, we show that Wasserstein-GANs and
WGAN-GP with a finite number of discriminator
updates per generator update do not always converge to the equilibrium point. We discuss these
results, leading us to a new explanation for the
stability problems of GAN training. Based on
our analysis, we extend our convergence results
to more general GANs and prove local convergence for simplified gradient penalties even if the
generator and data distributions lie on lower dimensional manifolds. We find these penalties to
work well in practice and use them to learn highresolution generative image models for a variety
of datasets with little hyperparameter tuning.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) are powerful latent variable models that can be
used to learn complex real-world distributions. Especially
for images, GANs have emerged as one of the dominant
approaches for generating new realistically looking samples
after the model has been trained on some dataset.
1

MPI Tübingen, Germany 2 ETH Zürich, Switzerland
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Lars
Mescheder <lars.mescheder@tue.mpg.de>.
3

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Method

unregularized (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
WGAN (Arjovsky et al., 2017)
WGAN-GP (Gulrajani et al., 2017)
DRAGAN (Kodali et al., 2017)
Instance noise (Sønderby et al., 2016)
ConOpt (Mescheder et al., 2017)
Gradient penalties (Roth et al., 2017)
Gradient penalty on real data only
Gradient penalty on fake data only

Local
convergence
(a.c. case)

Local
convergence
(general case)

3
7
7
3
3
3
3
3
3

7
7
7
7
3
3
3
3
3

Table 1. Convergence properties of different GAN training algorithms for general GAN-architectures. Here, we distinguish between the case where both the data and generator distributions are
absolutely continuous (a.c.) and the general case where they may
lie on lower dimensional manifolds.

However, while very powerful, GANs can be hard to train
and in practice it is often observed that gradient descent
based GAN optimization does not lead to convergence. As
a result, a lot of recent research has focused on finding
better training algorithms (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Gulrajani
et al., 2017; Kodali et al., 2017; Sønderby et al., 2016; Roth
et al., 2017) for GANs as well as gaining better theoretically
understanding of their training dynamics (Arjovsky et al.,
2017; Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017; Mescheder et al., 2017;
Nagarajan & Kolter, 2017; Heusel et al., 2017).
Despite practical advances, the training dynamics of GANs
are still not completely understood. Recently, Mescheder
et al. (2017) and Nagarajan & Kolter (2017) showed that
local convergence and stability properties of GAN training can be analyzed by examining the eigenvalues of the
Jacobian of the the associated gradient vector field: if the
Jacobian has only eigenvalues with negative real-part at the
equilibrium point, GAN training converges locally for small
enough learning rates. On the other hand, if the Jacobian has
eigenvalues on the imaginary axis, it is generally not locally
convergent. Moreover, Mescheder et al. (2017) showed that
if there are eigenvalues close but not on the imaginary axis,
the training algorithm can require intractably small learning
rates to achieve convergence. While Mescheder et al. (2017)
observed eigenvalues close to the imaginary axis in practice,
this observation does not answer the question if eigenvalues
close to the imaginary axis are a general phenomenon and if
yes, whether they are indeed the root cause for the training

