Parallel and Streaming Algorithms for K-Core Decomposition

Hossein Esfandiari 1 Silvio Lattanzi 1 Vahab Mirrokni 1

Abstract
The k-core decomposition is a fundamental primitive in many machine learning and data mining applications. We present the first distributed and the
first streaming algorithms to compute and maintain an approximate k-core decomposition with
provable guarantees. Our algorithms achieve rigorous bounds on space complexity while bounding the number of passes or number of rounds
of computation. We do so by presenting a new
powerful sketching technique for k-core decomposition, and then by showing it can be computed efficiently in both streaming and MapReduce models. Finally, we confirm the effectiveness of our
sketching technique empirically on a number of
publicly available graphs.

1. Introduction
A wide range of data mining, machine learning and social
network analysis problems can be modeled as graph mining
tasks on large graphs. The ability to analyze layers of connectivity is useful to understand the hierarchical structure
of the input data and the role of nodes in different networks.
A commonly used technique for this task is the k-core decomposition: a k-core of a graph is a maximal subgraph
where every node has induced degree at least k. k-core
decomposition has many real world applications from understanding dynamics in social networks (Bhawalkar et al.,
2012) to graph visualization (Alvarez-Hamelin et al., 2005),
from describing protein functions based on protein-protein
networks (Altaf-Ul-Amin et al., 2006) to computing network centrality measures (Healy et al., 2006). k-core is
also widely used as a sub-routine for community detection
algorithms (Chester et al., 2012; Mitzenmacher et al., 2015)
or for finding dense clusters in graphs (Lee et al., 2010;
Mitzenmacher et al., 2015). As a graph theoretic tool k-core
decomposition has been used to solve the densest subgraph
1
Google Research. Correspondence to: Hossein Esfandiari
<esfandiari@googol.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

problem (Lee et al., 2010; Bahmani et al., 2012; Epasto
et al., 2015; Esfandiari et al., 2015).
k-core is often use a feature in machine learning systems
with applications in network analysis, spam detection and
biology. Furthermore, in comparison with other densitybased measure as the densest subgraph, it has the advantage
to assign a score to every node in the network. Finally, the
k-core decomposition induce a hierarchical clustering on the
entire network. For many applications in machine learning
and in data mining, it is important to be able to compute it
efficiently on large graphs.
In the past decade, with increasing size of data sets available
in various applications, the need for developing scalable
algorithms has become more important. By definition, the
process of computing k-core decomposition is sequential:
in order to find the k-core, one can keep removing all nodes
of degree less than k from the remaining graph until there
is no such a node. As a result, computing k-cores for big
graphs in distributed systems is a challenging task. In fact,
while k-core decomposition has been studied extensively in
the literature and many efficient decentralized and streaming
heuristics have been developed for this problem (Montresor
et al., 2013; Sarayuce et al., 2015), nevertheless developing a distributed or a streaming algorithm with provable
guarantees for k-core decomposition problem remains an
unsolved problem. One difficulty in tackling the problem
is that simple non-adaptive sampling techniques used for
similar problems as densest subgraph (Lee et al., 2010; Esfandiari et al., 2015; Bahmani et al., 2012; Epasto et al.,
2015; Bhattacharya et al., 2016) do not work here (See Related Work for details). In this paper, we tackle this problem
and present the first parallel and streaming algorithm for
this problem with provable approximation guarantee. We do
so by defining an approximate notion of k-core, and providing an adaptive space-efficient sketching technique that can
be used to compute an approximate k-core decomposition
efficiently. Roughly speaking, a 1 − -approximate k-core
is an induced subgraph that includes the k-core, and such
that the induced degree of every node is at least (1 − )k.
Our Contributions. As a foundation to all our results, we
provide a powerful sketching technique to compute a 1 − approximate k-core for all k simultaneously. Our sketch
is adaptive in nature and it is based on a novel iterative

