Proportional Allocation:
Simple, Distributed, and Diverse Matching with High Entropy

Shipra Agrawal * 1 Vahab Mirrokni 2 Morteza Zadimoghaddam 2

Abstract
Inspired by many applications of bipartite matching in online advertising and machine learning,
we study a simple and natural iterative proportional allocation algorithm: Maintain a priority
score β a for each node a ∈ A on one side of the
bipartition, initialized as β a = 1. Iteratively allocate the nodes i ∈ I on the other side to eligible
nodes in A in proportion of their priority scores.
After each round, for each node a ∈ A, decrease
or increase the score β a based on whether it is
over- or under- allocated. Our first result is that
this simple, distributed algorithm converges to a
(1 − )-approximate fractional b-matching solun
tion in O( log
2 ) rounds. We also extend the proportional allocation algorithm and convergence
results to the maximum weighted matching problem, and show that the algorithm can be naturally
tuned to produce maximum matching with high
entropy. High entropy, in turn, implies additional
desirable properties of this matching, e.g., it satisfies certain diversity and fairness (aka anonymity)
properties that are desirable in a variety of applications in online advertising and machine learning.

1. Introduction
Generalized bipartite matching or bipartite b-matching is
one of the fundamental problems in computer science.
Canonical applications include resource allocation problems such as ad allocation in online advertising, job/server
allocation in cloud computing, organ/donor matching, and
product recommendation under resource constraints. It has
also been utilized as an algorithmic tool in a variety of do*

Equal contribution 1 Columbia University, New York,
NY 2 Google Research.
Correspondence to:
Shipra
Agrawal
<sa3305@columbia.edu>,
Vahab
Mirrokni
<mirrokni@google.com>,
Morteza
Zadimoghaddam
<zadim@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

mains, including computer vision (Belongie et al., 2002),
estimating text similarity (Pang et al., 2016), string matching
for protein structure alignment (Krissinel & Henrick, 2004),
document clustering (Dhillon, 2001); and as a subroutine
in several machine learning tasks (Huang & Jebara, 2007;
Jebara & Shchogolev, 2006).
The focus of this paper is on large-scale matching problems
such as those arising in online advertising. In online advertising settings, a set of advertisers A provide their targeting
domains to determine what subset of impressions I they
are interested in. This can be modeled as a bipartite graph
G(A, I, E). The advertisers also set capacity/targeting constraints on the number of impressions they want their ads to
be shown to, referred to as capacity (or budget) constraints.
It is assumed that each advertiser a has a capacity constraint
Ca . The matching task is to assign each impression to at
most one eligible advertiser based on the targeting information while respecting the capacity constraints. Typically,
the goal is to maximize either the number of matched impressions, or the sum of values of the assignments if we are
awarded different values for the assignment of every pair of
impressions and advertisers.
The rapid growth in Internet advertising has introduced
many large scale matching problems for assigning billions
of impressions to advertisers on a daily basis. Classic centralized approaches to solve these problems may be irrelevant due to their computational and memory limitations. In
online advertising, the number of impressions are usually
much higher than the number of advertisers. Such bipartite
graphs are called lopsided bipartite graphs. The number of
impressions is often so large that these matching instances
do not fit in the memory of a single machine, and there is a
dire need of designing simple and scalable matching algorithms. This is true even if we treat similar impressions as
identical copies because each impression type is “the Cartesian product of several features (such as geographic location,
time of day/week), domains of which have sizes typically
ranging from thousands to millions” (Bateni et al., 2017).
Similar lopsided bipartite matching problems arise in many
other domains, for example in product recommendation,
where the number of users is typically much higher than the
number of products, or document-word clustering, where

