Mixed batches and symmetric discriminators for GAN training

Thomas Lucas* 1 Corentin Tallec* 2 Jakob Verbeek 1 Yann Ollivier 3

Abstract

vincing source of samples of natural images (Karras et al.,
2018). GANs consist of a generator and a discriminator
network. The generator maps samples from a latent random
variable with a basic prior, such as a multi-variate Gaussian,
to the observation space. This defines a probability distribution over the observation space. A discriminator network is
trained to distinguish between generated samples and true
samples in the observation space. The generator, on the
other hand, is trained to fool the discriminator. In an idealized setting with unbounded capacity of both networks and
infinite training data, the generator should converge to the
distribution from which the training data has been sampled.

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are powerful generative models based on providing feedback to a generative network via a discriminator
network. However, the discriminator usually assesses individual samples. This prevents the discriminator from accessing global distributional
statistics of generated samples, and often leads to
mode dropping: the generator models only part
of the target distribution. We propose to feed
the discriminator with mixed batches of true and
fake samples, and train it to predict the ratio of
true samples in the batch. The latter score does
not depend on the order of samples in a batch.
Rather than learning this invariance, we introduce
a generic permutation-invariant discriminator architecture. This architecture is provably a universal approximator of all symmetric functions.
Experimentally, our approach reduces mode collapse in GANs on two synthetic datasets, and
obtains good results on the CIFAR10 and CelebA
datasets, both qualitatively and quantitatively.

In most adversarial setups, the discriminator classifies individual data samples. Consequently, it cannot directly detect
discrepancies between the distribution of generated samples
and global statistics of the training distribution, such as its
moments or quantiles. For instance, if the generator models
a restricted part of the support of the target distribution very
well, this can fool the discriminator at the level of individual
samples, a phenomenon known as mode dropping. In such a
case there is little incentive for the generator to model other
parts of the support of the target distribution. A more thorough explanation of this effect can be found in (Salimans
et al., 2016).

1. Introduction

In order to access global distributional statistics, imagine a
discriminator that could somehow take full probability distributions as its input. This is impossible in practice. Still,
it is possible to feed large batches of training or generated
samples to the discriminator, as an approximation of the
corresponding distributions. The discriminator can compute
statistics on those batches and detect discrepancies between
the two distributions. For instance, if a large batch exhibits
only one mode from a multimodal distribution, the discriminator would notice the discrepancy right away. Even though
a single batch may not encompass all modes of the distribution, it will still convey more information about missing
modes than an individual example.

Estimating generative models from unlabeled data is one
of the challenges in unsupervised learning. Recently, several latent variable approaches have been proposed to learn
flexible density estimators together with efficient sampling,
such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), variational autoencoders (Kingma &
Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014), iterative transformation of noise (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015), or non-volume
preserving transformations (Dinh et al., 2017).
In this work we focus on GANs, currently the most con*
Equal contribution 1 Université Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS,
Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France. 2 Université
Paris Sud, INRIA, équipe TAU, Gif-sur-Yvette, 91190, France.
3
Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research Paris, France. Correspondence to: Corentin Tallec <corentin.tallec@inria.fr>,
Thomas Lucas <thomas.lucas@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Training the discriminator to discriminate “pure” batches
with only real or only synthetic samples makes its task too
easy, as a single bad sample reveals the whole batch as synthetic. Instead, we introduce a “mixed” batch discrimination
task in which the discriminator needs to predict the ratio of
real samples in a batch.
1

