Generalization without Systematicity:
On the Compositional Skills of Sequence-to-Sequence Recurrent Networks

Brenden Lake 1 2 Marco Baroni 2

Abstract
Humans can understand and produce new utterances effortlessly, thanks to their compositional
skills. Once a person learns the meaning of a
new verb “dax,” he or she can immediately understand the meaning of “dax twice” or “sing and
dax.” In this paper, we introduce the SCAN domain, consisting of a set of simple compositional
navigation commands paired with the corresponding action sequences. We then test the zero-shot
generalization capabilities of a variety of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) trained on SCAN
with sequence-to-sequence methods. We find that
RNNs can make successful zero-shot generalizations when the differences between training and
test commands are small, so that they can apply “mix-and-match” strategies to solve the task.
However, when generalization requires systematic compositional skills (as in the “dax” example
above), RNNs fail spectacularly. We conclude
with a proof-of-concept experiment in neural machine translation, suggesting that lack of systematicity might be partially responsible for neural
networks’ notorious training data thirst.

1. Introduction
Human language and thought are characterized by systematic compositionality, the algebraic capacity to understand
and produce a potentially infinite number of novel combinations from known components (Chomsky, 1957; Montague,
1970). For example, if a person knows the meaning and
usage of words such as “twice,” “and,” and “again,” once
she learns a new verb such as “to dax” she can immediately
understand or produce instructions such as “dax twice and
1
Dept. of Psychology and Center for Data Science, New York
University 2 Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research. Correspondence to: Brenden Lake <brenden@nyu.edu>, Marco Baroni
<mbaroni@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

then dax again.” This type of compositionality is central to
the human ability to make strong generalizations from very
limited data (Lake et al., 2017). In a set of influential and
controversial papers, Jerry Fodor and other researchers have
argued that neural networks are not plausible models of the
mind because they are associative devices that cannot capture systematic compositionality (Fodor & Pylyshyn, 1988;
Marcus, 1998; Fodor & Lepore, 2002; Marcus, 2003; Calvo
& Symons, 2014, a.o.).
In the last few years, neural network research has made
astounding progress in practical domains where success
depends on generalization. Perhaps most strikingly, end-toend recurrent neural networks currently dominate the stateof-the-art in machine translation (Bojar et al., 2016; Wu
et al., 2016). Since the overwhelming majority of sentences
or even word sequences in a language only occur once,
even in a large corpus (Baroni, 2009), this points to strong
generalization abilities. Still, it is commonly observed that
neural networks are extremely sample inefficient, requiring
very large training sets, which suggests they may lack the
same algebraic compositionality that humans exploit, and
they might only be sensitive to broad patterns over lots of
accumulated statistics (Lake et al., 2017).
In this paper, we introduce a grounded navigation environment where the learner must translate commands given in a
limited form of natural language into a sequence of actions.
This problem is naturally framed as a sequence-to-sequence
task, and, due to its simplicity, it is ideal to study systematic
generalization to novel examples in a controlled setup. We
thus use it to test a wide range of modern recurrent network
architectures in terms of their compositional abilities. Our
results suggest that standard recurrent seq2seq architectures
generalize very well when novel examples feature a mixture of constructions that have been observed in training.
However, the models are catastrophically affected by systematic differences between training and test sentences, of
the sort that would be trivial for an agent equipped with an
“algebraic mind” (Marcus, 2003).

