Mutual Information Neural Estimation
Mohamed Ishmael Belghazi 1 Aristide Baratin 1 2 Sai Rajeswar 1 Sherjil Ozair 1 Yoshua Bengio 1 3 4
Aaron Courville 1 3 R Devon Hjelm 1 4

Abstract
We argue that the estimation of mutual information between high dimensional continuous random variables can be achieved by gradient descent
over neural networks. We present a Mutual Information Neural Estimator (MINE) that is linearly
scalable in dimensionality as well as in sample
size, trainable through back-prop, and strongly
consistent. We present a handful of applications
on which MINE can be used to minimize or maximize mutual information. We apply MINE to improve adversarially trained generative models. We
also use MINE to implement the Information Bottleneck, applying it to supervised classification;
our results demonstrate substantial improvement
in flexibility and performance in these settings.

1. Introduction
Mutual information is a fundamental quantity for measuring
the relationship between random variables. In data science
it has found applications in a wide range of domains and
tasks, including biomedical sciences (Maes et al., 1997),
blind source separation (BSS, e.g., independent component
analysis, Hyvärinen et al., 2004), information bottleneck (IB,
Tishby et al., 2000), feature selection (Kwak & Choi, 2002;
Peng et al., 2005), and causality (Butte & Kohane, 2000).
Put simply, mutual information quantifies the dependence
of two random variables X and Z. It has the form,
Z
dPXZ
dPXZ ,
(1)
I(X; Z) =
log
dP
X ⊗ PZ
X ×Z
where
PXZ is the joint
R
R probability distribution, and PX =
dP
and
P
=
dPXZ are the marginals. In conXZ
Z
Z
X
1

Montréal Institute for Learning Algorithms (MILA),
University of Montréal 2 Department of Mathematics and
Statistics, McGill University 3 Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR) 4 The Institute for Data Valorization
(IVADO). Correspondence to: Mohamed Ishmael Belghazi <ishmael.belghazi@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

trast to correlation, mutual information captures non-linear
statistical dependencies between variables, and thus can act
as a measure of true dependence (Kinney & Atwal, 2014).
Despite being a pivotal quantity across data science, mutual
information has historically been difficult to compute (Paninski, 2003). Exact computation is only tractable for discrete
variables (as the sum can be computed exactly), or for a
limited family of problems where the probability distributions are known. For more general problems, this is not
possible. Common approaches are non-parametric (e.g.,
binning, likelihood-ratio estimators based on support vector
machines, non-parametric kernel-density estimators; see,
Fraser & Swinney, 1986; Darbellay & Vajda, 1999; Suzuki
et al., 2008; Kwak & Choi, 2002; Moon et al., 1995; Kraskov
et al., 2004), or rely on approximate gaussianity of data
distribution (e.g., Edgeworth expansion, Van Hulle, 2005).
Unfortunately, these estimators typically do not scale well
with sample size or dimension (Gao et al., 2014), and thus
cannot be said to be general-purpose. Other recent works
include Kandasamy et al. (2017); Singh & Pczos (2016);
Moon et al. (2017).
In order to achieve a general-purpose estimator, we rely
on the well-known characterization of the mutual information as the Kullback-Leibler (KL-) divergence (Kullback,
1997) between the joint distribution and the product of the
marginals (i.e., I(X; Z) = DKL (PXZ || PX ⊗ PZ )). Recent work uses a dual formulation to cast the estimation of
f -divergences (including the KL-divergence, see Nguyen
et al., 2010) as part of an adversarial game between competing deep neural networks (Nowozin et al., 2016). This
approach is at the cornerstone of generative adversarial networks (GANs, Goodfellow et al., 2014), which train a
generative model without any explicit assumptions about
the underlying distribution of the data.
In this paper we demonstrate that exploiting dual optimization to estimate divergences goes beyond the minimax objective as formalized in GANs. We leverage this strategy
to offer a general-purpose parametric neural estimator of
mutual information based on dual representations of the
KL-divergence (Ruderman et al., 2012), which we show
is valuable in settings that do not necessarily involve an
adversarial game. Our estimator is scalable, flexible, and
completely trainable via back-propagation. The contribu-

