Differentiable Dynamic Programming for Structured Prediction and Attention

Arthur Mensch 1 Mathieu Blondel 2

Abstract
Dynamic programming (DP) solves a variety of
structured combinatorial problems by iteratively
breaking them down into smaller subproblems.
In spite of their versatility, many DP algorithms
are non-differentiable, which hampers their use
as a layer in neural networks trained by backpropagation. To address this issue, we propose
to smooth the max operator in the dynamic programming recursion, using a strongly convex
regularizer. This allows to relax both the optimal value and solution of the original combinatorial problem, and turns a broad class of DP algorithms into differentiable operators. Theoretically, we provide a new probabilistic perspective on backpropagating through these DP operators, and relate them to inference in graphical
models. We derive two particular instantiations
of our framework, a smoothed Viterbi algorithm
for sequence prediction and a smoothed DTW
algorithm for time-series alignment. We showcase these instantiations on structured prediction
(audio-to-score alignment, NER) and on structured and sparse attention for translation.
Modern neural networks are composed of multiple layers of nested functions. Although layers usually consist
of elementary linear algebraic operations and simple nonlinearities, there is a growing need for layers that output the
value or the solution of an optimization problem. This can
be used to design loss functions that capture relevant regularities in the input (Lample et al., 2016; Cuturi & Blondel,
2017) or to create layers that impose prior structure on the
output (Kim et al., 2017; Amos & Kolter, 2017; Niculae &
Blondel, 2017; Djolonga & Krause, 2017).
Among these works, several involve a convex optimization
1
Inria, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette,
France.
Work performed at 2 NTT Communication Science Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan. Correspondence to: AM
<arthur.mensch@m4x.org>, MB <mathieu@mblondel.org>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

problem (Amos & Kolter, 2017; Niculae & Blondel, 2017;
Djolonga & Krause, 2017); others solve certain combinatorial optimization problems by dynamic programming (Kim
et al., 2017; Cuturi & Blondel, 2017; Nowak et al., 2018).
However, because dynamic programs (Bellman, 1952) are
usually non-differentiable, virtually all these works resort
to the formalism of conditional random fields (CRFs) (Lafferty et al., 2001), which can be seen as changing the semiring used by the dynamic program — replacing all values by
their exponentials and all (max, +) operations with (+, ×)
operations (Verdu & Poor, 1987). While this modification
smoothes the dynamic program, it looses the sparsity of
solutions, since hard assignments become soft ones. Moreover, a general understanding of how to relax and differentiate dynamic programs is lacking. In this work, we propose to do so by leveraging smoothing (Moreau, 1965; Nesterov, 2005) and backpropagation (Linnainmaa, 1970). We
make the following contributions.
1) We present a unified framework for turning a broad class
of dynamic programs (DP) into differentiable operators.
Unlike existing works, we propose to change the semiring
to use (maxΩ , +) operations, where maxΩ is a max operator smoothed with a strongly convex regularizer Ω (§1).
2) We show that the resulting DP operators, that we call
DPΩ , are smoothed relaxations of the original DP algorithm and satisfy several key properties, chief among them
convexity. In addition, we show that their gradient, ∇DPΩ ,
is equal to the expected trajectory of a certain random walk
and can be used as a sound relaxation to the original dynamic program’s solution. Using negative entropy for Ω
recovers existing CRF-based works from a different perspective — we provide new arguments as to why this Ω is
a good choice. On the other hand, using squared ℓ2 norm
for Ω leads to new algorithms whose expected solution is
sparse. We derive a clean and efficient method to backpropagate gradients, both through DPΩ and ∇DPΩ . This
allows us to define differentiable DP layers that can be incorporated in neural networks trained end-to-end (§2).
3) We illustrate how to to derive two particular instantiations of our framework, a smoothed Viterbi algorithm for
sequence prediction and a smoothed DTW algorithm for
supervised time-series alignment (§3). The latter is illustrated in Figure 1. Finally, we showcase these two instanti-

