On Matching Pursuit and Coordinate Descent
Francesco Locatello * 1 2 Anant Raj * 1 Sai Praneeth Karimireddy 3
Gunnar Rätsch 2 Bernhard Schölkopf 1 Sebastian U. Stich 3 Martin Jaggi 3

Abstract
Two popular examples of first-order optimization
methods over linear spaces are coordinate descent
and matching pursuit algorithms, with their randomized variants. While the former targets the
optimization by moving along coordinates, the
latter considers a generalized notion of directions.
Exploiting the connection between the two algorithms, we present a unified analysis of both,
providing affine invariant sublinear O(1/t) rates
on smooth objectives and linear convergence on
strongly convex objectives. As a byproduct of
our affine invariant analysis of matching pursuit,
our rates for steepest coordinate descent are the
tightest known. Furthermore, we show the first accelerated convergence rate O(1/t2 ) for matching
pursuit and steepest coordinate descent on convex
objectives.

1. Introduction
In this paper we address the following convex optimization
problem:
min f (x) ,
(1)
x2lin(A)

where f is a convex function. The minimization is over a
linear space, which is parametrized as the set of linear combinations of elements from a given set A. These elements
of A are called atoms. In the most general setting, A is
assumed to be a compact but not necessarily finite subset of
a Hilbert space, i.e., a linear space equipped with an inner
product, complete in the corresponding norm. Problems
of the form (1) are tackled by a multitude of first-order
optimization methods and are of paramount interest in the
*
Equal contribution 1 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 Dept.
of Computer
Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 3 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Francesco Locatello <francesco.locatello@tuebingen.mpg.de>, Anant Raj
<anant.raj@tuebingen.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

machine learning community (Seber & Lee, 2012; Meir &
Rätsch, 2003; Schölkopf & Smola, 2001; Menard, 2018;
Tibshirani, 2015).
Traditionally, matching pursuit (MP) algorithms were introduced to solve the inverse problem of representing a
measured signal by a sparse combination of atoms from an
over-complete basis (Mallat & Zhang, 1993). In other words,
the solution of the optimization problem (1) is formed as
a linear combination of few of the elements of the atom
set A – i.e. a sparse approximation. At each iteration, the
MP algorithm picks a direction from A according to the
gradient information, and takes a step. This procedure is
not limited to atoms of fixed dimension. Indeed, lin(A) can
be an arbitrary linear subspace of the ambient space and
we are interested in finding the minimizer of f only on this
domain, see e.g. (Gillis & Luce, 2018). Conceptually, MP
stands in the middle between coordinate descent (CD) and
gradient descent, as the algorithm is allowed to descend the
function along a prescribed set of directions which does not
necessarily correspond to coordinates. This is particularly
important for machine learning applications as it translates
to a sparse representation of the iterates in terms of the
elements of A while maintaining the convergence guarantees (Lacoste-Julien et al., 2013; Locatello et al., 2017b).
The first analysis of the MP algorithm in the optimization
sense to solve the template (1) without incoherence assumptions was done by (Locatello et al., 2017a). To prove convergence, they exploit the connection between MP and the
Frank-Wolfe (FW) algorithm (Frank & Wolfe, 1956), a
popular projection-free algorithm for the constrained optimization case. On the other hand, steepest coordinate
descent is a special case of MP (when the atom set is the
L1 ball). This is particularly important as the CD rates can
be deduced from the MP rates. Furthermore, the literature
on coordinate descent is currently much richer than the one
on MP. Therefore, understanding the connection of the two
classes of CD and MP-type algorithms is a main goal of this
paper, and results in benefits for both sides of the spectrum.
In particular, the contributions of this paper are:
• We present an affine invariant convergence analysis for
Matching Pursuit algorithms solving (1). Our approach
is tightly related to the analysis of coordinate descent

