Tree Edit Distance Learning via Adaptive Symbol Embeddings

Benjamin Paaßen 1 Claudio Gallicchio 2 Alessio Micheli 2 Barbara Hammer 1

Abstract
Metric learning has the aim to improve classification accuracy by learning a distance measure
which brings data points from the same class
closer together and pushes data points from different classes further apart. Recent research has
demonstrated that metric learning approaches can
also be applied to trees, such as molecular structures, abstract syntax trees of computer programs,
or syntax trees of natural language, by learning the cost function of an edit distance, i.e. the
costs of replacing, deleting, or inserting nodes
in a tree. However, learning such costs directly
may yield an edit distance which violates metric axioms, is challenging to interpret, and may
not generalize well. In this contribution, we propose a novel metric learning approach for trees
which we call embedding edit distance learning
(BEDL) and which learns an edit distance indirectly by embedding the tree nodes as vectors,
such that the Euclidean distance between those
vectors supports class discrimination. We learn
such embeddings by reducing the distance to prototypical trees from the same class and increasing
the distance to prototypical trees from different
classes. In our experiments, we show that BEDL
improves upon the state-of-the-art in metric learning for trees on six benchmark data sets, ranging
from computer science over biomedical data to a
natural-language processing data set containing
over 300,000 nodes.

1. Introduction
Many classification approaches in machine learning explicitly or implicitly rely on some measure of distance (Kulis,
2013; Bellet et al., 2014; Mokbel et al., 2015). This is par1
Cognitive Interaction Technology, Bielefeld University, Germany 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Pisa, Italy.
Correspondence to: Benjamin Paaßen <bpaassen@techfak.unibielefeld.de>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

ticularly apparent in case of the k-nearest neighbor classifier
which classifies data points by assigning the label of the
majority of the k nearest neighbors according to a given
distance (Cover & Hart, 1967); or in case of learning vector quantization approaches which classify data points by
assigning the label of the closest prototype according to
a given distance (Kohonen, 1995). The success of such
machine learning approaches hinges on the distance being
discriminative, that is, data points from the same class being generally closer compared to data points from different
classes. If the distance does not fulfill this criterion, one
has to adapt or learn the distance measure with respect to
the data, which is the topic of metric learning (Kulis, 2013;
Bellet et al., 2014).
Most prior research in metric learning has focused on learning a generalization of the Euclidean distance according
to some cost function (Kulis, 2013; Bellet et al., 2014).
However, the Euclidean distance is not applicable to nonvectorial data, such as protein sequences, abstract syntax
trees of computer programs, or syntax trees of natural language. To process these kinds of data, edit distances are a
popular option, in particular the tree edit distance (Zhang
& Shasha, 1989). In this contribution, we develop a novel
metric learning scheme for the tree edit distance which we
call embedding edit distance learning (BEDL).
While past research on metric learning for trees does exist
(Bellet et al., 2014), BEDL goes beyond the state-of-the-art
in multiple aspects:
• Based on the work of Bellet et al. (2012), we provide a
generalized re-formulation of the edit distance which
lends itself to metric learning, and can be applied to any
kind of edit distance which uses replacement, deletion,
and insertion operations. Furthermore, we consider not
only one optimal edit script for metric learning, but all
co-optimal edit scripts via a novel forward-backward
algorithm.
• Our approach requires only a linear number of data
tuples for metric learning, as we represent classes by
few prototypes, which are selected via median learning
vector quantization (Nebel et al., 2015).
• Most importantly, we do not directly learn the operation costs for the string edit distance, but instead learn

