Analysis of Minimax Error Rate for Crowdsourcing
and Its Application to Worker Clustering Model

Hideaki Imamura 1 2 Issei Sato 1 2 Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

Abstract
While crowdsourcing has become an important
means to label data, there is great interest in
estimating the ground truth from unreliable labels produced by crowdworkers. The Dawid and
Skene (DS) model is one of the most well-known
models in the study of crowdsourcing. Despite its
practical popularity, theoretical error analysis for
the DS model has been conducted only under restrictive assumptions on class priors, confusion
matrices, or the number of labels each worker
provides. In this paper, we derive a minimax error rate under more practical setting for a broader
class of crowdsourcing models including the DS
model as a special case. We further propose the
worker clustering model, which is more practical than the DS model under real crowdsourcing
settings. The wide applicability of our theoretical analysis allows us to immediately investigate
the behavior of this proposed model, which can
not be analyzed by existing studies. Experimental results showed that there is a strong similarity
between the lower bound of the minimax error
rate derived by our theoretical analysis and the
empirical error of the estimated value.

1. Introduction
Crowdsourcing has become an essential tool for largescale data collection in machine learning. While crowdsourcing provides a less expensive means of labeling data,
the data annotated by a crowd can be of low quality because crowd workers are often non-experts and are sometimes even adversarial. Many crowdsourcing services try to
The code for the experiment can be used in
https://github.com/HideakiImamura/MinimaxErrorRate.
1
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 2 RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan.
Correspondence to: Hideaki Imamura <imamura@ms.k.utokyo.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

solve this problem by providing redundancy for labeling,
i.e., by collecting multiple labels from different workers
for each task (Ipeirotis et al., 2010; Welinder et al., 2010;
Snow et al., 2008). This strategy raises the question: how
can the ground truths be estimated from noisy and redundant labels? Estimating the ground truth is difficult in the
laissez-faire crowdsourcing setting in which a large number of workers in the world can freely label as many tasks
as they want. In this setting, a small number of workers
annotate data a large number of times, while most workers
perform annotation only a few times. That is, the number of
tasks to be labeled per worker typically follows Zipf’s law.
In this paper, we focus on this setting because it is more realistic than the non-laissez-faire crowdsourcing setting, in
which the number of tasks to be labeled per worker is almost constant across all workers and which is assumed in
the experiments of many previous works (Welinder et al.,
2010; Snow et al., 2008).
In the context of estimating the ground truth of each task
from noisy and redundant labels, Dawid & Skene (1979)
conducted pioneering research. It is assumed in the Dawid
and Skene (DS) model that each worker has his or her
own confusion matrix. The ground truth of each task
and the confusion matrix of each worker are jointly estimated by the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm
(Dempster et al., 1977).
Although the DS model has had empirical success
(Welinder et al., 2010; Snow et al., 2008), there are two
major problems. First, there are few theoretical error analyses on the performance conducted for the DS model, and
the existing theoretical analyses are only valid under strong
assumptions. For example, Gao et al. (2016) assumed that
the class prior is uniform and Zhang et al. (2014) assumed
that the entries of the confusion matrices are strictly positive. Second, the experimental validity of the existing
methods is confirmed only when the number of tasks to be
labeled per worker is almost constant on both synthetic and
real-world data (Welinder et al., 2010; Snow et al., 2008).
To alleviate the first problem, we provide a novel theoretical error analysis under milder assumptions based on
Fano’s method, which is a useful minimax lower-bounding
technique (Yu, 1997). Our theoretical analysis is applicable

