Dropout Training, Data-dependent Regularization, and Generalization Bounds

Wenlong Mou 1 Yuchen Zhou 2 Jun Gao 3 Liwei Wang 3 4

Abstract
We study the problem of generalization guarantees for dropout training. A general framework
is first proposed for learning procedures with random perturbation on model parameters. The generalization error is bounded by sum of two offset Rademacher complexities: the main term is
Rademacher complexity of the hypothesis class
with minus offset induced by the perturbation variance, which characterizes data-dependent regularization by the random perturbation; the auxiliary
term is offset Rademacher complexity for the variance class, controlling the degree to which this
regularization effect can be weakened. For neural
networks, we estimate upper and lower bounds
for the variance induced by truthful dropout, a
variant of dropout that we propose to ensure unbiased output and fit into our framework, and the
variance bounds exhibits connection to adaptive
regularization methods. By applying our framework to ReLU networks with one hidden layer,
a generalization upper bound is derived with no
assumptions on the parameter norms or data distribution, with O(1/n) fast rate and adaptivity
to geometry of data points being achieved at the
same time.

1. Introduction
The past six years witnessed the scintillating success of
dropout training method in deep learning, ever since the
seminal work by (Hinton et al., 2012). It has become a
common technique among deep learning practitioners, to
randomly mask out part of network during training, and use
the entire network for prediction. A series of comprehensive
1
Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley
Department of Statistics, University of Wisconsin, Madison 3 Key
Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking
University 4 Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing
Institute of Big Data Research. Correspondence to: Liwei Wang
<wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

experimental studies have shown the regularization effect
incurred by dropout, as the gap between training loss and
testing loss is significantly reduced. This simple technique
has developed into an active research area, with several
variants being proposed, advancing the state-of-the-art test
performances in deep learning (Ma et al., 2016; Huang et al.,
2016; Goodfellow et al., 2013; Wan et al., 2013; Rippel
et al., 2014). Perhaps surprisingly, dropout training usually achieves the better testing performance in the tradeoff
between capacity and generalization, compared with standard `2 regularization. This well-known phenomena was
characterized as ”Altitude Training” (Wager et al., 2014):
analogous to athletes who were trained in a harder situation
than they compete in, the difficulties induced by perturbation during training endow the model with more robustness,
making life easier for it when faced with testing data.
Despite its empirical success, current theoretical understanding into this technique is very vague. In their original paper,
Hinton et al. (2012) describes dropout training as trying to
ensemble exponentially many sub-networks with sharing
parameters. However, the final model is actually taking
average instead of ensemble. Thus their original argument
is weakened by the well-known non-convexity of neural
networks’ loss functions, as averaged parameter can lead
to significantly larger loss. Moreover, as the way in which
dropout helps generalization remaining a myth, practitioners
usually find themselves confused with different situations
where dropout work or not. For example, Ioffe & Szegedy
(2015) discovered that dropout doesn’t help if ”Batch Normalization (BN)” is used in the network. This was verified by extensive experiments, and equivocally explained as
”some regularization effect” of BN. The theoretical results
proposed in this paper, on the other hand, is able to address
this issue in a solid and quantitative way.
Wide applications of dropout techniques also motivates a
lot of theoretical studies ranging from statistical to computational perspectives. Wager et al. (2013) showed the adaptive
regularization effect of dropout training for generalized linear models. They also established connections to adaptive
gradient methods such as AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011).
In (Wager et al., 2014), faster rate convergence was shown
to be achieved using dropout, for a class of topic models.
For the online learning setting, dropout was considered a
kind of perturbation in Follow the Perturbed Leader (FTPL)

