Differentiable Compositional Kernel Learning for Gaussian Processes
Shengyang Sun 1 2 Guodong Zhang 1 2 Chaoqi Wang 1 2 Wenyuan Zeng 1 2 3 Jiaman Li 1 2 Roger Grosse 1 2

Abstract
The generalization properties of Gaussian processes depend heavily on the choice of kernel,
and this choice remains a dark art. We present the
Neural Kernel Network (NKN), a flexible family
of kernels represented by a neural network. The
NKN’s architecture is based on the composition
rules for kernels, so that each unit of the network
corresponds to a valid kernel. It can compactly
approximate compositional kernel structures such
as those used by the Automatic Statistician (Lloyd
et al., 2014), but because the architecture is differentiable, it is end-to-end trainable with gradientbased optimization. We show that the NKN is
universal for the class of stationary kernels. Empirically we demonstrate NKN’s pattern discovery and extrapolation abilities on several tasks
that depend crucially on identifying the underlying structure, including time series and texture
extrapolation, as well as Bayesian optimization.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) are a powerful and widely used
class of models due to their nonparametric nature, explicit
representation of posterior uncertainty, and ability to flexibly
model a variety of structures in data. However, patterns of
generalization in GP depend heavily on the choice of kernel
function (Rasmussen, 1999); different kernels can impose
widely varying modeling assumptions, such as smoothness,
linearity, or periodicity. Capturing appropriate kernel structures can be crucial for interpretability and extrapolation
(Duvenaud et al., 2013; Wilson & Adams, 2013). Even for
experts, choosing GP kernel structures remains a dark art.
GPs’ strong dependence on kernel structures has motivated
work on automatic kernel learning methods. Sometimes this
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, CA. 2 Vector Institute. 3 Uber Advanced Technologies
Group, Toronto, ON, CA. Correspondence to: Shengyang Sun
<ssy@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

(a) Ground Truth

(b) NKN Prediction

Figure 1. 2-D synthetic data (Left) and extrapolation result using
our neural kernel network (Right). The 2-D function is y =
p
(cos(2x1 ) + cos(2x2 )) ⇤ x1 x2 . Black dots represent 100 training
data randomly sampled from [ 6, 6]2 . This synthetic experiment
illustrates NKN’s ability to discover and extrapolate patterns.

can be done by imposing a specific kind of structure: e.g.,
Bach (2009); Duvenaud et al. (2011) learned kernel structures which were additive over subsets of the variables. A
more expressive space of kernels is spectral mixtures (Wilson & Adams, 2013; Kom Samo & Roberts, 2015; Remes
et al., 2017), which are based on spectral domain summations. For example, spectral mixture (SM) kernels (Wilson
& Adams, 2013) approximate all stationary kernels using
Gaussian mixture models in the spectral domain. Deep kernel learning (DKL) (Wilson et al., 2016) further boosted the
expressiveness by transforming the inputs of spectral mixture base kernel with a deep neural network. However, the
expressiveness of DKL still depends heavily on the kernel
placed on the output layer.
In another line of work, Duvenaud et al. (2013) defined
a context-free grammar of kernel structures based on the
composition rules for kernels. Due to its compositionality,
this grammar could express combinations of properties such
as smoothness, linearity, or periodicity. They performed a
greedy search over this grammar to find a kernel struture
which matched the input data. Using the learned structures,
they were able to produce sensible extrapolations and interpretable decompositions for time series datasets. Lloyd
et al. (2014) extended this work to an Automatic Statistician
which automatically generated natural language reports. All
of these results depended crucially on the compositionality
of the underlying space. The drawback was that discrete
search over the kernel grammar is very expensive, often
requiring hours of computation even for short time series.

