Deep Density Destructors

David I. Inouye 1 Pradeep Ravikumar 1

Abstract
We propose a unified framework for deep density
models by formally defining density destructors.
A density destructor is an invertible function
that transforms a given density to the uniform
density—essentially destroying any structure in
the original density. This destructive transformation generalizes Gaussianization via ICA and
more recent autoregressive models such as MAF
and Real NVP. Informally, this transformation
can be seen as a generalized whitening procedure
or a multivariate generalization of the univariate
CDF function. Unlike Gaussianization, our destructive transformation has the elegant property
that the density function is equal to the absolute
value of the Jacobian determinant. Thus, each
layer of a deep density can be seen as a shallow
density—uncovering a fundamental connection
between shallow and deep densities. In addition,
our framework provides a common interface for
all previous methods enabling them to be systematically combined, evaluated and improved.
Leveraging the connection to shallow densities,
we also propose a novel tree destructor based
on tree densities and an image-specific destructor
based on pixel locality. We illustrate our framework on a 2D dataset, MNIST, and CIFAR-10.
Code is available on first author’s website.

1. Introduction
Creating a complex model can be viewed from two perspectives: one constructive and one destructive. As an illustration, suppose someone is trying to build a replica of a
Lego model with a set of the same pieces. From a constructive perspective, the person could build an entire replica,
compare it to the original model, rebuild the replica based
on the comparison, and repeat until the replica is similar
1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: David I. Inouye <dinouye@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

to the original model. From a destructive perspective, the
person could remove one piece at a time from the original model and record where each piece was removed; then,
the person could easily construct a replica by reversing the
recorded destructive process.
Analogous to building a replica given an original model,
estimating a complex distribution via deep networks given
samples from the true distribution can be viewed from the
constructive or destructive perspective. Deep generative
models such as VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende
et al., 2014), GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and variants
estimate a constructive transformation from samples of a
simple base distribution to samples from a complex distribution (e.g. distribution of real images).1 Formally, this
amounts to the following approximation:
z ∼ BaseDistribution
b ≡ Gφ (z) ∼ GenerativeDistribution ,
x

(1)

where z is a latent variable, φ are the parameters of the genb approximates x, the true observed
erative network, and x
variable. As a mirror of the constructive process, we propose estimating an invertible destructive transformation, or
destructive flow, from the input distribution to the base distribution:
x ∼ DataDistribution
zb ≡ Dθ (x) ∼ ApproximateBaseDistribution ,

(2)

where x is from the true data distribution and zb is an approximation to the base distribution of z. The destructive
transformation Dθ is similar to the inference network in
VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014)
but while VAEs only use an (non-invertible) inference network for learning the generative model Gφ , the destructive
perspective implicitly estimates a generative transformation
via the inverse of Dθ , namely Gφ ≡ Dθ−1 in Eq. 1. Thus,
learning simplifies to only estimating a single deep network
Dθ rather than two. Note that if the destructive model is
b = x because the
flexible enough so that zb = z, then x
network is invertible. The beauty of density estimation via
invertible transformations is that not only can the model be
sampled from, but the likelihood values can be computed
1
The transformation can be stochastic as in VAEs or deterministic as in GANs.

