Recurrent Predictive State Policy Networks

Ahmed Hefny * 1 Zita Marinho * 2 3 Wen Sun 2 Siddhartha S. Srinivasa 4 Geoffrey Gordon 1

Abstract
We introduce Recurrent Predictive State Policy
(RPSP) networks, a recurrent architecture that
brings insights from predictive state representations to reinforcement learning in partially observable environments. Predictive state policy
networks consist of a recursive filter, which keeps
track of a belief about the state of the environment,
and a reactive policy that directly maps beliefs
to actions. The recursive filter leverages predictive state representations (PSRs) (Rosencrantz &
Gordon, 2004; Sun et al., 2016) by modeling predictive state — a prediction of the distribution
of future observations conditioned on history and
future actions. This representation gives rise to
a rich class of statistically consistent algorithms
(Hefny et al., 2018) to initialize the recursive filter. Predictive state serves as an equivalent representation of a belief state. Therefore, the policy
component of the RPSP-network can be purely
reactive, simplifying training while still allowing
optimal behaviour. We optimize our policy using a combination of policy gradient based on
rewards (Williams, 1992) and gradient descent
based on prediction error of the recursive filter.
We show the efficacy of RPSP-networks under
partial observability on a set of robotic control
tasks from OpenAI Gym. We empirically show
that RPSP-networks perform well compared with
memory-preserving networks such as GRUs, as
well as finite memory models, being the overall
best performing method.

*

Equal contribution 1 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 2 Robotics Institute, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 3 ISR/IT, Instituto Superior
Técnico, Lisbon, Portugal 4 Paul G. Allen School of Computer
Science & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, USA.
Correspondence to: Ahmed Hefny <ahefny@cs.cmu.edu>, Zita
Marinho <zmarinho@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been significant progress in deep reinforcement learning (Bojarski et al., 2016; Schulman et al.,
2015; Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2016). Deep reinforcement learning combines deep networks as a representation
of the policy with reinforcement learning algorithms and
enables end-to-end training.
While traditional applications of deep learning rely on standard architectures with sigmoid or ReLU activations, there
is an emerging trend of using composite architectures that
contain parts explicitly resembling other algorithms such
as Kalman filtering (Haarnoja et al., 2016) and value iteration (Tamar et al., 2016). It has been shown that such
architectures can outperform standard neural networks.
In this work, we focus on partially observable environments,
where the agent does not have full access to the state of the
environment, but only to partial observations thereof. The
agent has to maintain instead a distribution over states, i.e.,
a belief state, based on the entire history of observations
and actions. The standard approach to this problem is to
employ recurrent architectures such as Long-Short-TermMemory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and
Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) (Cho et al., 2014). Despite
their success (Hausknecht & Stone, 2015), these methods
are difficult to train due to non-convexity, and their hidden
states lack a predefined statistical meaning.
Models based on predictive state representations (Littman
et al., 2001; Singh et al., 2004; Rosencrantz & Gordon, 2004;
Boots et al., 2013) offer an alternative method to construct
a surrogate for belief state in a partially observable environment. These models represent state as the expectation
of sufficient statistics of future observations, conditioned
on history and future actions. Predictive state models admit efficient learning algorithms with theoretical guarantees.
Moreover, the successive application of the predictive state
update procedure (i.e., filtering equations) results in a recursive computation graph that is differentiable with respect to
model parameters. Therefore, we can treat predictive state
models as recurrent networks and apply backpropagation
through time (BPTT) (Hefny et al., 2018; Downey et al.,
2017) to optimize model parameters. We use this insight to
construct a Recurrent Predictive State Policy (RPSP) network, a special recurrent architecture that consists of (1) a

