A Conditional Gradient Framework for Composite Convex Minimization
with Applications to Semidefinite Programming

Alp Yurtsever 1 Olivier Fercoq 2 Francesco Locatello 3 4 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract
We propose a conditional gradient framework
for a composite convex minimization template
with broad applications. Our approach combines
smoothing and homotopy techniques under the
CGM framework,
and provably achieves the opti√
mal O(1/ k) convergence rate. We demonstrate
that the same rate holds if the linear subproblems
are solved approximately with additive or multiplicative error. In contrast with the relevant work,
we are able to characterize the convergence when
the non-smooth term is an indicator function. Specific applications of our framework include the
non-smooth minimization, semidefinite programming, and minimization with linear inclusion constraints over a compact domain. Numerical evidence demonstrates the benefits of our framework.

1. Introduction
The importance of convex optimization in machine learning
has increased dramatically in the last decade due to the new
theory in structured sparsity, rank minimization and statistical learning models like support vector machines. Indeed, a
large class of learning formulations can be addressed by the
following composite convex minimization template:
min F (x) := f (x) + g(Ax),

x∈X

(1.1)

where X ⊂ Rn is compact (nonempty, bounded, closed) and
its 0-dimensional faces (i.e., its vertices) are called atoms.
f : X → R ∪ {+∞} is a smooth proper closed convex
function, A ∈ Rd×n , and g : Rd → R ∪ {+∞} is a proper
closed convex function which is possibly non-smooth.
1
LIONS, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland 2 LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, France
3
BMI, Dept. of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland 4 Empirical Inference, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Germany. Correspondence to: Alp Yurtsever
<alp.yurtsever@epfl.ch>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

By using the powerful proximal gradient framework, problems belonging to the template (1.1) can be solved nearly as
efficiently as if they were fully smooth with fast convergence
rates. By proximal (prox) operator, we mean:
1
proxϕ (v) = arg min ϕ(x) + kx − vk2 .
x
2
These methods make use of the gradient of the smooth
function f along with the prox of the non-smooth part
g(A · ) + ιX , where ιX denotes the indicator function of X ,
and are optimal as they match the iteration lower-bounds.
Surprisingly, the proximal operator can impose an undesirable computational burden and even intractability on these
gradient-based methods, such as the computation of a full
singular value decomposition in the ambient dimension or
the computation of proximal mapping for the latent group
lasso (Jaggi, 2013). Moreover, the linear mapping A often
complicates the computation of the prox itself, and require
more sophisticated splitting or primal-dual methods.
As a result, the conditional gradient method (CGM, aka
Frank-Wolfe method) has recently increased in popularity,
since it requires only a linear minimization oracle (lmo). By
lmo, we mean a resolvent of the following problem:
lmoX (v) = arg min x, v .
x∈X

CGM features significantly reduced computational costs
(e.g., when X is the spectrahedron), tractability (e.g., when
X is a latent group lasso norm), and interpretability (e.g.,
they generate solutions as a combination of atoms of X ).
The method is shown in Algorithm 1 when g(Ax) = 0:
Algorithm 1 CGM for smooth minimization
Input: x1 ∈ X
for k = 1, 2, . . . , do
ηk = 2/(k + 1)
sk = arg minx∈X ∇f (xk ), x
xk+1 = xk + ηk (sk − xk )
end for
The method itself is optimal for this particular template
(Lan, 2014). Unfortunately, CGM provably cannot handle
the non-smooth term g(Ax) in (1.1) via its subgradients (cf.
Section 5.3 for a counter example by Nesterov (2017)).

