Learning One Convolutional Layer with Overlapping Patches

Surbhi Goel 1 Adam Klivans 1 Raghu Meka 2

Abstract
We give the first provably efficient algorithm for
learning a one hidden layer convolutional network
with respect to a general class of (potentially overlapping) patches under mild conditions on the
underlying distribution. We prove that our framework captures commonly used schemes from computer vision, including one-dimensional and twodimensional “patch and stride” convolutions. Our
algorithm– Convotron– is inspired by recent work
applying isotonic regression to learning neural
networks. Convotron uses a simple, iterative update rule that is stochastic in nature and tolerant
to noise (requires only that the conditional mean
function is a one layer convolutional network, as
opposed to the realizable setting). In contrast to
gradient descent, Convotron requires no special
initialization or learning-rate tuning to converge to
the global optimum. We also point out that learning one hidden convolutional layer with respect to
a Gaussian distribution and just one disjoint patch
P (the other patches may be arbitrary) is easy in
the following sense: Convotron can efficiently recover the hidden weight vector by updating only
in the direction of P .

lowed by average pooling (Figure 1). More formally, for
an input image x, we consider k patches of size r indicated by selection matrices P1 , . . . , Pk ∈ {0, 1}r×n where
each matrix has exactly one 1 in each row and at most
one 1 in each column. The neural network is computed
Pk
as fw (x) = k1 i=1 σ(wT Pi x) where σ is the activation
function and w ∈ Rr is the weight vector corresponding to
the convolution filter. We focus on ReLU and leaky ReLU
activation functions.

Figure 1. Architecture of convolutional network with one hidden
layer and average pooling. Each purple rectangle corresponds to a
patch.

1.1. Our Contributions

1. Introduction
Developing provably efficient algorithms for learning commonly used neural network architectures continues to be a
core challenge in machine learning. The underlying difficulty arises from the highly non-convex nature of the optimization problems posed by neural networks. Obtaining
provable guarantees for learning even very basic architectures remains open.
In this paper we consider a simple convolutional neural
network with a single filter and overlapping patches fol*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin 2 Department of Computer Science, UCLA.
Correspondence to: Surbhi Goel <surbhi@cs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

The main contribution of this paper is a simple, stochastic update algorithm Convotron (Algorithm 1) for provably
learning the above convolutional architecture. The algorithm has the following properties:
• Works for general classes of overlapping patches and
requires mild distributional conditions.
• Proper recovery of the unknown weight vector.
• Stochastic in nature with a “gradient-like” update step.
• Requires no special/random initialization scheme or
tuning of the learning rate.
• Tolerates noise and succeeds in the probabilistic concept model of learning.
• Logarithmic convergence in 1/, the error parameter,
in the realizable setting.

