Learning Independent Causal Mechanisms

Giambattista Parascandolo 1 2 Niki Kilbertus 1 3 Mateo Rojas-Carulla 1 3 Bernhard Schölkopf 1

Abstract
Statistical learning relies upon data sampled from
a distribution, and we usually do not care what
actually generated it in the first place. From the
point of view of causal modeling, the structure of
each distribution is induced by physical mechanisms that give rise to dependences between observables. Mechanisms, however, can be meaningful autonomous modules of generative models that make sense beyond a particular entailed
data distribution, lending themselves to transfer
between problems. We develop an algorithm to recover a set of independent (inverse) mechanisms
from a set of transformed data points. The approach is unsupervised and based on a set of
experts that compete for data generated by the
mechanisms, driving specialization. We analyze
the proposed method in a series of experiments on
image data. Each expert learns to map a subset of
the transformed data back to a reference distribution. The learned mechanisms generalize to novel
domains. We discuss implications for transfer
learning and links to recent trends in generative
modeling.

1. Introduction
Humans are able to recognize objects such as handwritten
digits based on distorted inputs. They can correctly label
translated, corrupted, or inverted digits, without having to relearn them from scratch. The same applies for new objects,
essentially after having seen them once. Arguably, human
intelligence utilizes mechanisms (such as translation) that
are independent from an input domain and thus generalize
across object classes. These mechanisms are modular, reusable and broadly applicable, and the problem of learning
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 2 Max Planck
ETH Center for Learning Systems 3 University of Cambridge.
Correspondence to: Giambattista Parascandolo <gparascandolo@tue.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Q
···

Q2
Q1

M1

QN
M2
E1

E2
EN

MN

P

Figure 1. An overview of the problem setup. Given a sample from
a canonical distribution P , and one from a mixture of transformed
distributions Qi obtained by mechanisms Mi on P , we want to
learn inverse mechanisms Ei as independent modules. Modules (or
experts) compete amongst each other for data points, encouraging
specialization.

them from data is fundamental for the study of transfer
and domain adaptation.
In the field of causality, the concept of independent mechanisms plays a central role both on the conceptual level
and, more recently, in applications to inference. The independent mechanisms (IM) assumption states that the causal
generative process of a system’s variables is composed of
autonomous modules that do not inform or influence each
other (Schölkopf et al., 2012; Peters et al., 2017).
If a joint density is Markovian with respect to a directed
graph G, we can write it as
p(x) = p(x1 , . . . , xd ) =

d
Y

p(xj |pajG ),

(1)

j=1

where pajG denotes the parents of variable xj in the graph.
For a given joint density, there are usually many decompositions of the form (1), with respect to different graphs. If
G is a causal graph, i.e., if its edges denote direct causation (Pearl, 2000), then the conditional p(xj |paG j ) can be
thought of as physical mechanism generating xj from its
parents, and we refer to it as a causal conditional. In this
case, we consider the factorization (1) a generative model
where the term “generative” truly refers to a physical generative process. As an aside, we note that in the alternative

