Importance Weighted Transfer of Samples in Reinforcement Learning

Andrea Tirinzoni 1 Andrea Sessa 1 Matteo Pirotta 2 Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract
We consider the transfer of experience samples
(i.e., tuples hs, a, s0 , ri) in reinforcement learning (RL), collected from a set of source tasks
to improve the learning process in a given target task. Most of the related approaches focus
on selecting the most relevant source samples for
solving the target task, but then all the transferred
samples are used without considering anymore
the discrepancies between the task models. In
this paper, we propose a model-based technique
that automatically estimates the relevance (importance weight) of each source sample for solving the target task. In the proposed approach, all
the samples are transferred and used by a batch
RL algorithm to solve the target task, but their
contribution to the learning process is proportional to their importance weight. By extending the results for importance weighting provided
in supervised learning literature, we develop a
finite-sample analysis of the proposed batch RL
algorithm. Furthermore, we empirically compare the proposed algorithm to state-of-the-art
approaches, showing that it achieves better learning performance and is very robust to negative
transfer, even when some source tasks are significantly different from the target task.

1. Introduction
The goal of transfer in Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 1998) is to speed-up RL algorithms by reusing
knowledge obtained from a set of previously learned tasks.
The intuition is that the experience made by learning source
tasks might be useful for solving a related, but different,
target task. Transfer across multiple tasks may be achieved
in different ways. The available approaches differ in the
type of information transferred (e.g., samples, value func1

Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy 2 SequeL Team, INRIA Lille, France. Correspondence to: Andrea Tirinzoni <andrea.tirinzoni@polimi.it>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

tions, parameters, policies, etc.) and in the criteria used to
establish whether such knowledge could be beneficial for
solving the target or not.
This work focuses on the problem of transferring samples
from a set of source MDPs to augment the dataset used
to learn the target MDP. To motivate our approach, consider a typical learning scenario where samples are costly
to obtain. This is often the case in robotics applications,
where the interaction with the real environment could be
extremely time-consuming, thus reducing the number of
samples available. The typical remedy of adopting a simulator often leads to sub-optimal solutions due to the differences with respect to the real environment. A more effective approach is to transfer the simulated samples to speedup learning in the target task.
The transfer of samples has been widely studied in the supervised learning community. In particular, Crammer et al.
(2008) formalized the problem from a theoretical perspective and provided generalization bounds for the transfer
scenario. An interesting result is a trade-off between the
number of tasks from which to transfer and the total number of samples. In RL, Taylor et al. (2008) and Lazaric
et al. (2008) proposed almost simultaneously methods to
transfer single samples. While the former method focused
on a model-based approach, the latter one proposed a selective approach to transfer samples into a batch RL algorithm (e.g., Fitted Q-Iteration (Ernst et al., 2005)). Furthermore, Lazaric et al. (2008) considered a model-free
approach to compute a similarity measure between tasks,
which was used to decide which samples to transfer. More
recently, Lazaric & Restelli (2011) analyzed the transfer of
samples in batch RL from a theoretical perspective, demonstrating again the trade-off between the total number of
samples and the number of tasks from which to transfer.
Finally, Laroche & Barlier (2017) proposed a way to transfer all the samples to augment the dataset used by Fitted QIteration. The limitation of this approach resides in the restrictive assumption that all the tasks are assumed to share
the same transition dynamics and differ only in the reward
function. For a survey on transfer in RL, we refer the reader
to (Taylor & Stone, 2009; Lazaric, 2012).
One of the main drawbacks of many previous works is that,
even after a detailed selection, transferred samples are used

