Online Linear Quadratic Control

Alon Cohen 1 2 Avinatan Hassidim 1 3 Tomer Koren 4 Nevena Lazic 4 Yishay Mansour 1 5 Kunal Talwar 4

Abstract
We study the problem of controlling linear timeinvariant systems with known noisy dynamics and
adversarially chosen quadratic losses. We present
the first efficient online learning
algorithms in this
√
setting that guarantee O( T) regret under mild
assumptions, where T is the time horizon. Our
algorithms rely on a novel SDP relaxation for the
steady-state distribution of the system. Crucially,
and in contrast to previously proposed relaxations,
the feasible solutions of our SDP all correspond to
“strongly stable” policies that mix exponentially
fast to a steady state.

1. Introduction
Linear-quadratic (LQ) control is one of the most widely
studied problems in control theory (Anderson et al., 1972;
Bertsekas, 1995; Zhou et al., 1996). It has been applied
successfully to problems in statistics, econometrics, robotics,
social science and physics. In recent years, it has also received much attention from the machine learning community,
as increasingly difficult control problems have led to demand
for data-driven control systems (Abbeel et al., 2007; Levine
et al., 2016; Sheckells et al., 2017).
In LQ control, both the state and action are real-valued
vectors. The dynamics of the environment are linear in the
state and action, and are perturbed by Gaussian noise. The
cost is quadratic in the state and control (action) vectors. The
optimal control policy, which minimizes the cost, selects the
control vector as a linear function of the state vector, and
can be derived by solving the algebraic Ricatti equations.
The main focus of this work is control of linear systems
whose quadratic costs vary in an unpredictable way. This
problem may arise in settings such as building climate control
1 Google Research, Tel Aviv 2 Technion—Israel Inst. of Tech-

nology 3 Bar Ilan University 4 Google Brain, Mountain View
5 Tel Aviv University. Correspondence to: Alon Cohen <aloncohen@google.com>, Tomer Koren <tkoren@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

in the presence of time-varying energy costs, due to energy
auctions or unexpected demand fluctuations. To measure
how well a control system adapts to time-varying costs, it
is common to consider the notion of regret: the difference
between the total cost of the controller, one that is only
aware of previously observed costs, and that of the best fixed
control policy in hindsight. This notion has been thoroughly
studied in the context of online learning, and particularly in
that of online convex optimization (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi,
2006; Hazan, 2016; Shalev-Shwartz, 2012). LQ control was
considered in the context of regret by Abbasi-Yadkori et al.
(2014), who give a learning algorithm for the problem of
tracking an adversarially changing target in a system with
noiseless linear dynamics.
In this paper we consider online learning with fixed, known,
linear dynamics and adversarially chosen quadratic cost
matrices. Our
√ main results are two online algorithm that
achieve O( T) regret, when comparing to any fast mixing
linear policy.1 One of our algorithms is based on Online
Gradient Descent (Zinkevich, 2003). The other is based on
Follow the Lazy Leader (Kalai & Vempala, 2005),
√ a variant
of Follow the Perturbed Leader with only O( T) expected
number of policy switches.
Overall, our approach follows Even-Dar et al. (2009). We
first show how to perform online learning in an “idealized
setting”, a hypothetical setting in which the learner can
immediately observe the steady-state cost of any chosen
control policy. We proceed to bound the gap between the
idealized costs and the actual costs.
Our technique is conceptually different to most learning
problems: instead of predicting a policy and observing its
steady-state cost, the learner predicts a steady-state distribution and derives from it a corresponding policy. Importantly, this view allows us to cast the idealized problem as a
semidefinite program which minimizes the expected costs
as a function of a steady state distribution (of both states and
controls). As the problem is now convex, we apply OGD
and FLL to the SDP and argue about fast-mixing properties
of its feasible solutions.
1 Technically, we define the class of “strongly stable” policies
that guarantee the desired fast mixing property. Conceptually,
slowly mixing policies are less attractive for implementation, given
their inherent gap between their long and short term cost.

