An Iterative, Sketching-based Framework for Ridge Regression

Agniva Chowdhury 1 Jiasen Yang 1 Petros Drineas 2

Abstract
Ridge regression is a variant of regularized least
squares regression that is particularly suitable in
settings where the number of predictor variables
greatly exceeds the number of observations. We
present a simple, iterative, sketching-based algorithm for ridge regression that guarantees highquality approximations to the optimal solution
vector. Our analysis builds upon two simple
structural results that boil down to randomized
matrix multiplication, a fundamental and wellunderstood primitive of randomized linear algebra. An important contribution of our work is the
analysis of the behavior of sub-sampled ridge regression problems when the ridge leverage scores
are used: we prove that accurate approximations
can be achieved by a sample whose size depends
on the degrees of freedom of the ridge-regression
problem rather than the dimensions of the design
matrix. Our empirical evaluations verify our theoretical results on both real and synthetic data.

1. Introduction
In statistics and machine learning, ridge regression (Gunst
& Mason, 1977; Hoerl & Kennard, 1970) (also known as
Tikhonov regularization or weight decay) is a variant of
regularized least squares problems where the choice of the
penalty function is the squared `2 -norm. Formally, let A ∈
Rn×d be the design matrix and let b ∈ Rn be the response
vector. Then, the linear algebraic formulation of the ridge
regression problem is as follows:

Z ∗ = min kAx − bk22 + λkxk22 ,
(1)
x∈Rd

where λ > 0 is the regularization parameter. There are two
fundamental motivations underlying the use of ridge regres1
Department of Statistics, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
IN 2 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, IN. Correspondence to: Agniva Chowdhury
<chowdhu5@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

sion. First, when d  n, i.e., the number of predictor variables d greatly exceeds the number of observations n, fitting
the full model without regularization (i.e., setting λ to zero)
will result in large prediction intervals and a non-unique
regression estimator. Second, if the design matrix A is
ill-conditioned, solving the standard least-squares problem
without regularization would depend on (AT A)−1 . This
inversion would be problematic if AT A were singular or
nearly singular and thus adding even a little noise to the elements of A could result in large changes in (AT A)−1 . Due
to these two considerations, solving standard least-squares
problems without regularization may provide a good fit to
the training data but may not generalize well to test data.
Ridge regression abandons the requirement of an unbiased
estimator in order to address the aforementioned problems.
At the cost of introducing bias, ridge regression reduces the
variance and thus might reduce the overall mean squared
error (MSE). The minimizer of eqn. (1) is
−1 T
x∗ = AT A + λId
A b,
(2)
or, equivalently (see Saunders et al. (1998) and Lemma 9 in
Appendix A),
−1
x∗ = AT AAT + λIn
b.
(3)
Both formulations work for any λ > 0 for either underconstrained or over-constrained ridge regression problems,
regardless of the rank of the design matrix A. It is easy to
see that x∗ can be computed in time
O(nd min{n, d} + min{n3 , d3 }) = O(nd min{n, d}).
In our work, we will focus on design matrices A ∈ Rn×d
with d  n, which is the most common setting for ridge
regression. For simplicity of exposition, we will assume
that the rank of A is equal to n.1 In the context of ridge
regression, a much more important quantity than the rank
of the design matrix is the effective degrees of freedom:
dλ =

n
X

σi2
≤ n,
σ2 + λ
i=1 i

(4)

where σi are the singular values of A.
1
Our results can be slightly improved to depend on the rank ρ
of the matrix A instead of n.

