Probabilistic Recurrent State-Space Models

Andreas Doerr 1 2 Christian Daniel 1 Martin Schiegg 1 Duy Nguyen-Tuong 1 Stefan Schaal 2 3 Marc Toussaint 4
Sebastian Trimpe 2

Abstract

In real systems, the latent state xt can typically not be
measured directly, but has to be inferred from a series of
noisy output observations. Efficient methods exist for linear
models (Van Overschee & De Moor, 2012) and non-linear,
deterministic models (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997).

State-space models (SSMs) are a highly expressive model class for learning patterns in time
series data and for system identification. Deterministic versions of SSMs (e.g., LSTMs) proved
extremely successful in modeling complex time
series data. Fully probabilistic SSMs, however,
are often found hard to train, even for smaller
problems. We propose a novel model formulation
and a scalable training algorithm based on doubly stochastic variational inference and Gaussian
processes. This combination allows efficient incorporation of latent state temporal correlations,
which we found to be key to robust training. The
effectiveness of the proposed PR-SSM is evaluated on a set of real-world benchmark datasets in
comparison to state-of-the-art probabilistic model
learning methods. Scalability and robustness are
demonstrated on a high dimensional problem.

1. Introduction
System identification, i.e. learning dynamics models from
data (Ljung, 2010), is key in model-based control design
(Aström & Murray, 2010; Camacho & Alba, 2013) and
model-based reinforcement learning (RL) (Deisenroth &
Rasmussen, 2011; Doerr et al., 2017b). State-space models
(SSMs) are one popular class of representations for model
learning (Billings, 2013), which describe a system with input ut , output yt , and a latent Markovian state xt . The
transition model f , observation model g, process, and measurement noise t and γt form a discrete-time SSM
xt+1 = f (xt , ut ) + t ,
yt = g(xt ) + γt .

(1)

1
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany.
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Stuttgart/Tübingen,
Germany. 3 University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA.
4
Machine Learning and Robotics Lab, University of Stuttgart,
Germany. Correspondence to: Andreas Doerr <andreasdoerr@gmx.net>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Probabilistic models enable safe RL and alleviate model
bias (Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011). Placing a Gaussian
process (GP) prior on the unknown transition function f and
potentially on the observation model g allows for Bayesian
model learning, resulting in GP-SSMs. Robust training of
these probabilistic, non-linear SSMs is a challenging and
only partially solved problem, especially for higher dimensional systems (Frigola et al., 2013; Bayer & Osendorfer,
2014; Krishnan et al., 2015; Fraccaro et al., 2016; Eleftheriadis et al., 2017; Svensson & Schön, 2017). This paper
proposes the probabilistic recurrent state-space model1 (PRSSM2 ). PR-SSM takes inspiration from RNN model learning. In particular, the transition model is unrolled over time,
therefore accounting for temporal correlations whilst simultaneously allowing for learning by backpropagation through
time. The proposed method enables probabilistic model
predictions, inferring complex latent state distributions, and
principled model complexity regularization. We propose
an adapted form of a recognition model for the initial state,
which facilitates scalability through batch learning and learning of slow or unstable system dynamics (cf. Sec. 5).
In summary, the key contributions of this paper are:
• Combining gradient-based and sample-based inference
for efficient learning of nonlinear Gaussian process
state-space models;
• Tractable variational approximation, maintaining the
true latent state posterior and temporal correlations;
• Doubly stochastic inference scheme for scalability;
• Recognition model, which allows for initializing the
latent state distribution and thus for robust training and
prediction.
Together, these contributions allow for efficient and robust
learning of the PR-SSM. The proposed framework is evaluated on a set of real-world system identification datasets and
benchmarked against a range of state-of-the art methods.
1

Code
available
at:
boschresearch/PR-SSM .
2
Pronounced prism.

https://github.com/

