Learning to Coordinate with Coordination Graphs
in Repeated Single-Stage Multi-Agent Decision Problems

Eugenio Bargiacchi 1 Timothy Verstraeten 1 Diederik M. Roijers 1 2 Ann Nowé 1 Hado van Hasselt 3

Abstract
Learning to coordinate between multiple agents
is an important problem in many reinforcement
learning problems. Key to learning to coordinate is exploiting loose couplings, i.e., conditional independences between agents. In this
paper we study learning in repeated fully cooperative games, multi-agent multi-armed bandits
(MAMABs), in which the expected rewards can
be expressed as a coordination graph. We propose multi-agent upper confidence exploration
(MAUCE), a new algorithm for MAMABs that exploits loose couplings, which enables us to prove
a regret bound that is logarithmic in the number of
arm pulls and only linear in the number of agents.
We empirically compare MAUCE to sparse cooperative Q-learning, and a state-of-the-art combinatorial bandit approach, and show that it performs
much better on a variety of settings, including
learning control policies for wind farms.

1. Introduction
Many decision problems can be phrased as coordination
problems of many artificial intelligent agents (Boutilier,
1996). Examples include robot soccer (Kok et al., 2003),
warehouse commissioning (Claes et al., 2017), and traffic
light control (Wiering, 2000). We consider the cooperative
case, where there is a single goal to be optimised. A naive
approach could be to consider a super agent that decides
on the actions of all agents involved, which could easily
result in an action space which is prohibitively large. However, many coordination tasks have loose couplings. This
means that the total reward to optimise can be decomposed
into a sum of local rewards that only depend on (possibly
1
Dept. of Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium 2 Fac. of Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam,
The Netherlands 3 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to:
Eugenio Bargiacchi <svalorzen@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

overlapping) subsets of agents. Then, each agent’s action
can only directly affects the rewards of few small subsets of
agents. Key to making coordination efficient is exploiting
such loose couplings.
For an example of such a coordination task, consider an
autonomously controlled wind farm in which each agent
represents a wind turbine that is able to adjust the alignment
of its blades to the wind (see Section 6.3). Each turbine
can maximize its own power output by aligning the blades
exactly perpendicular to the wind, but doing so may hinder
turbines that are behind it due to turbulence (Van Dijk et al.,
2016). It should be possible to do better through coordination. However, considering the full joint action over all
turbines leads to a high-dimensional action space, which
would be hard to optimise. Instead, we can see that this
problem is loosely coupled, by noting that the power output
of each turbine only directly depends on a small subset of
other turbines — the turbines upwind within a certain distance. This means that the total output can be phrased as a
sum of local rewards that depend on small subsets of agents.
In this paper, we formalize multi-agent multi-armed bandits
(MAMABs) and investigate how to balance exploration and
exploitation in the joint action taken by the agents, such
that the loss due to taking suboptimal joint actions during
learning is bounded. Building on the upper confidence
bound (UCB) framework (Auer et al., 2002) for single-agent
multi-armed bandits, we formulate a new algorithm that we
call multi-agent upper confidence exploration (MAUCE)
(Section 4). MAUCE balances exploitation and exploration
using local estimates and local upper confidence bounds.
We prove in Section 5 that MAUCE achieves a regret bound
that depends on the harmonic mean of the local upper confidence bounds, rather than their sum, as we would get by
applying the combinatorial bandit framework (Cesa-Bianchi
& Lugosi, 2012; Chen et al., 2013). This leads to a regret
logarithmic in the number of arm-pulls and linear in the
number of agents. In contrast, the naive approach of considering the full joint action is exponential in the number
of agents. In Section 6 we compare empirically the performance of MAUCE to other approaches from the literature,
and show that it achieves much less regret in various settings,
including wind farm control.

