Global Convergence of Policy Gradient Methods
for the Linear Quadratic Regulator

Maryam Fazel * 1 Rong Ge * 2 Sham M. Kakade * 1 Mehran Mesbahi * 1

Abstract
Direct policy gradient methods for reinforcement
learning and continuous control problems are a
popular approach for a variety of reasons: 1) they
are easy to implement without explicit knowledge
of the underlying model, 2) they are an “endto-end” approach, directly optimizing the performance metric of interest, 3) they inherently allow
for richly parameterized policies. A notable drawback is that even in the most basic continuous
control problem (that of linear quadratic regulators), these methods must solve a non-convex
optimization problem, where little is understood
about their efficiency from both computational
and statistical perspectives. In contrast, system
identification and model based planning in optimal control theory have a much more solid theoretical footing, where much is known with regards
to their computational and statistical properties.
This work bridges this gap showing that (model
free) policy gradient methods globally converge to
the optimal solution and are efficient (polynomially so in relevant problem dependent quantities)
with regards to their sample and computational
complexities.

2016) and Atari game playing (Mnih et al., 2015). Deep
reinforcement learning (DeepRL) is becoming increasingly
popular for tackling such challenging sequential decision
making problems.
Many of these successes have relied on sampling based
reinforcement learning algorithms such as policy gradient
methods, including the DeepRL approaches. For these approaches, there is little theoretical understanding of their
efficiency, either from a statistical or a computational perspective. In contrast, control theory (optimal and adaptive
control) has a rich body of tools, with provable guarantees,
for related sequential decision making problems, particularly those that involve continuous control. These latter
techniques are often model-based—they estimate an explicit
dynamical model first (via system identification) and then
design optimal controllers.
This work builds bridges between these two lines of work,
namely, between optimal control theory and sample based
reinforcement learning methods, using ideas from mathematical optimization.
1.1. The optimal control problem
In the standard optimal control problem, a dynamical system
is described as
xt+1 = ft (xt , ut , wt ) ,

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen major advances in the control of
uncertain dynamical systems using reinforcement learning
and data-driven approaches; examples range from allowing
robots to perform more sophisticated controls tasks such
as robotic hand manipulation (Tassa et al., 2012; Al Borno
et al., 2013; Kumar et al., 2016; Levine et al., 2016; Tobin
et al., 2017; Rajeswaran et al., 2017a), to sequential decision making in game domains, e.g., AlphaGo (Silver et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Washington, Seattle, WA,
USA 2 Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. Correspondence to:
Rong Ge <rongge@cs.duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

where ft maps a state xt ∈ Rd , a control (the action) ut ∈
Rk , and a disturbance wt , to the next state xt+1 ∈ Rd ,
starting from an initial state x0 . The objective is to find the
control input ut which minimizes the long term cost,
minimize

T
X

ct (xt , ut )

t=0

such that

xt+1 = ft (xt , ut , wt ) t = 0, . . . , T.

Here the ut are allowed to depend on the history of observed
states, and T is the time horizon (which can be finite or
infinite). In practice, this is often solved by considering the
linearized control (sub-)problem where the dynamics are
approximated by
xt+1 = At xt + Bt ut + wt ,

