A Delay-tolerant Proximal-Gradient Algorithm for Distributed Learning

Konstantin Mishchenko 1 Franck Iutzeler 2 Jérôme Malick 3 Massih-Reza Amini 2

Abstract

In our distributed setting, the n data examples are split
across M machines, each machine i having a private subset
Si of the examples. Problem (1) then reformulates as


M 
X
ni   1 X
min
`j (x) +r(x)
(2)
n
ni
x∈Rd
i=1 | {z }
j∈Si
:=πi |
{z
}

Distributed learning aims at computing highquality models by training over scattered data.
This covers a diversity of scenarios, including
computer clusters or mobile agents. One of the
main challenges is then to deal with heterogeneous machines and unreliable communications.
In this setting, we propose and analyze a flexible
asynchronous optimization algorithm for solving nonsmooth learning problems. Unlike most
existing methods, our algorithm is adjustable
to various levels of communication costs, machines computational powers, and data distribution evenness. We prove that the algorithm converges linearly with a fixed learning rate that does
not depend on communication delays nor on the
number of machines. Although long delays in
communication may slow down performance, no
delay can break convergence.

proportion

:=fi (x)
local empirical loss

where ni = |Si | the cardinality of the local data subset,
πi the proportion of data locally stored, and fi the local
empirical loss at machine i. This type of problem arises
when one wants to learn over distributed devices, each of
which having a local part of the data (this locality coming
from the prohibitive size of the data, or its privacy), as in
federated learning (Konečnỳ et al., 2016).

1. Introduction
Distributed learning set-up We consider a general
learning problem formulated as the following nonsmooth
optimization problem

The communication constraints of the distributed setting naturally lead us to consider a master-slave framework. More precisely, we present an optimization algorithm where slave machines compute (deterministic) updates based on their local data and asynchronously communicate their result to a master machine where the updates
are aggregated to produce a new iterate. To cope up with
the diversity of the scenarios included in this framework
(e.g. computing clusters, mobile devices), we pay a special
attention to have realistic assumptions on communication
delays and data distribution.

n

min

x∈Rd

1X
`i (x) + r(x),
n i=1

(1)

where n is the size of the training set, the `i ’s are smooth
convex empirical loss functions and r is a non-smooth convex regularizer. This template models a broad range of
problems arising in machine learning and signal processing: finite-sum structure of the data-fidelity term includes
the least-squares or logistic loss functions; the regularization term includes penalties such as `1 or group lasso.
1
King Abdullah University of Science & Technology
(KAUST) 2 Univ. Grenoble Alpes 3 CNRS and LJK. Correspondence to: Franck Iutzeler <franck.iutzeler@univ-grenoblealpes.fr>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Contributions We propose a proximal-gradient optimization algorithm for distributed learning with flexible
asynchronous communications. This algorithm allows every slave to perform an arbitrary number of passes on his
local data, thus adjusting the computation/communication
trade-off. We show that the algorithm converges linearly,
in the strongly convex case, with a rate independent of the
computing system, which is highly desirable for scalability.
To this end, we develop a new epoch-based mathematical
analysis, encompassing computation times and communication delays, to refocus the theory on algorithmics.
Ouline of the paper The paper is structured as follows.
In Section 2, we review the related literature and their
limitations in our context. Then we present in Section 3
the new asynchronous distributed algorithm, denoted as
DAve-RPG for Distributed Averaging of Repeated Proximal Gradient steps. In Section 4, we provide local and

