K-means clustering using random matrix sparsification

Kaushik Sinha 1

Abstract
K-means clustering algorithm using Lloyd’s
heuristic is one of the most commonly used tools
in data mining and machine learning that shows
promising performance. However, it suffers from
a high computational cost resulting from pairwise Euclidean distance computations between
data points and cluster centers in each iteration
of Lloyd’s heuristic. Main contributing factor of
this computational bottle neck is a matrix-vector
multiplication step, where the matrix contains all
the data points and the vector is a cluster center.
In this paper we show that we can randomly sparsify the original data matrix resulting in a sparse
data matrix which can significantly speed up the
above mentioned matrix vector multiplication step
without significantly affecting cluster quality. In
particular, we show that optimal k-means clustering solution of the sparse data matrix, obtained
by applying random matrix sparsification, results
in an approximately optimal k-means clustering
objective of the original data matrix. Our empirical studies on three real world datasets corroborate our theoretical findings and demonstrate that
our proposed sparsification method can indeed
achieve satisfactory clustering performance.

1. Introduction
K-means clustering is a classical clustering problems and
has been studied for several decades. The goal of K-Means
clustering is to find a set of k cluster centers for a dataset
such that the sum of squared distances of each point to
its closest cluster center is minimized. While it is known
that k-means clustering is an NP hard optimization problem even for k = 2 (Dasgupta, 2008), in practice a local
search heuristic due to Lloyd (Lloyd, 1982) is widely used
for solving K-means clustering problem. Lloyd’s iterative
1

Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science,
Wichita State University, KS, USA. Correspondence to: Kaushik
Sinha <kaushik.sinha@wichita.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

algorithm begins with k arbitrary “cluster centers”, and in
each iteration, each point is assigned to the nearest cluster
center, and each cluster center is recomputed as the center
of mass of all points assigned to it. These last two steps are
repeated until the process stabilizes. Lloyd’s algorithm for
k-means clustering is known to be one of the top ten data
mining tools of the last fifty years (Wu, 2008).
K-means clustering is typically performed on a data matrix A ∈ Rn×d , consisting of n data points each having
d attributes/features and per iteration computational cost
of Lloyd’s algorithm is O(nkd). In recent years there has
been a series of work towards reducing this computational
cost and speeding up k-means clustering computation. Most
of these works can broadly be classified into three categories. In the first category, K-means clustering algorithm
is accelerated by avoiding unnecessary distance calculations
by applying various forms of triangular inequality and by
keeping track of lower and upper bounds for distances between points and cluster centers (Elkan, 2003; Hamerly,
2010; Drake & Hamerly, 2012; Ding et al., 2015; Newling
& Fleuret, 2016; Bottesch et al., 2016). All these algorithms
ensure the exact same clustering result that would have been
obtained had one applied Lloyd’s heuristic from the same
set of initial cluster centers without applying any distance inequality bounds. In the second category, various dimension
reduction techniques are applied to data matrix A to reduce
data dimensionality from d to d0 (d0  d), where d0 is independent of n and d, so that optimal k-means clustering
0
solution of dimensionality reduced dataset A0 ∈ Rn×d ensures an approximately optimal k-means clustering objective
function of A. Most prominent among these is the random
projection based dimensionality reduction technique that
reduces data dimensionality from d to Ω(k/2 ) resulting
in (1 + ) approximation of the optimal k-means objective function (Boutsidis et al., 2010; 2015; Cohen et al.,
2015) and also from d to O(log(k)/2 ) resulting in (9 + )
approximation of the optimal k-means objective function
(Cohen et al., 2015). Recently, (Liu et al., 2017) demonstrated the the random projection step can be performed
by multiplying with a sparse matrix that yields the same
(1 + ) approximation guarantee. Additionally, random
feature selection method reduces data dimensionality from
d to Ω(k log k/2 ) resulting in (1 + ) approximation of
the optimal k-means objective function (Boutsidis et al.,

