SAFFRON: an Adaptive Algorithm for
Online Control of the False Discovery Rate

Aaditya Ramdas 1 Tijana Zrnic 2 Martin J. Wainwright 1 Michael I. Jordan 1

Abstract
In the online false discovery rate (FDR) problem,
one observes a possibly infinite sequence of pvalues P1 , P2 , . . . , each testing a different null hypothesis, and an algorithm must pick a sequence
of rejection thresholds α1 , α2 , . . . in an online
fashion, effectively rejecting the k-th null hypothesis whenever Pk ≤ αk . Importantly, αk must be
a function of the past, and cannot depend on Pk
or any of the later unseen p-values, and must be
chosen to guarantee that for any time t, the FDR
up to time t is less than some pre-determined
quantity α ∈ (0, 1). In this work, we present a
powerful new framework for online FDR control
that we refer to as “SAFFRON”. Like older alphainvesting algorithms, SAFFRON starts off with
an error budget (called alpha-wealth) that it intelligently allocates to different tests over time, earning back some alpha-wealth whenever it makes a
new discovery. However, unlike older methods,
SAFFRON’s threshold sequence is based on a
novel estimate of the alpha fraction that it allocates to true null hypotheses. In the offline setting,
algorithms that employ an estimate of the proportion of true nulls are called “adaptive”, hence
SAFFRON can be seen as an online analogue of
the offline Storey-BH adaptive procedure. Just
as Storey-BH is typically more powerful than the
Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) procedure under independence, we demonstrate that SAFFRON is also
more powerful than its non-adaptive counterparts
such as LORD.
1
Departments of Statistics and Electrical Engineering and
Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, USA 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: Aaditya Ramdas <aramdas@eecs.berkeley.edu>,
Tijana Zrnic <tijana@eecs.berkeley.edu>, Martin J. Wainwright <wainwrig@eecs.berkeley.edu>, Michael I. Jordan <jordan@eecs.berkeley.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
It is now commonplace in science and technology to make
thousands or even millions of related decisions based on
data analysis. As a simplified example, to discover which
genes may be related to diabetes, we can formulate the
decision-making problem in terms of hypotheses that take
the form “gene X is not associated with diabetes,” for many
different genes X, and test for which of these null hypotheses can be confidently rejected by the data. As first identified
by Tukey in a seminal 1953 manuscript (1953), the central
difficulty when testing a large number of null hypotheses
is that several of them may appear to be false, purely by
chance. Arguably, we would like the set of rejected null hypotheses R to have high precision, so that most discovered
genes are indeed truly correlated with diabetes and further
investigations are not fruitless. Unfortunately, separately
controlling the false positive rate for each individual test actually does not provide any guarantee on the precision. This
motivated the development of procedures that can provide
guarantees on an error metric called the false discovery rate
(FDR) (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995), defined as:
 0

|H ∩ R|
FDR ≡ E [FDP(R)] = E
,
|R|
where H0 is the unknown set of truly null hypotheses, and
0/0 ≡ 0. Here the FDP represents the ratio of falsely rejected nulls to the total number of rejected nulls, and since
the set of discoveries R is data-dependent, the FDR takes
an expectation over the underlying randomness. The evidence from a hypothesis test can typically be summarized
in terms of a p-value, and so offline multiple testing algorithms take a set of p-values {Pi } as their input, and a target
FDR level α ∈ (0, 1), and produce a rejected set R that is
guaranteed to have FDR ≤ α. Of course, one also desires
a high recall, or equivalently a low false negative rate, but
without assumptions on many uncontrollable factors like the
frequency and strength of signals, additional guarantees on
the recall are impossible.
While the offline paradigm previously described is the classical setting for multiple decision-making, the corresponding
online problem is emerging as a major area of its own. For
example, large information technology companies run thou-

