Deep Variational Reinforcement Learning for POMDPs

Maximilian Igl 1 Luisa Zintgraf 1 Tuan Anh Le 1 Frank Wood 2 Shimon Whiteson 1

Abstract
Many real-world sequential decision making problems are partially observable by nature, and the
environment model is typically unknown. Consequently, there is great need for reinforcement
learning methods that can tackle such problems
given only a stream of rewards and incomplete
and noisy observations. In this paper, we propose
deep variational reinforcement learning (DVRL),
which introduces an inductive bias that allows
an agent to learn a generative model of the environment and perform inference in that model
to effectively aggregate the available information.
We develop an n-step approximation to the evidence lower bound (ELBO), allowing the model
to be trained jointly with the policy. This ensures that the latent state representation is suitable
for the control task. In experiments on Mountain Hike and flickering Atari we show that our
method outperforms previous approaches relying
on recurrent neural networks to encode the past.

1. Introduction
Most deep reinforcement learning (RL) methods assume
that the state of the environment is fully observable at every
time step. However, this assumption often does not hold in
reality, as occlusions and noisy sensors may limit the agent’s
perceptual abilities. Such problems can be formalised as
partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs)
(Astrom, 1965; Kaelbling et al., 1998). Because we usually
do not have access to the true generative model of our environment, there is a need for reinforcement learning methods
that can tackle POMDPs when only a stream of observations
is given, without any prior knowledge of the latent state
space or the transition and observation functions.
P OMDPs are notoriously hard to solve: since the current ob1

University of Oxford, United Kingdom 2 University of British
Columbia, Canada. Correspondence to: Maximilian Igl <maximilian.igl@eng.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

(a) RNN-based approach. The RNN acts as an encoder for the
action-observation history, on which actor and critic are conditioned. The networks are updated end-to-end with an RL loss.

(b) DVRL. The agent learns a generative model which is used to
update a belief distribution. Actor and critic now condition on the
belief. The generative model is learned to optimise both the ELBO
and the RL loss.
Figure 1: Comparison of RNN and DVRL encoders.

servation does in general not carry all relevant information
for choosing an action, information must be aggregated over
time and in general, the entire history must be taken into
account.
This history can be encoded either by remembering features
of the past (McCallum, 1993) or by performing inference to
determine the distribution over possible latent states (Kaelbling et al., 1998). However, the computation of this belief
state requires knowledge of the model.
Most previous work on deep learning in POMDPs relies on
training a recurrent neural network (RNN) to summarise the
past. Examples are the deep recurrent Q-network (DRQN)
(Hausknecht & Stone, 2015) and the action-specific deep
recurrent Q-network (ADRQN) (Zhu et al., 2017). Because
these approaches are completely model-free, they place a
heavy burden on the RNN. Since performing inference implicitly requires a known or learned model, they are likely to
summarise the history either by only remembering features
of the past or by computing simple heuristics instead of
actual belief states. This is often suboptimal in complex
tasks. Generalisation is also often easier over beliefs than

