Fitting New Speakers Based on a Short Untranscribed Sample

Eliya Nachmani 1 2 Adam Polyak 1 Yaniv Taigman 1 Lior Wolf 1 2

Abstract
Learning-based Text To Speech systems have the
potential to generalize from one speaker to the
next and thus require a relatively short sample
of any new voice. However, this promise is currently largely unrealized. We present a method
that is designed to capture a new speaker from a
short untranscribed audio sample. This is done
by employing an additional network that given
an audio sample, places the speaker in the embedding space. This network is trained as part of
the speech synthesis system using various consistency losses. Our results demonstrate a greatly improved performance on both the dataset speakers,
and, more importantly, when fitting new voices,
even from very short samples.

1. Introduction
The technological feasibility of ubiquitous Text To Speech
(TTS), in which talking avatars of everyone we know would
interact with us as a form of asynchronous communication,
depends on the ability to sample individual speakers in a casual way. In the past year, Neural TTS systems have shifted
from high quality single speaker systems to multi-speaker
systems (see Sec. 2). However, most of these systems rely
on the availability of training samples of all speakers during
training.
One exception is the VoiceLoop system (Taigman et al.,
2018), which was shown to be able to fit a new speaker from
relatively few samples. This ability, however, is limited by
three factors: (i) The obtained quality of a training-naive
voice is lower than the quality obtained for speakers that
participated in the training process. (ii) The ability of the
system to capture the identity of a new speaker, heavily
depends on the amount of data that is available for the fitting
process. (iii) The fitting requires both the voice sample and
the transcript.
1
Facebook AI Research 2 Tel Aviv University. Correspondence
to: Eliya Nachmani <eliyan@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

In this work, we propose a TTS network that is designed
to fit a new voice based on a limited amount of data and
without the transcript of the new speaker. While the current
multi-speaker TTS methods rely on a speaker embedding
that is stored in one or more Look Up Tables (LUTs), our
method incorporates a fitting network Ns , which is trained
jointly with the other networks of the TTS system.
During training, instead of retrieving the speaker embedding
for the speaker of the training sample from the LUT, we
apply the network Ns to the sample’s target audio. The
embedding thus obtained is used in the process of generating
the same audio. Multiple losses are added in order to ensure
that the embedding of the reconstructed audio is similar to
the embedding of the target sample and that the embeddings
are well-separated.
While our approach is general and can be applied to any neural TTS system, we focus our experiments on the VoiceLoop
system, since it is the only multispeaker system for which
an official implementation was released. The official implementation of Char2Wav (Sotelo et al., 2017) is multispeaker, but the method was published as a single speaker
method and is not competitive with other multispeaker systems. DeepVoice3 has a community implementation (Park,
2018). However, at this time, the generated voice contains
noticeable artifacts.
In addition to proposing the new method, we also investigate
the underlying principles of voice fitting by constructing a
single network that does not model individual speakers, but
which is made to mimic multiple speakers by performing
priming. These experiments demonstrate that mimicking a
new speaker does not require an optimization process and
can be based on even a short sample.

2. Previous Work
A common view of the TTS literature divides the existing methods into four top-level groups: rule-based methods, concatenative systems, statistical-parametric, which
includes many successful HMM based methods, and the
emerging neural models.
While there have been attempts to create concatenative systems that rely on relatively little data (Jin et al., 2017), or
on automatic filtering of the training set used for an HMM

