Let’s be Honest: An Optimal No-Regret Framework for Zero-Sum Games

Ehsan Asadi Kangarshahi * 1 Ya-Ping Hsieh * 1 Mehmet Fatih Sahin 1 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract
We revisit the problem of solving two-player zerosum games in the decentralized setting. We propose a simple algorithmic framework that simultaneously achieves the best rates for honest regret as
well as adversarial regret, and in addition resolves
the open problem of removing the logarithmic
terms in convergence to the value of the game.
We achieve this goal in three steps. First, we
provide a novel analysis of the optimistic mirror
descent (OMD), showing that it can be modified
to guarantee fast convergence for both honest regret and value of the game, when the players are
playing collaboratively. Second, we propose a
new algorithm, dubbed as robust optimistic mirror descent (ROMD), which attains optimal adversarial regret without knowing the time horizon
beforehand. Finally, we propose a simple signaling scheme, which enables us to bridge OMD
and ROMD to achieve the best of both worlds.
Numerical examples are presented to support our
theoretical claims and show that our non-adaptive
ROMD algorithm can be competitive to OMD
with adaptive step-size selection.

1. Introduction
The simple zero-sum games have been studied extensively,
often from the standpoint of analyzing the convergence to
the Nash equilibrium. At the equilibrium, the players employ a min-max pair of strategies where no player can improve their pay-off by a unilateral deviation (Von Neumann,
1928).
In this setting, one can expect that the players arrive at the
equilibrium via decentralized, no-regret learning algorithms,
which hold even in the presence of potential adversarial
behavior, and which also better model selfish play. The
*

Equal contribution 1 LIONS, EPFL, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Ya-Ping Hsieh <ya-ping.hsieh@epfl.ch>, Volkan Cevher
<volkan.cevher@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

resulting dynamics is of great interest in optimization and
behavioral economics (Myerson, 1999), especially under
communication constraints.
When the behavior of each player is explained by a noregret algorithm, it is possible to significantly improve convergence rates beyond the so-called black-box, adversarial
dynamics. This observation was first made by (Daskalakis
et al., 2011), which tailored a decentralized version of Nesterov’s primal-dual method based on the excessive gap condition.
Intriguingly, (Daskalakis et al., 2011) left it as an open question on the existence of a simple algorithm that converges
at optimal rates for both regret and the value of the game in
an uncoupled manner, both against honest (i.e., cooperative)
and dishonest (i.e., arbitrarily adversarial) behavior.
The challenge was partially settled by the modified optimistic mirror descent (OMD) framework in (Rakhlin &
Sridharan, 2013b). While the framework of (Daskalakis
et al., 2011) is considered unnatural and involves additional
logarithmic factors, similar arguments apply to Rakhlin &
Sridharan (2013b)’s framework: The modified OMD needs
to know the game horizon a priori to determine the stepsizes. Their analysis also results in non-optimal regret and
logarithmic factors in convergence to the value of the game.
Besides the aforementioned drawbacks, neither approaches
can accommodate natural switches between honest and dishonest behavior.
In this work, we propose a simple algorithmic framework
that closes the gap between upper and lower bounds for
adversarial regret as well as convergence to the value of
the game, while maintaining the best known rate for honest regret, thereby resolving the open problem posed by
(Daskalakis et al., 2011).
We achieve the desiderata as follows: First, we provide a
novel analysis of OMD and show that it can obtain fast
convergence for both honest regret and value of the game,
when both players are honest. Second, we introduce robust
optimistic mirror descent (ROMD), which attains optimal
adversarial regret without knowing the time horizon. Finally,
we propose a simple signaling scheme, which enables us to
bridge OMD and ROMD to achieve the best of both worlds,
and seamlessly handle honest and dishonest behavior.

