Scalable Bilinear π Learning Using State and Action Features

Yichen Chen 1 Lihong Li 2 Mengdi Wang 3

Abstract
Approximate linear programming (ALP) represents one of the major algorithmic families
to solve large-scale Markov decision processes
(MDP). In this work, we study a primal-dual
formulation of the ALP, and develop a scalable,
model-free algorithm called bilinear π learning
for reinforcement learning when a sampling oracle is provided. This algorithm enjoys a number of advantages. First, it adopts linear and bilinear models to represent the high-dimensional
value function and state-action distributions, respectively, using given state and action features.
Its run-time complexity depends on the number
of features, not the size of the underlying MDPs.
Second, it operates in a fully online fashion without having to store any sample, thus having minimal memory footprint. Third, we prove that it is
sample-efficient, solving for the optimal policy to
high precision with a sample complexity linear in
the dimension of the parameter space.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning lies at the intersection between control, machine learning, and stochastic processes (Bertsekas
& Tsitsiklis, 1996; Sutton & Barto, 1998). The objective
is to learn an optimal policy of a controlled system from
interaction data. The most studied model for a controlled
stochastic system is the Markov decision process (MDP),
i.e., a controlled random walk over a state space S, where
in each state s ∈ S one can choose an action a from an
action space A so that the random walk transitions to another state s0 ∈ S with probability Pa (s, s0 ). In this paper,
we do not assume the MDP model is explicitly known, but
consider the setting where a generative model is given (see,
1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ, USA 2 Google Inc., Kirkland, WA, USA
3
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering,
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to:
Mengdi Wang <mengdiw@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

e.g., Azar et al. (2013)). In other words, there is an oracle
that takes (s, a) as input and outputs a random s0 with probability Pa (s, s0 ) and an immediate reward ra (s) ∈ [0, 1].
This is also known as the simulator-defined MDP in some
literatures (Dietterich et al., 2013; Taleghan et al., 2015).
Our goal is to find an optimal policy which, when running
on the MDP to generate an infinitely long trajectory, yields
the highest average per-step reward in the limit.
Here, we focus on problems where the state and action
spaces S and A are too large to be enumerated. In practice,
it might be computationally challenging to even store a
single state of the process (e.g., states could correspond
to high-resolution images). Suppose that we are given a
collection of state features φ : S 7→ RD and action features
ψ : A 7→ RU . They map each state s ∈ S and action
a ∈ A to column vectors φ(s) = (φ1 (s), . . . , φD (s))T and
ψ(a) = (ψ1 (a), . . . , ψU (a))T , respectively, where D 
S := |S| and U  A := |A|.
Our primary interest is to develop a sample-efficient and
computationally scalable algorithm, which takes advantage
of the given features to solve an MDP with very large state
and action spaces. Given the feature maps, φ and ψ, we
adopt linear and bilinear models for approximating both the
value function and the stationary state-action distribution of
the MDP. By doing so, we can represent the value functions
and state-action distributions, which are high-dimensional
quantities, using a much smaller number of parameters.
Contributions. Our main contribution is a tractable,
model-free primal-dual π-learning algorithm for such compact parametric representations. It incrementally updates
parameters as new transitions are observed. With given
state and action features, its per-iteration complexity is low,
depending on U and D, not on |S| or |A|:
• The new algorithm is inspired by a saddle point formulation of policy optimization in MDPs, which we
refer to as the Bellman saddle point problem. We show
a strong relation between the parametric saddle point
problem and the original Bellman equation. In particular, the difference between solutions to these two
problems can be quantified using the `∞ - and `1 -errors
of the parametric function classes that are used to approximate the optimal value function and state-action

