Reviving and Improving Recurrent Back-Propagation

Renjie Liao * 1 2 3 Yuwen Xiong * 1 2 Ethan Fetaya 1 3 Lisa Zhang 1 3 KiJung Yoon 4 5 Xaq Pitkow 4 5
Raquel Urtasun 1 2 3 Richard Zemel 1 3 6

Abstract
In this paper, we revisit the recurrent backpropagation (RBP) algorithm (Almeida, 1987;
Pineda, 1987), discuss the conditions under which
it applies as well as how to satisfy them in deep
neural networks. We show that RBP can be unstable and propose two variants based on conjugate
gradient on the normal equations (CG-RBP) and
Neumann series (Neumann-RBP). We further investigate the relationship between Neumann-RBP
and back propagation through time (BPTT) and
its truncated version (TBPTT). Our NeumannRBP has the same time complexity as TBPTT but
only requires constant memory, whereas TBPTT’s
memory cost scales linearly with the number of
truncation steps. We examine all RBP variants,
along with BPTT and TBPTT, in three different
application domains: associative memory with
continuous Hopfield networks, document classification in citation networks using graph neural networks, and hyperparameter optimization for fully
connected networks. All experiments demonstrate
that RBPs, especially the Neumann-RBP variant,
are efficient and effective for optimizing convergent recurrent neural networks.

1. Introduction
Back-propagation through time (BPTT) (Werbos, 1990) is
nowadays the standard approach for training recurrent neural networks (RNNs). However, the computation and memory cost of BPTT scale linearly with the number of steps
which makes BPTT impractical for applications where long
sequences are common (Sutskever et al., 2014; Goodfellow
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
University of Toronto 2 Uber ATG Toronto 3 Vector Institute
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University 5 Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine
6
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research. Correspondence to:
Renjie Liao <rjliao@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

et al., 2016). Moreover, as the number of unrolling steps increases, the numerical error accumulates which may render
the algorithm useless in some applications, e.g., gradientbased hyperparameter optimization (Maclaurin et al., 2015).
This issue is often solved in practice by using truncated
back-propagation through time (TBPTT) (Williams & Peng,
1990; Sutskever, 2013) which has constant computation and
memory cost, is simple to implement, and effective in some
applications. However, the quality of the TBPTT approximate gradient is not well understood. A natural question to
ask is, can we get better gradient approximations while still
using the same computational cost as TBPTT?
Here will show that under certain conditions on the underlying model, the answer is positive. In particular, we consider
a class of RNNs whose hidden state converges to a steady
state. For this class of RNNs, we can bypass BPTT and
compute the exact gradient using an algorithm called recurrent back-propagation (RBP) (Almeida, 1987; Pineda,
1987). The key observation exploited by RBP is that the
gradient of the steady state w.r.t. the learnable parameters
can be directly computed using the implicit function theorem, alleviating the need to unroll the entire forward pass.
The main computational cost of RBP is in solving a linear
system which has constant memory and computation time
w.r.t. the number of unrolling steps. However, due to the
strong assumptions that RBP imposes, TBPTT has become
the standard approach used in practice and RBP did not get
much attention for many years.
In this paper, we first revisit RBP in the context of modern deep learning. We discuss the original algorithm, the
assumptions it imposes and how to satisfy them for deep neural networks. Second, we notice that although the fixed point
iteration method used in (Almeida, 1987; Pineda, 1987) is
guaranteed to converge if the steady hidden state is achievable, in practice it can fail to do so within a reasonable
amount of steps. This may be caused by the fact that there
are many fixed points and the algorithm is sensitive to initialization. We try to overcome the instability issue by
proposing two variants of RBP based on conjugate gradient on normal equations (CG-RBP) and Neumann series
(Neumann-RBP). We show a connection between NeumannRBP and TBPTT which sheds some new light on the approximation quality of TBPTT. In the experiments, we show

