Improving the Privacy and Accuracy of ADMM-Based Distributed Algorithms

Xueru Zhang 1 Mohammad Mahdi Khalili 1 Mingyan Liu 1

Abstract
Alternating direction method of multiplier
(ADMM) is a popular method used to design distributed versions of a machine learning algorithm,
whereby local computations are performed on local data with the output exchanged among neighbors in an iterative fashion. During this iterative
process the leakage of data privacy arises. A differentially private ADMM was proposed in prior
work (Zhang & Zhu, 2017) where only the privacy loss of a single node during one iteration
was bounded, a method that makes it difficult to
balance the tradeoff between the utility attained
through distributed computation and privacy guarantees when considering the total privacy loss of
all nodes over the entire iterative process. We
propose a perturbation method for ADMM where
the perturbed term is correlated with the penalty
parameters; this is shown to improve the utility
and privacy simultaneously. The method is based
on a modified ADMM where each node independently determines its own penalty parameter in
every iteration and decouples it from the dual updating step size. The condition for convergence
of the modified ADMM and the lower bound on
the convergence rate are also derived.

1. Introduction
Distributed machine learning is crucial for many settings
where the data is possessed by multiple parties or when the
quantity of data prohibits processing at a central location. It
helps to reduce the computational complexity, improve both
the robustness and the scalability of data processing. In a
distributed setting, multiple entities/nodes collaboratively
work toward a common optimization objective through an
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
Correspondence to: Xueru Zhang <xueru@umich.edu>, Mohammad Mahdi Khalili <khalili@umich.edu>, Mingyan Liu
<mingyan@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

interactive process of local computation and message passing, which ideally should result in all nodes converging to
a global optimum. Existing approaches to decentralizing
an optimization problem primarily consist of subgradientbased algorithms (Nedic et al., 2008; Nedic & Ozdaglar,
2009; Lobel & Ozdaglar, 2011), ADMM-based algorithms
(Wei & Ozdaglar, 2012; Ling & Ribeiro, 2014; Shi et al.,
2014; Zhang & Kwok, 2014; Ling et al., 2016), and composite of subgradient and ADMM (Bianchi et al., 2014). It has
been shown that ADMM-based algorithms can converge at
the rate of O( k1 ) while subgradient-based algorithms typically converge at the rate of O( √1k ), where k is the number
of iterations (Wei & Ozdaglar, 2012). In this study, we will
solely focus on ADMM-based algorithms.
The information exchanged over the iterative process gives
rise to privacy concerns if the local training data is proprietary to each node, especially when it contains sensitive
information such as medical or financial records, web search
history, and so on. It is therefore highly desirable to ensure
such iterative processes are privacy-preserving.
A widely used notion of privacy is the ε-differential privacy;
it is generally achieved by perturbing the algorithm such
that the probability distribution of its output is relatively
insensitive to any change to a single record in the input
(Dwork, 2006). Several differentially private distributed
algorithms have been proposed, including (Hale & Egerstedty, 2015; Huang et al., 2015; Han et al., 2017; Zhang &
Zhu, 2017; Bellet et al., 2017). While a number of such
studies have been done for (sub)gradient-based algorithms,
the same is much harder for ADMM-based algorithms due
to its computational complexity stemming from the fact that
each node is required to solve an optimization problem in
each iteration. To the best of our knowledge, only (Zhang
& Zhu, 2017) applies differential privacy to ADMM, where
the noise is either added to the dual variable (dual variable
perturbation) or the primal variable (primal variable perturbation) in ADMM updates. However, (Zhang & Zhu,
2017) could only bound the privacy loss of a single iteration. Since an attacker can potentially use all intermediate
results to perform inference, the privacy loss accumulates
over time through the iterative process. It turns out that the
tradeoff between the utility of the algorithm and its privacy
preservation over the entire computational process becomes
hard using the existing method.

