Batch Bayesian Optimization via Multi-objective Acquisition Ensemble for
Automated Analog Circuit Design

Wenlong Lyu 1 Fan Yang 1 Changhao Yan 1 Dian Zhou 1 2 Xuan Zeng 1

Abstract
Bayesian optimization methods are promising for
the optimization of black-box functions that are
expensive to evaluate. In this paper, a novel batch
Bayesian optimization approach is proposed. The
parallelization is realized via a multi-objective
ensemble of multiple acquisition functions. In
each iteration, the multi-objective optimization of
the multiple acquisition functions is performed
to search for the Pareto front of the acquisition
functions. The batch of inputs are then selected
from the Pareto front. The Pareto front represents
the best trade-off between the multiple acquisition
functions. Such a policy for batch Bayesian optimization can significantly improve the efficiency
of optimization. The proposed method is compared with several state-of-the-art batch Bayesian
optimization algorithms using analytical benchmark functions and real-world analog integrated
circuits. The experimental results show that the
proposed method is competitive compared with
the state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
The advancement of modern society is driven by the development of Integrated Circuits (IC). Unlike the digital
circuits where the design flow is already highly automated,
the automation of analog circuit design is still a challenging
problem.
Traditionally, the design parameters of analog circuits like
widths and lengths of transistors are manually calculated
by designers with their experience and the understanding
of the design specifications. However, due to the progress
1

State Key Lab of ASIC and System, School of Microelectronics, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 2 Department of Electrical
Engineering, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX, U.S.A.
Correspondence to: Fan Yang <yangfan@fudan.edu.cn>, Xuan
Zeng <xzeng@fudan.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

of IC manufacture technology forecasted by Moore’s law,
the circuit devices become more and more complicated, and
the parasitic effect of the circuits can no longer be ignored.
On the other hand, the demands for high-performance, lowpower analog circuits are increasing. It is much more difficult to meet the performance and time-to-market requirements with manual circuit design. Automated analog circuit
design has thus attracted much research interest in the past
decade (Rutenbar et al., 2007).
The analog circuit design automation problems can be formulated as optimization problems. The aim is to find the
optimal design parameters that provide the best circuit performance, which can be represented by a figure of merit
(FOM) real-valued function. Prior works about analog circuit optimization include offline model-based approaches
(Colleran et al., 2003; Daems et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2014)
and simulation-based approaches. The offline model-based
methods try to build global models of the FOM via manual calculation or regression with simulated data and then
optimize the cheap-to-evaluate models. The problem with
this approach is that the accurate models are usually hard to
get. For example, in Wang et al. (2014), 100,000 randomly
simulated points are used to train a sparse polynomial model
for an amplifier circuit with ten design parameters.
Simulation-based methods, instead, treat the performances
of the circuits as black-box functions. The performances
are obtained from circuit simulations. Global optimization
algorithms are directly applied to the black-box functions.
For simulation-based circuit optimization methods, metaheuristic algorithms (Phelps et al., 2000; Liu et al., 2009)
are widely used. Although these algorithms can explore the
whole design space, they have relatively low convergence
rate. When the circuit simulation takes a long time, both
model-based and simulation-based approaches can be very
time-consuming.
In recent years, the Gaussian process (GP) (Rasmussen,
2006) model has been introduced for the automated design
of analog circuits to reduce the required number of circuit
simulations. In Liu et al. (2014), GP is combined with differential evolution algorithm. Recently, Bayesian optimization
(BO) (Shahriari et al., 2016) algorithm has also been applied for analog circuit optimization. In Lyu et al. (2017),

