Black Box FDR
Wesley Tansey 1 2 Yixin Wang 1 3 David M. Blei 1 3 4 Raul Rabadan 2

Abstract
Analyzing large-scale, multi-experiment studies
requires scientists to test each experimental outcome for statistical significance and then assess
the results as a whole. We present Black Box
FDR (BB-FDR), an empirical-Bayes method for
analyzing multi-experiment studies when many
covariates are gathered per experiment. BB-FDR
learns a series of black box predictive models to
boost power and control the false discovery rate
(FDR) at two stages of study analysis. In Stage
1, it uses a deep neural network prior to report
which experiments yielded significant outcomes.
In Stage 2, a separate black box model of each
covariate is used to select features that have significant predictive power across all experiments.
In benchmarks, BB-FDR outperforms competing
state-of-the-art methods in both stages of analysis. We apply BB-FDR to two real studies on
cancer drug efficacy. For both studies, BB-FDR
increases the proportion of significant outcomes
discovered and selects variables that reveal key
genomic drivers of drug sensitivity and resistance
in cancer.

1. Introduction
High-throughput screening (HTS) techniques have fundamentally changed the landscape of modern biological experimentation. Rather than conducting just one experiment
at a time, HTS enables scientists to perform hundreds of
parallel experiments, each with different biological samples and different interventions. At the same time, HTS
also enables scientists to gather rich contextual information about each experiment by profiling the samples under
1

Data Science Institute, Columbia University, New York, NY,
USA 2 Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY, USA 3 Department of Statistics,
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA 4 Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Wesley Tansey <wt2274@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

study using techniques like DNA sequencing. Thus, each
HTS study produces a dataset of many experiments, where
each experiment contains both an outcome variable and a
high-dimensional feature set describing the context.
Figure 1 shows a slice of the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity
in Cancer (GDSC) dataset (Yang et al., 2012), an HTS study
investigating how cancer cell lines respond to different cancer therapeutics. The left panel shows the relative response
of 30 different cancer cell lines (C1 , C2 , . . . , C30 ) treated
with the drug Nutlin-3. For each cell line, the treatment response (black triangles) is overlayed on top of the untreated
control replicate distribution (gray box plots). Even when no
drug is applied, each cell line still exhibits natural variation.
The first goal in analyzing this data is therefore to address
the question of whether a given cell line responded to the
treatment. Concretely, we need to perform a hypothesis test
for each cell line, where the null hypothesis is that the drug
had no effect. Absent other information, this would be a
classic multiple hypothesis testing (MHT) problem.
But HTS studies such as GDSC differ from the classical
setup by also producing a rich set of side information for
each experiment. The right panel of Figure 1 shows a subset
of the genomic profile for each cell line, with a black dot
indicating the cell line has a mutation in that gene. Biologically, a mutated gene can lead to different phenotypic
behavior that may cause sensitivity or resistance to a drug.
Statistically, this means the likelihood of a cell line responding to treatment is a latent function of that cell line’s genomic profile. Identifying which mutations are associated
with treatment response could guide future experiments and
development of new targeted therapies. Deriving scientific
insight from patterns across experiments represents a second
phase of hypothesis testing, where the null hypothesis is
that a given gene is not associated with drug response.
We term these two phases Stage 1 and Stage 2 and ask two
scientifically-motivated statistical inference questions:
• Stage 1: How do we leverage the available side information in a HTS study to increase how many significant
outcomes we can detect?
• Stage 2: Can we discover which variables are associated with significant outcomes, even when the underlying function is high-dimensional and nonlinear?

