One-Shot Segmentation in Clutter

Claudio Michaelis 1 2 Matthias Bethge 1 2 3 4 Alexander S. Ecker 1 2 4

Abstract
We tackle the problem of one-shot segmentation:
finding and segmenting a previously unseen object in a cluttered scene based on a single instruction example. We propose a novel dataset, which
we call cluttered Omniglot. Using a baseline architecture combining a Siamese embedding for
detection with a U-net for segmentation we show
that increasing levels of clutter make the task progressively harder. Using oracle models with access to various amounts of ground-truth information, we evaluate different aspects of the problem and show that in this kind of visual search
task, detection and segmentation are two intertwined problems, the solution to each of which
helps solving the other. We therefore introduce
MaskNet, an improved model that attends to multiple candidate locations, generates segmentation
proposals to mask out background clutter and selects among the segmented objects. Our findings
suggest that such image recognition models based
on an iterative refinement of object detection and
foreground segmentation may provide a way to
deal with highly cluttered scenes.

1. Introduction
Humans are not only good at learning to recognize novel,
unknown objects from a single instruction example (oneshot learning), but can also localize these objects in highly
cluttered scenes and segment them from the background.
In the computer vision community, one-shot learning has recently received a lot of attention and substantial progress has
been made in the context of image classification (Koch et al.,

A One-shot segmentation
Scene

Target

Segmentation

B Siamese U-net

C MaskNet
Same?
No
No

Yes

Figure 1. One-Shot Segmentation. A, Goal: find a target in a
cluttered scene and produce a pixel-wise segmentation. B, Our
Siamese U-net baseline localizes the target, then segments it.
C, MaskNet generates proposals of segmented instances, masks
the background, then computes the best match.

Centre for Integrative Neuroscience and Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Tübingen, Germany 2 Bernstein Centre for Computational Neuroscience, Tübingen, Germany 3 Max
Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany
4
Center for Neuroscience and Artificial Intelligence, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Alexander Ecker <alexander.ecker@uni-tuebingen.de>.

2015; Lake et al., 2015; Vinyals et al., 2016; Bertinetto et al.,
2016; Snell et al., 2017; Triantafillou et al., 2017; Shyam
et al., 2017). Segmentation, however, is still very much
tied to classification, limiting its applicability to datasets
with less than a few hundred semantic or object classes
(or subsets thereof, e. g. the SceneParse150 benchmark on
ADE20k (Zhou et al., 2017)). This stands in contrast to
humans who can segment previously unseen objects simply
by using contextual information.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

In the present paper, we work towards closing this gap by
tackling the problem of one-shot segmentation: Given a
single instruction example (the target) and a cluttered image

1

