Stochastic Variance-Reduced Policy Gradient

Matteo Papini * 1 Damiano Binaghi * 1 Giuseppe Canonaco * 1 Matteo Pirotta 2 Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel reinforcementlearning algorithm consisting in a stochastic
variance-reduced version of policy gradient for
solving Markov Decision Processes (MDPs).
Stochastic variance-reduced gradient (SVRG)
methods have proven to be very successful in
supervised learning. However, their adaptation to
policy gradient is not straightforward and needs
to account for I) a non-concave objective function; II) approximations in the full gradient computation; and III) a non-stationary sampling process. The result is SVRPG, a stochastic variancereduced policy gradient algorithm that leverages
on importance weights to preserve the unbiasedness of the gradient estimate. Under standard assumptions on the MDP, we provide convergence
guarantees for SVRPG with a convergence rate
that is linear under increasing batch sizes. Finally,
we suggest practical variants of SVRPG, and we
empirically evaluate them on continuous MDPs.

1. Introduction
On a very general level, artificial intelligence addresses
the problem of an agent that must select the right actions
to solve a task. The approach of Reinforcement Learning
(RL) (Sutton & Barto, 1998) is to learn the best actions
by direct interaction with the environment and evaluation
of the performance in the form of a reward signal. This
makes RL fundamentally different from Supervised Learning (SL), where correct actions are explicitly prescribed
by a human teacher (e.g., for classification, in the form of
class labels). However, the two approaches share many challenges and tools. The problem of estimating a model from
samples, which is at the core of SL, is equally fundamental in RL, whether we choose to model the environment,
*

Equal contribution 1 Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy
Inria, Lille, France. Correspondence to: Matteo Papini <matteo.papini@polimi.it>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

a value function, or directly a policy defining the agent’s
behaviour. Furthermore, when the tasks are characterized
by large or continuous state-action spaces, RL needs the
powerful function approximators (e.g., neural networks)
that are the main subject of study of SL. In a typical SL
setting, a performance function J(θ) has to be optimized
w.r.t. to model parameters θ. The set of data that are available for training is often a subset of all the cases of interest,
which may even be infinite, leading to optimization of finite sums that approximate the expected performance over
an unknown data distribution. When generalization to the
complete dataset is not taken into consideration, we talk
about Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM). Even in this
case, stochastic optimization is often used for reasons of
efficiency. The idea of stochastic gradient (SG) ascent (Nesterov, 2013) is to iteratively focus on a random subset of
the available data to obtain an approximate improvement
direction. At the level of the single iteration, this can be
much less expensive than taking into account all the data.
However, the sub-sampling of data is a source of variance
that can potentially compromise convergence, so that periteration efficiency and convergence rate must be traded off
with proper handling of meta-parameters. Variance-reduced
gradient algorithms such as SAG (Roux et al., 2012), SVRG
(Johnson & Zhang, 2013) and SAGA (Defazio et al., 2014a)
offer better ways of solving this trade-off, with significant
results both in theory and practice. Although designed explicitly for ERM, these algorithms address a problem that
affects more general machine learning problems.
In RL, stochastic optimization is rarely a matter of choice,
since data must be actively sampled by interacting with an
initially unknown environment. In this scenario, limiting
the variance of the estimates is a necessity that cannot be
avoided, which makes variance-reduced algorithms very
interesting. Among RL approaches, policy gradient (Sutton
et al., 2000) is the one that bears the closest similarity to SL
solutions. The fundamental principle of these methods is
to optimize a parametric policy through stochastic gradient
ascent. Compared to other applications of SG, the cost of
collecting samples can be very high since it requires to interact with the environment. This makes SVRG-like methods
potentially much more efficient than, e.g., batch learning.
Unfortunately, RL has a series of difficulties that are not
present in ERM. First, in SL the objective can often be de-

