Generalized Earley Parser:
Bridging Symbolic Grammars and Sequence Data for Future Prediction

Siyuan Qi 1 Baoxiong Jia 1 2 Song-Chun Zhu 1
Generalized Earley Parser

Abstract
Future predictions on sequence data (e.g., videos
or audios) require the algorithms to capture nonMarkovian and compositional properties of highlevel semantics. Context-free grammars are natural choices to capture such properties, but traditional grammar parsers (e.g., Earley parser) only
take symbolic sentences as inputs. In this paper,
we generalize the Earley parser to parse sequence
data which is neither segmented nor labeled. This
generalized Earley parser integrates a grammar
parser with a classifier to find the optimal segmentation and labels, and makes top-down future
predictions. Experiments show that our method
significantly outperforms other approaches for future human activity prediction.

1. Introduction
We consider the task of labeling unsegmented sequence data
and predicting future labels. This is a ubiquitous problem
with important applications in many perceptual tasks, e.g.,
recognition and anticipation of human activities or speech.
A generic modeling approach is key for intelligent agents to
perform future-aware tasks (e.g., assistive activities).
Such tasks often exhibit non-Markovian and compositional
properties, which should be captured by a top-down prediction algorithm. Consider the video sequence in Figure 1,
human observers recognize the first two actions and predict
the most likely future action based on the entire history.
Context-free grammars are natural choices to model such
reasoning processes, and it is one step closer to Turing machines than Markov models (e.g., Hidden Markov Models)
in the Chomsky hierarchy.
However, it is not clear how to directly use symbolic gram1

University of California, Los Angeles, USA 2 Peking
University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Siyuan Qi
<syqi@cs.ucla.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Grammar
Final output

microwave food

...

open microwave

Parse Tree
Future prediction

take food

put into microwave

Classier
raw output

Sequence
input data

...

...

Figure 1. The input of the generalized Earley parser is a matrix of
probabilities of each label for each frame, given by an arbitrary
classifier. The parser segments and labels the sequence data into
a label sentence in the language of a given grammar. Future
predictions are then made based on the grammar.

mars to parse and label sequence data. Traditional grammar
parsers take symbolic sentences as inputs instead of noisy
sequence data like videos or audios. The data has to be i)
segmented and ii) labeled to apply existing grammar parsers
to. One naive solution is to first segment and label the data
using a classifier and thus generating a label sentence. Then
grammar parsers can be applied on top of it for prediction.
But this is apparently non-optimal, since the grammar rules
are not considered in the classification process. It may not
even be possible to parse this label sentence, because they
are very often grammatically incorrect.
In this paper, we design a grammar-based parsing algorithm
that directly operates on sequence input data, which goes
beyond the scope of symbolic string inputs. Specifically,
we propose a generalized Earley parser based on the Earley
parser (Earley, 1970). The algorithm finds the optimal segmentation and label sentence according to both a symbolic
grammar and a classifier output of probabilities of labels for
each frame as shown in Figure 1. Optimality here means
maximizing the probability of the label sentence according
to the classifier output while being grammatically correct.
The difficulty of achieving this optimality lies in the joint
optimization of both the grammar structure and the parsing
likelihood of the output label sentence. For example, an
expectation-maximization-type algorithm will not work well

