Attention-based Deep Multiple Instance Learning

Maximilian Ilse * 1 Jakub M. Tomczak * 1 Max Welling 1

Abstract
Multiple instance learning (MIL) is a variation
of supervised learning where a single class label is assigned to a bag of instances. In this paper, we state the MIL problem as learning the
Bernoulli distribution of the bag label where the
bag label probability is fully parameterized by
neural networks. Furthermore, we propose a neural network-based permutation-invariant aggregation operator that corresponds to the attention
mechanism. Notably, an application of the proposed attention-based operator provides insight
into the contribution of each instance to the bag
label. We show empirically that our approach
achieves comparable performance to the best MIL
methods on benchmark MIL datasets and it outperforms other methods on a MNIST-based MIL
dataset and two real-life histopathology datasets
without sacrificing interpretability.

1. Introduction
In typical machine learning problems like image classification it is assumed that an image clearly represents a category
(a class). However, in many real-life applications multiple instances are observed and only a general statement of
the category is given. This scenario is called multiple instance learning (MIL) (Dietterich et al., 1997; Maron &
Lozano-Pérez, 1998) or, learning from weakly annotated
data (Oquab et al., 2014). The problem of weakly annotated
data is especially apparent in medical imaging (Quellec
et al., 2017) (e.g., computational pathology, mammography
or CT lung screening) where an image is typically described
by a single label (benign/malignant) or a Region Of Interest
(ROI) is roughly given.
MIL deals with a bag of instances for which a single class
label is assigned. Hence, the main goal of MIL is to learn a
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Correspondence to: Maximilian Ilse <m.ilse@uva.nl>, Jakub M.
Tomczak <j.m.tomczak@uva.nl>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

model that predicts a bag label, e.g., a medical diagnosis. An
additional challenge is to discover key instances (Liu et al.,
2012), i.e., the instances that trigger the bag label. In the
medical domain the latter task is of great interest because of
legal issues1 and its usefulness in clinical practice. In order
to solve the primary task of a bag classification different
methods are proposed, such as utilizing similarities among
bags (Cheplygina et al., 2015b), embedding instances to
a compact low-dimensional representation that is further
fed to a bag-level classifier (Andrews et al., 2003; Chen
et al., 2006), and combining responses of an instance-level
classifier (Ramon & De Raedt, 2000; Raykar et al., 2008;
Zhang et al., 2006). Only the last approach is capable of
providing interpretable results. However, it was shown
that the instance level accuracy of such methods is low
(Kandemir & Hamprecht, 2015) and in general there is a
disagreement among MIL methods at the instance level
(Cheplygina et al., 2015a). These issues call into question
the usability of current MIL models for interpreting the final
decision.
In this paper, we propose a new method that aims at incorporating interpretability to the MIL approach and increasing its
flexibility. We formulate the MIL model using the Bernoulli
distribution for the bag label and train it by optimizing the
log-likelihood function. We show that the application of the
Fundamental Theorem of Symmetric Functions provides a
general procedure for modeling the bag label probability
(the bag score function) that consists of three steps: (i) a
transformation of instances to a low-dimensional embedding, (ii) a permutation-invariant (symmetric) aggregation
function, and (iii) a final transformation to the bag probability. We propose to parameterize all transformations
using neural networks (i.e., a combination of convolutional
and fully-connected layers), which increases the flexibility
of the approach and allows to train the model in an endto-end manner by optimizing an unconstrained objective
function. Last but not least, we propose to replace widelyused permutation-invariant operators such as the maximum
operator max and the mean operator mean by a trainable
weighted average where weights are given by a two-layered
neural network. The two-layered neural network corre1
According to the European Union General Data Protection
Regulation (taking effect 2018), a user should have the right to
obtain an explanation of the decision reached.

