Problem Dependent Reinforcement Learning Bounds Which Can Identify
Bandit Structure in MDPs
Andrea Zanette 1 Emma Brunskill 1

Abstract
In order to make good decision under uncertainty
an agent must learn from observations. To do
so, two of the most common frameworks are
Contextual Bandits and Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). In this paper, we study whether
there exist algorithms for the more general framework (MDP) which automatically provide the
best performance bounds for the specific problem at hand without user intervention and without modifying the algorithm. In particular, it is
found that a very minor variant of a recently proposed reinforcement learning algorithm for MDPs
already
p matches the best possible regret bound
Õ( SAT ) in the dominant term if deployed on
a tabular Contextual Bandit problem despite the
agent being agnostic to such setting.

1. Introduction
For reinforcement learning (RL) to realize its huge potential benefit, we must create reinforcement learning algorithms that do not require extensive expertise and problemdependent fine-tuning to achieve high performance in a
particular domain of interest. Much exciting research is
advancing this vision, such as alleviating the need for feature engineering using deep neural networks, and making
it easier to specify the desired behavior through inverse reinforcement learning and reward design (Mnih et al., 2013;
Abbeel & Ng, 2004). Here instead we consider the theoretical aspects of a key but understudied issue: what decision
process framework to use, and how that choice impacts the
resulting performance.
In reinforcement learning (learning to make good decisions
under uncertainty), there are three common frameworks
that allow learning from observations: multi-armed bandits
(MABs) and contextual MABs, Markov decision processes
1
Stanford University, Stanford, California. Correspondence to:
Andrea Zanette <zanette@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

(MDPs) and partially observable MDPs (POMDPs). Bandits assume that the actions taken do not impact the next
state, MDPs assume actions impact the next state but the
state is a sufficient statistic of prior history, and POMDPs
assume that the true Markov state is latent, and in general
the next state can depend on the full history of prior actions and observations. It is known that these three decision
process frameworks differ significantly in computational
complexity and statistical efficiency. In particular, when
the decision process model is unknown and an agent must
perform reinforcement learning, existing theoretical bounds
illustrate that the best results possible in bandits, contextual bandits, MDPs and POMDPs may significantly differ.
For example there exist upper bounds on the regret of algorithms for discrete
state and action contextual bandits which
p
scale as Õ( SAT ) (see (Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi, 2012))
and lower bounds on the regret of algorithms for
pepisodic
discrete state and action MDPs which scale as ⌦( HSAT )
(Osband & Van Roy, 2016),
here indicating there is a gap
p
of at least a factor of H between the regret possible in
the two settings. Such work suggests that to obtain good
performance, it is of significant interest to have algorithms
that either implicitly or explicitly use the simplest setting
(of bandits, MDPs, POMDPs) that captures the domain of
interest during reinforcement learning,
As (outside of simulated domains) the true decision process properties are unknown, choosing whether to model a
problem using the bandit, MDP or POMDP frameworks is
typically far from trivial. A software engineer working on
a product recommendation engine may not know whether
the product recommendations have a significant impact on
the customers’ later states and preferences, such that the
engineer should model the problem as a MDP instead of a
bandit in order to be able to use a reinforcement learning algorithm to learn a policy that best maximizes revenue. This
may result in requiring prohibitive amounts of interaction
data to learn a good decision policy. Ideally an engineer
should be able to write down a problem in a very general
way and be confident that the algorithm will inherit the best
performance of the underlying domain and problem.
Here we work to create RL algorithms with strong setting
/ framework dependent bounds. Our hope is to create reinforcement learning methods that perform as well as the

