RLlib: Abstractions for Distributed Reinforcement Learning

Eric Liang * 1 Richard Liaw * 1 Philipp Moritz 1 Robert Nishihara 1 Roy Fox 1 Ken Goldberg 1
Joseph E. Gonzalez 1 Michael I. Jordan 1 Ion Stoica 1

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms involve
the deep nesting of highly irregular computation
patterns, each of which typically exhibits opportunities for distributed computation. We argue for
distributing RL components in a composable way
by adapting algorithms for top-down hierarchical control, thereby encapsulating parallelism and
resource requirements within short-running compute tasks. We demonstrate the benefits of this
principle through RLlib: a library that provides
scalable software primitives for RL. These primitives enable a broad range of algorithms to be
implemented with high performance, scalability,
and substantial code reuse. RLlib is available as
part of the open source Ray project 1 .

1. Introduction
Advances in parallel computing and composition through
symbolic differentiation have been fundamental to the recent
success of deep learning. Today, there are a wide range of
deep learning frameworks (Paszke et al., 2017; Abadi et al.,
2016; Chen et al., 2016; Jia et al., 2014) that enable rapid
innovation in neural network design and facilitate training
at the scale necessary for progress in the field.
In contrast, while the reinforcement learning community
enjoys the advances in systems and abstractions for deep
learning, there has been comparatively less progress in the
design of systems and abstractions that directly target reinforcement learning. Nonetheless, many of the challenges in
reinforcement learning stem from the need to scale learning
and simulation while also integrating a rapidly increasing
range of algorithms and models. As a consequence, there
is a fundamental need for composable parallel primitives to
support research in reinforcement learning.
*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Eric Liang <ericliang@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).
1
RLlib documentation can be found at http://rllib.io

In the absence of a single dominant computational pattern
(e.g., tensor algebra) or fundamental rules of composition
(e.g., symbolic differentiation), the design and implementation of reinforcement learning algorithms can often be
cumbersome, requiring RL researchers to directly reason
about complex nested parallelism. Unlike typical operators
in deep learning frameworks, individual components may require parallelism across a cluster (e.g., for rollouts), leverage
neural networks implemented by deep learning frameworks,
recursively invoke other components (e.g., model-based subtasks), or interface with black-box third-party simulators. In
essence, the heterogeneous and distributed nature of many of
these components poses a key challenge to reasoning about
their parallel composition. Meanwhile, the main algorithms
that connect these components are rapidly evolving and expose opportunities for parallelism at varying levels. Finally,
RL algorithms manipulate substantial amounts of state (e.g.,
replay buffers and model parameters) that must be managed
across multiple levels of parallelism and physical devices.
The substantial recent progress in RL algorithms and applications has resulted in a large and growing number of RL
libraries (Caspi, 2017; Duan et al., 2016; Hafner et al., 2017;
Hesse et al., 2017; Kostrikov, 2017; Schaarschmidt et al.,
2017). While some of these are highly scalable, few enable
the composition of components at scale. In large part, this
is due to the fact that many of the frameworks used by these
libraries rely on communication between long-running program replicas for distributed execution; e.g., MPI (Gropp
et al., 1996), Distributed TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016),
and parameter servers (Li et al., 2014)). As this programming model ignores component boundaries, it does not
naturally encapsulate parallelism and resource requirements
within individual components.2 As a result, reusing these
distributed components requires the insertion of appropriate
control points in the program, a burdensome and error-prone
process (Section 2). The absence of usable encapsulation
hinders code reuse and leads to error prone reimplementation of mathematically complex and often highly stochastic
algorithms. Even worse, in the distributed setting, often
2
By encapsulation, we mean that individual components specify their own internal parallelism and resources requirements and
can be used by other components that have no knowledge of these
requirements.

