Dynamical Isometry and a Mean Field Theory of CNNs:
How to Train 10,000-Layer Vanilla Convolutional Neural Networks
Lechao Xiao 1 2 Yasaman Bahri 1 2 Jascha Sohl-Dickstein 1 Samuel S. Schoenholz 1 Jeffrey Pennington 1

Abstract
In recent years, state-of-the-art methods in computer vision have utilized increasingly deep convolutional neural network architectures (CNNs),
with some of the most successful models employing hundreds or even thousands of layers. A variety of pathologies such as vanishing/exploding
gradients make training such deep networks challenging. While residual connections and batch
normalization do enable training at these depths,
it has remained unclear whether such specialized
architecture designs are truly necessary to train
deep CNNs. In this work, we demonstrate that it is
possible to train vanilla CNNs with ten thousand
layers or more simply by using an appropriate
initialization scheme. We derive this initialization
scheme theoretically by developing a mean field
theory for signal propagation and by characterizing the conditions for dynamical isometry, the
equilibration of singular values of the input-output
Jacobian matrix. These conditions require that the
convolution operator be an orthogonal transformation in the sense that it is norm-preserving.
We present an algorithm for generating such random initial orthogonal convolution kernels and
demonstrate empirically that they enable efficient
training of extremely deep architectures.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been crucial to the success of deep learning. Architectures based on
CNNs have achieved unprecedented accuracy in domains
ranging across computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012),
speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012), natural language
processing (Collobert et al., 2011; Kalchbrenner et al., 2014;
1

Google Brain 2 Work done as part of the Google AI Residency
program (g.co/airesidency). Correspondence to: Lechao Xiao
<xlc@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Figure 1. Extremely deep CNNs can be trained without the use
of batch normalization or residual connections simply by using
a Delta-Orthogonal initialization with critical weight and bias
variance and appropriate (in this case, tanh) nonlinearity. Test
(solid) and training (dashed) curves on MNIST (top) and CIFAR10 (bottom) for depths 1,250, 2,500, 5,000, and 10, 000.

Kim, 2014), and recently even the board game Go (Silver
et al., 2016; 2017).
The performance of deep convolutional networks has improved as these networks have been made ever deeper.
For example, some of the best-performing models on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) have employed hundreds or even
a thousand layers (He et al., 2016a;b). However, these
extremely deep architectures have been trainable only in
conjunction with techniques like residual connections (He
et al., 2016a) and batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy,
2015). It is an open question whether these techniques qualitatively improve model performance or whether they are
necessary crutches that solely make the networks easier to
train. In this work, we study vanilla CNNs using a combination of theory and experiment to disentangle the notions
of trainability and generalization performance. In doing so,
we show that through a careful, theoretically-motivated initialization scheme, we can train vanilla CNNs with 10,000
layers using no architectural tricks.

