Nonoverlap-Promoting Variable Selection

Pengtao Xie 1 2 Hongbao Zhang 1 Yichen Zhu 3 Eric P. Xing 1

Abstract
Variable selection is a classic problem in machine learning (ML), widely used to find important explanatory factors, and improve generalization performance and interpretability of ML
models. In this paper, we consider variable selection for models where multiple responses are
to be predicted based on the same set of covariates. Since each response is relevant to a unique
subset of covariates, we desire the selected variables for different responses have small overlap.
We propose a regularizer that simultaneously encourage orthogonality and sparsity, which jointly
brings in an effect of reducing overlap. We apply this regularizer to four model instances and
develop efficient algorithms to solve the regularized problems. We provide a formal analysis on
why the proposed regularizer can reduce generalization error. Experiments on both simulation
studies and real-world datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed regularizer in selecting less-overlapped variables and improving
generalization performance.

1. Introduction
Among the many criteria of evaluating model quality, two
are typically considered: (1) accuracy of prediction on unseen data; (2) interpretation of the model. For (2), scientists
prefer a simpler model because it puts more light on the relationship between the response and covariates. Parsimony
is especially an important issue when the number of predictors is large. With a large number of predictors, we often
would like to determine a smaller subset that exhibits the
strongest effects.
To produce accurate prediction while selecting a subset of
1
Petuum Inc 2 School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon
University 3 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University.
Correspondence to: Pengtao Xie <pengtao.xie@petuum.com>,
Eric P. Xing <eric.xing@petuum.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

important factors, regularization-based variable-selection
methods have been widely studied. The most notable one
is `1 -regularization (Tibshirani, 1996), which encourages
the model coefficients to be sparse. Its variants including
`1 /`2 -norm (Yuan & Lin, 2006) that brings in a group sparsity effect and elastic net (Zou & Hastie, 2005) which encourages strongly correlated predictors to be in or out of
the model together, among many others.
In many ML problems, multiple responses are to be predicted based on the same set of covariates. For example,
in multi-task classification, the classifiers of m classes are
built on top of a shared feature set and each classifier has
a class-specific coefficient vector. In topic modeling (Blei
et al., 2003), multiple topics are learned over the same vocabulary and each topic has a unique multinomial distribution on the words. Different responses are relevant to different subsets of covariates. For example, an education topic
is relevant to words like student, university, professor while
a political topic is relevant to words like government, president, election, etc. To account for the difference between
different responses when performing variable selection, we
desire the selected variables for different responses to be
less-overlapped.
The problem is formally formulated as follows. Consider
m responses sharing d covariates. Each response has a specific d-dimensional weight vector w where each dimension
corresponds to a covariate. Let s(w) = {k|wk 6= 0} – the
support of w – index the selected variables for a response.
For any two responses i and j, we desire their selected variables s(wi ) and s(wj ) are less overlapped, where the over|s(w )∩s(w )|
lapness is measured by |s(wii )∪s(wjj )| . To achieve this effect, we propose a regularizer that simultaneously encourages different weight vectors to be close to being orthogonal and each vector to be sparse, which jointly encourage vectors’ supports to have small overlap. Empirically,
we verify that minimizing this regularizer reduces overlap
among selected variables.
The major contributions of this work include:
• We propose a new type of regularization approach which
encourages a nonoverlap effect in variable selection.
• We apply the proposed regularizer to four models: multiclass logistic regression, distance metric learning, sparse

