Analyzing the Robustness of Nearest Neighbors to Adversarial Examples
Yizhen Wang 1 Somesh Jha 2 Kamalika Chaudhuri 1

Abstract
Motivated by safety-critical applications, testtime attacks on classiﬁers via adversarial examples has recently received a great deal of attention.
However, there is a general lack of understanding
on why adversarial examples arise; whether they
originate due to inherent properties of data or due
to lack of training samples remains ill-understood.
In this work, we introduce a theoretical framework
analogous to bias-variance theory for understanding these effects. We use our framework to analyze the robustness of a canonical non-parametric
classiﬁer – the k-nearest neighbors. Our analysis shows that its robustness properties depend
critically on the value of k – the classiﬁer may
be inherently non-robust for small k, but its robustness approaches that of the Bayes Optimal
classiﬁer for fast-growing k. We propose a novel
modiﬁed 1-nearest neighbor classiﬁer, and guarantee its robustness in the large sample limit. Our
experiments 1 suggest that this classiﬁer may have
good robustness properties even for reasonable
data set sizes.

1. Introduction
Machine learning is increasingly applied in security-critical
domains such as automotive systems, healthcare, ﬁnance
and robotics. To ensure safe deployment in these applications, there is an increasing need to design machine-learning
algorithms that are robust in the presence of adversarial attacks.
A realistic attack paradigm that has received a lot of recent
attention (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Papernot et al., 2016a;
Szegedy et al., 2013; Papernot et al., 2017b) is test-time
*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, San Diego
University of Wisconsin-Madison. Correspondence to: Kamalika
Chaudhuri <kamalika@cs.ucsd.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).
1
Code
available
at:
https://github.com/
EricYizhenWang/robust_nn_icml

attacks via adversarial examples. Here, an adversary has
the ability to provide modiﬁed test inputs to an alreadytrained classiﬁer, but cannot modify the training process in
any way. Their goal is to perturb legitimate test inputs by a
“small amount” in order to force the classiﬁer to report an
incorrect label. An example is an adversary that replaces a
stop sign by a slightly defaced version in order to force an
autonomous vehicle to recognize it as an yield sign. This
attack is undetectable to the human eye if the perturbation
is small enough.
Prior work has considered adversarial examples in the context of linear classiﬁers (Lowd and Meek, 2005), kernel
SVMs (Biggio et al., 2013) and neural networks (Szegedy
et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Papernot et al., 2017b;
2016a; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016). However, most of
this work has either been empirical, or has focussed on developing theoretically motivated attacks and defenses. Consequently, there is a general lack of understanding on why
adversarial examples arise; whether they originate due to
inherent properties of data or due to lack of training samples
remains ill-understood.
This work develops a theoretical framework for robust learning in order to understand the effects of distributional properties and ﬁnite samples on robustness. Building on traditional
bias-variance theory (Friedman et al., 2000), we posit that a
classiﬁcation algorithm may be robust to adversarial examples due to three reasons. First, it may be distributionally
robust, in the sense that the output classiﬁer is robust as the
number of training samples grow to inﬁnity. Second, even
the output of a distributionally robust classiﬁcation algorithm may be vulnerable due to too few training samples
– this is characterized by ﬁnite sample robustness. Finally,
different training algorithms might result in classiﬁers with
different degrees of robustness, which we call algorithmic
robustness. These quantities are analogous to bias, variance
and algorithmic effects respectively.
Next, we analyze a simple non-parametric classiﬁcation
algorithm: k-nearest neighbors in our framework. Our analysis demonstrates that large sample robustness properties of
this algorithm depend very much on k.
Speciﬁcally, we identify two distinct regimes for k with
vastly different robustness properties. When k is constant,
we show that k-nearest neighbors has zero robustness in the

