Feasible Arm Identification
Julian Katz-Samuels 1 Clayton Scott 1

Abstract
We introduce the feasible arm identification
problem, a pure exploration multi-armed bandit
problem where the agent is given a set of Ddimensional arms and a polyhedron P “ tx :
Ax ď bu Ă RD . Pulling an arm gives a random
vector and the goal is to determine, using a fixed
budget of T pulls, which of the arms have means
belonging to P . We propose three algorithms
MD-UCBE, MD-SAR, and MD-APT and provide
a unified analysis establishing upper bounds for
each of them. We also establish a lower bound that
matches up to constants the upper bounds of MDUCBE and MD-APT. Finally, we demonstrate the
effectiveness of our algorithms on synthetic and
real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Pure exploration multi-armed bandit (MAB) problems provide a framework for determining via a sequential experiment which of a set of distributions meet some criteria. In
this setting, there are K distributions ν1 , . . . , νK and the
agent sequentially chooses from which distribution to sample an observation. At the end of the sampling stage, the
agent outputs the distributions which he believes meet the
desired criteria and the performance of the agent is measured
based on the quality of this decision. In the MAB literature,
distributions are also referred to as arms, and sampling a
realization from a distribution νi is referred to as pulling
arm i. The most well-studied of these problems is top-k arm
identification. In this problem, the goal is to find the k best
arms, that is, k arms with the largest means. This problem
and other pure exploration problems have applications in a
wide range of areas, including crowdsourcing, A/B testing,
and online advertising.
In many application domains, the arms and the criteria for
1

Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering,
University of Michigan. Correspondence to: Julian Katz-Samuels
<jkatzsam@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

a good arm are multi-dimensional in nature. For example, in crowdsourcing it is important to distinguish good
workers from bad workers. For a multilabel classification
task (where examples are associated with multiple labels), a
worker can be modeled as a multi-dimensional arm where
each dimension corresponds to her accuracy at identifying a
particular label, and a natural definition for a “good worker”
is that her accuracy is above some threshold for each label
(e.g., 90%). A common approach for finding such workers
is to use a collection of examples labeled by domain experts
as a set of tests. Since workers are paid for each example
that they label, often an organization is only willing to spend
a limited number of queries to find good workers and an
effective method under this budget constraint is needed.
As another example, consider A/B testing for designing
products such as websites, ads, and video games. In this
setting, there are several options for a product and a company diverts traffic to each of the options to determine which
one to choose. Multi-dimensional criteria arise naturally in
this domain, as well. For example, a company that wants to
grow its user base for its website might desire the rate of new
subscriptions to be above some level, while still maintaining
a certain level of user retention among its current users. If
the product is a video game, the company might also be
interested in maintaining some metric of user engagement
above a certain threshold.
The pure exploration MAB literature lacks (i) a simple
framework for describing problems where the arms and criteria are multi-dimensional and (ii) practical algorithms for
addressing these problems. In this paper, we aim to address
this gap. We introduce the feasible arm identification problem in which arms are associated with multi-dimensional
distributions and the goal is to find arms whose means belong to a given polyhedron1 P “ tx : Ax ď bu. Polyhedra
encompass a large class of regions that can model common
user-defined constraints, including thresholds or ranges on
individual dimensions and linear constraints involving multiple dimensions. We propose several algorithms for the fixed
budget setting and provide upper and lower bounds. Finally, we demonstrate through experiments on synthetic and
real-world datasets that by leveraging the geometry of the
1

There are several conflicting definitions of polyhedra. We
define a polyhedron as the intersection of a finite number of closed
halfspaces (Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004).

