More Robust Doubly Robust Off-policy Evaluation
Mehrdad Farajtabar * 1 Yinlam Chow * 2 Mohammad Ghavamzadeh 2

Abstract
We study the problem of off-policy evaluation
(OPE) in reinforcement learning (RL), where the
goal is to estimate the performance of a policy
from the data generated by another policy(ies). In
particular, we focus on the doubly robust (DR)
estimators that consist of an importance sampling
(IS) component and a performance model, and
utilize the low (or zero) bias of IS and low variance of the model at the same time. Although the
accuracy of the model has a huge impact on the
overall performance of DR, most of the work on
using the DR estimators in OPE has been focused
on improving the IS part, and not much on how to
learn the model. In this paper, we propose alternative DR estimators, called more robust doubly
robust (MRDR), that learn the model parameter
by minimizing the variance of the DR estimator.
We first present a formulation for learning the DR
model in RL. We then derive formulas for the
variance of the DR estimator in both contextual
bandits and RL, such that their gradients w.r.t. the
model parameters can be estimated from the samples, and propose methods to efficiently minimize
the variance. We prove that the MRDR estimators are strongly consistent and asymptotically
optimal. Finally, we evaluate MRDR in bandits
and RL benchmark problems, and compare its
performance with the existing methods.

1. Introduction
In many real-world decision-making problems, in areas such
as marketing, finance, robotics, and healthcare, deploying
a policy without having an accurate estimate of its performance could be costly, unethical, or even illegal. This is
why the problem of off-policy evaluation (OPE) has been
heavily studied in contextual bandits (e.g., Dudı́k et al. 2011;
*
Equal contribution 1 Georgia Tech 2 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Yinlam Chow <yinlamchow@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Swaminathan et al. 2017) and reinforcement learning (RL)
(e.g., Precup et al. 2000a; 2001; Paduraru 2013; Mahmood
et al. 2014; Thomas et al. 2015a; Li et al. 2015; Jiang & Li
2016; Thomas & Brunskill 2016), and some of the results
have been applied to problems in marketing (e.g., Li et al.
2011; Theocharous et al. 2015), healthcare (e.g., Murphy
et al. 2001; Hirano et al. 2003), and education (e.g., Mandel et al. 2014; 2016). The goal in OPE is to estimate the
performance of an evaluation policy, given a log of data generated by the behavior policy(ies). The OPE problem can be
viewed as a form of counterfactual reasoning to infer causal
effects of a new treatment from historical data (e.g., Bottou
et al. 2013; Shalit et al. 2017; Louizos et al. 2017).
Three different approaches to OPE in RL can be identified
in the literature. 1) Direct Method (DM) which learns a
model of the system and then uses it to estimate the performance of the evaluation policy. This approach often has
low variance but its bias depends on how well the selected
function class represents the system and on whether the
number of samples is sufficient to accurately learn this function class. There are two major problems with this approach:
(a) Its bias cannot be easily quantified, since in general it is
difficult to quantify the approximation error of a function
class; (b) It is not clear how to choose the loss function for
model learning without the knowledge of the evaluation policy (or the distribution of the evaluation policies). Without
this knowledge, we may select a loss function that focuses
on learning the areas that are irrelevant for the evaluation
policy(ies). 2) Importance Sampling (IS) that uses the IS
term to correct the mismatch between the distributions of
the system trajectory induced by the evaluation and behavior
policies. Although this approach is unbiased (under mild assumptions) in case the behavior policy is known, its variance
can be very large when there is a big difference between the
distributions of the evaluation and behavior policies, and
grows exponentially with the horizon of the RL problem.
3) Doubly Robust (DR) which is a combination of DM
and IS, and can achieve the low variance of DM and no (or
low) bias of IS. The DR estimator was first developed in
statistics (e.g., Cassel et al. 1976; Robins et al. 1994; Robins
& Rotnitzky 1995; Bang & Robins 2005) to estimate from
incomplete data with the property that is unbiased when
either of its DM or IS estimators is correct. It was brought
to our community, first in contextual bandits by Dudı́k et al.

