Competitive Caching with Machine Learned Advice

Thodoris Lykouris 1 Sergei Vassilvitskii 2

Abstract
We develop a framework for augmenting online algorithms with a machine learned oracle to achieve
competitive ratios that provably improve upon unconditional worst case lower bounds when the oracle has low error. Our approach treats the oracle
as a complete black box, and is not dependent on
its inner workings, or the exact distribution of its
errors. We apply this framework to the traditional
caching problem creating an eviction strategy for
a cache of size k. We demonstrate that naively
following the oracle’s recommendations may lead
to very poor performance, even when the average
error is quite low. Instead we show how to modify the Marker algorithm to take into account the
oracle’s predictions, and prove that this combined
approach achieves a competitive ratio that both
(i) decreases as the oracle’s error decreases, and
(ii) is always capped by O(log k), which can be
achieved without any oracle input. We complement our results with an empirical evaluation of
our algorithm on real world datasets, and show
that it performs well empirically even using simple off-the-shelf predictions.

1. Introduction
Despite the success and prevalence of machine learned systems across many application domains, there are still a lot of
hurdles that one needs to overcome to deploy an ML system
in practice (Sculley et al., 2015). As these systems are rarely
100% perfect, a key challenge is dealing with errors that
inevitably arise.
There are many reasons that learned systems may exhibit
errors when deployed. First, most of them are trained to
be good on average, minimizing some expected loss. In
*
Equal contribution 1 Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
Google Research, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to:
Thodoris Lykouris <teddlyk@cs.cornell.edu>, Sergei Vassilvitskii <sergeiv@google.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

doing so, the system may invest its efforts on reducing the
error on the majority of inputs, at the expense of increased
error on a handful of outliers. Another problem is that
generalization error guarantees only apply when the train
and test examples are drawn from the same distribution. If
this assumption is violated, either due to distribution drift
or adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014), the machine
learned predictions may be very far from the truth. In all
cases, any system backed by machine learning needs to be
robust enough to handle occasional errors.
While machine learning is in the business of predicting the
unknown, online algorithms provide guidance on how to
act without any knowledge of the future. These powerful
methods show how to hedge decisions so that, regardless of
what the future holds, the online algorithm performs nearly
as well as the optimal offline algorithm. However these
guarantees come at a cost: since they protect against the
worst case, online algorithms may be overly cautious, which
leads to high competitive ratios even for seemingly simple
problems.
In this work, we ask: What if the online algorithm is
equipped with a machine learned oracle? How can one
use this oracle to combine the predictive power of machine
learning with the robustness of online algorithms?
We focus on a prototypical example of this area: the online
paging, or caching problem. In this setting, requests arrive
one at a time to a server equipped with a small amount of
memory. Upon processing a request, the server places the
answer in the memory (in case an identical request comes
in the future). Since the local memory has limited size,
the server must decide which of the current elements to
evict. It is well known that if the local memory or cache
has size k, then any deterministic algorithm has competitive
ratio Ω(k). However, an O(k) bound can be also achieved
by almost any reasonable strategy, thus this metric fails to
distinguish between algorithms that perform well in practice
and those that perform poorly. The competitive ratio of the
best randomized algorithm is Θ(log k) which, despite far
from trivial, is also much higher than observed in practice.
In contrast, we show how to use machine learned predictions to achieve
a competitive ratio of approximately
p
2 + O(min( η/O PT, log k), when using a hypothesis with
total absolute loss η (see Section 3 for a precise statement of

