On the Implicit Bias of Dropout

Poorya Mianjy 1 Raman Arora 1 Rene Vidal 2

Abstract
Algorithmic approaches endow deep learning systems with implicit bias that helps them generalize even in over-parametrized settings. In this
paper, we focus on understanding such a bias induced in learning through dropout, a popular technique to avoid overfitting in deep learning. For
single hidden-layer linear neural networks, we
show that dropout tends to make the norm of incoming/outgoing weight vectors of all the hidden
nodes equal. In addition, we provide a complete
characterization of the optimization landscape induced by dropout.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning systems based on deep neural
networks are usually over-parameterized, i.e. the number
of parameters in the model is much larger than the size of
the training data, which makes these systems prone to overfitting. Several explicit regularization strategies have been
used in practice to help these systems generalize, including
`1 and `2 regularization of the parameters (Nowlan and Hinton, 1992). Recently, (Neyshabur et al., 2015) showed that
a variety of such norm-based regularizers can provide sizeindependent capacity control, suggesting that the network
size is not a good measure of complexity in such settings.
Such a view had been previously motivated in the context of
matrix factorization (Srebro et al., 2005), where it is preferable to have many factors of limited overall influence rather
than a few important ones.
Besides explicit regularization techniques, practitioners
have used a spectrum of algorithmic approaches to improve
the generalization ability of over-parametrized models. This
includes early stopping of back propagation (Caruana et al.,
2001), batch normalization (Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015) and
1

Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, USA 2 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA. Correspondence to: Raman
Arora <arora@cs.jhu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014). In particular, dropout,
which is the focus of this paper, randomly drops hidden
nodes along with their connections at training time. Dropout
was introduced by Srivastava et al. (2014) as a way of breaking up co-adaptation among neurons, drawing insights from
the success of the sexual reproduction model in the evolution of advanced organisms. While dropout has enjoyed
tremendous success in training deep neural networks, the
theoretical understanding of how dropout (and other algorithmic heuristics) provide regularization in deep learning
remains somewhat limited.
We argue that a prerequisite for understanding implicit regularization due to various algorithmic heuristics in deep
learning, including dropout, is to analyze their behavior in
simpler models. Therefore, in this paper, we consider the
following learning problem. Let x ∈ Rd2 represent an input
feature vector with some unknown distribution D such that
Ex∼D [xx> ] = I. The output label vector y ∈ Rd1 is given
as y = Mx for some M ∈ Rd1 ×d2 . We consider the hypothesis class represented by a single hidden-layer linear network parametrized as hU,V (x) = UV> x, where V ∈ Rd2 ×r
and U ∈ Rd1 ×r are the weight matrices in the first and
the second layers, respectively. The goal of learning is to
find weight matrices U, V that minimize the expected loss
`(U, V) := Ex∼D [ky−hU,V (x)k2 ] = Ex∼D [ky−UV> xk2 ].
A natural learning algorithm to consider is back-propagation
with dropout, which can be seen as an instance of stochastic
gradient descent on the following objective:
#
"
2
1
>
f (U, V) := Ebi ∼Ber(θ),x∼D y − U diag(b)V x
, (1)
θ
where the expectation is w.r.t. the underlying distribution on
data as well as randomization due to dropout (each hidden
unit is dropped independently with probability 1 − θ). This
procedure, which we simply refer to as dropout in this paper,
is given in Algorithm 1.
It is easy to check (see Lemma A.1 in the supplementary)
that the objective in equation (1) can be written as
f (U, V) = `(U, V) + λ

r
X

kui k2 kvi k2 ,

(2)

i=1

where λ = 1−θ
θ is the regularization parameter, and ui and
vi represent the ith columns of U and V, respectively. Note

