Learning K-way D-dimensional Discrete Codes for Compact Embedding
Representations

Ting Chen 1 Martin Renqiang Min 2 Yizhou Sun 1

Abstract
Conventional embedding methods directly associate each symbol with a continuous embedding
vector, which is equivalent to applying a linear
transformation based on a “one-hot” encoding of
the discrete symbols. Despite its simplicity, such
approach yields the number of parameters that
grows linearly with the vocabulary size and can
lead to overfitting. In this work, we propose a
much more compact K-way D-dimensional discrete encoding scheme to replace the “one-hot"
encoding. In the proposed “KD encoding”, each
symbol is represented by a D-dimensional code
with a cardinality of K, and the final symbol embedding vector is generated by composing the
code embedding vectors. To end-to-end learn semantically meaningful codes, we derive a relaxed
discrete optimization approach based on stochastic gradient descent, which can be generally applied to any differentiable computational graph
with an embedding layer. In our experiments
with various applications from natural language
processing to graph convolutional networks, the
total size of the embedding layer can be reduced
up to 98% while achieving similar or better performance.

1. Introduction
Embedding methods, such as word embedding (Mikolov
et al., 2013; Pennington et al., 2014), have become pillars
in many applications when learning from discrete structures. The examples include language modeling (Kim
et al., 2016), machine translation (Sennrich et al., 2015),
text classification (Zhang et al., 2015b), knowledge graph
and social network modeling (Bordes et al., 2013; Chen &
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles 2 NEC Laboratories America. Correspondence to:
Ting Chen <tingchen@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Sun, 2017), and many others (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Chen
et al., 2016). The objective of the embedding module in
neural networks is to represent a discrete symbol, such as
a word or an entity, with some continuous embedding vector v ∈ Rd . This seems to be a trivial problem, at the
first glance, in which we can directly associate each symbol with a learnable embedding vector, as is done in existing work. To retrieve the embedding vector of a specific
symbol, an embedding table lookup operation can be performed. This is equivalent to the following: first we encode
N
each symbol
P with an “one-hot” encoding vector b ∈ [0, 1]
where j bj = 1 (N is the total number of symbols),
and then generate the embedding vector v by simply multiplying the “one-hot” vector b with the embedding matrix
W ∈ RN ×d , i.e. v = W T b.
Despite the simplicity of this “one-hot” encoding based
embedding approach, it has several issues. The major issue
is that the number of parameters grows linearly with the
number of symbols. This becomes very challenging when
we have millions or billions of entities in the database, or
when there are lots of symbols with only a few observations
(e.g. Zipf’s law). There also exists redundancy in the O(N )
parameterization, considering that many symbols are actually similar to each other. This over-parameterization can
further lead to overfitting; and it also requires a lot of memory, which prevents the model from being deployed to mobile devices. Another issue is purely from the code space
utilization perspective, where we find “one-hot” encoding
is extremely inefficient. Its code space utilization rate is
almost zero as N/2N → 0 when N → ∞, while N dimensional discrete coding system can effectively represent 2N
symbols.
To address these issues, we propose a novel and much
more compact coding scheme that replaces the “one-hot”
encoding. In the proposed approach, we use a K-way Ddimensional code to represent each symbol, where each
code has D dimensions, and each dimension has a cardinality of K. For example, a concept of cat may be encoded
as (5-1-3-7), and a concept of dog may be encoded as (5-13-9). The code allocation for each symbol is based on data
and specific tasks such that the codes can capture semantics
of symbols, and similar codes should reflect similar mean-

