Spotlight: Optimizing Device Placement for Training Deep Neural Networks

Yuanxiang Gao 1 2 Li Chen 1 Baochun Li 1

Abstract
Training deep neural networks (DNNs) requires
an increasing amount of computation resources,
and it becomes typical to use a mixture of GPU
and CPU devices. Due to the heterogeneity of
these devices, a recent challenge is how each operation in a neural network can be optimally placed
on these devices, so that the training process can
take the shortest amount of time possible. The current state-of-the-art solution uses reinforcement
learning based on the policy gradient method, and
it suffers from suboptimal training times. In this
paper, we propose Spotlight, a new reinforcement
learning algorithm based on proximal policy optimization, designed specifically for finding an
optimal device placement for training DNNs. The
design of our new algorithm relies upon a new
model of the device placement problem: by modeling it as a Markov decision process with multiple stages, we are able to prove that Spotlight
achieves a theoretical guarantee on performance
improvements. We have implemented Spotlight
in the CIFAR-10 benchmark and deployed it on
the Google Cloud platform. Extensive experiments have demonstrated that the training time
with placements recommended by Spotlight is
60.9% of that recommended by the policy gradient method.

1. Introduction
It takes an increasing amount of computation resources to
train today’s neural networks, and it is typical to employ
a heterogeneous mixture of both CPU and GPU devices
to meet such computation requirements (Sutskever et al.,
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto 2 School of Communication and Information Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. Correspondence to: Yuanxiang Gao <yuanxiang@ece.utoronto.ca>, Li Chen <lchen@ece.utoronto.ca>,
Baochun Li <bli@ece.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

...
Training time

Sample

Update
Train!

Place
GPU1 GPU2

...
GPU3 CPU
Stage 0

Stage 1

Stage 2

...

Final states

Figure 1. Using a multi-stage Markov decision process to model
the device placement problem.

2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015; He et al., 2016). With such
a distributed environment of CPU and GPU devices, it is
important to specify how each operation in a neural network
should be matched to each of these CPU and GPU devices,
referred to as the device placement problem. The objective is
to find a match — or placement — of operations to devices,
so that the time required to train a neural network can be
minimized.
In recent literature, Mirhoseini et al. (Mirhoseini et al., 2017)
proposed to solve the device placement problem using a reinforcement learning approach, based on the policy gradient
method (Sutton et al., 2000). Unfortunately, the standard
policy gradient method is known to be inefficient, as it performs one gradient update for each data sample (Shulman
et al., 2017). With the vanilla policy gradient method, it took
27 hours over a cluster of 160 workers to find a placement
that outperforms an existing heuristic (Mirhoseini et al.,
2017). Such training costs are prohibitive and hardly acceptable by machine learning practitioners.
In broad strokes, we argue that the device placement problem can be solved more efficiently by using a more modern
reinforcement learning approach in the literature, called
proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Shulman et al., 2015;
2017; Heess et al., 2017). Proximal policy optimization was
originally applied in the domain of continuous robot control,
and was effective in teaching a simulated robot to perform
complex tasks. While promising, applying proximal policy optimization to solve the device placement problem
involves a non-trivial challenge that must be addressed: the
device placement problem needs to be modeled as a Markov
decision process (MDP).

