Regret Minimization for Partially Observable Deep Reinforcement Learning

Peter Jin 1 Kurt Keutzer 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning algorithms that estimate state and state-action value functions have
been shown to be effective in a variety of challenging domains, including learning control strategies from raw image pixels. However, algorithms
that estimate state and state-action value functions
typically assume a fully observed state and must
compensate for partial observations by using finite
length observation histories or recurrent networks.
In this work, we propose a new deep reinforcement learning algorithm based on counterfactual
regret minimization that iteratively updates an approximation to an advantage-like function and
is robust to partially observed state. We demonstrate that this new algorithm can substantially
outperform strong baseline methods on several
partially observed reinforcement learning tasks:
learning first-person 3D navigation in Doom and
Minecraft, and acting in the presence of partially
observed objects in Doom and Pong.

1. Introduction
Many reinforcement learning problems of practical interest have the property of partial observability, where observations of state are generally non-Markovian. Practical
deep reinforcement learning algorithms fall into two broad
classes, neither of which satisfactorily deals with partial
observability despite the prevalance of partial observations
in the real world. One class of algorithms consists of value
function-based methods such as deep Q-learning (Mnih
et al., 2013; 2015), which are known to be highly sample efficient but generally assume a Markovian observation space.
The other class of algorithms consists of Monte Carlo policy
gradient methods such as trust region policy optimization
(Schulman et al., 2015), which do not need to assume Markovian observations but are less sample efficient than value
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Peter Jin
<phj@eecs.berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

function-based methods. Some policy gradient methods
such as advantage actor-critic (Mnih et al., 2016) introduce
the Markov assumption through a critic or state-dependent
baseline to improve sample efficiency.
There are two common workarounds for the problem of
partial observation: (a) learning policies and value functions
on finite length observation histories, and (b) learning recurrent policies and recurrent value functions. Finite length
observation histories concatenate the most recent raw observations into a stack of observations, and are a simple but
effective technique to approximate the appearance of full
observability. Recurrent functions can potentially incorporate an infinite observation history, but they can be harder to
optimize. When using either finite length observation histories or recurrent functions, the same value function-based
methods and policy gradient methods are employed with
their respective tradeoffs in partially observable domains.
We are interested in developing methods that combine the
best of both value function-based methods and policy gradient methods for partial observable domains. That is, can
we develop methods that are sample efficient but are also
robust to partial observation spaces?
Our contribution is a new model-free deep reinforcement
learning algorithm based on the principle of regret minimization which does not require access to a Markovian state.
Our method learns a policy by estimating an advantage-like
function which approximates a quantity called the counterfactual regret. Counterfactual regret is central to the family
of counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich
et al., 2007) algorithms for solving incomplete information games. Hence we call our algorithm “advantage-based
regret minimization” (ARM).
We evaluate our approach on three partially observable visual reinforcement learning tasks: first-person 3D navigation in Doom and Minecraft (Kempka et al., 2016; Johnson
et al., 2016), avoiding partially observed objects in Doom,
and playing Pong with partial observation perturbations
(Bellemare et al., 2013). In our experiments, we find that
our method is more robust and offers substantial improvement over prior methods on partially observable tasks.

