Safe Element Screening for Submodular Function Minimization

Weizhong Zhang 1 Bin Hong 2 Lin Ma 1 Wei Liu 1 Tong Zhang 1

Abstract
Submodular functions are discrete analogs of convex functions, which have applications in various
fields, including machine learning and computer
vision. However, in large-scale applications, solving Submodular Function Minimization (SFM)
problems remains challenging. In this paper, we
make the first attempt to extend the emerging technique named screening in large-scale sparse learning to SFM for accelerating its optimization process. We first conduct a careful studying of the
relationships between SFM and the corresponding
convex proximal problems, as well as the accurate primal optimum estimation of the proximal
problems. Relying on this study, we subsequently
propose a novel safe screening method to quickly
identify the elements guaranteed to be included
(we refer to them as active) or excluded (inactive)
in the final optimal solution of SFM during the
optimization process. By removing the inactive
elements and fixing the active ones, the problem
size can be dramatically reduced, leading to great
savings in the computational cost without sacrificing any accuracy. To the best of our knowledge,
the proposed method is the first screening method
in the fields of SFM and even combinatorial optimization, thus pointing out a new direction for
accelerating SFM algorithms. Experiment results
on both synthetic and real datasets demonstrate
the significant speedups gained by our approach.

1. Introduction
Submodular Functions (Fujishige, 2005) are a special class
of set functions, which have rich structures and a lot of links
1
Tencent AI Lab 2 State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University.
Correspondence to: Weizhong Zhang
<zhangweizhongzju@gmail.com>,
Bin Hong <hongbinzju@gmail.com>, Lin Ma <forest.linma@gmail.com>,
Wei
Liu
<wl2223@columbia.edu>,
Tong
Zhang
<tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

with convex functions. They arise naturally in many domains, such as clustering (Narasimhan & Bilmes, 2007), image
segmentation (Kolmogorov & Zabin, 2004; Cevher et al.,
2009), document summarization (Lin & Bilmes, 2011a),
etc. Most of these applications can be finally deduced to a
Submodular Function Minimization (SFM) problem:
min F (A),

A⊆V

(SFM)

where F (A) is a submodular function defined on a set V .
The problem of SFM has been extensively studied for several decades in the literatures (Edmonds, 1970; Lovász,
1983; McCormick, 2005; Wu et al., 2016; Ene et al., 2017),
in which many algorithms have been developed from the
perspectives of combinatorial optimization and convex optimization. The most well-known conclusion is that SFM
is solvable in strongly polynomial time (Iwata et al., 2001).
Unfortunately, due to the high-degree polynomial dependence, the applications of submodular functions on the large
scale problems remain challenging, such as image segmentation (Cevher et al., 2009) and speech analysis (Lin & Bilmes,
2011b), which both involve a huge number of variables.
Screening (El Ghaoui et al., 2012) is an emerging technique, which has been proved to be effective in accelerating
large-scale sparse model training. It is motivated by the
well-known feature of sparse models that a significant portion of the coefficients in the optimal solutions of them (resp.
their dual problems) are zeros, that is, the corresponding
features (resp. samples) are irrelevant with the final learned
models. Screening methods aim to quickly identify these
irrelevant features and/or samples and remove them from
the datasets before or during the training process. Thus, the
problem size can be reduced dramatically, leading to substantial savings in the computational cost. The framework
of these methods is given in Algorithm 1. Since screening
methods are always independent of the training algorithms,
they can be integrated with all the algorithms flexibly. In
the recent few years, specific screening methods for most
of the traditional sparse models have been developed, such
as Lasso (Tibshirani et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2013; Wang
& Ye, 2015), sparse logistic regression (Wang et al., 2014),
multi-task learning (Ndiaye et al., 2015) and SVM (Ogawa
et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2017). Empirical studies indicate
that the speedups they achieved can be orders of magnitudes.

