The Uncertainty Bellman Equation and Exploration

Brendan O’Donoghue 1 Ian Osband 1 Remi Munos 1 Volodymyr Mnih 1

Abstract

tions that maximize rewards given its current knowledge?

We consider the exploration/exploitation problem in reinforcement learning. For exploitation,
it is well known that the Bellman equation connects the value at any time-step to the expected
value at subsequent time-steps. In this paper we
consider a similar uncertainty Bellman equation
(UBE), which connects the uncertainty at any
time-step to the expected uncertainties at subsequent time-steps, thereby extending the potential
exploratory benefit of a policy beyond individual
time-steps. We prove that the unique fixed point
of the UBE yields an upper bound on the variance of the posterior distribution of the Q-values
induced by any policy. This bound can be much
tighter than traditional count-based bonuses that
compound standard deviation rather than variance. Importantly, and unlike several existing
approaches to optimism, this method scales naturally to large systems with complex generalization. Substituting our UBE-exploration strategy
for -greedy improves DQN performance on 51
out of 57 games in the Atari suite.

Separating estimation and control in RL via ‘greedy’ algorithms can lead to premature and suboptimal exploitation.
To offset this, the majority of practical implementations introduce some random noise or dithering into their action
selection (such as -greedy). These algorithms will eventually explore every reachable state and action infinitely
often, but can take exponentially long to learn the optimal policy (Kakade, 2003). By contrast, for any set of
prior beliefs the optimal exploration policy can be computed directly by dynamic programming in the Bayesian
belief space. However, this approach can be computationally intractable for even very small problems (Guez et al.,
2012) while direct computational approximations can fail
spectacularly badly (Munos, 2014).

1. Introduction
We consider the reinforcement learning (RL) problem of an
agent interacting with its environment to maximize cumulative rewards over time (Sutton & Barto, 1998). We model
the environment as a Markov decision process (MDP), but
where the agent is initially uncertain of the true dynamics and mean rewards of the MDP (Bellman, 1957; Bertsekas, 2005). At each time-step, the agent performs an action, receives a reward, and moves to the next state; from
these data it can learn which actions lead to higher payoffs.
This leads to the exploration versus exploitation trade-off:
Should the agent investigate poorly understood states and
actions to improve future performance or instead take ac1
DeepMind. Correspondence to: Brendan O’Donoghue
<bodonoghue@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

For this reason, most provably-efficient approaches to reinforcement learning rely upon the optimism in the face of
uncertainty (OFU) principle (Lai & Robbins, 1985; Kearns
& Singh, 2002; Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002). These algorithms give a bonus to poorly-understood states and actions and subsequently follow the policy that is optimal
for this augmented optimistic MDP. This optimism incentivises exploration but, as the agent learns more about the
environment, the scale of the bonus should decrease and
the agent’s performance should approach optimality. At
a high level these approaches to OFU-RL build up confidence sets that contain the true MDP with high probability
(Strehl & Littman, 2004; Lattimore & Hutter, 2012; Jaksch
et al., 2010). These techniques can provide performance
guarantees that are ‘near-optimal’ in terms of the problem
parameters. However, apart from the simple ‘multi-armed
bandit’ setting with only one state, there is still a significant gap between the upper and lower bounds for these
algorithms (Lattimore, 2016; Jaksch et al., 2010; Osband
& Van Roy, 2016).
One inefficiency in these algorithms is that, although the
concentration may be tight at each state and action independently, the combination of simultaneously optimistic
estimates may result in an extremely over-optimistic estimate for the MDP as a whole (Osband & Van Roy, 2017).
Other works have suggested that a Bayesian posterior sampling approach may not suffer from these inefficiencies and
can lead to performance improvements over OFU methods

