Conditional Noise-Contrastive Estimation of Unnormalised Models
Ciwan Ceylan * 1 Michael U. Gutmann * 2

Abstract
Many parametric statistical models are not properly normalised and only specified up to an intractable partition function, which renders parameter estimation difficult. Examples of unnormalised models are Gibbs distributions, Markov
random fields, and neural network models in unsupervised deep learning. In previous work, the estimation principle called noise-contrastive estimation (NCE) was introduced where unnormalised
models are estimated by learning to distinguish
between data and auxiliary noise. An open question is how to best choose the auxiliary noise
distribution. We here propose a new method that
addresses this issue. The proposed method shares
with NCE the idea of formulating density estimation as a supervised learning problem but in
contrast to NCE, the proposed method leverages
the observed data when generating noise samples. The noise can thus be generated in a semiautomated manner. We first present the underlying theory of the new method, show that score
matching emerges as a limiting case, validate the
method on continuous and discrete valued synthetic data, and show that we can expect an improved performance compared to NCE when the
data lie in a lower-dimensional manifold. Then
we demonstrate its applicability in unsupervised
deep learning by estimating a four-layer neural
image model.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of estimating the parameters θ ∈
RM of an unnormalised statistical model φ(u; θ) : X 7→
R+ from observed data X = {x1 , . . . , xN }, where the
*
Equal contribution 1 UMIC, RWTH Aachen University,
Aachen, Germany (affiliated with KTH Royal Institute of Technology and University of Edinburgh during project timespan) 2 School
of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Ciwan Ceylan <ceylan@vision.rwthaachen.de>, Michael Gutmann <michael.gutmann@ed.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

xi ∈ X are independently sampled from the unknown data
distribution pd . Unnormalised models output non-negative
numbers but do not integrate or sum to one, i.e. they are
statisticalRmodels that are defined up to the partition function
Z(θ) = φ(u; θ) du. Unnormalised models are widely
used, e.g. to model images (Köster & Hyvärinen, 2010;
Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2013), natural language (Mnih &
Teh, 2012; Zoph et al., 2016), or memory (Hopfield, 1982).
If the partition function Z(θ) can be evaluated analytically in closed form, the unnormalised model φ(u; θ) can
be easily converted to a (normalised) statistical model
p(u; θ) = φ(u; θ)/Z(θ) that can be estimated by maximising the likelihood. However, for most unnormalised models
the integral defining the partition function is analytically
intractable and computationally expensive to approximate.
Several methods have been proposed in the literature to
estimate unnormalised models including Monte Carlo maximum likelihood (Geyer, 1994), contrastive divergence (Hinton, 2002), score matching (Hyvärinen, 2005), and noisecontrastive estimation (Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2010; 2012)
and its generalisations (Pihlaja et al., 2010; Gutmann &
Hirayama, 2011). The basic idea of noise-contrastive estimation (NCE) is to formulate the density estimation problem
as a classification problem where the model is trained to
distinguish between the observed data and some reference
(noise) data. NCE is used in several application domains
(Mnih & Teh, 2012; Chen et al., 2015; Tschiatschek et al.,
2016) and similar “learning by comparison” ideas are employed for learning with generative latent variable models
(Gutmann et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2014).
In NCE, the choice of the auxiliary noise distribution is left
to the user. While simple distributions, e.g. uniform or Gaussian distributions, have successfully been used (Gutmann &
Hyvärinen, 2012; Mnih & Teh, 2012), the estimation performance of NCE depends on the distribution chosen and more
tailored distributions were found to typically yield better
results, see e.g. (Ji et al., 2016). Intuitively, the noise samples in NCE ought to resemble the observed data in order
for the classification problem not to be too easy. To alleviate the burden on the user to generate such noise, we here
propose conditional noise-contrastive estimation that semiautomatically generates the noise based on the observed
data.

