Understanding Generalization and Optimization Performance of Deep CNNs

Pan Zhou 1 Jiashi Feng 1

Abstract
This work aims to provide understandings on the
remarkable success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) by theoretically analyzing
their generalization performance and establishing optimization guarantees for gradient descent
based training algorithms. Specifically, for a CNN
model consisting of l convolutional layers and one
fully connected layer, we provepthat its generalization error is bounded by O( θe
%/n) where θ
denotes freedom degree of the network parameQl
ters and %e = O(log( i=1 bi (ki − si + 1)/p) +
log(bl+1 )) encapsulates architecture parameters
including the kernel size ki , stride si , pooling size
p and parameter magnitude bi . To our best knowledge, this is the first generalization bound that
Ql+1
only depends on O(log( i=1 bi )), tighter than
existing ones that all involve an exponential term
Ql+1
like O( i=1 bi ). Besides, we prove that for an arbitrary gradient descent algorithm, the computed
approximate stationary point by minimizing empirical risk is also an approximate stationary point
to the population risk. This well explains why gradient descent training algorithms usually perform
sufficiently well in practice. Furthermore, we
prove the one-to-one correspondence and convergence guarantees for the non-degenerate stationary points between the empirical and population
risks. It implies that the computed local minimum
for the empirical risk is also close to a local minimum for the population risk, thus ensuring the
good generalization performance of CNNs.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been successfully applied to various fields, such as image classifica1

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering (ECE),
National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to:
Pan Zhou <pzhou@u.nus.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

tion (Szegedy et al., 2015; He et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017),
speech recognition (Sainath et al., 2013; Abdel-Hamid et al.,
2014), and classic games (Silver et al., 2016; Brown &
Sandholm, 2017). However, theoretical analyses and understandings on deep CNNs still largely lag their practical
applications. Recently, although many works establish theoretical understandings on deep feedforward neural networks
(DNNs) from various aspects, e.g. (Neyshabur et al., 2015;
Kawaguchi, 2016; Zhou & Feng, 2018; Tian, 2017; Lee
et al., 2017), only a few (Sun et al., 2016; Kawaguchi et al.,
2017; Du et al., 2017a;b) provide explanations on deep
CNNs due to their more complex architectures and operations. Besides, these existing works all suffer certain discrepancy between their theories and practice. For example,
the developed generalization error bound either exponentially grows along with the depth of a CNN model (Sun et al.,
2016) or is data-dependent (Kawaguchi et al., 2017), and the
convergence guarantees for optimization algorithms over
CNNs are achieved by assuming an over-simplified CNN
model consisting of only one non-overlapping convolutional
layer (Du et al., 2017a;b).
As an attempt to explain the practical success of deep CNNs
and mitigate the gap between theory and practice, this work
aims to provide tighter data-independent generalization error bound and algorithmic optimization guarantees for the
commonly used deep CNN models in practice. Specifically,
we theoretically analyze the deep CNNs from following two
aspects: (1) how their generalization performance varies
with different network architecture choices and (2) why gradient descent based algorithms such as stochastic gradient
descend (SGD) (Robbins & Monro, 1951), adam (Kingma
& Ba, 2015) and RMSProp (Tieleman & Hinton, 2012), on
minimizing empirical risk usually offer models with satisfactory performance. Moreover, we theoretically demonstrate
the benefits of (stride) convolution and pooling operations,
which are unique for CNNs, to the generalization performance, compared with feedforward networks.
Formally, we consider a CNN model g(w; D) parameterized by w ∈ Rd , consisting of l convolutional layers and
one subsequent fully connected layer. It maps the input
D ∈ Rr0 ×c0 to an output vector v ∈ Rdl+1 . Its i-th convolutional layer takes Z(i−1) ∈ Rr̃i−1 ×c̃i−1 ×di−1 as input
and outputs Z(i) ∈ Rr̃i ×c̃i ×di through spatial convolution,
non-linear activation and pooling operations sequentially.

