Stochastic Video Generation with a Learned Prior
Emily Denton 1 Rob Fergus 1 2

Abstract
Generating video frames that accurately predict
future world states is challenging. Existing approaches either fail to capture the full distribution of outcomes, or yield blurry generations, or
both. In this paper we introduce a video generation model with a learned prior over stochastic
latent variables at each time step. Video frames
are generated by drawing samples from this prior
and combining them with a deterministic estimate
of the future frame. The approach is simple and
easily trained end-to-end on a variety of datasets.
Sample generations are both varied and sharp,
even many frames into the future, and compare
favorably to those from existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Learning to generate future frames of a video sequence
is a challenging research problem with great relevance to
reinforcement learning, planning and robotics. Although impressive generative models of still images have been demonstrated (e.g. Reed et al. (2017); Karras et al. (2017)), these
techniques do not extend to video sequences. The main issue is the inherent uncertainty in the dynamics of the world.
For example, when a bouncing ball hits the ground unknown
effects, such surface imperfections or ball spin, ensure that
its future trajectory is inherently random.
Consequently, pixel-level frame predictions of such an event
degrade when a deterministic loss function is used, e.g. with
the ball itself blurring to accommodate multiple possible
futures. Recently, loss functions that impose a distribution
instead have been explored. One such approach are adversarial losses (Goodfellow et al., 2014), but training difficulties
and mode collapse often mean the full distribution is not
captured well.
We propose a new stochastic video generation (SVG) model
that combines a deterministic frame predictor with time1

2

New York University Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Emily Denton <denton@cs.nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

dependent stochastic latent variables. We propose two variants of our model: one with a fixed prior over the latent
variables (SVG-FP) and another with a learned prior (SVGLP). The key insight we leverage for the learned-prior model
is that for the majority of the ball’s trajectory, a deterministic
model suffices. Only at the point of contact does the modeling of uncertainty become important. The learned prior can
can be interpreted as a a predictive model of uncertainty. For
most of the trajectory the prior will predict low uncertainty,
making the frame estimates deterministic. However, at the
instant the ball hits the ground it will predict a high variance
event, causing frame samples to differ significantly.
We train our model by introducing a recurrent inference
network to estimate the latent distribution for each time step.
This novel recurrent inference architecture facilitates easy
end-to-end training of SVG-FP and SVG-LP. We evaluate
SVG-FP and SVG-LP on two real world datasets and a
stochastic variant of the Moving MNIST dataset. Sample
generations are both varied and sharp, even many frames
into the future.

2. Related work
Several models have been proposed that use prediction
within video to learn deep feature representations appropriate for high-level tasks such as object detection. Wang
& Gupta (2015) learn an embedding for patches taken from
object video tracks. Zou et al. (2012) use similar principles
to learn features that exhibit a range of complex invariances.
Lotter et al. (2016) propose a predictive coding model that
learns features effective for recognition of synthetic faces,
as well as predicting steering angles in the KITTI benchmark. Criterions related to slow feature analysis (Wiskott &
Sejnowski, 2002) have been proposed such as linearity of
representations (Goroshin et al., 2015) and equivariance to
ego-motion (Jayaraman & Grauman, 2015). Agrawal et al.
(2015) learn a representation by predicting transformations
obtained by ego-motion.
A range of deep video generation models have recently been
proposed. Srivastava et al. (2015) use LSTMs trained on prelearned low dimensional image representations. Ranzato
et al. (2014) adopt a discrete vector quantization approach
inspired by text models. Video Pixel Networks (Kalchbrenner et al., 2016) are a probabilistic approach to generation

