Learning Compact Neural Networks with Regularization

Samet Oymak 1

Abstract
Proper regularization is critical for speeding up
training, improving generalization performance,
and learning compact models that are cost efficient. We propose and analyze regularized gradient descent algorithms for learning shallow neural
networks. Our framework is general and covers weight-sharing (convolutional networks), sparsity (network pruning), and low-rank constraints
among others. We first introduce covering dimension to quantify the complexity of the constraint set and provide insights on the generalization properties. Then, we show that proposed
algorithms become well-behaved and local linear
convergence occurs once the amount of data exceeds the covering dimension. Overall, our results
demonstrate that near-optimal sample complexity
is sufficient for efficient learning and illustrate
how regularization can be beneficial to learn overparameterized networks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNN) find ubiquitous use in large
scale machine learning systems. Applications include
speech processing, computer vision, natural language processing, and reinforcement learning (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Graves et al., 2013; Hinton et al., 2012; Silver et al., 2016).
DNNs can be efficiently trained with first-order methods
and provide state of the art performance for important machine learning benchmarks such as ImageNet and TIMIT
(Russakovsky et al., 2015; Graves et al., 2013). They also
lie at the core of complex systems such as recommendation
and ranking models and self-driving cars (Covington et al.,
2016; Wang et al., 2015; Bojarski et al., 2016).
The abundance of promising applications bring a need to
understand the properties of deep learning models. Recent
literature shows a growing interest towards theoretical prop1

University of California, Riverside, CA, USA. Work done
at The Voleon Group, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
<oymak@ece.ucr.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

erties of complex neural network models. Significant questions of interest include efficient training of such models
and their generalization abilities. Typically, neural nets are
trained with first order methods that are based on (stochastic) gradient descent. The variations include Adam, Adagrad, and variance reduction methods (Kingma & Ba, 2014;
Duchi et al., 2011; Johnson & Zhang, 2013). The fact that
SGD is highly parallellizable is often crucial to training
large scale models. Consequently, there is a growing body
of works that focus on the theoretical understanding of gradient descent algorithms (Zhong et al., 2017b; Tian, 2017;
Panigrahy et al., 2018; Soltanolkotabi et al., 2017; Ge et al.,
2017; Janzamin et al., 2015) and the generalization properties of DNNs (Zhang et al., 2016; Hardt et al., 2015; Bartlett
et al., 2017; Kawaguchi et al., 2017; Neyshabur et al., 2017).
In this work, we propose and analyze regularized gradient descent algorithms to provably learn compact neural
networks that have space-efficient representation. This is
in contrast to existing theory literature where the focus is
mostly fully-connected neural networks (FNN). Proper regularization is a critical tool for building models that are
compact and that have better generalization properties. This
is achieved by reducing degrees of freedom of the model.
Sparsifying and quantizing neural networks lead to storage
efficient compact models that will be building blocks intelligent mobile devices (Han et al., 2015a;b; Courbariaux et al.,
2016; Denton et al., 2014; Jin et al., 2016; Dong et al., 2017;
Aghasi et al., 2017). The pruning idea has been around
for many years (Hassibi & Stork, 1993; Cun et al., 1990)
however it gained recent attention due to the growing size of
the state of the art DNN models. Convolutional neural nets
(CNN) are also compact models that efficiently utilize their
parameters by weight sharing (Krizhevsky et al., 2012).
We study neural network regularization and address both
generalization and optimization problems with an emphasis
on one hidden-layer networks. We introduce a machinery to measure the impact of regularization, namely the
covering dimension of the constraint set. We show that
covering dimension controls generalization properties as
well as the optimization landscape. Hence, regularization
can have substantial benefit over training unconstrained
(e.g. fully-connected) models and can help with training
over-parameterized networks.

