Exploiting the Potential of Standard Convolutional Autoencoders
for Image Restoration by Evolutionary Search

Masanori Suganuma 1 2 Mete Ozay 2 Takayuki Okatani 2 1

Abstract
Researchers have applied deep neural networks to
image restoration tasks, in which they proposed
various network architectures, loss functions, and
training methods. In particular, adversarial training, which is employed in recent studies, seems
to be a key ingredient to success. In this paper,
we show that simple convolutional autoencoders
(CAEs) built upon only standard network components, i.e., convolutional layers and skip connections, can outperform the state-of-the-art methods which employ adversarial training and sophisticated loss functions. The secret is to search
for good architectures using an evolutionary algorithm. All we did was to train the optimized CAEs
by minimizing the `2 loss between reconstructed
images and their ground truths using the ADAM
optimizer. Our experimental results show that this
approach achieves 27.8 dB peak signal to noise
ratio (PSNR) on the CelebA dataset and 33.3 dB
on the SVHN dataset, compared to 22.8 dB and
19.0 dB provided by the former state-of-the-art
methods, respectively.

1. Introduction
The task of image restoration, which is to recover a clean image from its corrupted version, is usually an ill-posed inverse
problem. In order to resolve or mitigate its ill-posedness,
researchers have incorporated image priors such as edge
statistics (Fattal, 2007), total variation (Perrone & Favaro,
2014), and sparse representation (Aharon et al., 2006; Yang
et al., 2010), which are built on intuition or statistics of
natural images. Recently, learning-based methods which
use convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al.,
1998; Krizhevsky et al., 2012) were introduced to overcome
1

RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan 2 Tohoku University, Sendai,
Japan.
Correspondence to: Masanori Suganuma <suganuma@vision.is.tohoku.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

the limitation of these hand-designed or simple priors, and
have significantly improved the state-of-the-art.
In these studies, researchers have approached the problem
mainly from two directions. One is to design new network
architectures and/or new loss functions. The other is to
develop new training methods, such as the employment of
adversarial training (Goodfellow et al., 2014). Later studies naturally proposed more complicated architectures to
improve the performance of earlier architectures. Mao et
al. (2016) proposed an architecture consisting of a chain
of symmetric convolutional and deconvolutional layers, between which they added skip connections (Srivastava et al.,
2015; He et al., 2016). Tai et al. (2017) proposed an 80layer memory network which contains a recursive unit and
a gate unit. Yang et al. (2017) proposed an image inpainting
framework that uses two networks: one for capturing the
global structure of an image, and one for reducing the discrepancy of texture appearance inside and outside missing
image regions. While many studies employ the `2 distance
between the clean and recovered images, some propose to
use new loss functions such as the perceptual loss to obtain
perceptually better results (Johnson et al., 2016; Ledig et al.,
2017).
There are also studies on the development of new training
methods. A recent trend is to use adversarial training, where
two networks are trained in an adversarial setting; a generator network is trained to perform image restoration, and a
discriminator network is trained to distinguish whether an
input is a true image or a restored one. The first work employing this framework for image inpainting is the context
encoder of Pathak et al. (2016). They minimize the sum
of a reconstruction loss over an encoder-decoder network
for restoring intensities of missing pixels and additionally
an adversarial loss over a discriminator network. Iizuka
et al. (2017) proposed an improved framework in which
global and local context discriminators are used to generate realistic images. While the above studies require the
shapes of missing regions (i.e., masks) for training, Yeh et
al. (2017a) proposed a method which does not need masks
for training. Their method first learns a latent manifold of
clean images by GANs and search for the closest encoding
of a corrupted image to infer missing regions. Despite its

