Racing Thompson: an Efficient Algorithm for Thompson Sampling with
Non-conjugate Priors

Yichi Zhou 1 Jun Zhu 1 Jingwe Zhuo 1

Abstract
Thompson sampling has impressive empirical performance for many multi-armed bandit problems.
But current algorithms for Thompson sampling
only work for the case of conjugate priors since
they require to perform online Bayesian posterior
inference, which is a difficult task when the prior
is not conjugate. In this paper, we propose a novel
algorithm for Thompson sampling which only requires to draw samples from a tractable proposal
distribution. So our algorithm is efficient even
when the prior is non-conjugate. To do this, we
reformulate Thompson sampling as an optimization proplem via the Gumbel-Max trick. After
that we construct a set of random variables and
our goal is to identify the one with highest mean
which is an instance of best arm identification
problems. Finally, we solve it with techniques in
best arm identification. Experiments show that
our algorithm works well in practice.

1. Introduction
In multi-armed bandit (MAB) problems (Lai & Robbins,
1985), an agent chooses an action (also called an arm in the
literature of MAB) from an action set repeatedly, and the
environment returns a reward as a response to the chosen
action. The agent’s goal is to maximize the cumulative reward over a period of time. In MAB, a reward distribution
is associated with each arm to characterize the uncertainty
of the reward. One key issue for MAB and many on-line
learning problems (Bubeck et al., 2012) is to well-balance
the exploitation-exploration tradeoff, that is, the tradeoff between choosing the action that has already yielded greatest
rewards and the action that is relatively unexplored.
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, State Key
Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys., THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China. Correspondence to: Jun Zhu <dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Yichi Zhou <vofhqn@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

As one of the most important problems in learning and
decision-making in unknown environments, MAB has been
studied in various settings since the seminal work (Lai &
Robbins, 1985) (see (Bubeck et al., 2012) for a nice review).
In this paper, we consider Bayesian bandits (Scott, 2010),
which is a well-studied variant of MAB. In a Bayesian bandit, the agent has a prior distribution on the mean of the
reward distribution for each action. The agent makes decisions adaptively according to the prior distributions and the
past observations of each action. The most popular algorithm for Bayesian bandits is known as Thompson sampling
(TS), which has a long history tracing back to (Thompson,
1933). TS has proven to be powerful in practice (Chapelle
& Li, 2011) with theoretical guarantees (Agrawal & Goyal,
2012; 2017; Kaufmann et al., 2012).
Thompson sampling selects each arm randomly according
to its probability to be optimal given the previous observations. Existing implementations of TS require to infer
the posterior distribution (See Section 3 for details), which
can be computationally intractable in sophisticated models; thereby limiting the scope of Bayesian bandits to use
simple conjugate priors. However, a non-conjugate prior
is very important in MAB. On one hand, non-conjugacy
naturally arises because of using either a flexible prior or a
flexible observation model (i.e., likelihood) to characterize
the complex properties often appearing in real-world applications. For example, in the Web Advertising task (Gopalan
et al., 2014), it is natural to use a Bernoulli distribution to
model the binary event whether a user clicks or not, and
the prior distributions of different advertisements are not
independent because of the similarity between two advertisements or other factors. In this case, it is likely to have
a conjugate prior that well incorporates such dependence.
Another example is in (Kawale et al., 2015), where TS is
used to do matrix-factorization recommendation in an online manner and their observation model is a product of
two Gaussian random variables with zero mean. An inverse
gamma distribution is used as the prior on their variances,
which is non-conjugate with the observation model. On
the other hand, if we impose an improper prior for convenience, it may lead to worse performance. For example,
in the well-known stochastic Bernoulli bandits problems
(Lai & Robbins, 1985), we have no prior knowledge on the

