Improving Regression Performance with Distributional Losses
Ehsan Imani 1 Martha White 1

Abstract
There is growing evidence that converting targets to soft targets in supervised learning can provide considerable gains in performance. Much
of this work has considered classification, converting hard zero-one values to soft labels—such
as by adding label noise, incorporating label ambiguity or using distillation. In parallel, there is
some evidence from a regression setting in reinforcement learning that learning distributions can
improve performance. In this work, we investigate the reasons for this improvement, in a regression setting. We introduce a novel distributional
regression loss, and similarly find it significantly
improves prediction accuracy. We investigate several common hypotheses, around reducing overfitting and improved representations. We instead
find evidence for an alternative hypothesis: this
loss is easier to optimize, with better behaved
gradients, resulting in improved generalization.
We provide theoretical support for this alternative hypothesis, by characterizing the norm of the
gradients of this loss.

1. Introduction
The choice of problem formulation for regression has a
large impact on prediction performance on new data—
generalization performance. There is an extensive literature on problem formulations to promote generalization,
including robust losses (Huber, 2011; Ghosh et al., 2017;
Barron, 2017); proxy losses and reductions between problems (Langford et al., 2006); the addition of regularization
to impose constraints or preferences on the solution; the
addition of label noise (Szegedy et al., 2016); and even ensuring multiple tasks are learned simultaneously, rather than
separately, as in multi-task learning (Caruana, 1998). There
is typically a goal in mind—such as classification accuracy
1

Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton.
Correspondence to: Martha White
<whitem@ualberta.ca>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

or absolute error for regression—but those losses are not
necessarily directly minimized.
In recent years, there has been a particular focus on learning
representations with neural networks that generalize better.
With fixed representations, the loss or problem formulation
can only have so much impact, because the learned function
is a linear function of inputs. With (deep) neural networks,
however, the performance can vary widely, based even on
simple modifications such as the initialization (Glorot &
Bengio, 2010). Particularly in classification, modifying the
outputs can significantly improve performance. An extensive empirical study on classification and age prediction
(Gao et al., 2017), under label ambiguity, showed that data
augmentation on the label side—putting a distribution over
an ambiguous label—significantly improved test accuracy,
validated also by other work on age estimation (Rothe et al.,
2018). Work on model compression (Ba & Caruana, 2013;
Urban et al., 2016) and distillation (Hinton et al., 2015)
highlight that a smaller student model can be trained to capture the generalization ability of a larger teacher model. In
general, there is a growing literature on data augmentation
and label smoothing, that advocates for reduced overfitting
and improved generalization from modifying the outputs
(Norouzi et al., 2016; Szegedy et al., 2016; Xie et al., 2016;
Miyato et al., 2016; Pereyra et al., 2017) and in reinforcement learning where learning distributional outputs, rather
than means, improves performance (Bellemare et al., 2017).
There has been some work—though considerably less—
towards understanding the impact of the properties of the
loss that promote effective optimization. There is a recent
insight that minimizing training time increases generalization performance (Hardt et al., 2015), motivating the design
of losses that can be more easily optimized. Though not the
focus in data augmentation, there have been some insights
about loss properties. Gao et al. (2017) showed that their
data augmentation approach provided a faster convergence
rate (see their Figure 8). Pereyra et al. (2017) showed that
label smoothing and their regularizer penalizing confident
predictions for classification provided smoother gradient
norms than without regularization. Bellemare et al. (2017)
hypothesized that the properties of the KL-divergence could
have improved learning performance, in a reinforcement
learning setting. These papers hint at something deeper
occurring with the loss, and motivate investigation into not
just the conversion of the problem but into the loss itself.

