On Acceleration with Noise-Corrupted Gradients
Michael B. Cohen 1 Jelena Diakonikolas 2 Lorenzo Orecchia 2

Abstract
Accelerated algorithms have broad applications
in large-scale optimization, due to their generality
and fast convergence. However, their stability in
the practical setting of noise-corrupted gradient
oracles is not well-understood. This paper provides two main technical contributions: (i) a new
accelerated method AGD+ that generalizes Nesterov’s AGD and improves on the recent method
AXGD (Diakonikolas & Orecchia, 2018), and (ii)
a theoretical study of accelerated algorithms under noisy and inexact gradient oracles, which is
supported by numerical experiments. This study
leverages the simplicity of AGD+ and its analysis to clarify the interaction between noise and
acceleration and to suggest modifications to the
algorithm that reduce the mean and variance of
the error incurred due to the gradient noise.

1. Introduction
First-order methods for convex optimization play a fundamental role in the solution of modern large-scale computational problems, encompassing applications in machine
learning (Bubeck, 2014), scientific computing (Spielman
& Teng, 2004; Kelner et al., 2013) and combinatorial optimization (Sherman, 2017; Ene & Nguyen, 2016). A central
object of study in this area is the notion of acceleration – an
algorithmic technique that can be deployed when minimizing a smooth convex function f (·) via queries to a first-order
oracle (a blackbox that on input x 2 X , returns the vector
rf (x) in constant time). In this setting, a function f (·) is Lsmooth if it is differentiable and its gradient is L-Lipschitz
continuous w.r.t to a pair of dual norms k · k, k · k⇤ , i.e.:
8 x, y 2 X , krf (x)
*

rf (y)k⇤  L · kx

yk. (1.1)

1

Equal contribution Department of EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Department of
Computer Science, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Jelena Diakonikolas <jelenad@bu.edu>, Lorenzo
Orecchia <orecchia@bu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Acceleration is interesting because it yields faster algorithms
than classical steepest-descent algorithms, often matching or
closely approximating known information-theoretic lower
bounds on the number of necessary queries to the oracle.
In the simplest smooth setting, the optimal accelerated algorithm, Accelerated Gradient Descent (Nesterov, 1983),
achieves an error that scales as O(1/k 2 ), where k is the number of oracle queries. This should be compared to the convergence of steepest-descent methods, which attempt to locally
minimize the first-order approximation to the function and
only yield O(1/k)-convergence (Ben-Tal & Nemirovski,
2001; Nesterov, 2013). Many of the workhorses of optimization, such as conjugate gradient and FISTA (Beck &
Teboulle, 2009), are instantiations of accelerated algorithms.
Because of its generality, acceleration still proves an active topic of research. In particular, two weaknesses in the
classical presentation of accelerated methods have recently
attracted attention of scholars and practitioners alike: 1) the
complexity and lack of underlying intuition in the convergence analysis of accelerated methods, and 2) the apparent
lack of robustness to perturbations of the gradient oracle
displayed by accelerated methods when compared to their
non-accelerated counterparts.
Recently, some of the mystery of acceleration has faded, as
different works have provided natural interpretations and
alternative proofs for accelerated methods (Allen-Zhu &
Orecchia, 2017; Krichene et al., 2015; Wibisono et al., 2016;
Bubeck et al., 2015; Lessard et al., 2016; Hu & Lessard,
2017; Diakonikolas & Orecchia, 2017). Of particular interest to our work is the framework of (Diakonikolas &
Orecchia, 2017), which completely derives accelerated algorithms from the Euler discretization of a continuous dynamics that minimizes a natural notion of duality gap.
In terms of robustness, it has long been observed empirically that a naı̈ve application of accelerated algorithms to
inexact oracles often leads to error accumulation, even in
the setting of random perturbations, while standard steepest
descent algorithms do not suffer from this problem (Hardt,
2014). From a theoretical point of view, a number of papers have introduced oracle models that account for inexact
gradient information. For example, (d’Aspremont, 2008)
proposed a restricted model of perturbations to the gradient that preserves the possibility of acceleration. More

