Dimensionality-Driven Learning with Noisy Labels

Xingjun Ma * 1 Yisen Wang * 2 Michael E. Houle 3 Shuo Zhou 1 Sarah M. Erfani 1 Shu-Tao Xia 2
Sudanthi Wijewickrema 1 James Bailey 1

Abstract
Datasets with significant proportions of noisy
(incorrect) class labels present challenges for
training accurate Deep Neural Networks (DNNs).
We propose a new perspective for understanding
DNN generalization for such datasets, by investigating the dimensionality of the deep representation subspace of training samples. We show
that from a dimensionality perspective, DNNs exhibit quite distinctive learning styles when trained
with clean labels versus when trained with a proportion of noisy labels. Based on this finding,
we develop a new dimensionality-driven learning strategy, which monitors the dimensionality
of subspaces during training and adapts the loss
function accordingly. We empirically demonstrate
that our approach is highly tolerant to significant
proportions of noisy labels, and can effectively
learn low-dimensional local subspaces that capture the data distribution.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated excellent
performance in solving many complex problems, and have
been widely employed for tasks such as speech recognition
(Hinton et al., 2012), computer vision (He et al., 2016) and
gaming agents (Silver et al., 2016). DNNs are capable of
learning very complex functions, and can generalize well
even for a huge number of parameters (Neyshabur et al.,
2014). However, recent studies have shown that DNNs may
generalize poorly for datasets which contain a high proportion noisy (incorrect) class labels (Zhang et al., 2017). It is
important to gain a fuller understanding of this phenomenon,
with a view to development of new training methods that can
*

Equal contribution 1 The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia 2 Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 3 National
Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to:
Yisen Wang <wangys14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Xingjun Ma
<xingjun.ma@unimelb.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

achieve good generalization performance in the presence of
variable amounts of label noise.
One simple approach for noisy labels is to ask a domain
expert to relabel or remove suspect samples in a preprocessing stage. However, this is infeasible for large datasets and
also runs the risk of removing crucial samples. An alternative is to correct noisy labels to their true labels via a clean
label inference step (Vahdat, 2017; Veit et al., 2017; Jiang
et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017). Such methods often assume
the availability of a supplementary labelled dataset containing pre-identified noisy labels which are used to develop
a model of the label noise. However, their effectiveness is
tied to the assumption that the data follow the noise model.
A different approach to tackle noisy labels is to utilize correction methods such as loss correction (Patrini et al., 2017;
Ghosh et al., 2017), label correction (Reed et al., 2014), or
additional linear correction layers (Sukhbaatar & Fergus,
2014; Goldberger & Ben-Reuven, 2017).
In this paper, we first investigate the dimensionality of the
deep representation subspaces learned by a DNN and provide a dimensionality-driven explanation of DNN generalization behavior in the presence of (class) label noise. Our
analysis employs a dimensionality measure called Local Intrinsic Dimensionality (LID) (Houle, 2013; 2017a), applied
to the deep representation subspaces of training examples.
We show that DNNs follow two-stage of learning in this
scenario: 1) an early stage of dimensionality compression,
that models low-dimensional subspaces that closely match
the underlying data distribution, and 2) a later stage of dimensionality expansion, that steadily increases subspace
dimensionality in order to overfit noisy labels. This second
stage appears to be a key factor behind the poor generalization performance of DNNs for noisy labels. Based on
this finding, we propose a new training strategy, termed
Dimensionality-Driven Learning, that avoids the dimensionality expansion stage of learning by adapting the loss
function. Our main contributions are:
• We show that from a dimensionality perspective, DNNs
exhibit distinctive learning styles with clean labels versus noisy labels.
• We show that the local intrinsic dimensionality can

