Compiling Combinatorial Prediction Games

Frederic Koriche 1

Abstract
In online optimization, the goal is to iteratively
choose solutions from a decision space, so as to
minimize the average cost over time. As long as
this decision space is described by combinatorial
constraints, the problem is generally intractable.
In this paper, we consider the paradigm of compiling the set of combinatorial constraints into a
deterministic and Decomposable Negation Normal Form (dDNNF) circuit, for which the tasks of
linear optimization and solution sampling take linear time. Based on this framework, we provide efficient characterizations of existing combinatorial
prediction strategies, with a particular attention
to mirror descent techniques. These strategies
are compared on several real-world benchmarks
for which the set of Boolean constraints is
preliminarily compiled into a dDNNF circuit.

1. Introduction
Combinatorial optimization is a important topic of computer
science and discrete mathematics, with a wide spectrum
of applications ranging from resource allocation and job
scheduling, to automated planning and configuration
softwares. A common problem is to minimize a modular
loss function ` over a discrete space S ⊆ {0, 1}d of
feasible solutions represented in a concise manner by a
set of combinatorial constraints. In the offline version
of this problem, all information necessary to define the
optimization task is available beforehand, and the challenge
is to develop algorithms which are provably or practically
better than enumerating all feasible solutions. Contrastingly,
in the online version of this problem (Audibert et al., 2014),
the objective function ` is subject to change over time.
The challenge here is more acute, since the optimization
algorithm is required to perform repeated choices on S so
as to minimize their average cost in the long run.
*

Equal contribution 1 CRIL, CNRS UMR 8188, Université d’Artois, France. Correspondence to: Frederic Koriche
<koriche@cril.fr>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Conceptually, an online combinatorial optimization problem
can be cast as a repeated prediction game between a learning
algorithm and its environment (Audibert et al., 2011;
2014). During each trial t, the learner chooses a feasible
solution st from its decision set S and, simultaneously, the
environment selects a loss vector `t ∈ [0, 1]d . Then, the
Pd
learner incurs the loss h`t , st i = i=1 `t (i)st (i) and, in
light of the feedback provided by its environment, updates
its strategy in order to improve the chance of selecting
better solutions on subsequent trials.
Several classes of combinatorial prediction games can be
distinguished, depending on the type of decision set, and the
type of observed feedback. In this paper, we focus on full
information games in which it is assumed that the feedback
supplied at trial t by the environment is the entire vector
`t . On the other hand, we make very few assumptions
about the decision set: S may be described by an arbitrary
SAT formula, that is, any set of combinatorial constraints
representable by Boolean clauses. As SAT encodings of
discrete solution spaces are frequently used in academic and
industrial applications (Biere et al., 2009), our setting covers
an important class of combinatorial prediction games.
As usual, the performance of an online learning algorithm is
measured according to two metrics. The first, called regret,
measures the difference in cumulative loss between the
algorithm and the best solution in hindsight. In this study,
we make no assumption about the sequence of loss vectors;
in particular `t may depend on the previous decisions
s1 , · · · , st−1 made by the learner. In such non-oblivious or
adversarial environments, the learner is generally allowed
to make decisions in a randomized way, and its predictive
performance is measured by the expected regret:
#
" T
T
X
X
RT = E
h`t , st i − min
h`t , si
t=1

s∈S

t=1

The second metric is computational complexity, i.e. the
amount of resources required to compute st at each round
t, given the sequence of feedbacks observed so far.
Related Work. In the literature of combinatorial prediction games, three main strategies have been proposed
to attain an expected regret that is sublinear in the game
horizon T and polynomial in the input dimension d. The

