Finding Influential Training Samples for Gradient Boosted Decision Trees

Boris Sharchilev 1 2 Yury Ustinovsky 3 Pavel Serdyukov 2 Maarten de Rijke 1

Abstract
We address the problem of finding influential
training samples for a particular case of tree
ensemble-based models, e.g., Random Forest
(RF) or Gradient Boosted Decision Trees (GBDT).
A natural way of formalizing this problem is
studying how the model’s predictions change
upon leave-one-out retraining, leaving out each individual training sample. Recent work has shown
that, for parametric models, this analysis can be
conducted in a computationally efficient way. We
propose several ways of extending this framework to non-parametric GBDT ensembles under
the assumption that tree structures remain fixed.
Furthermore, we introduce a general scheme of
obtaining further approximations to our method
that balance the trade-off between performance
and computational complexity. We evaluate our
approaches on various experimental setups and
use-case scenarios and demonstrate both the quality of our approach to finding influential training
samples in comparison to the baselines and its
computational efficiency.1

1. Introduction and Background
As machine learning-based models become more
widespread and grow in both scale and complexity, methods
of interpreting their predictions are increasingly attracting
attention from the machine learning community. Some
of the applications and benefits of employing these
methods outlined in previous work (Ancona et al., 2017)
include (1) “debugging” the model to expose ways of
model failures not discoverable via conventional test set
performance measuring (e.g., data or target leakages);
1
Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands 2 Yandex, Moscow, Russia 3 Department of Mathematics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Boris Sharchilev <bshar@yandex-team.ru>, Pavel
Serdyukov <pavser@yandex-team.ru>, Maarten de Rijke <derijke@uva.nl>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).
1
Supporting code for the paper is available at https://
github.com/bsharchilev/influence_boosting.

(2) boosting developer’s trust in the model’s performance in
scenarios when on-line evaluation is not available before
deployment; and (3) increasing user satisfaction and/or
confidence in provided predictions, etc. Various problem
setups (Palczewska et al., 2013; Tolomei et al., 2017;
Fong & Vedaldi, 2017) and interpretation methods, both
model-agnostic (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg & Lee,
2017) and model-specific (Shrikumar et al., 2017; Tolomei
et al., 2017; Sundararajan et al., 2017), have recently been
proposed in the literature.
A common trait shared by the majority of these methods
is that they do not provide a way of automatically improving the model, since the model is fixed; the main use-case
thus becomes manual analytics by the user or the developer, which is both time and resource-consuming. It is thus
desirable to derive a framework for obtaining actionable insights into the model’s behavior allowing us to automatically
improve a model’s performance.
One such framework has recently been introduced by Koh &
Liang (2017); it deals with finding the most influential training objects. They formalize the notion of “influence” via an
infinitesimal approximation to leave-one-out retraining: the
core question that this work aims to answer is “how would
the model’s performance on a test object xtest change if the
weight of a training object xtrain is perturbed?” Assuming
a smooth parametric model family (e.g., linear models or
neural networks), the authors employ the Influence Functions framework from classical statistics (Cook & Weisberg (1980); also see Koh & Liang (2017) for a literature
review on the topic) to show that this quantity can be estimated much faster than via straightforward model retraining,
which makes their method tractable in a real-world scenario.
A natural use-case of such a framework is to consider individual test objects (or groups of them) on which the model
performs poorly and either remove the most “harmful” training objects or prioritize a batch of new objects for labeling
based on which ones are expected to be the most “helpful,”
akin to active learning.
Unfortunately, the method suggested by Koh & Liang (2017)
heavily relies on the smooth parametric nature of the model
family. While this is a large class of machine learning models, it is by far not the only one. In particular, decision
tree ensembles such as Random Forests (Ho, 1995, RF) and
Gradient Boosted Decision Trees (Friedman, 2001, GBDT)
are probably the most widely used model family in industry,
largely due to their state-of-the-art performance on struc-

