Binary Partitions with Approximate Minimum Impurity

Eduardo S. Laber * 1 Marco Molinaro * 1 Felipe de A. Mello Pereira 1

Abstract
The problem of splitting attributes is one of the
main steps in the construction of decision trees. In
order to decide the best split, impurity measures
such as Entropy and Gini are widely used. In practice, decision-tree inducers use heuristics for finding splits with small impurity when they consider
nominal attributes with a large number of distinct
values. However, there are no known guarantees for the quality of the splits obtained by these
heuristics. To fill this gap, we propose two new
splitting procedures that provably achieve nearoptimal impurity. We also report experiments that
provide evidence that the proposed methods are
interesting candidates to be employed in splitting
nominal attributes with many values during decision tree/random forest induction.

1. Introduction

An important design choice is whether to use multiway
splits or binary splits. One possibility is splitting a nominal
attribute with n distinct values into n branches, one for each
value. When n is large, this option may lead to a severe data
fragmentation, which makes the classification task harder
and increases the risk of data overfit since we may have only
a few examples associated with each branch. Note that any
decision tree obtained via multiway splits can be simulated
by a decision tree that only uses binary splits. Thus, we
focus our study on binary splits.
The standard approach for deciding the split is to search for
‘pure’ partitions of the set of examples, that is, partitions in
which each branch is very homogeneous with respect to the
class distribution of its examples. To measure how impure
each branch is, impurity measures are often employed. An
impurity measure maps a vector u = (u1 , . . . , uk ), counting how many examples of each class we have in a node
(branch), into a non-negative scalar 1 . Arguably, two of the
most classical impurity measures are the Gini impurity


k
X
ui
ui
iGini (u) =
1−
,
kuk1
kuk1
i=1

Decision Trees as well as ensemble methods that use them
(e.g. Random Forests and Gradient Boosted Trees) are
among the most popular methods for classification tasks. It
is widely known that decision trees, specially small ones,
are easy to interpret while ensemble methods usually yield
to more stable/accurate classifications.

which is used in the CART package (Breiman et al., 1984),
and the Entropy impurity

When building a decision tree, in each node, one needs
to address two problems: which attribute shall be used
for branching, and how to split the chosen attribute, i.e.,
which values of the attribute go to each branch. For the
first problem we refer the reader to (Hothorn et al., 2006;
Nowozin, 2012). Here we consider the latter, which is a
well-studied problem (Breiman et al., 1984; Nadas et al.,
1991; Chou, 1991; Burshtein et al., 1992; Coppersmith et al.,
1999; Elomaa & Rousu, 2004). More specifically, we focus
on nominal attributes (i.e. finite set of possible values with
no additional structure such as order).

that, along with its variants, is used in the C4.5 decision tree
inducer (Quinlan, 1992). Given an attribute and an impurity
measure, the goal is then to find a binary split (L∗ , R∗ ) for
the attribute values that induces a binary partition of the set
of examples with minimum weighted impurity, where the
weights are given by the number of examples that lie into
each of the two branches.

*

Equal contribution 1 Departamento de Informática, PUCRIO, Brazil.
Correspondence to: Eduardo Laber <eduardo.laber1@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

iEntr (u) = −



k
X
ui
ui
log
,
kuk1
kuk1
i=1

For classification tasks with only two classes, Breiman et
al. (Breiman et al., 1984) proposed an algorithm that finds
a partition with minimum weighted impurity in O(n log n)
time for a family of impurity measures that include both Gini
and Entropy. For nominal attributes with a small number of
distinct values n, the best partition can be found in O(2n )
1
In the original definition an impurity measure maps a vector
of probabilities into a non-negative scalar.

