Leveraging Well-Conditioned Bases: Streaming and
Distributed Summaries in Minkowski p-Norms
Graham Cormode * 1 Charlie Dickens * 1 David P. Woodruff * 2

Abstract
Work on approximate linear algebra has led to
efficient distributed and streaming algorithms for
problems such as approximate matrix multiplication, low rank approximation, and regression,
primarily for the Euclidean norm `2 . We study
other `p norms, which are more robust for p < 2,
and can be used to find outliers for p > 2. Unlike previous algorithms for such norms, we give
algorithms that are (1) deterministic, (2) work simultaneously for every p ≥ 1, including p = ∞,
and (3) can be implemented in both distributed
and streaming environments. We apply our results
to `p -regression, entrywise `1 -low rank approximation, and approximate matrix multiplication.

1. Introduction
Analyzing high dimensional, high volume data can be timeconsuming and resource intensive. Core data analysis, such
as robust instances of regression, involve convex optimization tasks over large matrices, and do not naturally distribute or parallelize. In response to this, approximation
algorithms have been proposed which follow a “sketch and
solve” paradigm: produce a reduced size representation of
the data, and solve a version of the problem on this summary (Woodruff, 2014). It is then argued that the solution on
the reduced data provides an approximation to the original
problem on the original data. This paradigm is particularly attractive when the summarization can be computed
efficiently on partial views of the full data—for example,
when it can be computed incrementally as the data arrives
(streaming model) or assembled from summarizations of
disjoint partitions of the data (distributed model) (Woodruff,
2014; Agarwal et al., 2012; Feldman et al., 2006). This
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK 2 School of Computer Science,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Charlie Dickens <c.dickens@warwick.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

template has been instantiated for a number of fundamental tasks in high dimensional linear algebra such as matrix
multiplication, low rank approximation, and regression.
Our understanding is well-established in the common case
of the Euclidean norm, i.e., when distances are measured
under the Minkowski p-norm for p = 2. Here, it suffices to
choose a sketching matrix independent of the data—where
each entry is i.i.d. Gaussian, Rademacher, or more efficient
variants of these. For other p values, less is known, but these
are often needed to handle limitations of the 2-norm. For
instance, p = 1 is widely used as it is extremely robust with
respect to the presence of outliers while p > 2 can be used
to detect outlying observations.
We continue the study of algorithms for `p norms on streaming and distributed data. A particular novelty of our results
is that unlike previous distributed and streaming algorithms,
they can all be implemented deterministically, i.e., our algorithms make no random choices. While in a number of settings randomized algorithms are highly beneficial, leading
to massive computational savings, there are other applications which require extremely high reliability, for which one
needs to obtain guaranteed performance across a large number of inputs. If one were to use a randomized algorithm,
then it would need vanishingly small error probability; however, many celebrated algorithms in numerical linear algebra
succeed with only constant probability. Another limitation
of randomized algorithms was shown in (Hardt & Woodruff,
2013): if the input to a randomized sketch depends on the
output of a preceding algorithm using the same sketch, then
the randomized sketch can give an arbitrarily bad answer.
Hence, such methods cannot handle adaptively chosen inputs. Thus, while randomized algorithms certainly have
their place, the issues of high reliability and adaptivity motivate the development of deterministic methods for a number
of other settings, for which algorithms are scarce.
Our techniques can be viewed as a conceptual generalization of Liberty’s Frequent Directions (in the 2-norm) (Liberty, 2013), which progressively computes an SVD on subsequent blocks of the input. This line of work (Liberty,
2013; Ghashami & Phillips, 2014; Ghashami et al., 2016;
Ghashami et al., 2016) is the notable exception in numerical linear algebra, as it provides deterministic methods,

