Comparing Dynamics: Deep Neural Networks versus Glassy Systems

Marco Baity-Jesi 1 Levent Sagun 2 3 Mario Geiger 3 Stefano Spigler 3 2 Gérard Ben Arous 4
Chiara Cammarota 5 Yann LeCun 4 6 7 Matthieu Wyart 3 Giulio Biroli 2 8

Abstract
We analyze numerically the training dynamics of
deep neural networks (DNN) by using methods
developed in statistical physics of glassy systems.
The two main issues we address are (1) the complexity of the loss landscape and of the dynamics within it, and (2) to what extent DNNs share
similarities with glassy systems. Our findings, obtained for different architectures and datasets, suggest that during the training process the dynamics
slows down because of an increasingly large number of flat directions. At large times, when the
loss is approaching zero, the system diffuses at
the bottom of the landscape. Despite some similarities with the dynamics of mean-field glassy
systems, in particular, the absence of barrier crossing, we find distinctive dynamical behaviors in the
two cases, showing that the statistical properties
of the corresponding loss and energy landscapes
are different. In contrast, when the network is
under-parametrized we observe a typical glassy
behavior, thus suggesting the existence of different phases depending on whether the network is
under-parametrized or over-parametrized.

1. Introduction
The training process of a deep neural network (DNN) shares
very strong similarities with the physical dynamics of disor1
Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, New York,
NY 10027, USA 2 Institut de Physique Théorique, Université Paris
Saclay, CEA, CNRS, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France 3 EPFL,
Lausanne, Switzerland 4 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, USA 5 Kings College
London, Department of Mathematics, Strand, London WC2R 2LS,
United Kingdom 6 Center for Data Science, New York University,
New York, USA 7 Facebook AI Research, Facebook Inc., New
York, USA 8 Laboratoire de Physique Statistique, École Normale
Supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University, Sorbonne Universités, 75005 Paris, France. Correspondence to: Marco Baity-Jesi
<mb4399@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

dered systems: the loss function plays the role of the energy,
the weights are the degrees of freedom, and the dataset corresponds to the parameters defining the energy function. The
randomness in the data is akin to what is called “quenched
disorder” in the physics literature.1 Training is routinely performed by the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), which
consists in starting from random initial conditions and then
letting the weights evolve dynamically towards configurations corresponding to low loss values. This process is, in
fact, similar to what is called “a quench” in physics. The
quenching protocol corresponds to a sudden decrease of the
thermal noise, usually done by lowering the temperature of
the thermal bath, for a system which is initially prepared
in equilibrium at very high temperature. The study of the
dynamics induced by quenches has been one of the most
important topics of out-of-equilibrium physics of the last
decades (Biroli, 2016). The main model considered in the
literature is based on stochastic Langevin equations, reminiscent of SGD and corresponding to an evolution governed
by gradient descent plus random noise. Since the initial temperature is very high, the initial conditions for the dynamics
are random, featureless and uncorrelated with the quenched
disorder if present, again in strong analogy with DNNs. Disordered systems are known to display glassy dynamics after
a quench, which means that the system gets stuck for long
times in local minima (Biroli, 2016; Bouchaud et al., 1998;
Berthier & Biroli, 2011; Cugliandolo, 2003). Given the
similarity between the training of DNNs and quenching of
disordered systems, it may seem surprising that meaningful
local minima with perfect accuracy on the training set are
found (Zhang et al., 2016).
In the current literature, several explanations are proposed
to explain this paradox. Two quite different points of view
emerge from it. One is that even though the loss function
displays a very large number of local minima with different
loss values, the dynamics during the training process allows
the system to decrease the loss without barrier crossing and
to converge towards quite low local minima that allow good
generalization. In other words, the loss landscape is very
rough, however, this doesn’t damage the performance of
1
In statistical physics, the term “quenched” refers to coefficients randomly picked at the preparation of the system and kept
constant during its evolution.

