Semi-Amortized Variational Autoencoders
Yoon Kim 1 Sam Wiseman 1 Andrew C. Miller 1 David Sontag 2 Alexander M. Rush 1

Abstract
Amortized variational inference (AVI) replaces
instance-specific local inference with a global inference network. While AVI has enabled efficient
training of deep generative models such as variational autoencoders (VAE), recent empirical work
suggests that inference networks can produce suboptimal variational parameters. We propose a
hybrid approach, to use AVI to initialize the variational parameters and run stochastic variational
inference (SVI) to refine them. Crucially, the local SVI procedure is itself differentiable, so the
inference network and generative model can be
trained end-to-end with gradient-based optimization. This semi-amortized approach enables the
use of rich generative models without experiencing the posterior-collapse phenomenon common
in training VAEs for problems like text generation. Experiments show this approach outperforms strong autoregressive and variational baselines on standard text and image datasets.

1. Introduction
Variational inference (VI) (Jordan et al., 1999; Wainwright
& Jordan, 2008) is a framework for approximating an
intractable distribution by optimizing over a family of
tractable surrogates. Traditional VI algorithms iterate over
the observed data and update the variational parameters with
closed-form coordinate ascent updates that exploit conditional conjugacy (Ghahramani & Beal, 2001). This style
of optimization is challenging to extend to large datasets
and non-conjugate models. However, recent advances in
stochastic (Hoffman et al., 2013), black-box (Ranganath
et al., 2014; 2016), and amortized (Mnih & Gregor, 2014;
Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014) variational
inference have made it possible to scale to large datasets and
rich, non-conjugate models (see Blei et al. (2017), Zhang
et al. (2017) for a review of modern methods).
1
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 CSAIL & IMES, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence
to: Yoon Kim <yoonkim@seas.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

In stochastic variational inference (SVI), the variational
parameters for each data point are randomly initialized
and then optimized to maximize the evidence lower bound
(ELBO) with, for example, gradient ascent. These updates
are based on a subset of the data, making it possible to scale
the approach. In amortized variational inference (AVI), the
local variational parameters are instead predicted by an inference (or recognition) network, which is shared (i.e. amortized) across the dataset. Variational autoencoders (VAEs)
are deep generative models that utilize AVI for inference and
jointly train the generative model alongside the inference
network.
SVI gives good local (i.e. instance-specific) distributions
within the variational family but requires performing optimization for each data point. AVI has fast inference, but having the variational parameters be a parametric function of the
input may be too strict of a restriction. As a secondary effect
this may militate against learning a good generative model
since its parameters may be updated based on suboptimal
variational parameters. Cremer et al. (2018) observe that
the amortization gap (the gap between the log-likelihood
and the ELBO due to amortization) can be significant for
VAEs, especially on complex datasets.
Recent work has targeted this amortization gap by combining amortized inference with iterative refinement during
training (Hjelm et al., 2016; Krishnan et al., 2018). These
methods use an encoder to initialize the local variational parameters, and then subsequently run an iterative procedure
to refine them. To train with this hybrid approach, they utilize a separate training time objective. For example Hjelm
et al. (2016) train the inference network to minimize the
KL-divergence between the initial and the final variational
distributions, while Krishnan et al. (2018) train the inference
network with the usual ELBO objective based on the initial
variational distribution.
In this work, we address the train/test objective mismatch
and consider methods for training semi-amortized variational autoencoders (SA-VAE) in a fully end-to-end manner.
We propose an approach that leverages differentiable optimization (Domke, 2012; Maclaurin et al., 2015; Belanger
et al., 2017) and differentiates through SVI while training
the inference network/generative model. We find that this
method is able to both improve estimation of variational
parameters and produce better generative models.

