D2 : Decentralized Training over Decentralized Data

Hanlin Tang 1 Xiangru Lian 1 Ming Yan 2 3 Ce Zhang 4 Ji Liu 5 1

Abstract
While training a machine learning model using
multiple workers, each of which collects data
from its own data source, it would be useful
when the data collected from different workers
are unique and different. Ironically, recent analysis of decentralized parallel stochastic gradient
descent (D-PSGD) relies on the assumption that
the data hosted on different workers are not too
different. In this paper, we ask the question: Can
we design a decentralized parallel stochastic gradient descent algorithm that is less sensitive to the
data variance across workers? In this paper, we
present D2 , a novel decentralized parallel stochastic gradient descent algorithm designed for large
data variance among workers (imprecisely, “decentralized” data). The core of D2 is a variance
reduction extension of D-PSGD.
It improvesthe

2 1
3

)
convergence rate from O √σnT + (nζ
to
T 2/3


O √σnT where ζ 2 denotes the variance among
2

data on different workers. As a result, D is robust
to data variance among workers. We empirically
evaluated D2 on image classification tasks, where
each worker has access to only the data of a limited set of labels, and find that D2 significantly
outperforms D-PSGD.

1. Introduction
Training machine learning models in a decentralized way
has attracted intensive interests recently (Lian et al., 2017a;
*

1

Equal contribution Department of Computation Science, University of Rochester 2 Department of Computational Mathematics,
Science and Engineering, Michigan State University 3 Department
of Mathematics, Michigan State University 4 Department of
Computer Science, ETH Zurich 5 Tencent AI Lab. Correspondence to: Hanlin Tang <htang14@ur.rochester.edu>,
Xiangru Lian <xiangru@yandex.com>,
Ming Yan
<yanm@math.msu.edu>, Ce Zhang <ce.zhang@inf.ethz.ch>, Ji
Liu <ji.liu.uwisc@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Yuan et al., 2016; Colin et al., 2016). In the decentralized
setting, there is a set of workers, each of which collects data
from different data sources. Instead of sending all data to
a centralized place, these workers only communicate with
their neighbors. The goal is to get a model that is the same as
if all data are collected in a centralized place. Decentralized
learning algorithms are important in scenarios where the
centralized communication is expensive or impossible, or
the underlying communication network has high latency.
For decentralized learning to provide benefits, each user
should provide data that is somehow unique, i.e., the variance of data collected from different workers are large. However, many recent theoretical results (Lian et al., 2017a;b;
Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009; Yuan et al., 2016) assume a
bounded data variance across workers — when data hosted
on different workers are very different, these approaches
converge slowly, both empirically and theoretically. In this
paper, we aim at bringing this discrepancy between the current theoretical understanding and the requirements from
some practical scenarios.
In this paper, we present D2 , a novel decentralized learning
algorithm designed to be robust under high data variance.
D2 is built upon decentralized parallel stochastic gradient
descent (D-PSGD), but benefits from an additional variance
reduction component. In D2 , each worker stores the stochastic gradient and its local model in the previous iterate and
linearly combines them with the current stochastic gradient
and local model. It results in an improved convergence rate
over D-PSGD by eliminating the data variation among workers. In particular, the
rate is improved from
 convergence


1
(nζ 2 ) 3
σ
σ
O √nT + T 2/3
to O √nT where ζ 2 is the data variation among all workers, σ 2 is the data variance within each
worker, n is the number of workers, and T is the number of
iterations. We empirically show D2 can significantly outperform D-PSGD by training an image classification model
where each worker has access to only the data of a limited
set of labels.
Throughout this paper, we consider the following decentralized optimization:
=:fi (x)

min

x∈RN

n
}|
{
1 Xz
f (x):=
Eξ∼Di Fi (x; ξ),
n i=1

(1)

