CyCADA: Cycle-Consistent Adversarial Domain Adaptation
Judy Hoffman 1 Eric Tzeng 1 Taesung Park 1 Jun-Yan Zhu 1 Phillip Isola 1 2 Kate Saenko 3 Alexei A. Efros 1
Trevor Darrell 1

Abstract
Domain adaptation is critical for success in new,
unseen environments. Adversarial adaptation
models have shown tremendous progress towards
adapting to new environments by focusing either
on discovering domain invariant representations
or by mapping between unpaired image domains.
While feature space methods are difficult to interpret and sometimes fail to capture pixel-level
and low-level domain shifts, image space methods
sometimes fail to incorporate high level semantic
knowledge relevant for the end task. We propose
a model which adapts between domains using
both generative image space alignment and latent
representation space alignment. Our approach,
Cycle-Consistent Adversarial Domain Adaptation
(CyCADA), guides transfer between domains according to a specific discriminatively trained task
and avoids divergence by enforcing consistency
of the relevant semantics before and after adaptation. We evaluate our method on a variety of
visual recognition and prediction settings, including digit classification and semantic segmentation
of road scenes, advancing state-of-the-art performance for unsupervised adaptation from synthetic
to real world driving domains.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks excel at learning from large amounts
of data, but can be poor at generalizing learned knowledge
to new datasets or environments. Even a slight departure
from a network’s training domain can cause it to make
spurious predictions and significantly hurt its performance
(Tzeng et al., 2017). The visual domain shift from nonphotorealistic synthetic data to real images presents an even
more significant challenge. While we would like to train
1

EECS and BAIR, UC Berkeley 2 Openai (work done while
at UC Berkeley) 3 CS Department, Boston University. Correspondence to: Judy Hoffman <jhoffman@eecs.berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Pixel accuracy on
target
Source-only:
54.0%
Adapted (ours):83.6%
Source image (GTA5)

Adapted source image (Ours)

Target image (CityScapes)

Accuracy on target
Source-only:
67.1%
Adapted (ours):90.4%
Source images (SVHN)

Adapted source images (Ours)

Target images (MNIST)

Figure 1: We propose CyCADA, an adversarial unsupervised adaptation algorithm which uses cycle and semantic
consistency to perform adaptation at multiple levels in a
deep network. Our model provides significant performance
improvements over source model baselines.

models on large amounts of synthetic data such as data
collected from graphics game engines, such models fail to
generalize to real-world imagery. For example, a state-ofthe-art semantic segmentation model trained on synthetic
dashcam data fails to segment the road in real images, and its
overall per-pixel label accuracy drops from 93% (if trained
on real imagery) to 54% (if trained only on synthetic data,
see Table 6).
Feature-level unsupervised domain adaptation methods address this problem by aligning the features extracted from
the network across the source (e.g. synthetic) and target
(e.g. real) domains, without any labeled target samples.
Alignment typically involves minimizing some measure of
distance between the source and target feature distributions,
such as maximum mean discrepancy (Long & Wang, 2015),
correlation distance (Sun & Saenko, 2016), or adversarial
discriminator accuracy (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015; Tzeng
et al., 2017). This class of techniques suffers from two main
limitations. First, aligning marginal distributions does not
enforce any semantic consistency, e.g. target features of a
car may be mapped to source features of a bicycle. Second,
alignment at higher levels of a deep representation can fail
to model aspects of low-level appearance variance which
are crucial for the end visual task.
Generative pixel-level domain adaptation models perform
similar distribution alignment—not in feature space but
rather in raw pixel space—translating source data to the
“style” of a target domain. Recent methods can learn to
translate images given only unsupervised data from both
domains (Bousmalis et al., 2017b; Shrivastava et al., 2017;

