Theoretical Analysis of Image-to-Image Translation with Adversarial Learning

Xudong Pan 1 Mi Zhang 1 Daizong Ding 1

Abstract
Recently, a unified model for image-to-image
translation tasks within adversarial learning
framework (Isola et al., 2017) has aroused
widespread research interests in computer vision
practitioners. Their reported empirical success
however lacks solid theoretical interpretations for
its inherent mechanism. In this paper, we reformulate their model from a brand-new geometrical
perspective and have eventually reached a full
interpretation on some interesting but unclear empirical phenomenons from their experiments. Furthermore, by extending the definition of generalization for generative adversarial nets (Arora et al.,
2017) to a broader sense, we have derived a condition to control the generalization capability of
their model. According to our derived condition,
several practical suggestions have also been proposed on model design and dataset construction
as a guidance for further empirical researches.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial nets (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
have been a trending topic in machine learning community
recent years, leading to a number of derived models (Mirza
& Osindero, 2014; Arjovsky et al., 2017) and related theoretical works (Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017; Lei et al., 2017). With
wide and fruitful applications in various scenarios such as
speech synthesis (Saito et al., 2018), text generation (Zhang
et al., 2017) and a considerable amount of visual tasks (Denton et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2016; Kataoka et al., 2017), the
idea behind GAN and its derivations is relatively simple and
intuitive. It aims at learning a mapping from an artificial distribution, usually priorly known gaussian for original GAN
and an unknown distribution of labels for conditional GAN
(Mirza & Osindero, 2014), to a real one. Via attaining an
equilibrium of the minimax game (Aumann, 1989) between
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China. Correspondence to: Mi Zhang <mi zhang@fudan.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

a generator (i.e. an adaptive model that maps a gaussian
noise to a fake sample) and a discriminator (i.e. an adaptive
model to distinguish a fake sample from a real distribution),
the adversarial learning models will finally learn a realistic
distribution for further generative tasks (Arora et al., 2017).
Noticeably, last year has also witnessed an empirical success
on traditional image-to-image translation tasks with the aid
of a model under conditional GAN paradigm (Isola et al.,
2017), arousing widespread research interest in computer
vision practitioners (Zheng et al., 2017; Choi et al., 2017).
Image-to-image translation, as a generic name for various
specific tasks in image processing, includes tasks such as
facial expression transfer (e.g. poker face → smile face),
artistic style transfer (e.g. Van Gogh’s → Monet’s). Generally speaking, the goal of image-to-image translation is to
process an image from a source collection to make it indistinguishable among a target collection of images. Although
related models and methods abound in literature (Reinhard
et al., 2001; Gatys et al., 2016; Zeiler et al., 2011), the first
attempt to tackle image-to-image translation as a whole instead of focusing on one of its specific tasks exclusively,
ought to be attributed to the pioneering work of Isola et al.
(2017), where the powerfulness of adversarial learning with
conditional GAN has been once again exhibited sufficiently.
We briefly review Isola’s original model as the optimization
problem below,
min max LcGAN (G, D) + λLL1 (G)
G

D

(1)

with LcGAN the conditional GAN-loss (or generally, adversarial loss) defined as
LcGAN (G, D) = Ex,y∼pr (x,y) [log D(x, y)]
+ Ex∼pr (x) [1 − log D(x, G(x))]

(2)

and LL1 the L1 loss (or identity loss) as
LL1 (G) = Ex,y∼pr (x,y) [ky − G(x)k1 ]

(3)

where pr (x, y) denotes the distribution of paired images
(e.g. in facial expression transfer, Bob’s poker face and
his ground-truth smile face) and pr (x) the distribution of
images over the source collection, with G, D respectively
the generator and the discriminator, λ the regularization
factor.

