MentorNet: Learning Data-Driven Curriculum
for Very Deep Neural Networks on Corrupted Labels

Lu Jiang 1 Zhengyuan Zhou 2 Thomas Leung 1 Li-Jia Li 1 Li Fei-Fei 1 2

Abstract
Recent deep networks are capable of memorizing the entire data even when the labels are completely random. To overcome the overfitting on
corrupted labels, we propose a novel technique
of learning another neural network, called MentorNet, to supervise the training of the base deep
networks, namely, StudentNet. During training,
MentorNet provides a curriculum (sample weighting scheme) for StudentNet to focus on the sample the label of which is probably correct. Unlike the existing curriculum that is usually predefined by human experts, MentorNet learns a
data-driven curriculum dynamically with StudentNet. Experimental results demonstrate that our
approach can significantly improve the generalization performance of deep networks trained on
corrupted training data. Notably, to the best of our
knowledge, we achieve the best-published result
on WebVision, a large benchmark containing 2.2
million images of real-world noisy labels.

1. Introduction
Zhang et al. (2017a) found that deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) are capable of memorizing the entire data
even with corrupted labels, where some or all true labels are
replaced with random labels. It is a consensus that deeper
CNNs usually lead to better performance. However, the ability of deep CNNs to overfit or memorize the corrupted labels
can lead to very poor generalization performance (Zhang
et al., 2017a). Recently, Neyshabur et al. (2017) and Arpit
et al. (2017) proposed deep learning generalization theories
to explain this interesting phenomenon.
This paper studies how to overcome the corrupted label for
deep CNNs, so as to improve generalization performance
1

2

Google Inc., Mountain View, United States Stanford University, Stanford, United States. Correspondence to: Lu Jiang
<lujiang@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

on the clean test data. Although learning models on weakly
labeled data might not be novel, improving deep CNNs on
corrupted labels is clearly an under-studied problem and
worthy of exploration, as deep CNNs are more prone to
overfitting and memorizing corrupted labels (Zhang et al.,
2017a). To address this issue, we focus on training very deep
CNNs from scratch, such as resnet-101 (He et al., 2016) or
inception-resnet (Szegedy et al., 2017) which has a few
hundred layers and orders-of-magnitude more parameters
than the number of training samples. These networks can
achieve the state-of-the-art result but perform poorly when
trained on corrupted labels.
Inspired by the recent success of Curriculum Learning (CL),
this paper tackles this problem using CL (Bengio et al.,
2009), a learning paradigm inspired by the cognitive process
of human and animals, in which a model is learned gradually using samples ordered in a meaningful sequence. A
curriculum specifies a scheme under which training samples
will be gradually learned. CL has successfully improved the
performance on a variety of problems. In our problem, our
intuition is that a curriculum, similar to its role in education,
may provide meaningful supervision to help a student overcome corrupted labels. A reasonable curriculum can help
the student focus on the samples whose labels have a high
chance of being correct.
However, for the deep CNNs, we need to address two limitations of the existing CL methodology. First, existing
curriculums are usually predefined and remain fixed during
training, ignoring the feedback from the student. The learning procedure of deep CNNs is quite complicated, and may
not be accurately modeled by the predefined curriculum.
Second, the alternating minimization, commonly used in
CL and self-paced learning (Kumar et al., 2010) requires
alternative variable updates, which is difficult for training
very deep CNNs via mini-batch stochastic gradient descent.
To this end, we propose a method to learn the curriculum
from data by a network called MentorNet. MentorNet learns
a data-driven curriculum to supervise the base deep CNN,
namely StudentNet. MentorNet can be learned to approximate an existing predefined curriculum or discover new
data-driven curriculums from data. The learned data-driven
curriculum can be updated a few times taking into account of

