D RACO: Byzantine-resilient Distributed Training via Redundant Gradients

Lingjiao Chen 1 Hongyi Wang 1 Zachary Charles 1 Dimitris Papailiopoulos 1

Abstract
Distributed model training is vulnerable to byzantine system failures and adversarial compute
nodes, i.e., nodes that use malicious updates to
corrupt the global model stored at a parameter
server (PS). To guarantee some form of robustness, recent work suggests using variants of the geometric median as an aggregation rule, in place of
gradient averaging. Unfortunately, median-based
rules can incur a prohibitive computational overhead in large-scale settings, and their convergence
guarantees often require strong assumptions. In
this work, we present D RACO, a scalable framework for robust distributed training that uses ideas
from coding theory. In D RACO, each compute
node evaluates redundant gradients that are used
by the parameter server to eliminate the effects of
adversarial updates. D RACO comes with problemindependent robustness guarantees, and the model
that it trains is identical to the one trained in the
adversary-free setup. We provide extensive experiments on real datasets and distributed setups
across a variety of large-scale models, where we
show that D RACO is several times, to orders of
magnitude faster than median-based approaches.

1. Introduction
Distributed and parallel implementations of stochastic optimization algorithms have become the de facto standard
in large-scale model training (Li et al., 2014; Recht et al.,
2011; Zhang et al., 2015; Agarwal et al., 2010; Abadi et al.,
2016; Chen et al., 2015; Paszke et al., 2017a; Chilimbi et al.,
2014). Due to increasingly common malicious attacks, hardware and software errors (Castro et al., 1999; Kotla et al.,
2007; Blanchard et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017), protecting distributed machine learning against adversarial attacks
and failures has become increasingly important. Unfortu1
University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Lingjiao Chen <lchen@cs.wisc.edu>.

Correspondence to:

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

nately, even a single adversarial node in a distributed setup
can introduce arbitrary bias and inaccuracies to the end
model(Blanchard et al., 2017).
A recent line of work (Blanchard et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2017) studies this problem under a synchronous training
setup, where compute nodes evaluate gradient updates and
ship them to a parameter server (PS) which stores and updates the global model. Many of the aforementioned work
use median-based aggregation, including the geometric median (GM) instead of averaging in order to make their computations more robust. The advantage of median-based
approaches is that they can be robust to up to a constant
fraction of the compute nodes being adversarial (Chen et al.,
2017). However, in large data settings, the cost of computing the geometric median can dwarf the cost of computing
a batch of gradients (Chen et al., 2017), rendering it impractical. Furthermore, proofs of convergence for such systems
require restrictive assumptions such as convexity, and need
to be re-tailored to each different training algorithm. A scalable distributed training framework that is robust against
adversaries and can be applied to a large family of training
algorithms (e.g., mini-batch SGD, GD, coordinate descent,
SVRG, etc.) remains an open problem.
In this paper, we instead use ideas from coding theory to
ensure robustness during distributed training. We present
D RACO, a general distributed training framework that is
robust against adversarial nodes and worst-case compute
errors. We show that D RACO can resist any s adversarial
compute nodes during training and returns a model identical
to the one trained in the adversary-free setup. This allows
D RACO to come with “black-box” convergence guarantees,
i.e., proofs of convergence in the adversary-free setup carry
through to the adversarial setup with no modification, unlike prior median-based approaches (Blanchard et al., 2017;
Chen et al., 2017). Moreover, in median-based approaches
such as (Blanchard et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017), the median computation may dominate the overall training time. In
D RACO, most of the computational effort is carried through
by the compute nodes. This key factor allows our framework to offer up to orders of magnitude faster convergence
in real distributed setups.
To design D RACO, we borrow ideas from coding theory
and algorithmic redundancy. In standard adversary-free dis-

