Lipschitz Continuity in Model-based Reinforcement Learning

Kavosh Asadi * 1 Dipendra Misra * 2 Michael L. Littman 1

Abstract
We examine the impact of learning Lipschitz
continuous models in the context of model-based
reinforcement learning. We provide a novel bound
on multi-step prediction error of Lipschitz models
where we quantify the error using the Wasserstein
metric. We go on to prove an error bound for
the value-function estimate arising from Lipschitz
models and show that the estimated value function
is itself Lipschitz. We conclude with empirical
results that show the benefits of controlling the
Lipschitz constant of neural-network models.

1. Introduction
The model-based approach to reinforcement learning (RL)
focuses on predicting the dynamics of the environment
to plan and make high-quality decisions (Kaelbling et al.,
1996; Sutton & Barto, 1998). Although the behavior of
model-based algorithms in tabular environments is well
understood and can be effective (Sutton & Barto, 1998),
scaling up to the approximate setting can cause instabilities.
Even small model errors can be magnified by the planning
process resulting in poor performance (Talvitie, 2014).
In this paper, we study model-based RL through the lens of
Lipschitz continuity, intuitively related to the smoothness
of a function. We show that the ability of a model to make
accurate multi-step predictions is related to the model’s
one-step accuracy, but also to the magnitude of the Lipschitz
constant (smoothness) of the model. We further show that
the dependence on the Lipschitz constant carries over to the
value-prediction problem, ultimately influencing the quality
of the policy found by planning.
We consider a setting with continuous state spaces and
stochastic transitions where we quantify the distance
between distributions using the Wasserstein metric. We
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Brown University, Providence, USA 2 Department of Computer
Science and Cornell Tech, Cornell University, New York, USA.
Correspondence to: Kavosh Asadi <kavosh@brown.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

introduce a novel characterization of models, referred
to as a Lipschitz model class, that represents stochastic
dynamics using a set of component deterministic functions.
This allows us to study any stochastic dynamic using
the Lipschitz continuity of its component deterministic
functions. To learn a Lipschitz model class in continuous
state spaces, we provide an Expectation-Maximization
algorithm (Dempster et al., 1977).
One promising direction for mitigating the effects of
inaccurate models is the idea of limiting the complexity
of the learned models or reducing the horizon of
planning (Jiang et al., 2015). Doing so can sometimes
make models more useful, much as regularization in
supervised learning can improve generalization performance
(Tibshirani, 1996). In this work, we also examine a type
of regularization that comes from controlling the Lipschitz
constant of models. This regularization technique can be
applied efficiently, as we will show, when we represent the
transition model by neural networks.

2. Background
We consider the Markov decision process (MDP) setting
in which the RL problem is formulated by the tuple
hS, A, R, T, γi. Here, by S we mean a continuous state
space and by A we mean a discrete action set. The functions
R : S × A → R and T : S × A → Pr(S) denote the reward
and transition dynamics. Finally, γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount
rate. If |A| = 1, the setting is called a Markov reward
process (MRP).
2.1. Lipschitz Continuity
Our analyses leverage the “smoothness” of various
functions, quantified as follows.
Definition 1. Given two metric spaces (M1 , d1 ) and
(M2 , d2 ) consisting of a space and a distance metric, a
function f : M1 7→ M2 is Lipschitz continuous (sometimes
simply Lipschitz) if the Lipschitz constant, defined as

d2 f (s1 ), f (s2 )
Kd1 ,d2 (f ) :=
sup
,
d1 (s1 , s2 )
s1 ∈M1 ,s2 ∈M1
is finite.

(1)

