Bayesian Optimization of Combinatorial Structures

Ricardo Baptista 1 Matthias Poloczek 2

Abstract
The optimization of expensive-to-evaluate blackbox functions over combinatorial structures is an
ubiquitous task in machine learning, engineering and the natural sciences. The combinatorial
explosion of the search space and costly evaluations pose challenges for current techniques in
discrete optimization and machine learning, and
critically require new algorithmic ideas. This
article proposes, to the best of our knowledge,
the first algorithm to overcome these challenges,
based on an adaptive, scalable model that identifies useful combinatorial structure even when
data is scarce. Our acquisition function pioneers
the use of semidefinite programming to achieve
efficiency and scalability. Experimental evaluations demonstrate that this algorithm consistently
outperforms other methods from combinatorial
and Bayesian optimization.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of optimizing an expensive-toevaluate black-box function over a set of combinatorial
structures. This problem is pervasive in machine learning, engineering, and the natural sciences. Applications
include object location in images (Zhang et al., 2015), drug
discovery (Negoescu et al., 2011), cross-validation of hyperparameters in mixed-integer solvers (Hutter et al., 2010),
food safety control (Hu et al., 2010), and model sparsification in multi-component systems (Baptista et al., 2018).
We also face this problem in the shared economy: a bike
sharing company has to decide where to place bike stations
among locations offered by the communal administration in
order to optimize its utility, as measured in a field test.
*
1
Equal contribution
Center for Computational Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 2 Dept. of Systems and Industrial Engineering,
The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ. Correspondence
to: Ricardo Baptista <rsb@mit.edu>, Matthias Poloczek
<poloczek@email.arizona.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

We present a novel algorithm for this problem, Bayesian
Optimization of Combinatorial Structures (BOCS), that is
capable of taming the combinatorial explosion of the search
domain while achieving sample-efficiency, thereby improving substantially over the state of the art. Specifically, our
contributions are:
1. A novel method to obtain an approximate optimizer
of the acquisition function that employs algorithmic
ideas from convex optimization to achieve scalability
and efficiency. This approach overcomes the inherent
limited scalability of many acquisition functions to
large combinatorial domains.
2. We propose a model that captures the interaction of
structural elements, and show how to infer these interactions in practice when data is expensive and thus
scarce. We also demonstrate the usefulness of this
interpretable model on experimental data.
3. We evaluate the performance of the BOCS algorithm
together with methods from machine learning and discrete optimization on a variety of benchmark problems,
including tasks from machine learning, aerospace engineering, and food safety control.
Related Work: Bayesian optimization has emerged as a
powerful technique for the optimization of expensive functions if the domain is a box-constrained subset of the real coordinate space, i.e., a tensor-product of bounded connected
univariate domains (e.g., see Brochu et al. (2010); Shahriari et al. (2016b)). Recently, these techniques have been
extended to certain high-dimensional problems whose boxconstrained sets have a low ‘effective dimensionality’ (Wang
et al., 2016; Binois et al., 2017) or an additive decomposition (Kandasamy et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016; Wang et al.,
2017). Hutter & Osborne (2013) and Swersky et al. (2014)
considered applications where parameters have conditional
dependencies, becoming irrelevant if other parameters take
certain values. Jenatton et al. (2017) presented a scalable
algorithm when these dependencies form a tree. Shahriari et al. (2016a) proposed techniques for growing the box
adaptively to optimize over unbounded continuous domains.
Structured domains have received little attention. Negoescu
et al. (2011) proposed a linear parametric belief model that

