Variational Inference and Model Selection
with Generalized Evidence Bounds
Chenyang Tao * Liqun Chen * Ruiyi Zhang Ricardo Henao Lawrence Carin

Abstract
Recent advances on the scalability and flexibility
of variational inference have made it successful
at unravelling hidden patterns in complex data.
In this work we propose a new variational bound
formulation, yielding an estimator that extends
beyond the conventional variational bound. It
naturally subsumes the importance-weighted and
Rényi bounds as special cases, and it is provably
sharper than these counterparts. We also present
an improved estimator for variational learning,
and advocate a novel high signal-to-variance ratio
update rule for the variational parameters. We
discuss model-selection issues associated with
existing evidence-lower-bound-based variational
inference procedures, and show how to leverage
the flexibility of our new formulation to address
them. Empirical evidence is provided to validate
our claims.

1. Introduction
One of the key challenges in modern machine learning is
to approximate complex distributions. Due to recent advances on learning scalability (Hoffman et al., 2013) and
flexibility (Kingma et al., 2016), and the development of
automated inference procedures (Ranganath et al., 2014),
variational inference (VI) has become a popular approach
for general latent variable models (Blei et al., 2017). Variational inference leverages a posterior approximation to
derive a lower bound on the log-evidence of the observed
samples, which can be efficiently optimized. This bound,
commonly known as the evidence lower bound (ELBO),
serves as a surrogate objective for maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE) of the model parameters. Successful ap*
Equal contribution Affiliation: Electrical & Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA. Correspondence to: Chenyang Tao <chenyang.tao@duke.edu>, Liqun Chen
<liqun.chen@duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

plications of VI have been reported in document analysis
(Blei et al., 2003), neuroscience (Friston et al., 2007), generative modeling (Kingma & Welling, 2014), among many
others.
It has been widely recognized that tightening the variational bound, in general, significantly improves model performance. Consequently, considerable research has been
directed toward this goal. The most direct approach seeks
to boost the expressive power of the approximate posterior.
Normalizing flows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Kingma
et al., 2016) exploited invertible transformations on latent
codes in latent variable models, Ranganath et al. (2016) and
Gregor et al. (2015) explored the hierarchical structure of the
latent code generation, and Miller et al. (2016) modeled the
posterior as a mixture of Gaussians. Adversarial variational
Bayes (Mescheder et al., 2017) employed a neural generator to produce posterior samples, and further leveraged a
density ratio estimator to compute the ELBO. Notably, the
matching between the true and approximate posterior can be
made implicit (Pu et al., 2017a) via an application of Stein’s
lemma (Liu & Wang, 2016).
An alternative direction seeks a modification of the variational objective. The importance-weighted autoencoder
(Burda et al., 2016) showed that the bound can be sharpened
by leveraging multiply-weighted posterior samples. Further,
χ-VI (Dieng et al., 2017), also known as Rényi-VI (Li &
Turner, 2016), derived an alternative bound that is sharper
than the ELBO. More generally, a sandwich formula holds
for the χ bound, thus tightening this gap improves performance. Bamler et al. (2017) developed a more general view
on variational bounds and presented a low-variance estimator based on a perturbative argument. It is important to note
that sharpening the variational bound may unexpectedly hurt
learning of the inference arm of the model (approximate
posterior) (Rainforth et al., 2017), thereby compromising
performance.
While most studies have focused on the scalability and flexibility of VI, a less-studied issue is that different models can
be equally plausible in terms of of the mean evidence lower
bound wrt a finite number of samples (Blei et al., 2017).
This is a fundamental problem inherited by VI, associated
with doing an empirical estimation of the expected log like-

