Streaming Principal Component Analysis in Noisy Settings

Teodor V. Marinov * 1 Poorya Mianjy * 1 Raman Arora 1

Abstract
We study streaming algorithms for principal component analysis (PCA) in noisy settings. We
present computationally efficient algorithms with
sub-linear regret bounds for PCA in the presence
of noise, missing data, and gross outliers.

1. Introduction
Principal component analysis (PCA) is a ubiquitous technique in statistics, machine learning and data science. Given
a dataset {xi }ni=1 ⊂ Rd , PCA finds a low dimensional
subspace of Rd which captures maximum variance in the
dataset. PCA is often performed as a pre-processing step for
dimensionality reduction to help reduce computational and
statistical burden for a downstream learning task, especially
in the context of big data.
PCA can be posed as a stochastic optimization problem,
where the samples are assumed to be drawn i.i.d. from an
unknown distribution D and the goal is to find a subspace
that is almost as good as the optimal subspace in terms of
capturing the variance in the distribution; such a view motivates design of stochastic approximation (SA) algorithms
that process one sample at a time with a computationally
cheap update and can scale to large datasets (Arora et al.,
2012; Balsubramani et al., 2013; Jain et al., 2016; Shamir,
2016; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2017a; Mianjy & Arora, 2018).
In this paper, we study PCA in a streaming setting. While
our algorithms are motivated by previous work on stochastic approximation algorithms for PCA, in our analysis, we
also consider a non-stochastic setting where we make no
distributional assumptions on data. In particular, the data
may have been generated deterministically or even adversarially. Such a setting makes sense for big data applications
where the data needs to be processed as it streams in, and
it is unreasonable to assume that successive samples are
independent or even identically distributed.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA. Correspondence to: Teodor
V. Marinov <tmarino2@cs.jhu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Big data is characterized not only by its sheer “volume” but
also by its “veracity”, or the lack thereof. Most big data
analysts do not trust the raw data due to large corruptions
and deletions. It is therefore crucial to design algorithms
for PCA that can handle extremely noisy data as well as
missing data and also scale to very large datasets.
Instead of studying PCA as a stochastic optimization problem, one can consider online PCA. However, the focus of
online analysis, and in particular of past work on online
PCA (Tsuda et al., 2005; Warmuth & Kuzmin, 2006; 2008;
Nie et al., 2013), is on bounding the adversarial regret, rather
than on the runtime. A “good” online method might therefore have low online regret, and thus a low iteration complexity as a stochastic procedure, but its expensive runtimeper-iteration might make it unappealing for stochastic approximation. Some recent work by Garber et al. (2015);
Allen-Zhu & Li (2017b) on online PCA has focussed on
computationally efficient updates. Here, we are concerned
both with designing robust streaming algorithms for PCA
with arbitrary corruptions void of any distributional assumptions as well as obtaining methods with low overall runtime.
Therefore, in this paper, we consider both the nonstochastic
and stochastic settings – for the former we give variants of
online mirror descent with sublinear regret guarantees on
the PCA objective, for the latter we give extensions of the
computationally efficient Oja’s algorithm. We study PCA
in a streaming setting with noisy gradients, missing data,
partial observations, and gross outliers.
To the best of our knowledge, PCA with corrupted gradients,
where corruption can be in the form of noise, missing entries
or outliers has not been studied in the online setting. Our
first contribution is to provide variants of online mirror
descent which obtain optimal regret guarantees in terms
of time horizon T and scale gracefully with the amount of
corruption to the data.
In the stochastic setting, there have been multiple works
dealing with subspace recovery when data is missing under some model (Balzano et al., 2010; Lounici et al., 2014;
Mitliagkas et al., 2014). Most of these works, either have
very stringent requirements on the distribution of the data
or prove only local convergence results. Our second main
contribution is in extending Oja’s algorithm, when data is
assumed to be stochastic, to the setting of corrupted gra-

