Efficient end-to-end learning for quantizable representations

Yeonwoo Jeong 1 Hyun Oh Song 1

Abstract
Embedding representation learning via neural networks is at the core foundation of modern similarity based search. While much effort has been put
in developing algorithms for learning binary hamming code representations for search efficiency,
this still requires a linear scan of the entire dataset
per each query and trades off the search accuracy
through binarization. To this end, we consider
the problem of directly learning a quantizable embedding representation and the sparse binary hash
code end-to-end which can be used to construct an
efficient hash table not only providing significant
search reduction in the number of data but also
achieving the state of the art search accuracy outperforming previous state of the art deep metric
learning methods. We also show that finding the
optimal sparse binary hash code in a mini-batch
can be computed exactly in polynomial time by
solving a minimum cost flow problem. Our results
on Cifar-100 and on ImageNet datasets show the
state of the art search accuracy in precision@k
and NMI metrics while providing up to 98× and
478× search speedup respectively over exhaustive linear search. The source code is available
at https://github.com/maestrojeong/Deep-HashTable-ICML18.

1. Introduction
Learning the representations that respect the pairwise relationships is one of the most important problems in machine
learning and pattern recognition with vast applications. To
this end, deep metric learning methods (Hadsell et al., 2006;
Weinberger et al., 2006; Schroff et al., 2015; Song et al.,
2016; Sohn, 2016; Song et al., 2017; Bell & Bala, 2015;
Sener et al., 2016) aim to learn an embedding representation space such that similar data are close to each other
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Hyun Oh
Song <hyunoh@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

and vice versa for dissimilar data. Some of these methods
have shown significant advances in various applications in
retrieval (Sohn, 2016; Schroff et al., 2015), clustering (Song
et al., 2017), domain adaptation (Sener et al., 2016), video
understanding (Wang & Gupta, 2015), etc.
Despite recent advances in deep metric learning methods,
deploying the learned embedding representation in large
scale applications poses great challenges in terms of the
inference efficiency and scalability. To address this, practitioners in large scale retrieval and recommendation systems
often resort to a separate post-processing step where the
learned embedding representation is run through quantization pipelines such as sketches, hashing, and vector quantization in order to significantly reduce the number of data to
compare during the inference while trading off the accuracy.
In this regard, we propose a novel end-to-end learning
method for quantizable representations jointly optimizing
for the quality of the network embedding representation and
the performance of the corresponding binary hash code. In
contrast to some of the recent methods (Cao et al., 2016;
Liu & Lu, 2017), our proposed method avoids ever having
to cluster the entire dataset, offers the modularity to accommodate any existing deep embedding learning techniques
(Schroff et al., 2015; Sohn, 2016), and is efficiently trained
in a mini-batch stochastic gradient descent setting. We show
that the discrete optimization problem of finding the optimal
binary hash codes given the embedding representations can
be computed efficiently and exactly by solving an equivalent
minimum cost flow problem. The proposed method alternates between finding the optimal hash codes of the given
embedding representations in the mini-batch and adjusting
the embedding representations indexed at the activated hash
code dimensions via deep metric learning methods.
Our end-to-end learning method outperforms state-of-theart deep metric learning approaches (Schroff et al., 2015;
Sohn, 2016) in retrieval and clustering tasks on the Cifar-100
(Krizhevsky et al., 2009) and the ImageNet (Russakovsky
et al., 2015) datasets while providing up to several orders
of magnitude speedup during inference. Our method utilizes efficient off-the-shelf implementations from OR-Tools
(Google optimization tools for combinatorial optimization
problems) (OR-tools, 2018), the deep metric learning library implementation in Tensorflow (Abadi et al., 2015),

