Competitive Multi-agent Inverse Reinforcement Learning
with Sub-optimal Demonstrations

Xingyu Wang 1 Diego Klabjan 1

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of inverse reinforcement learning in zero-sum stochastic games
when expert demonstrations are known to be suboptimal. Compared to previous works that decouple agents in the game by assuming optimality
in expert policies, we introduce a new objective
function that directly pits experts against Nash
Equilibrium policies, and we design an algorithm
to solve for the reward function in the context
of inverse reinforcement learning with deep neural networks as model approximations. To find
Nash Equilibrium in large-scale games, we also
propose an adversarial training algorithm for zerosum stochastic games, and show the theoretical
appeal of non-existence of local optima in its objective function. In numerical experiments, we
demonstrate that our Nash Equilibrium and inverse reinforcement learning algorithms address
games that are not amenable to existing benchmark algorithms. Moreover, our algorithm successfully recovers reward and policy functions
regardless of the quality of the sub-optimal expert
demonstration set.

1. Introduction
In the field of reinforcement learning, various algorithms
have been proposed that guide an agent to make decisions,
interact with the environment, and maximize the profit or
return. As of late, multi-agent reinforcement learning, a generalization of single-agent reinforcement learning tasks, has
been gaining momentum since it is aligned with the growing attention on multi-agent systems and the applications
thereof. Either for solving a single-agent task or a multiagent system, reinforcement learning entails the knowledge
1

Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL. Correspondence to:
Diego Klabjan <d-klabjan@northwestern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

of the reward function, or at least observations of immediate
reward. Some learning tasks, however, provide little or no
knowledge of the reward function, but we do have access
to demonstrations performed by “experts” in the task. For
example, successful training of an auto-pilot system often
takes full advantage of human driving behavior datasets. On
the contrary, a naive, manually crafted artificial reward function may fail to capture the sophisticated balance between
safety, speed, and simplicity in maneuvering during driving.
As one of the widely used approaches to these tasks, imitation learning concentrates on recovering policies from
available demonstrations, which is justifiable as long as experts are known to be optimal (Ross et al., 2011). Another
approach, termed as inverse reinforcement learning (IRL),
formulates the task as an inverse problem of inferring the
reward function from demonstrations of experts (Abbeel
& Ng, 2004; Ziebart et al., 2008; Finn et al., 2016; Ho &
Ermon, 2016; Choi et al., 2016). In general, the former approach is perceived as simpler, while the latter compresses
task-related information into a succinct reward function that
is more transferable to further applications.
To the best of our knowledge, existing IRL works concerning multi-agent competitive games make the same assumption that expert demonstrations are optimal. (In a multiagent system, optimality is usually defined in the sense of
Nash Equilibria.) IRL can thus be decoupled into two subproblems in two-agent games. Reddy et al. (2012) base the
algorithm on the optimality assumption on experts’ policies,
and decouple the IRL task in general-sum games when updating the reward function. By applying the Bayesian IRL
framework (Ramachandran & Amir, 2007) to multi-agent
zero-sum stochastic games, Lin et al. (2017) find reward
functions that maximize the probability of the Nash Equilibrium policies with prescribed prior distribution of rewards
and optimality constraints for both agent’s demonstrations.
Yet the more complicated the game is, the farther this optimality assumption may diverge from the truth. For instance,
hardly would anyone believe that players in the Go game, as
well as team games including most sport and video games,
manage to find and employ a Nash Equilibrium policy.
To take sub-optimality in experts’ demonstrations into account, we propose a completely different approach to per-

