Rapid Adaptation with Conditionally Shifted Neurons

Tsendsuren Munkhdalai 1 Xingdi Yuan 1 Soroush Mehri 1 Adam Trischler 1

Abstract

adversarial data points (Szegedy et al., 2013).

We describe a mechanism by which artificial neural networks can learn rapid adaptation – the ability to adapt on the fly, with little data, to new
tasks – that we call conditionally shifted neurons.
We apply this mechanism in the framework of
metalearning, where the aim is to replicate some
of the flexibility of human learning in machines.
Conditionally shifted neurons modify their activation values with task-specific shifts retrieved from
a memory module, which is populated rapidly
based on limited task experience. On metalearning benchmarks from the vision and language
domains, models augmented with conditionally
shifted neurons achieve state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
The ability to adapt our behavior rapidly in response to
external or internal feedback is a primary ingredient of human intelligence. This cognitive flexibility is commonly
ascribed to prefrontal cortex (PFC) and working memory in
the brain. Neuroscientific evidence suggests that these areas
use incoming information to support task-specific temporal
adaptation and planning (Stokes et al., 2013; Siegel et al.,
2015; Miller & Buschman, 2015; Brincat & Miller, 2016).
This occurs on the fly, within only a few hundred milliseconds, and supports a wide variety of task-specific behaviors
(Monsell, 2003; Sakai, 2008).
On the other hand, most existing machine learning systems
are designed for a single task. They are trained through
one optimization phase after which learning ceases. Systems built in such a train-and-then-test manner do not scale
to complex, realistic environments: they require gluts of
single-task data and are prone to issues related to distributional shifts, such as catastrophic forgetting (Srivastava et al.,
2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kirkpatrick et al., 2016) and
1

Microsoft Research, Montréal, Québec,
Correspondence to:
Tsendsuren Munkhdalai
suren.munkhdalai@microsoft.com>.
th

Canada.
<tsend-

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

There is growing interest and progress in building flexible, adaptive models, particularly within the framework
of metalearning (learning to learn) (Mitchell et al., 1993;
Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2016; Bachman
et al., 2017). The goal of metalearning algorithms is the
ability to learn new tasks efficiently, given little training
data for each individual task. Metalearning models learn
this ability (to learn) by training on a distribution of related
tasks.
In this work we develop a neural mechanism for metalearning via rapid adaptation that we call conditionally shifted
neurons. Conditionally shifted neurons (CSNs), like standard artificial neurons, produce activation values based on
input from connected neurons modulated by the connection
weights. Additionally, they have the capacity to shift their
activation values on the fly based on auxiliary conditioning
information. These conditional shifts adapt model behavior
to the task at hand.
A model with CSNs operates in two phases: a description phase and a prediction phase. Assume, for each task
τ ∼ p(τ ), that we have access to a description Dτ . In
the simplest case, this is a set of example datapoints and
their corresponding labels: Dτ = {(x0i , yi0 )}ni=1 .1,2 In the
description phase, the model processes Dτ and extracts conditioning information as a function of its performance on
Dτ . Based on this information, it generates activation shifts
to adapt itself to the task and stores them in a key-value
memory. In the prediction phase, the model acts on unseen
datapoints xj ∈ τ , from the same task, to predict their labels
yj . To improve these predictions, the model retrieves shifts
from memory and applies them to the activations of individual neurons. During training, the model learns the meta
procedure of how to extract conditioning information in the
description phase and generate useful conditional shifts for
the prediction phase. At test time, it uses this procedure to
adapt itself to new tasks from p(τ ).
We define and investigate two forms of conditioning information in this work (§2.3). The first uses the gradient of
1

More abstractly, a task description could be given by a set of
instructions or demonstrations of expert behavior.
2
In a C-way, k-shot classification task, n = k × C.

