Learning Dynamics of Linear Denoising Autoencoders

Arnu Pretorius 1 2 Steve Kroon 1 2 Herman Kamper 3

Abstract
Denoising autoencoders (DAEs) have proven useful for unsupervised representation learning, but
a thorough theoretical understanding is still lacking of how the input noise influences learning.
Here we develop theory for how noise influences
learning in DAEs. By focusing on linear DAEs,
we are able to derive analytic expressions that
exactly describe their learning dynamics. We verify our theoretical predictions with simulations
as well as experiments on MNIST and CIFAR-10.
The theory illustrates how, when tuned correctly,
noise allows DAEs to ignore low variance directions in the inputs while learning to reconstruct
them. Furthermore, in a comparison of the learning dynamics of DAEs to standard regularised
autoencoders, we show that noise has a similar
regularisation effect to weight decay, but with
faster training dynamics. We also show that our
theoretical predictions approximate learning dynamics on real-world data and qualitatively match
observed dynamics in nonlinear DAEs.*

1. Introduction
The goal of unsupervised learning is to uncover hidden structure in unlabelled data, often in the form of latent feature
representations. One popular type of model, an autoencoder,
does this by trying to reconstruct its input (Bengio et al.,
2007). Autoencoders have been used in various forms to address problems in machine translation (Chandar et al., 2014;
Tu et al., 2017), speech processing (Elman & Zipser, 1987;
Zeiler et al., 2013), and computer vision (Rifai et al., 2011;
1
Computer Science Division, Stellenbosch University, South
Africa 2 CSIR/SU Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research,
3
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Stellenbosch University, South Africa. Correspondence to: Steve Kroon
<kroon@sun.ac.za>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).
*
Code to reproduce all the results in this paper is available at:
https://github.com/arnupretorius/lindaedynamics icml2018

Larsson, 2017), to name just a few areas. Denoising autoencoders (DAEs) are an extension of autoencoders which
learn latent features by reconstructing data from corrupted
versions of the inputs (Vincent et al., 2008). Although this
corruption step typically leads to improved performance
over standard autoencoders, a theoretical understanding of
its effects remains incomplete. In this paper, we provide
new insights into the inner workings of DAEs by analysing
the learning dynamics of linear DAEs.
We specifically build on the work of Saxe et al. (2013a;b),
who studied the learning dynamics of deep linear networks
in a supervised regression setting. By analysing the gradient
descent weight update steps as time-dependent differential
equations (in the limit as the learning rate approaches a
small value), Saxe et al. (2013a) were able to derive exact
solutions for the learning trajectory of these networks as a
function of training time. Here we extend their approach
to linear DAEs. To do this, we use the expected reconstruction loss over the noise distribution as an objective
(requiring a different decomposition of the input covariance)
as a tractable way to incorporate noise into our analytic
solutions. This approach yields exact equations which can
predict the learning trajectory of a linear DAE.
Our work here shares the motivation of many recent studies (Advani & Saxe, 2017; Pennington & Worah, 2017;
Pennington & Bahri, 2017; Nguyen & Hein, 2017; Dinh
et al., 2017; Louart et al., 2017; Swirszcz et al., 2017; Lin
et al., 2017; Neyshabur et al., 2017; Soudry & Hoffer, 2017;
Pennington et al., 2017) working towards a better theoretical
understanding of neural networks and their behaviour. Although we focus here on a theory for linear networks, such
networks have learning dynamics that are in fact nonlinear.
Furthermore, analyses of linear networks have also proven
useful in understanding the behaviour of nonlinear neural
networks (Saxe et al., 2013a; Advani & Saxe, 2017).
First we introduce linear DAEs (§2). We then derive analytic expressions for their nonlinear learning dynamics (§3),
and verify our solutions in simulations (§4) which show
how noise can influence the shape of the loss surface and
change the rate of convergence for gradient descent optimisation. We also find that an appropriate amount of noise can
help DAEs ignore low variance directions in the input while
learning the reconstruction mapping. In the remainder of

