Practical Contextual Bandits with Regression Oracles
Dylan J. Foster 1 Alekh Agarwal 2 Miroslav Dudı́k 2 Haipeng Luo 3 Robert E. Schapire 2

Abstract
A major challenge in contextual bandits is to
design general-purpose algorithms that are both
practically useful and theoretically well-founded.
We present a new technique that has the empirical and computational advantages of realizabilitybased approaches combined with the flexibility
of agnostic methods. Our algorithms leverage the
availability of a regression oracle for the valuefunction class, a more realistic and reasonable
oracle than the classification oracles over policies typically assumed by agnostic methods. Our
approach generalizes both UCB and LinUCB to
far more expressive possible model classes and
achieves low regret under certain distributional assumptions. In an extensive empirical evaluation,
we find that our approach typically matches or
outperforms both realizability-based and agnostic
baselines.

1. Introduction
We study the design of practically useful, theoretically wellfounded, general-purpose algorithms for the contextual bandits (CBs) problem. In this setting, the learner repeatedly
receives context, then selects an action, resulting in a received reward. The aim is to learn a policy, a mapping
from contexts to actions, to maximize the long-term cumulative reward. For instance, a news portal must repeatedly choose articles to present to each user to maximize
clicks. Here, the context is information about the user, the
actions are the articles, and the reward might be indicator
of a click. We refer the reader to an ICML 2017 tutorial
(http://hunch.net/˜rwil/) for further examples.
CB algorithms can be put into two groups. Some methods (Langford & Zhang, 2008; Agarwal et al., 2014) are
1
Cornell University. Work performed while the author was an
intern at Microsoft Research. 2 Microsoft Research 3 University
of Southern California. Correspondence to: Dylan J. Foster
<djf244@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

agnostic in the sense that they are provably effective for
any given policy class and data distribution. In contrast,
realizability-based approaches such as LinUCB and variants (Chu et al., 2011; Li et al., 2017; Filippi et al., 2010) or
Thompson sampling (Thompson, 1933) assume the data is
generated from a particular parametrized family of models.
Computationally tractable realizability-based algorithms are
only known for specific model families, such as when the
conditional reward distributions come from a generalized
linear model.
The two groups of approaches seem to have different advantages and disadvantages. Empirically, in the contextual
semibandit setting, Krishnamurthy et al. (2016) found that
the realizability-based LinUCB approach outperforms all
agnostic baselines using a linear policy class. However, the
agnostic approaches were able to overcome this shortcoming by using a more powerful policy class. Computationally,
previous realizability-based approaches have been limited
by their reliance on either closed-form confidence bounds
(as in LinUCB variants), or the ability to efficiently sample
from and frequently update the posterior (as in Thompson sampling). Agnostic approaches, on the other hand,
typically assume an oracle for cost-sensitive classification,
which is computationally intractable in the worst case, but
often practically feasible for many natural policy classes.
In this paper, we aim to develop techniques that combine
the best of both of these approaches. To this end, in Section 3, we propose computationally efficient and practical
realizability-based algorithms for arbitrary model classes.
As is often done in agnostic approaches, we assume the availability of an oracle which reduces to a standard learning
setting and knows how to efficiently leverage the structure
of the model class. Specifically, we require access to a leastsquares regression oracle over the model class that we use
for predicting rewards given contexts. Since regression can
often be solved efficiently, the availability of such an oracle
is a far more reasonable assumption than the cost-sensitive
classification oracle usually assumed, which typically must
solve NP-hard problems. In fact, for this reason, even the
classification oracles are typically approximated by regression oracles in practice (see, e.g., Beygelzimer & Langford,
2009). Our main algorithmic components here are motivated by and adapted from a recent work of Krishnamurthy
et al. (2017) on cost-sensitive active learning.

