PIPPS: Flexible Model-Based Policy Search
Robust to the Curse of Chaos
Paavo Parmas 1 Carl Edward Rasmussen 2 Jan Peters 3 4 Kenji Doya 1

Previously, the exploding gradient problem has
been explained to be central in deep learning and
model-based reinforcement learning, because it
causes numerical issues and instability in optimization. Our experiments in model-based reinforcement learning imply that the problem is not
just a numerical issue, but it may be caused by
a fundamental chaos-like nature of long chains
of nonlinear computations. Not only do the magnitudes of the gradients become large, the direction of the gradients becomes essentially random.
We show that reparameterization gradients suffer
from the problem, while likelihood ratio gradients are robust. Using our insights, we develop
a model-based policy search framework, Probabilistic Inference for Particle-Based Policy Search
(PIPPS), which is easily extensible, and allows
for almost arbitrary models and policies, while
simultaneously matching the performance of previous data-efficient learning algorithms. Finally,
we invent the total propagation algorithm, which
efficiently computes a union over all pathwise
derivative depths during a single backwards pass,
automatically giving greater weight to estimators
with lower variance, sometimes improving over
reparameterization gradients by 106 times.

1. Introduction
We were motivated by Probabilistic Inference for Learning
Control (PILCO) (Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011), a modelbased reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm which showed
impressive results by learning continuous control tasks using
1

Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University, Okinawa, Japan 2 University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK 3 TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany 4 Max Planck Institute
for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to:
Paavo Parmas <paavo.parmas@oist.jp>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Velocity

Abstract

Position

Position

(a) Analytic approximation

(b) Particle approximation

Figure 1. One can either perform extensive mathematical derivations to analytically predict an approximate trajectory distribution,
or use a flexible particle approach to predict a stochastic approximation to the true trajectory distribution.

several orders of magnitude less data than model-free alternatives. The keys to its success were a principled approach
to model uncertainty, and analytic moment-matching (MM)
based Gaussian approximations of trajectory distributions.
Unfortunately the MM framework is computationally inflexible. For example, it cannot be used with neural network
models. Thus, this work searches for an alternative flexible
method for evaluating trajectory distributions and gradients.
Particle sampling methods are a general scheme, which can
be applied in practically any setting. Indeed, model-free
algorithms have previously been successfully used with particle trajectories from the same types of models as used
in PILCO (Kupcsik et al., 2014), (Chatzilygeroudis et al.,
2017). Aiming for better performance, model-based gradients can be evaluated using the reparameterization (RP) trick
to differentiate through stochasticities. This approach was
previously attempted in the context of PILCO, but surprisingly, it did not work, with the poor performance attributed
to local minima (McHutchon, 2014).
Recently, several works have attempted a similar method
using Bayesian neural network dynamics models and the RP
trick. Depeweg et al. (2016) successfully used this approach
to solve non-standard problems. Gal et al. (2016), on the
other hand, found that the direct approach with RP did not
work on the standard cart-pole swing-up task. It is difficult

