Semiparametric Contextual Bandits
Akshay Krishnamurthy 1 Zhiwei Steven Wu 1 Vasilis Syrgkanis 2

Abstract
This paper studies semiparametric contextual bandits, a generalization of the linear stochastic bandit problem where the reward for an action is modeled as a linear function of known action features
confounded by a non-linear action-independent
term.p We design new algorithms that achieve
Õ(d T ) regret over T rounds, when the linear function is d-dimensional, which matches
the best known bounds for the simpler unconfounded case and improves on a recent result
of Greenewald et al. (2017). Via an empirical
evaluation, we show that our algorithms outperform prior approaches when there are non-linear
confounding effects on the rewards. Technically, our algorithms use a new reward estimator inspired by doubly-robust approaches and our
proofs require new concentration inequalities for
self-normalized martingales.

1. Introduction
A number of applications including online personalization,
mobile health, and adaptive clinical trials require that an
agent repeatedly makes decisions based on user or patient information with the goal of optimizing some metric, typically
referred to as a reward. For example, in online personalization problems, we might serve content based on user history
and demographic information with the goal of maximizing
user engagement with our service. Since counterfactual information is typically not available, these problems require
algorithms to carefully balance exploration—making potentially suboptimal decisions to acquire new information—
with exploitation—using collected information to make better decisions. Such problems are often best modeled with
the framework of contextual bandits, which captures the
exploration-exploitation tradeoff and enables rich decision
making policies but ignores the long-term temporal effects
1

Microsoft Research, New York, New York 2 Microsoft Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Correspondence to: Akshay
Krishnamurthy <akshay@cs.umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

that make general reinforcement learning challenging. Contextual bandit algorithms have seen recent success in applications, including news recommendation (Li et al., 2010)
and mobile health (Tewari & Murphy, 2017).
Contextual bandit algorithms can be categorized as either
parametric or agnostic, depending on whether they model
the relationship between the reward and the decision or not.
Parametric approaches typically assume that the reward is a
(generalized) linear function of a known decision-specific
feature vector (Filippi et al., 2010; Chu et al., 2011; AbbasiYadkori et al., 2011; Agrawal & Goyal, 2013). Once this
function is known to high accuracy, it can be used to make
near-optimal decisions. Exploiting this fact, algorithms for
this setting focus on learning the parametric model. Unfortunately, fully parametric assumptions are often unrealistic
and challenging to verify in practice, and these algorithms
may perform poorly when the assumptions do not hold.
In contrast, agnostic approaches make no modeling assumptions about the reward and instead compete with a large
class of decision-making policies (Langford & Zhang, 2008;
Agarwal et al., 2014). While these policies are typically
parametrized in some way, these algorithms provably succeed under weaker conditions and are generally more robust
than parametric ones. On the other hand, they typically have
worse statistical guarantees, are conceptually much more
complex, and have high computational overhead, technically
requiring solving optimization problems that are NP-hard
in the worst case. This leads us to a natural question:
Is there an algorithm that inherits the simplicity and statistical guarantees of the parametric
methods and the robustness of the agnostic ones?
Working towards an affirmative answer to this question, we
consider a semiparametric contextual bandit setup where
the reward is modeled as a linear function of the decision
confounded by an additive non-linear perturbation that is
independent of the decision. This setup significantly generalizes the standard parametric one, allowing for complex,
non-stationary, and non-linear rewards (See Section 2 for a
precise formulation). On the other hand, since this perturbation is just a baseline reward for all decisions, it has no
influence on the optimal one, which depends only on the
unknown linear function. In the language of econometrics

