A Reductions Approach to Fair Classification

Alekh Agarwal 1 Alina Beygelzimer 2 Miroslav Dudı́k 1 John Langford 1 Hanna Wallach 1

Abstract
We present a systematic approach for achieving
fairness in a binary classification setting. While
we focus on two well-known quantitative definitions of fairness, our approach encompasses many
other previously studied definitions as special
cases. The key idea is to reduce fair classification
to a sequence of cost-sensitive classification
problems, whose solutions yield a randomized
classifier with the lowest (empirical) error subject
to the desired constraints. We introduce two
reductions that work for any representation of the
cost-sensitive classifier and compare favorably
to prior baselines on a variety of data sets, while
overcoming several of their disadvantages.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, the media have paid considerable
attention to machine learning systems and their ability to
inadvertently discriminate against minorities, historically
disadvantaged populations, and other protected groups when
allocating resources (e.g., loans) or opportunities (e.g., jobs).
In response to this scrutiny—and driven by ongoing debates
and collaborations with lawyers, policy-makers, social scientists, and others (e.g., Barocas & Selbst, 2016)—machine
learning researchers have begun to turn their attention to the
topic of “fairness in machine learning,” and, in particular, to
the design of fair classification and regression algorithms.
In this paper we study the task of binary classification subject to fairness constraints with respect to a pre-defined protected attribute, such as race or sex. Previous work in this
area can be divided into two broad groups of approaches.
The first group of approaches incorporate specific quantitative definitions of fairness into existing machine learning
1

Microsoft Research, New York 2 Yahoo! Research, New York.
Correspondence to: A. Agarwal <alekha@microsoft.com>,
A.
Beygelzimer
<beygel@gmail.com>,
M.
Dudı́k
<mdudik@microsoft.com>, J. Langford <jcl@microsoft.com>,
H. Wallach <wallach@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

methods, often by relaxing the desired definitions of fairness, and only enforcing weaker constraints, such as lack of
correlation (e.g., Woodworth et al., 2017; Zafar et al., 2017;
Johnson et al., 2016; Kamishima et al., 2011; Donini et al.,
2018). The resulting fairness guarantees typically only hold
under strong distributional assumptions, and the approaches
are tied to specific families of classifiers, such as SVMs.
The second group of approaches eliminate the restriction
to specific classifier families and treat the underlying classification method as a “black box,” while implementing
a wrapper that either works by pre-processing the data or
post-processing the classifier’s predictions (e.g., Kamiran
& Calders, 2012; Feldman et al., 2015; Hardt et al., 2016;
Calmon et al., 2017). Existing pre-processing approaches
are specific to particular definitions of fairness and typically
seek to come up with a single transformed data set that will
work across all learning algorithms, which, in practice, leads
to classifiers that still exhibit substantial unfairness (see our
evaluation in Section 4). In contrast, post-processing allows
a wider range of fairness definitions and results in provable
fairness guarantees. However, it is not guaranteed to find the
most accurate fair classifier, and requires test-time access to
the protected attribute, which might not be available.
We present a general-purpose approach that has the key
advantage of this second group of approaches—i.e., the
underlying classification method is treated as a black
box—but without the noted disadvantages. Our approach
encompasses a wide range of fairness definitions, is
guaranteed to yield the most accurate fair classifier, and
does not require test-time access to the protected attribute.
Specifically, our approach allows any definition of fairness
that can be formalized via linear inequalities on conditional
moments, such as demographic parity or equalized
odds (see Section 2.1). We show how binary classification
subject to these constraints can be reduced to a sequence
of cost-sensitive classification problems. We require only
black-box access to a cost-sensitive classification algorithm,
which does not need to have any knowledge of the desired
definition of fairness or protected attribute. We show that
the solutions to our sequence of cost-sensitive classification
problems yield a randomized classifier with the lowest
(empirical) error subject to the desired fairness constraints.
Corbett-Davies et al. (2017) and Menon & Williamson

