A Two-Step Computation of the Exact GAN Wasserstein Distance

Huidong Liu 1 Xianfeng Gu 1 Dimitris Samaras 1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a two-step method to
compute the Wasserstein distance in Wasserstein
Generative Adversarial Networks (WGANs): 1)
The convex part of our objective can be solved
by linear programming; 2) The non-convex residual can be approximated by a deep neural network. We theoretically prove that the proposed
formulation is equivalent to the discrete MongeKantorovich dual formulation. Furthermore, we
give the approximation error bound of the Wasserstein distance and the error bound of generalizing
the Wasserstein distance from discrete to continuous distributions. Our approach optimizes the
exact Wasserstein distance, obviating the need for
weight clipping previously used in WGANs. Results on synthetic data show that the our method
computes the Wasserstein distance more accurately. Qualitative and quantitative results on
MNIST, LSUN and CIFAR-10 datasets show that
the proposed method is more efficient than stateof-the-art WGAN methods, and still produces images of comparable quality.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) are deep generative models that have been receiving increased attention. GANs have been widely used in
image inpainting (Yeh et al., 2017), semantic segmentation
(Zhu & Xie, 2016; Nguyen et al., 2017), face editing (Liu &
Tuzel, 2016; Shu et al., 2017), etc. GANs use a generator to
generate synthetic samples from a simple low dimensional
distribution, and then feed the generated samples together
with real samples to a discriminator, or critic, that maximizes the probability of real samples and minimizes the
1

Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Huidong
Liu
<huidliu@cs.stonybrook.edu>,
Xianfeng
Gu
<gu@cs.stonybrook.edu>,
Dimitris
Samaras
<samaras@cs.stonybrook.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

probability of synthetic samples.
GANs are widely used and unfortunately, are known to
be hard to train. GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014) employ
the Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence to measure the distance between the distribution of real data and generated
data. The JS divergence is discontinuous w.r.t. the generator’s parameters (Arjovsky et al., 2017). Other probability
measures, such as Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, Total
Variation (TV) distance, or Pearson χ2 divergence used in
Least Square GANs (Mao et al., 2017), also suffer from this
drawback (Arjovsky et al., 2017). Fedus et al. show that
minimizing a non-saturating objective for the generator can
handle this problem. Roth et al. propose regularization techniques to address this issue. BGANs (Hjelm et al., 2018)
apply the importance weights on generated samples to train
the generator. Popular methods that tackle this problem are
based on i) Mean Maximum Discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton
et al., 2012), and ii) the Wasserstein distance, employing the
Integral Probability Metrics (IPMs) (Müller, 1997; Mroueh
& Sercu, 2017); however they need to restrict the functions
in a constrained set. MMD-based methods like MMD-NET
(Dziugaite et al., 2015) and MMD GANs (Bińkowski et al.,
2018) need to select suitable kernel parameters, but it is very
hard to set kernel parameters for better results. Wasserstein
distance-based methods, such as WGAN (Arjovsky et al.,
2017), McGAN (Mroueh et al., 2017), MMD-GAN (Li
et al., 2017), RWGAN (Guo et al., 2017), etc., need weight
clipping. WGAN-GP (Gulrajani et al., 2017), and Spectral
Normalization (SN) (Miyato et al., 2018) (with Wasserstein distance) apply regularizations on the critic trying to
make the critic 1-Lipschitz, but they fail to optimize the true
Wasserstein distance.
The objectives of Wasserstein distance-based GANs are,
in essence, practical implementations of the MongeKantorovich dual formulation (Villani, 2008). The solution
to the Monge-Kantorovich primal formulation is a joint distribution, represented as a 2D array, and the solution to the
dual formulation is a function. It is easier for a Deep Neural
Network (DNN) to represent a function for the discriminator.
However, solving the Monge-Kantorovich dual formulation
is still an open problem in practice. WGAN, RWGAN, etc.,
use weight clipping to ensure the 1-Lipschitz condition of
the Kantorovich potential, such that the Monge-Kantorovich
dual formulation is simpler and easier to optimize. How-

