Visualizing and Understanding Atari Agents

Sam Greydanus 1 Anurag Koul 1 Jonathan Dodge 1 Alan Fern 1

Abstract
While deep reinforcement learning (deep RL)
agents are effective at maximizing rewards, it is
often unclear what strategies they use to do so. In
this paper, we take a step toward explaining deep
RL agents through a case study using Atari 2600
environments. In particular, we focus on using
saliency maps to understand how an agent learns
and executes a policy. We introduce a method for
generating useful saliency maps and use it to show
1) what strong agents attend to, 2) whether agents
are making decisions for the right or wrong reasons, and 3) how agents evolve during learning.
We also test our method on non-expert human
subjects and find that it improves their ability to
reason about these agents. Overall, our results
show that saliency information can provide significant insight into an RL agent’s decisions and
learning behavior.

1. Introduction
Deep learning algorithms have achieved state-of-the-art results in image classification (He et al., 2015; Krizhevsky
et al., 2012), machine translation (Mikolov et al., 2010),
image captioning (Karpathy & Fei-Fei, 2015), drug discovery (Dahl et al., 2014), and deep reinforcement learning
(Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017). In spite of their
impressive performance on such tasks, they are often criticized for being black boxes. Researchers must learn to
interpret these models before using them to solve real-world
problems where trust and reliability are critical.
While an abundance of literature has addressed how to explain deep image classifiers (Fong & Vedaldi, 2017; Ribeiro
et al., 2016; Simonyan et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2016) and
deep sequential models (Karpathy et al., 2016; Murdoch
& Szlam, 2017), very little work has focused on explaining deep RL agents. These agents are known to perform
1
Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA. Correspondence to: Sam Greydanus <greydanus.17@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

well in challenging environments that have sparse rewards
and noisy, high-dimensional inputs. Simply observing the
policies of these agents is one way to understand them.
However, explaining their decision-making process in more
detail requires better tools.
In this paper, we investigate deep RL agents that use raw
visual input to make their decisions. In particular, we focus
on exploring the utility of visual saliency to gain insight into
the decisions made by these agents. To the best of our knowledge, there has not been a thorough investigation of saliency
for this purpose. Thus, it is unclear which saliency methods
produce meaningful visualizations across full episodes of
an RL agent and whether those visualizations yield insight.
Past methods for visualizing deep RL agents include t-SNE
embeddings (Mnih et al., 2015; Zahavy et al., 2016), Jacobian saliency maps (Wang et al., 2016; Zahavy et al., 2016),
and reward curves (Mnih et al., 2015). These tools are
difficult for non-experts to interpret, due to the need to understand expert-level concepts, such as embeddings. Other
tools, such as reward curves, treat the agents as black boxes
and hence provide limited explanatory power about the internal decision making processes. Our work is motivated by
trying to strike a favorable balance between interpretability
and insight into the underlying decision making.
Our first contribution is to describe a simple perturbationbased technique for generating saliency videos of deep RL
agents. Our work was motivated by the generally poor
quality of Jacobian saliency, which has been the primary
visualization tool for deep RL agents in prior work (see
Figure 1). For the sake of thoroughness, we limit our experiments to six Atari 2600 environments: Pong, SpaceInvaders,
Breakout, MsPacman, Frostbite, and Enduro. Our long-term
goal is to visualize and understand the policies of any deep
reinforcement learning agent that uses visual inputs. We
make our code and results available online1 .
Our main contribution is to conduct a series of investigative explorations into explaining Atari agents. First, we
identify the key strategies of the three agents that exceed human baselines in their environments. Second, we visualize
agents throughout training to see how their policies evolved.
Third, we explore the use of saliency for detecting when an
1

github.com/greydanus/visualize atari

