Learning to Reweight Examples for Robust Deep Learning

Mengye Ren 1 2 Wenyuan Zeng 1 2 Bin Yang 1 2 Raquel Urtasun 1 2

Abstract
Deep neural networks have been shown to be
very powerful modeling tools for many supervised
learning tasks involving complex input patterns.
However, they can also easily overfit to training
set biases and label noises. In addition to various
regularizers, example reweighting algorithms are
popular solutions to these problems, but they
require careful tuning of additional hyperparameters, such as example mining schedules and
regularization hyperparameters. In contrast to
past reweighting methods, which typically consist
of functions of the cost value of each example,
in this work we propose a novel meta-learning
algorithm that learns to assign weights to training
examples based on their gradient directions. To
determine the example weights, our method
performs a meta gradient descent step on the
current mini-batch example weights (which are
initialized from zero) to minimize the loss on
a clean unbiased validation set. Our proposed
method can be easily implemented on any type
of deep network, does not require any additional
hyperparameter tuning, and achieves impressive
performance on class imbalance and corrupted
label problems where only a small amount of
clean validation data is available.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely used for
machine learning applications due to their powerful capacity
for modeling complex input patterns. Despite their success,
it has been shown that DNNs are prone to training set
biases, i.e. the training set is drawn from a joint distribution
p(x, y) that is different from the distribution p(xv , y v ) of the
evaluation set. This distribution mismatch could have many
1
Uber Advanced Technologies Group, Toronto ON, CANADA
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto ON, CANADA. Correspondence to: Mengye Ren
<mren3@uber.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

different forms. Class imbalance in the training set is a very
common example. In applications such as object detection
in the context of autonomous driving, the vast majority
of the training data is composed of standard vehicles but
models also need to recognize rarely seen classes such as
emergency vehicles or animals with very high accuracy.
This will sometime lead to biased training models that do
not perform well in practice.
Another popular type of training set bias is label noise.
To train a reasonable supervised deep model, we ideally
need a large dataset with high-quality labels, which require
many passes of expensive human quality assurance (QA).
Although coarse labels are cheap and of high availability,
the presence of noise will hurt the model performance, e.g.
Zhang et al. (2017) has shown that a standard CNN can
fit any ratio of label flipping noise in the training set and
eventually leads to poor generalization performance.
Training set biases and misspecification can sometimes be
addressed with dataset resampling (Chawla et al., 2002), i.e.
choosing the correct proportion of labels to train a network
on, or more generally by assigning a weight to each example
and minimizing a weighted training loss. The example
weights are typically calculated based on the training loss,
as in many classical algorithms such as AdaBoost (Freund
& Schapire, 1997), hard negative mining (Malisiewicz et al.,
2011), self-paced learning (Kumar et al., 2010), and other
more recent work (Chang et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2017).
However, there exist two contradicting ideas in training
loss based approaches. In noisy label problems, we prefer
examples with smaller training losses as they are more
likely to be clean images; yet in class imbalance problems,
algorithms such as hard negative mining (Malisiewicz et al.,
2011) prioritize examples with higher training loss since
they are more likely to be the minority class. In cases when
the training set is both imbalanced and noisy, these existing
methods would have the wrong model assumptions. In fact,
without a proper definition of an unbiased test set, solving
the training set bias problem is inherently ill-defined. As the
model cannot distinguish the right from the wrong, stronger
regularization can usually work surprisingly well in certain
synthetic noise settings. Here we argue that in order to learn
general forms of training set biases, it is necessary to have
a small unbiased validation to guide training. It is actually

