Transfer in Deep Reinforcement Learning Using
Successor Features and Generalised Policy Improvement

André Barreto 1 Diana Borsa 1 John Quan 1 Tom Schaul 1 David Silver 1
Matteo Hessel 1 Daniel Mankowitz 1 Augustin Žı́dek 1 Rémi Munos 1

Abstract
The ability to transfer skills across tasks has the
potential to scale up reinforcement learning (RL)
agents to environments currently out of reach. Recently, a framework based on two ideas, successor
features (SFs) and generalised policy improvement (GPI), has been introduced as a principled
way of transferring skills. In this paper we extend
the SF&GPI framework in two ways. One of the
basic assumptions underlying the original formulation of SF&GPI is that rewards for all tasks of
interest can be computed as linear combinations
of a fixed set of features. We relax this constraint
and show that the theoretical guarantees supporting the framework can be extended to any set of
tasks that only differ in the reward function. Our
second contribution is to show that one can use
the reward functions themselves as features for
future tasks, without any loss of expressiveness,
thus removing the need to specify a set of features
beforehand. This makes it possible to combine
SF&GPI with deep learning in a more stable way.
We empirically verify this claim on a complex
3D environment where observations are images
from a first-person perspective. We show that the
transfer promoted by SF&GPI leads to very good
policies on unseen tasks almost instantaneously.
We also describe how to learn policies specialised
to the new tasks in a way that allows them to
be added to the agent’s set of skills, and thus be
reused in the future.

1. Introduction
In recent years reinforcement learning (RL) has undergone a
major change in terms of the scale of its applications: from
1
DeepMind. Correspondence to: André Barreto <andrebarreto@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

relatively small and well-controlled benchmarks to problems
designed to challenge humans—who are now consistently
outperformed by artificial agents in domains considered out
of reach only a few years ago (Mnih et al., 2015; Bowling
et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; 2017).
At the core of this shift has been deep learning, a machine learning paradigm that recently attracted a lot of attention due to impressive accomplishments across many
areas (Goodfellow et al., 2016). Despite the successes
achieved by the combination of deep learning and RL,
dubbed “deep RL”, the agents’s basic mechanics have remained essentially the same, with each problem tackled
as an isolated monolithic challenge. An alternative would
be for our agents to decompose a problem into smaller
sub-problems, or “tasks”, whose solutions can be reused
multiple times, in different scenarios. This ability of explicitly transferring skills to quickly adapt to new tasks could
lead to another leap in the scale of RL applications.
Recently, Barreto et al. (2017) proposed a framework for
transfer based on two ideas: generalised policy improvement
(GPI), a generalisation of the classic dynamic-programming
operation, and successor features (SFs), a representation
scheme that makes it possible to quickly evaluate a policy
across many tasks. The SF&GPI approach is appealing
because it allows transfer to take place between any two
tasks, regardless of their temporal order, and it integrates
almost seamlessly into the RL framework.
In this paper we extend Barreto et al.’s (2017) framework
in two ways. First, we argue that its applicability is broader
than initially shown. SF&GPI was designed for the scenario
where each task corresponds to a different reward function;
one of the basic assumptions in the original formulation was
that the rewards of all tasks can be computed as a linear
combination of a fixed set of features. We show that such an
assumption is not strictly necessary, and in fact it is possible
to have guarantees on the performance of the transferred
policy even on tasks that are not in the span of the features.
The realisation above adds some flexibility to the problem
of computing features that are useful for transfer. Our second contribution is to show a simple way of addressing this

