Extracting Automata from Recurrent Neural Networks
Using Queries and Counterexamples

Gail Weiss 1 Yoav Goldberg 2 Eran Yahav 1

Abstract
We present a novel algorithm that uses exact learning and abstraction to extract a deterministic finite automaton describing the state dynamics of a
given trained RNN. We do this using Angluin’s L∗
algorithm as a learner and the trained RNN as an
oracle. Our technique efficiently extracts accurate
automata from trained RNNs, even when the state
vectors are large and require fine differentiation.

1. Introduction
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are a class of neural
networks used to process sequences of arbitrary lengths. An
RNN receives an input sequence timestep by timestep, returning a new state vector after each step. For classification
tasks, this is followed by passing the state vectors to a multiclass classification component, which is trained alongside
the RNN and returns a classification for the sequence. We
call a combination of an RNN and a binary classification
component an RNN-acceptor.
RNNs are central to deep learning, and natural language
processing in particular. However, while they have been
shown to reasonably approximate a variety of languages,
what they eventually learn is unclear. Indeed, several lines
of work attempt to extract clear rules for their decisions
(Jacobsson, 2005; Omlin & Giles, 1996; Cechin et al., 2003).
Motivation Given an RNN-acceptor R trained over a finite
alphabet Σ, our goal is to extract a deterministic finite-state
automaton (DFA) A that classifies sequences in a manner
observably equivalent to R. (Ideally, we would like to obtain
a DFA that accepts exactly the same language as the network,
but this is a much more difficult task.)
We approach this task using exact learning.
1

2

Technion, Haifa, Israel Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel.
Correspondence to: Gail Weiss <sgailw@cs.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Exact Learning In the field of exact learning, concepts (sets
of instances) can be learned precisely from a minimally adequate teacher—an oracle capable of answering two query
types (Goldman & Kearns, 1995):
• membership queries: label a given instance
• equivalence queries: state whether a given hypothesis
(set of instances) is equal to the concept held by the
teacher. If not, return an instance on which the hypothesis and the concept disagree (a counterexample).
The L∗ algorithm (Angluin, 1987) is an exact learning algorithm for learning a DFA from a minimally adequate teacher
for some regular language L. In this context, the concept is
L, and the instances are words over its alphabet.
We designate a trained RNN1 as teacher for the L∗ algorithm,
in order to extract a DFA representing its behavior. The
RNN is used trivially to answer membership queries: input
sequences are fed to the network for classification. The main
challenge in this setting is answering equivalence queries.
Problem Definition: Equivalence Query Given an RNNacceptor R trained over a finite alphabet Σ, and a DFA A
over Σ, determine whether R and A are equivalent, and
return a counterexample w ∈ Σ∗ if not.
As this problem is likely to be intractable, we use an approximation. One approach would be random sampling;
however, should R and A be similar, this may take time.
Our Approach We use finite abstraction of the RNN R to
answer equivalence queries. The finite abstraction and the
L∗ DFA A act as two hypotheses for the RNN ground truth,
and must at least be equivalent to each other in order to be
equivalent to R. Whenever the two disagree on a sample, we
find its true classification in R, obtaining through this either
a counterexample to A or a refinement to the abstraction.
Our approach is guaranteed never to return an incorrect
counterexample nor invoke an unnecessary refinement; i.e.,
it yields no false negatives. As far as we know, this is the
first attempt to apply exact learning to a given RNN.
1
In what follows, when understood from context, we use the
term RNN to mean RNN-acceptor.

