Is Generator Conditioning Causally Related to GAN Performance?

Augustus Odena 1 Jacob Buckman 1 Catherine Olsson 1 Tom B. Brown 1 Christopher Olah 1 Colin Raffel 1
Ian Goodfellow 1

Abstract
Recent work (Pennington et al., 2017) suggests
that controlling the entire distribution of Jacobian
singular values is an important design consideration in deep learning. Motivated by this, we study
the distribution of singular values of the Jacobian
of the generator in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). We find that this Jacobian generally becomes ill-conditioned at the beginning
of training and that the average (with z ∼ p(z))
conditioning of the generator is highly predictive of two other ad-hoc metrics for measuring
the “quality” of trained GANs: the Inception
Score and the Frechet Inception Distance (FID).
We test the hypothesis that this relationship is
causal by proposing a “regularization” technique
(called Jacobian Clamping) that softly penalizes
the condition number of the generator Jacobian.
Jacobian Clamping improves the mean Inception Score and the mean FID for GANs trained
on several datasets and greatly reduces inter-run
variance of the aforementioned scores, addressing (at least partially) one of the main criticisms
of GANs.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (or GANs) are a promising techique for building flexible generative models (Goodfellow et al., 2014). There have been many successful efforts to scale them up to large datasets and new applications
(Denton et al., 2015; Radford et al., 2015; Odena et al.,
2016; Zhang et al., 2016; Karras et al., 2017; Miyato &
Koyama, 2018). There have also been many efforts to better understand their training procedure, and in particular
to understand various pathologies that seem to plague that
training procedure (Metz et al., 2016; Arora et al., 2017;
Heusel et al., 2017; Nagarajan & Kolter, 2017; Arjovsky
1
Google Brain. Correspondence to: Augustus Odena <augustusodena@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

& Bottou, 2017). The most notable of these pathologies
— “mode collapse” — is characterized by a tendency of
the generator to output samples from a small subset of the
modes of the data distribution. In extreme cases, the generator will output only a few unique samples or even just the
same sample repeatedly. Instead of studying this pathology and others from a probabilistic perspective, we study
the distribution of the squared singular values of the inputoutput Jacobian of the generator. Studying this quantity allows us to characterize GANs in a new way — we find that
it is predictive of other GAN performance measures. Moreover, we find that by controlling this quantity, we can improve average-case performance measures while greatly reducing inter-run variance of those measures. More specifically, this work makes the following contributions:
• We study the squared singular values of the generator Jacobian at individual points in the latent space.
We find that the Jacobian generally becomes illconditioned quickly at the beginning of training, after
which it tends to fall into one of two clusters: a “good
cluster” in which the condition number stays the same
or even gradually decreases, and a “bad cluster”, in
which the condition number continues to grow.
• We discover a strong correspondence between the
conditioning of the Jacobian and two other quantitative metrics for evaluating GAN quality: the Inception
Score and the Frechet Inception Distance. GANs with
better conditioning tend to perform better according to
these metrics.
• We provide evidence that the above correspondence
is causal by proposing and testing a new regularization technique, which we call Jacobian Clamping. We
show that you can constrain the conditioning of the Jacobian relatively cheaply1 and that doing so improves
the mean values and reduces inter-run variance of the
values for the Inception Score and FID.

2. Background and Notation
Generative Adversarial Networks: A generative adversarial network (GAN) consists of two neural networks
1

The Jacobian Clamping algorithm doubles the batch size.

