Weightless: Lossy weight encoding for deep neural network compression

Brandon Reagen 1 Udit Gupta 1 Robert Adolf 1 Michael M. Mitzenmacher 1 Alexander M. Rush 1
Gu-Yeon Wei 1 David Brooks 1 2

Abstract

Train model

The large memory requirements of deep neural
networks limit their deployment and adoption
on many devices. Model compression methods
effectively reduce the memory requirements of
these models, usually through applying transformations such as weight pruning or quantization.
In this paper, we present a novel scheme for lossy
weight encoding co-designed with weight simplification techniques. The encoding is based on the
Bloomier filter, a probabilistic data structure that
can save space at the cost of introducing random
errors. Leveraging the ability of neural networks
to tolerate these imperfections and by re-training
around the errors, the proposed technique, named
Weightless, can compress weights by up to 496×
without loss of model accuracy. This results in up
to a 1.51× improvement over the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
The continued success of neural networks comes with increasing demands on compute, memory, and networking
resources. Moreover, the correlation between model size
and accuracy suggests that tomorrow’s networks will only
grow larger. This growth presents a challenge for resourceconstrained platforms such as mobile phones and wireless
sensors. A common workflow is to train networks in the
cloud using high-performance devices including GPUs and
even customized hardware (Google, 2017). Trained neural
networks are then distributed to edge devices and used to
make inferences on new data. To make the inferences efficient, devices now leverage special hardware (Apple, 2017;
Qualcomm, 2017), mobile GPUs, or CPUs with heavily
optimized code (Hazelwood et al., 2018).
While many products have been successfully deployed to
1

Harvard University, Cambridge,
Menlo Park, CA. Correspondence to:
<reagen@fas.harvard.edu>.

MA 2 Facebook,
Brandon Reagen

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Weightless
encode
<496x BW
reduction

Cloud

Transmit
compressed
weights
0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0

Network

Process
inferences
Weightless
decode

Edge device

Figure 1. Weightless compresses neural networks by up to three
orders of magnitude, which facilitates efficient transmission of
trained models from the cloud to edge devices.

alleviate the computational costs of network training and
inference, one remaining practical issue is reducing the burden of distributing the latest models, especially in regions of
the world not using high-bandwidth networks. For instance,
it is estimated that, globally, 800 million users will be using
2G networks by 2020 (GSMA, 2014), which can take up to
30 minutes to download just 20 MB of data. By contrast,
today’s neural networks are on the order of tens to hundreds
of MBs, making them difficult to distribute. The limited
storage capacity on resource-constrained devices poses an
additional challenge as more applications look to leverage
neural networks.
Model compression is a popular solution for these problems.
A variety of compression algorithms have been proposed in
recent years and many exploit the intrinsic redundancy in
model weights. Broadly speaking, the majority of this work
has focused on simplification methods (e.g., weight pruning
and quantization), while comparatively little effort has been
spent on devising techniques for encoding and compressing.
In this paper we propose Weightless: a novel lossy compression method co-designed with weight simplification techniques. Weightless is based on the probabilistic Bloomier
filter data structure (Chazelle et al., 2004). Bloomier filters
inexactly store a function map, and by adjusting the filter
parameter, we can elect to reduce the structure’s size at the
cost of an increased chance of erroneous values. We use the
filters to compactly encode the weights of a neural network
for transmission and storage (Figure 1), exploiting redundancy in the weights to tolerate some errors. Bloomier filters
excel when the encoded data is sparse and the values have a
small contiguous range. Therefore, to maximize compression, we simplify the weights for encoding by aggressively
pruning connections and clustering values. Finally, the size
of the filters encoding the weights can be further reduced

