Adversarial Regression with Multiple Learners
Liang Tong * 1 Sixie Yu * 1 Scott Alfeld 2 Yevgeniy Vorobeychik 1

Abstract
Despite the considerable success enjoyed by machine learning techniques in practice, numerous
studies demonstrated that many approaches are
vulnerable to attacks. An important class of such
attacks involves adversaries changing features at
test time to cause incorrect predictions. Previous
investigations of this problem pit a single learner
against an adversary. However, in many situations
an adversary’s decision is aimed at a collection of
learners, rather than specifically targeted at each
independently. We study the problem of adversarial linear regression with multiple learners. We
approximate the resulting game by exhibiting an
upper bound on learner loss functions, and show
that the resulting game has a unique symmetric
equilibrium. We present an algorithm for computing this equilibrium, and show through extensive
experiments that equilibrium models are significantly more robust than conventional regularized
linear regression.

1. Introduction
Increasing use of machine learning in adversarial settings
has motivated a series of efforts investigating the extent
to which learning approaches can be subverted by malicious parties. An important class of such attacks involves
adversaries changing their behaviors, or features of the environment, to effect an incorrect prediction. Most previous
efforts study this problem as an interaction between a single
learner and a single attacker (Brückner & Scheffer, 2011;
Dalvi et al., 2004; Li & Vorobeychik, 2014; Zhou et al.,
2012). However, in reality attackers often target a broad
array of potential victim organizations. For example, they
craft generic spam templates and generic malware, and then
disseminate these widely to maximize impact. The resulting
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of EECS, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA 2 Computer Science Department, Amherst
College, Amherst, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Yevgeniy Vorobeychik <eug.vorobey@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

ecology of attack targets reflects not a single learner, but
many such learners, all making autonomous decisions about
how to detect malicious content, although these decisions
often rely on similar training datasets.
We model the resulting game as an interaction between multiple learners, who simultaneously learn linear regression
models, and an attacker, who observes the learned models (as in white-box attacks (Šrndic & Laskov, 2014)), and
modifies the original feature vectors at test time in order
to induce incorrect predictions. Crucially, rather than customizing the attack to each learner (as in typical models),
the attacker chooses a single attack for all learners. We
term the resulting game a Multi-Learner Stackelberg Game,
to allude to its two stages, with learners jointly acting as
Stackelberg leaders, and the attacker being the follower. Our
first contribution is the formal model of this game. Our second contribution is to approximate this game by deriving
upper bounds on the learner loss functions. The resulting
approximation yields a game in which there always exists
a symmetric equilibrium, and this equilibrium is unique.
In addition, we prove that this unique equilibrium can be
computed by solving a convex optimization problem. Our
third contribution is to show that the equilibrium of the approximate game is robust, both theoretically (by showing it
to be equivalent to a particular robust optimization problem),
and through extensive experiments, which demonstrate it to
be much more robust to attacks than standard regularization
approaches.
Related Work Both attacks on and defenses of machine
learning approaches have been studied within the literature on adversarial machine learning (Brückner & Scheffer,
2011; Dalvi et al., 2004; Li & Vorobeychik, 2014; Zhou
et al., 2012; Lowd & Meek, 2005). These approaches commonly assume a single learner, and consider either the problem of finding evasions against a fixed model (Dalvi et al.,
2004; Lowd & Meek, 2005; Šrndic & Laskov, 2014), or
algorithmic approaches for making learning more robust
to attacks (Russu et al., 2016; Brückner & Scheffer, 2011;
Dalvi et al., 2004; Li & Vorobeychik, 2014; 2015). Most
of these efforts deal specifically with classification learning,
but several consider adversarial tampering with regression
models (Alfeld et al., 2016; Grosshans et al., 2013), although
still within a single-learner and single-attacker framework.
Stevens & Lowd (2013) study the algorithmic problem of

