Shampoo: Preconditioned Stochastic Tensor Optimization

Vineet Gupta 1 Tomer Koren 1 Yoram Singer 2 1

Abstract
Preconditioned gradient methods are among the
most general and powerful tools in optimization.
However, preconditioning requires storing and
manipulating prohibitively large matrices. We describe and analyze a new structure-aware preconditioning algorithm, called Shampoo, for stochastic
optimization over tensor spaces. Shampoo maintains a set of preconditioning matrices, each of
which operates on a single dimension, contracting over the remaining dimensions. We establish
convergence guarantees in the stochastic convex
setting, the proof of which builds upon matrix
trace inequalities. Our experiments with stateof-the-art deep learning models show that Shampoo is capable of converging considerably faster
than commonly used optimizers. Surprisingly,
although it involves a more complex update rule,
Shampoo’s runtime per step is comparable in practice to that of simple gradient methods such as
SGD, AdaGrad, and Adam.

1. Introduction
Over the last decade, stochastic first-order optimization
methods have emerged as the canonical tools for training
large-scale machine learning models. These methods are
particularly appealing due to their wide applicability and
their low runtime and memory costs.
A potentially more powerful family of algorithms consists of
preconditioned gradient methods. Preconditioning methods
maintain a matrix, termed a preconditioner, which is used
to transform (i.e., premultiply) the gradient vector before
it is used to take a step. Classic algorithms in this family
include Newton’s method, which employs the local Hessian
as a preconditioner, as well as a plethora of quasi-Newton
methods (e.g., Fletcher, 2013; Lewis and Overton, 2013;
1 Google Brain, Mountain View, CA, USA 2 Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Tomer Koren
<tkoren@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Nocedal, 1980) that can be used whenever second-order
information is unavailable or too expensive to compute.
Newer additions to this family are preconditioned online
algorithms, most notably AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011), that
use the covariance matrix of the accumulated gradients to
form a preconditioner.
While preconditioned methods often lead to improved convergence properties, the dimensionality of typical problems
in machine learning prohibits out-of-the-box use of fullmatrix preconditioning. To mitigate this issue, specialized
variants have been devised in which the full preconditioner
is replaced with a diagonal approximation (Duchi et al.,
2011; Kingma and Ba, 2014), a sketched version (Gonen
and Shalev-Shwartz, 2015; Pilanci and Wainwright, 2017),
or various estimations thereof (Erdogdu and Montanari,
2015; Agarwal et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2016). While the
diagonal methods are heavily used in practice thanks to their
favorable scaling with the dimension, the other approaches
are seldom practical at large scale as one typically requires
a fine approximation (or estimate) of the preconditioner that
often demands super-linear memory and computation.
In this paper, we take an alternative approach to preconditioning and describe an efficient and practical apparatus that
exploits the structure of the parameter space. Our approach
is motivated by the observation that in numerous machine
learning applications, the parameter space entertains a more
complex structure than a monolithic vector in Euclidean
space. In multiclass problems the parameters form a matrix
of size m × n where m is the number of features and n is
the number of classes. In neural networks, the parameters
of each fully-connected layer form an m × n matrix with n
being the number of input nodes and m is the number of
outputs. The space of parameters of convolutional neural
networks for images is a collection of 4 dimensional tensors
of the form input-depth × width × height × output-depth.
As a matter of fact, machine learning software tools such as
Torch and TensorFlow are designed with tensor structure in
mind.
Our algorithm, which we call Shampoo,1 retains the tensor
structure of the gradient and maintains a separate preconditioner matrix for each of its dimensions. An illustration of
Shampoo is provided in Figure 1. The set of preconditioners
1We call it Shampoo because it has to do with pre-conditioning.

