Prediction Rule Reshaping

Matt Bonakdarpour 1 Sabyasachi Chatterjee 2 Rina Foygel Barber 1 John Lafferty 3

Abstract
Two methods are proposed for high-dimensional
shape-constrained regression and classification.
These methods reshape pre-trained prediction
rules to satisfy shape constraints like monotonicity and convexity. The first method can be applied
to any pre-trained prediction rule, while the second method deals specifically with random forests.
In both cases, efficient algorithms are developed
for computing the estimators, and experiments
are performed to demonstrate their performance
on four datasets. We find that reshaping methods
enforce shape constraints without compromising
predictive accuracy.

1. Introduction
Shape constraints like monotonicity and convexity arise naturally in many real-world regression and classification tasks.
For example, holding all other variables fixed, a practitioner
might assume that the price of a house is a decreasing function of neighborhood crime rate, that an individual’s utility
function is concave in income level, or that phenotypes
such as height or the likelihood of contracting a disease are
monotonic in certain genetic effects.
Parametric models like linear regression implicity impose
monotonicity constraints at the cost of strong assumptions
on the true underlying function. On the other hand, nonparametric techniques like kernel regression impose weak
assumptions but do not guarantee monotonicity or convexity in their predictions. Shape-constrained nonparametric
regression methods attempt to offer the best of both worlds,
allowing practitioners to dispense with parametric assumptions while retaining many of their appealing properties.
However, classical approaches to nonparametric regression

under shape constraints suffer from the curse of dimensionality (Han & Wellner, 2016; Han et al., 2017). Some methods
have been developed to mitigate this issue under assumptions like additivity, where
P the true function f is assumed to
have the form f (x) = j fj (xj ) + c, where a subset of the
component fj ’s are shape-constrained (Pya & Wood, 2015;
Chen & Samworth, 2016; Xu et al., 2016). But in many
real-world settings, the lack of interaction terms among the
predictors can be too restrictive.
Approaches from the machine learning community like random forests, gradient boosted trees, and deep learning methods have been shown to exhibit outstanding empirical performance on high-dimensional tasks. But these methods do
not guarantee monotonicity or convexity.
In this paper, we propose two methods for high-dimensional
shape-constrained regression and classification. These methods blend the performance of machine learning methods
with the classical least-squares approach to nonparametric
shape-constrained regression.
In Section (2.1), we describe black box reshaping, which
takes any pre-trained prediction rule and reshapes it on a set
of test inputs to enforce shape constraints. In the case of
monotonicity constraints, we develop an efficient algorithm
to compute the estimator.
Section (2.2) presents a second method designed specifically
to reshape random forests (Breiman, 2001). This approach
reshapes each individual decision tree based on its split
rules and estimated leaf values. Again, in the case of monotonicity constraints, we present another efficient reshaping
algorithm.
We apply our methods to four datasets in Section (3) and
show that they enforce the pre-specified shape constraints
without sacrificing accuracy.
1.1. Related Work

1

Department of Statistics, The University of Chicago
2
Department of Statistics, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign 3 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Yale University. Correspondence to: Matt Bonakdarpour
<mbonakda@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

In the context of monotonicity constraints, the black box
reshaping method is related to the method of rearrangements
(Chernozhukov et al., 2009; 2010). The rearrangement operation takes a pre-trained prediction rule and sorts its predictions to enforce monotonicity. In higher dimensions, the
rearranged estimator is the average of one-dimensional rearrangements. In contrast, this paper focuses on isotonization

