Augment and Reduce: Stochastic Inference for Large Categorical Distributions

Francisco J. R. Ruiz 1 2 Michalis K. Titsias 3 Adji B. Dieng 2 David M. Blei 2

Abstract
Categorical distributions are ubiquitous in machine learning, e.g., in classification, language
models, and recommendation systems. However,
when the number of possible outcomes is very
large, using categorical distributions becomes
computationally expensive, as the complexity
scales linearly with the number of outcomes. To
address this problem, we propose augment and
reduce (A & R), a method to alleviate the computational complexity. A & R uses two ideas: latent
variable augmentation and stochastic variational
inference. It maximizes a lower bound on the
marginal likelihood of the data. Unlike existing
methods which are specific to softmax, A & R is
more general and is amenable to other categorical
models, such as multinomial probit. On several
large-scale classification problems, we show that
A & R provides a tighter bound on the marginal
likelihood and has better predictive performance
than existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Categorical distributions are fundamental to many areas of
machine learning. Examples include classification (Gupta
et al., 2014), language models (Bengio et al., 2006), recommendation systems (Marlin & Zemel, 2004), reinforcement
learning (Sutton & Barto, 1998), and neural attention models (Bahdanau et al., 2015). They also play an important
role in discrete choice models (McFadden, 1978).
A categorical is a die with K sides, a discrete random variable that takes on one of K unordered outcomes; a categorical distribution gives the probability of each possible
outcome. Categorical variables are challenging to use when
there are many possible outcomes. Such large categoricals
appear in common applications such as image classification
1

University of Cambridge. 2 Columbia University. 3 Athens University of Economics and Business.. Correspondence to: Francisco
J. R. Ruiz <f.ruiz@eng.cam.ac.uk, f.ruiz@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

with many classes, recommendation systems with many
items, and language models over large vocabularies. In this
paper, we develop a new method for fitting and using large
categorical distributions.
The most common way to form a categorical is through the
softmax transformation, which maps a K-vector of reals
to a distribution of K outcomes. Let ψ be a real-valued
K-vector. The softmax transformation is
exp {ψk }
.
0
k0 exp {ψk }

p(y = k | ψ) = P

(1)

Note the softmax is not the only way to map real vectors
to categorical distributions; for example, the multinomial
probit (Albert & Chib, 1993) is an alternative. Also note that
in many applications, such as in multiclass classification,
the parameter ψk is a function of per-sample features x. For
example, a linear classifier forms a categorical over classes
through a linear combination, ψk = wk> x.
We usually fit a categorical with maximum likelihood estimation or any other closely related strategy. Given a dataset
y1:N of categorical data—each yn is one of K values—we
aim to maximize the log likelihood,
Llog likelihood =

N
X

log p(yn | ψ).

(2)

n=1

Fitting this objective requires evaluating both the log probability and its gradient.
Eqs. 1 and 2 reveal the challenge to using large categoricals.
Evaluating the log probability and evaluating its gradient
are both O(K) operations. But this is not OK: most algorithms for fitting categoricals—for example, stochastic
gradient ascent—require repeated evaluations of both gradients and probabilities. When K is large, these algorithms
are prohibitively expensive.
Here we develop a method for fitting large categorical distributions, including the softmax but also more generally.
It is called augment and reduce (A & R). A & R rewrites the
categorical distribution with an auxiliary variable ε,
Z
p(y | ψ) = p(y, ε | ψ)dε.
(3)
A & R then replaces the expensive log probability with a vari-

ational bound on the integral in Eq. 3. Using stochastic

