NetGAN: Generating Graphs via Random Walks

Aleksandar Bojchevski * 1 Oleksandr Shchur * 1 Daniel Zügner * 1 Stephan Günnemann 1

Abstract
We propose NetGAN – the first implicit generative model for graphs able to mimic real-world
networks. We pose the problem of graph generation as learning the distribution of biased random
walks over the input graph. The proposed model
is based on a stochastic neural network that generates discrete output samples and is trained using
the Wasserstein GAN objective. NetGAN is able
to produce graphs that exhibit well-known network patterns without explicitly specifying them
in the model definition. At the same time, our
model exhibits strong generalization properties,
as highlighted by its competitive link prediction
performance, despite not being trained specifically for this task. Being the first approach to
combine both of these desirable properties, NetGAN opens exciting avenues for further research.

1. Introduction
Generative models for graphs have a longstanding history,
with applications including data augmentation, anomaly
detection and recommendation (Chakrabarti & Faloutsos,
2006). Explicit probabilistic models such as Barabási-Albert
or stochastic blockmodels are the de-facto standard in this
field (Goldenberg et al., 2010). However, it has also been
shown on multiple occasions that our intuitions about structure and behavior of graphs may be misleading. For instance, heavy-tailed degree distributions in real graphs were
in strong disagreement with the models existing at the time
of their discovery (Barabási & Albert, 1999). More recent
works like Dong et al. (2017) and Broido & Clauset (2018)
keep bringing up other surprising characteristics of realworld networks that question the validity of the established
models. This leads us to the question: “How do we define a model that captures all the essential (potentially still
unknown) properties of real graphs?”
*
Equal contribution 1 Technical University of Munich, Germany.
Correspondence to: Daniel Zügner <zuegnerd@in.tum.de>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

An increasingly popular way to address this issue in other
fields is by switching from explicit (prescribed) models to
implicit ones. This transition is especially notable in computer vision, where generative adversarial networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al., 2014) significantly advanced the state
of the art over the classic prescribed approaches like mixtures of Gaussians (Blanken et al., 2007). GANs achieve
unparalleled results in scenarios such as image and 3D objects generation (e.g., Karras et al., 2017; Berthelot et al.,
2017; Wu et al., 2016). However, despite their massive success when dealing with real-valued data, adapting GANs
to handle discrete objects like graphs or text remains an
open research problem (Goodfellow, 2016). In fact, discreteness is only one of the obstacles when applying GANs
to network data. Large repositories of graphs that all come
from the same distribution are not available. This means
that in a typical setting one has to learn from a single graph.
Additionally, any model operating on a graph necessarily
has to be permutation invariant, as graphs are isomorphic
under node reordering.
In this work we introduce NetGAN – the first implicit generative model for graphs and networks that tackles all of the
above challenges. We formulate the problem of learning the
graph topology as learning the distribution of biased random
walks over the graph. Like in the typical GAN setting, the
generator G – in our case defined as a stochastic neural
network with discrete output samples – learns to generate
random walks that are plausible in the real graph, while the
discriminator D then has to distinguish them from the true
ones that are sampled from the original graph.
The main requirement for a graph generative model is the
ability to generate realistic graphs. In the experimental
section we compare NetGAN to other established prescribed
models on this task. We observe that our proposed method
consistently reproduces most known patterns inherent to
real-world networks without explicitly specifying any of
them in the model definition (e.g., degree distribution, as
seen in Fig. 1). However, a model that simply replicates the
original graph would also trivially fulfill this requirement,
which clearly isn’t our goal. In order to prove that this
is not the case we examine the generalization properties
of NetGAN by evaluating its link prediction performance.
As our experiments show, our model exhibits competitive
performance in this task and even achieves state-of-the-art

