TACO: Learning Task Decomposition via Temporal Alignment for Control

Kyriacos Shiarlis 1 Markus Wulfmeier 2 Sasha Salter 2 Shimon Whiteson 3 Ingmar Posner 2

Abstract

platform, LfD requires only the ability to control the agent.

Many advanced Learning from Demonstration
(LfD) methods consider the decomposition of
complex, real-world tasks into simpler sub-tasks.
By reusing the corresponding sub-policies within
and between tasks, they provide training data for
each policy from different high-level tasks and
compose them to perform novel ones. However,
most existing approaches to modular LfD focus
either on learning a single high-level task or depend on domain knowledge and temporal segmentation. By contrast, we propose a weakly
supervised, domain-agnostic approach based on
task sketches, which include only the sequence of
sub-tasks performed in each demonstration. Our
approach simultaneously aligns the sketches with
the observed demonstrations and learns the required sub-policies, which improves generalisation in comparison to separate optimisation procedures. We evaluate the approach on multiple domains, including a simulated 3D robot arm control
task using purely image-based observations. The
approach performs commensurately with fully supervised approaches, while requiring significantly
less annotation effort, and significantly outperforms methods which separate segmentation and
imitation.

However, complex real world tasks pose a severe challenge
for simple LfD approaches such as behavioural cloning
(BC). While a complex task can often be broken down into
simpler sub-tasks, the algorithm itself lacks the means to
discover the decomposition and must instead learn a monolithic policy for the whole task. The resulting policies are
not only more complex but also less reusable. For example,
a cube stacking task can be broken down into sub-tasks for
approaching a cube, grasping it, moving to a location, and
placing it onto an existing stack. In particular, sub-policies
for approaching and grasping the cube can be reused in other
manipulation routines such as rotating or throwing the cube.

1. Introduction
Learning from demonstration (LfD) represents a popular
paradigm to teaching complex behaviours to robots and
virtual agents through demonstrations, without the need for
explicit programming or other description of a task, such
as a cost function (Argall et al., 2009). The benefits of
LfD over manual task definitions are numerous. First, some
behaviours are difficult to program or manually encode, but
can be easily demonstrated. Second, while programming
behaviours requires expert knowledge of the application
1

Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
2
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, United
Kingdom 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Kyriacos Shiarlis
<k.c.shiarlis@uva.nl>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Modular LfD addresses this challenge by modelling the
task as a composition of sub-tasks for which reusable subpolicies (modules) are learned. These sub-policies are often
easier to learn and can be composed in different ways to
execute new tasks, enabling zero-shot imitation.
One approach to modular LfD is to provide the learner
with additional information about the demonstrations. This
comes in many forms, e.g., manual segmentation of demonstrations (Hovland et al., 1996), interactive feedback during
learning (Niekum et al., 2015), or prior knowledge about
the task. Such domain knowledge may come in the form of
motion primitives, hard-coded parametric motion models
(Ekvall & Kragic, 2006; Schaal, 2006) and problem-specific
state modelling (Abdo et al., 2013; Konidaris et al., 2012).
An additional benefit is that since these methods ground
demonstrations on human-defined sub-tasks, the learned
policies are interpretable. They are, however, labour intensive, perform sub-optimally if the underlying assumptions
are incorrect, and require domain knowledge.
In this work, we consider a general, weakly supervised,
modular LfD setting where demonstrations are augmented
only with a task sketch. This sketch describes the sequence
of sub-tasks that occur within the demonstration, without
additional information on their alignment (see Figure 1).
Drawing inspiration from speech recognition (Graves et al.,
2006) as well as modular reinforcement learning (Andreas
et al., 2017), we introduce temporal alignment for control
(TACO)1 , an efficient, domain agnostic algorithm that learns
modular and grounded policies from high level task descriptions, while relying purely on weak supervision.
1
The TACO algorithm and experiments will soon be available
at https://sites.google.com/view/taco-ml.

