Learning Continuous Hierarchies
in the Lorentz Model of Hyperbolic Geometry

Maximilian Nickel 1 Douwe Kiela 1

Abstract
We are concerned with the discovery of hierarchical relationships from large-scale unstructured
similarity scores. For this purpose, we study different models of hyperbolic space and find that
learning embeddings in the Lorentz model is substantially more efficient than in the Poincaré-ball
model. We show that the proposed approach
allows us to learn high-quality embeddings of
large taxonomies which yield improvements over
Poincaré embeddings, especially in low dimensions. Lastly, we apply our model to discover
hierarchies in two real-world datasets: we show
that an embedding in hyperbolic space can reveal
important aspects of a company’s organizational
structure as well as reveal historical relationships
between language families.

1. Introduction
Hierarchical structures are ubiquitous in knowledge representation and reasoning. Starting with Linnaeus, taxonomies
have long been used in biology to categorize and understand
the relationships between species (Mayr, 1968). In social
science, hierarchies are used to understand social interactions or to analyze organizational structures such as companies and governments (Dodds et al., 2003). In comparative
linguistics, evolutionary trees are used to describe the origin of languages (Campbell, 2013), while ontologies are
used to provide a rich categorization of entities in semantic
networks (Antoniou & Van Harmelen, 2004). Hierarchies
are also known to provide important information for learning and classification (Silla & Freitas, 2011). In cognitive
development, the results of Inhelder & Piaget (1964) suggest that the classification structure in children’s thinking is
hierarchical in nature.
Hierarchies can therefore provide important insights into
1
Facebook AI Research, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence
to: Maximilian Nickel <maxn@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

systems of concepts. However, explicit information about
such hierarchical relationships is unavailable for many domains. In this paper, we therefore consider the problem of
discovering concept hierarchies from unstructured observations, specifically in the following setting:
1. We focus on discovering pairwise hierarchical relations
between concepts, where all superior and subordinate
concepts are observed.
2. We aim to infer concept hierarchies only from pairwise
similarity measurements, which are relatively easy and
cheap to obtain in many domains.
Examples of hierarchy discovery that adhere to this setting
include the creation of taxonomies from similarity judgments (e.g., genetic similarity of species or cognate similarity of languages) and the recovery of organizational hierarchies and dominance relations from social interactions.
To infer hierarchies from similarity judgments, we propose
to model such relationships as a combination of two separate aspects: relatedness and generality. Concept A is a
parent (a superior) to concept B if both concepts are related
and A is more general than B. By separating these aspects,
we can then discover concept hierarchies via hyperbolic
embeddings. In particular, we build upon ideas of Poincaré
embeddings (Nickel & Kiela, 2017) to learn continuous representations of hierarchies. Due to its geometric properties,
hyperbolic space can be thought of as a continuous analogue
to discrete trees. By embeddings concepts in such a way
that their similarity order is preserved, we can then identify
(soft) hierarchical relationships from the embedding: relatedness is captured via the distance in the embedding space,
while generality is captured via the norm of the embeddings.
To learn high-quality embeddings, we propose a new optimization approach based on the Lorentz model of hyperbolic
space what enables the efficient closed-form computation
of geodesics on the manifold. This facilitates the development of an efficient optimizer that directly follows these
geodesics, rather than doing a first-order approximation as
in (Nickel & Kiela, 2017). It allows us also to avoid numerical instabilities that arise from the Poincaré distance.
As we will show experimentally, this optimization method

