Estimation of Markov Chain via Rank-Constrained Likelihood
Xudong Li 1 Mengdi Wang 1 Anru Zhang 2

Abstract
This paper studies the estimation of low-rank
Markov chains from empirical trajectories. We
propose a non-convex estimator based on rankconstrained likelihood maximization. Statistical upper bounds are provided for the KullbackLeiber divergence and the `2 risk between the
estimator and the true transition matrix. The estimator reveals a compressed state space of the
Markov chain. We also develop a novel DC (difference of convex function) programming algorithm to tackle the rank-constrained non-smooth
optimization problem. Convergence results are
established. Experiments show that the proposed
estimator achieves better empirical performance
than other popular approaches.

1. Introduction
In scientific studies, engineering systems, and social environments, one often has to interact with complex processes
with uncertainties, collect data, and learn to make predictions and decisions. A critical question is how to model the
unknown random process from data. To answer this question, we particularly focus on discrete Markov chains with
a finite but potentially huge state space. Suppose we are
given a sequence of observations generated by an unknown
Markov process. The true transition matrix is unknown, and
the physical states of the system and its law of transition is
hidden under massive noisy observations. We are interested
in the estimation and state compression of Markov processes, i.e., to identify compact representations of the state
space and recover a reduced-dimensional Markov model.

of Markov chains with low-rank transition matrices in this
paper. Low-rankness is ubiquitous in practice. For example, the random walk of a taxi turns out to correspond to
a nearly low-rank Markov chain. Each taxi trip can be
viewed as a sample transition of a city-wide random walk
that characterizes the traffic dynamics. For another example, control and reinforcement learning, which are typically
modeled as Markov decision processes, suffer from the
curse of dimensionality (Sutton & Barto, 1998). It is of
vital interest to identify the compressed representation of
the “state” of game, in order to reduce the dimensionality
of policy and value functions. Multiple efforts show that as
long as a reduced model or a compact state representation
is given, one can solve high-dimensional control problems
in sample-efficient ways; see (Singh et al., 1995; Van Roy,
2006; Malek et al., 2014) for examples.
The low-rank Markov chain is a basic model for analyzing
data generated by stochastic processes. It is closely related
to a variety of latent-variable models, including Markov process with rich observations (Azizzadenesheli et al., 2016),
state aggregation models (Singh et al., 1995) and hidden
Markov models (Hsu et al., 2012). Low-rankness of Markov
chains can be used to recover network partition under some
lumpability assumption (E et al., 2008). In particular, lowrank Markov chain can be viewed as a special form of
hidden Markov model where the observations contain all
the information of the hidden states.

Department of Operations Research and Financial
Engineering, Princeton University, Sherrerd Hall, Princeton, NJ 08544 2 Department of Statistics, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706.
Correspondence to: Xudong Li <xudongl@princeton.edu>, Mengdi
Wang <mengdiw@princeton.edu>, Anru Zhang <anruzhang@stat.wisc.edu>.

In this article, we propose a rank-constrained maximum likelihood approach for transition matrix estimation from empirical trajectories. The statistical guarantees is developed
for the proposed estimator. Especially, the upper bounds for
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the estimator and the true transition matrix as well as the `2 risk are
established. We further provide a minimax lower bound to
show that the proposed estimator is near rate-optimal within
a class of low-rank Markov chains. A related recent work
(Zhang & Wang, 2017) considered the low-rank estimation
by a spectral method and established upper bound for the
total variation. Compared to the existing results, our maximum likelihood estimator and the KL-divergence bounds
appear to be the first ones of this type.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

The proposed estimator requires solving an optimization
problem with both rank and polyhedral constraints. Due to
the presence of non-convex rank constraint, the optimiza-

To be more specific, we focus on the estimation of a class
1

