Exploring Hidden Dimensions in Parallelizing Convolutional Neural Networks

Zhihao Jia 1 Sina Lin 2 Charles R. Qi 1 Alex Aiken 1

Abstract
The past few years have witnessed growth in the
computational requirements for training deep convolutional neural networks. Current approaches
parallelize training onto multiple devices by applying a single parallelization strategy (e.g., data
or model parallelism) to all layers in a network.
Although easy to reason about, these approaches
result in suboptimal runtime performance in largescale distributed training, since different layers
in a network may prefer different parallelization
strategies. In this paper, we propose layer-wise
parallelism that allows each layer in a network
to use an individual parallelization strategy. We
jointly optimize how each layer is parallelized by
solving a graph search problem. Our evaluation
shows that layer-wise parallelism outperforms
state-of-the-art approaches by increasing training throughput, reducing communication costs,
achieving better scalability to multiple GPUs,
while maintaining original network accuracy.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have proven to be
general and effective across many tasks including image
classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2016),
face recognition (Lawrence et al., 1997), text classification (Wang et al., 2012), and game playing (Silver et al.,
2016). Their success has resulted in growth in the computational requirements to train today’s CNNs, which takes
days or even weeks on modern processors (Zeiler & Fergus,
2014; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; Szegedy et al., 2016).
Previous work has investigated parallelization techniques
to accelerate training. The most common approach is data
parallelism (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014) that keeps a replica of an entire network on
each device and assigns a subset of the training data to
1
Stanford University 2 Microsoft. Correspondence to: Zhihao
Jia <zhihao@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

each device. Another common approach is model parallelism (Mirhoseini et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2017) that divides
the network parameters into disjoint subsets and trains each
subset on a dedicated device. Both approaches apply a single parallelization strategy (i.e., data or model parallelism)
to all layers in a CNN. However, within a CNN, different layers may prefer different parallelization strategies for
achieving optimal runtime performance. For example, a
densely-connected layer with millions of parameters prefers
model parallelism to reduce communication cost for synchronizing parameters, while a convolutional layer typically
prefers data parallelism to eliminate data transfers from the
previous layer. In addition, some layers may prefer more
sophisticated parallelization strategies such as parallelizing
in a mixture of multiple data dimensions (see Section 3).
Because of the differing characteristics of different layers in
a network, applying a single parallelization strategy to all
layers usually results in suboptimal runtime performance.
In this paper, we propose layer-wise parallelism, which enables each layer in a network to use an individual parallelization strategy. Layer-wise parallelism performs the same
computation for each layer as it is defined in the original
network and therefore maintains the same network accuracy
by design. Compared to existing parallelization approaches,
our approach defines a more comprehensive search space
of parallelization strategies, which includes data and model
parallelism as two special cases. Our goal is to find the parallelization strategies for individual layers to jointly achieve
the best possible runtime performance while maintaining
the original network accuracy. To formalize the problem,
we introduce parallelization configurations that define the
search space for parallelizing a layer across multiple devices.
We propose a cost model that quantitively evaluates the runtime performance of different parallelization strategies. The
cost model considers both the computation power of each
device and the communication bandwidth between devices.
With the cost model, we convert the original problem of
choosing parallelization configurations for individual layers
to a graph search problem and develop an efficient algorithm
to find a globally optimal strategy under the cost model.
We evaluate the runtime performance of layer-wise parallelism with AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), VGG-16 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014), and Inception-v3 (Szegedy
et al., 2016) on the ILSVRC 2012 image classification

