Self-Bounded Prediction Suffix Tree via Approximate String Matching

Dongwoo Kim 1 2 Christian Walder 3 1

Abstract
Prediction suffix trees (PST) provide an effective tool for sequence modelling and prediction.
Current prediction techniques for PSTs rely on
exact matching between the suffix of the current
sequence and the previously observed sequence.
We present a provably correct algorithm for learning a PST with approximate suffix matching by
relaxing the exact matching condition. We then
present a self-bounded enhancement of our algorithm where the depth of suffix tree grows automatically in response to the model performance
on a training sequence. Through experiments
on synthetic datasets as well as three real-world
datasets, we show that the approximate matching
PST results in better predictive performance than
the other variants of PST.

1. Introduction
Prediction suffix trees (PST) provide an elegant and effective
tool for sequence prediction tasks such as compression,
temporal classification, reinforcement learning, and DNA
sequencing (Li & Fu, 2014; Majumdar, 2016; Messias &
Whiteson, 2017). The advantage of PSTs over other fixedorder Markov model is that the number of symbols used
to predict depends on prediction context through the suffix
tree data structure, which provides an efficient way to store
and retrieve a set of strings and all their suffixes (Bellemare
et al., 2014).
Many PST algorithms perform exact matching between the
suffix of the current sequence and sub-sequences in the
previous sequence (Ron et al., 1996). The algorithms then
make a prediction based on the previous history of those subsequences. Although the exact matching explicitly models
the context where the same pattern occurred, it is potentially
1
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia
Data to Decisions CRC, Kent Town, SA, Australia 3 Data61 at
CSIRO, Canberra, ACT, Australia. Correspondence to: Dongwoo
Kim <dongwoo.kim@anu.edu.au>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

(a)

(b)

G 44 ˇ
G 44 ˇ
ˇ

ˇ
ˇ

ˇ
ˇ

ˇ
ˇ

ˇ 4ˇ

ˇ

ˇ
ˇ

Figure 1. Musical note prediction: how do we predict the next
1 can relate the first and last three
symbol of each score? (a) A PST
symbols and makes a prediction with the suffix of length three. (b)
A PST cannot relate the first and last three symbols due to the little
variation in the suffix with the same length although the pattern is
similar.

vulnerable to variation in a sequence such as substitution
noise. To illustrate the prediction under variation, we present
two symbolic music scores in Figure 1. When a PST model
performs a prediction on the first score, it can take advantage
of the same pattern between the first and last three symbols,
where the latter is the suffix of the current sequence. On
the other hand, the model cannot relate the first and last
three symbols given the second score because of the minor
variation in the suffix with the same length.
Another practical assumption made in earlier work is that a
shorter suffix has a higher priority than a longer one during
prediction (Dekel et al., 2005; Karampatziakis & Kozen,
2009). This might be an appropriate assumption for some
domains where the recently observed symbols are more
important than the previous symbols, but this might be inappropriate for other domains. For example, a longer suffix
would be more important than a suffix of length one to predict the next symbol of a music sheet since the temporal
pattern in music is often continued over multiple notes.
In this paper, we provide a novel construction of the prediction suffix tree and its online learning algorithm via approximate string matching. In that sense, the proposed algorithm
can be robust to small variations in a sequence. We also
provide a mechanism to control the importance of different
suffixes based on their length. Finally, we derive a selfbounded version of the proposed model that decides the
maximum length of suffix based on a trade-off between a
confidence of prediction and complexity of algorithm automatically.

