Latent Space Policies for Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning

Tuomas Haarnoja * 1 Kristian Hartikainen * 2 Pieter Abbeel 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
We address the problem of learning hierarchical
deep neural network policies for reinforcement
learning. In contrast to methods that explicitly restrict or cripple lower layers of a hierarchy to force
them to use higher-level modulating signals, each
layer in our framework is trained to directly solve
the task, but acquires a range of diverse strategies
via a maximum entropy reinforcement learning
objective. Each layer is also augmented with latent random variables, which are sampled from a
prior distribution during the training of that layer.
The maximum entropy objective causes these latent variables to be incorporated into the layer’s
policy, and the higher level layer can directly control the behavior of the lower layer through this
latent space. Furthermore, by constraining the
mapping from latent variables to actions to be
invertible, higher layers retain full expressivity:
neither the higher layers nor the lower layers are
constrained in their behavior. Our experimental
evaluation demonstrates that we can improve on
the performance of single-layer policies on standard benchmark tasks simply by adding additional
layers, and that our method can solve more complex sparse-reward tasks by learning higher-level
policies on top of high-entropy skills optimized
for simple low-level objectives.

1. Introduction
Model-free deep reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated potential in many challenging domains, ranging from
games (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2016) to manipulation (Levine et al., 2016) and locomotion task (Schulman
et al., 2015). Part of the promise of incorporating deep rep*

Equal contribution 1 Berkeley Artificial Intelligence Research, University of California, Berkeley, USA 2 Independent
researcher, Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Tuomas
Haarnoja <haarnoja@berkeley.edu>, Kristian Hartikainen <kristian.hartikainen@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

resentations into RL is the potential for the emergence of hierarchies, which can enable reasoning and decision making
at different levels of abstract. A hierarchical RL algorithm
could, in principle, efficiently discover solutions to complex problems and reuse representations between related
tasks. While hierarchical structures have been observed
to emerge in deep networks applied to perception tasks,
such as computer vision (LeCun et al., 2015), it remains an
open question how suitable hierarchical representations can
be induced in a reinforcement learning setting. A central
challenge with these methods is the automation of the hierarchy construction process: hand-specified hierarchies require
considerable expertise and insight to design and limit the
generality of the approach (Sutton et al., 1999; Kulkarni
et al., 2016; Tessler et al., 2017), while automated methods
must contend with severe challenges, such as the collapse of
all primitives into just one useful skill (Bacon et al., 2017)
or the need to hand-engineer primitive discovery objectives
or intermediate goals (Heess et al., 2016).
When learning hierarchies automatically, we must answer a
critical question: What objective can we use to ensure that
lower layers in a hierarchy are useful to the higher layers?
Prior work has proposed a number of heuristic approaches,
such as hiding some parts of the observation from the lower
layers (Heess et al., 2016), hand-designing state features
and training the lower layer behaviors to maximize mutual
information against these features (Florensa et al., 2017), or
constructing diversity-seeking priors that cause lower-layer
primitives to take on different roles (Daniel et al., 2012;
Eysenbach et al., 2018). Oftentimes, these heuristics intentionally cripple the lower layers of the hierarchy, for
example, by withholding information, so as to force a hierarchy to emerge, or else limit the higher levels of the hierarchy
to selecting from among a discrete set of skills (Bacon et al.,
2017). In both cases, the hierarchy is forced to emerge because neither higher nor lower layers can solve the problem
alone. However, constraining the layers in this way can
involve artificial and task-specific restrictions (Heess et al.,
2016) or else diminish overall performance.
Instead of crippling or limiting the different levels of the hierarchy, we can imagine a hierarchical framework in which
each layer directly attempts to solve the task and, if it is not
fully successful, makes the job easier for the layer above
it. In this paper, we explore a solution to the hierarchical

