Optimal Rates of Sketched-regularized Algorithms for Least-Squares
Regression over Hilbert Spaces

Junhong Lin 1 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract
We investigate regularized algorithms combining
with projection for least-squares regression problem over a Hilbert space, covering nonparametric regression over a reproducing kernel Hilbert
space. We prove convergence results with respect
to variants of norms, under a capacity assumption
on the hypothesis space and a regularity condition on the target function. As a result, we obtain
optimal rates for regularized algorithms with randomized sketches, provided that the sketch dimension is proportional to the effective dimension up
to a logarithmic factor. As a byproduct, we obtain similar results for Nyström regularized algorithms. Our results provide optimal, distributiondependent rates that do not have any saturation effect for sketched/Nyström regularized algorithms,
considering both the attainable and non-attainable
cases.

1. Introduction
Let the input space H be a separable Hilbert space with
inner product denoted by h·, ·iH , and the output space R.
Let ρ be an unknown probability measure on H × R. In this
paper, we study the following expected risk minimization,
Z
e
e
inf E(ω), E(ω) =
(hω, xiH − y)2 dρ(x, y), (1)
ω∈H

H×R

where the measure ρ is known only through a sample
z = {zi = (xi , yi )}ni=1 of size n ∈ N, independently and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) according to ρ.
The above regression setting covers nonparametric regression over a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (Cucker &
Zhou, 2007; Steinwart & Christmann, 2008), and it is close
1
Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems, École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Junhong Lin <junhong.lin@epfl.ch>, Volkan
Cevher <volkan.cevher@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

to functional regression (Ramsay, 2006) and linear inverse
problems (Engl et al., 1996). A basic algorithm for the
problem is ridge regression, and its generalization, spectralregularized algorithm. Such algorithms can be viewed as
solving an empirical, linear equation with the empirical covariance operator replaced by a regularized one, see (Caponnetto & Yao, 2006; Bauer et al., 2007; Gerfo et al., 2008; Lin
et al., 2018) and references therein. Here, the regularization
is used to control the complexity of the solution to against
over-fitting and to achieve best generalization ability.
The function/estimator generated by classic regularized algorithm is in the subspace span{x} of H, where x =
{x1 , · · · , xn }. More often, the search of an estimator
for some specific algorithms is restricted to a different
(and possibly smaller) subspace S, which leads to regularized algorithms with projection. Such approaches
have computational advantages in nonparametric regression with kernel methods (Williams & Seeger, 2000;
Smola & Schölkopf, 2000). Typically, with a subsample/sketch dimension m < n, S = span{x̃j : 1 ≤ j ≤ m}
where x̃j is chosen randomly from the input set x,
Pm
or S = span{ j=1 Gij xj : 1 ≤ i ≤ m} where G =
[Gij ]1≤i≤m,1≤j≤n is a general randomized matrix whose
rows are drawn according to a distribution. The resulted
algorithms are called Nyström regularized algorithm and
sketched-regularized algorithm, respectively.
Our starting points of this paper are recent papers (Bach,
2013; Alaoui & Mahoney, 2015; Yang et al., 2015; Rudi
et al., 2015; Myleiko et al., 2017) where convergence results
on Nyström/sketched regularized algorithms for learning
with kernel methods are given. Particularly, within the fixed
design setting, i.e., the input set x are deterministic while
the output set y = {y1 , · · · , yn } treated randomly, convergence results have been derived, in (Bach, 2013; Alaoui &
Mahoney, 2015) for Nyström ridge regression and in (Yang
et al., 2015) for sketched ridge regression. Within the random design setting (which is more meaningful (Hsu et al.,
2014) in statistical learning theory) and involving a regularity/smoothness condition on the target function (Smale &
Zhou, 2007), optimal statistical results on generalization error bounds (excess risks) have been obtained in (Rudi et al.,
2015) for Nyström ridge regression. The latter results were
further generalized in (Myleiko et al., 2017) to a general

