Deep One-Class Classification

Lukas Ruff * 1 Robert A. Vandermeulen * 2 Nico Görnitz 3 Lucas Deecke 4 Shoaib A. Siddiqui 2 5
Alexander Binder 6 Emmanuel Müller 1 Marius Kloft 2

Abstract
Despite the great advances made by deep learning in many machine learning problems, there
is a relative dearth of deep learning approaches
for anomaly detection. Those approaches which
do exist involve networks trained to perform a
task other than anomaly detection, namely generative models or compression, which are in turn
adapted for use in anomaly detection; they are
not trained on an anomaly detection based objective. In this paper we introduce a new anomaly
detection method—Deep Support Vector Data
Description—, which is trained on an anomaly
detection based objective. The adaptation to the
deep regime necessitates that our neural network
and training procedure satisfy certain properties,
which we demonstrate theoretically. We show
the effectiveness of our method on MNIST and
CIFAR-10 image benchmark datasets as well as
on the detection of adversarial examples of GTSRB stop signs.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD) (Chandola et al., 2009; Aggarwal,
2016) is the task of discerning unusual samples in data. Typically, this is treated as an unsupervised learning problem
where the anomalous samples are not known a priori and
*

Equal contribution

A part of the work was done while LR, RV, LD, and MK were
with Department of Computer Science, Humboldt University of
Berlin, Germany. 1 Hasso Plattner Institute, Potsdam, Germany
2
Department of Computer Science, TU Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany 3 Machine Learning Group, Department of
Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, TU Berlin, Berlin,
Germany 4 School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland 5 German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI GmbH), Kaiserslautern, Germany 6 ISTD pillar,
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore. Correspondence to: Lukas Ruff <contact@lukasruff.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

it is assumed that the majority of the training dataset consists of “normal” data (here and elsewhere the term “normal”
means not anomalous and is unrelated to the Gaussian distribution). The aim then is to learn a model that accurately
describes “normality.” Deviations from this description are
then deemed to be anomalies. This is also known as oneclass classification (Moya et al., 1993). AD algorithms are
often trained on data collected during the normal operating
state of a machine or system for monitoring (Lavin & Ahmad, 2015). Other domains include intrusion detection for
cybersecurity (Garcia-Teodoro et al., 2009), fraud detection
(Phua et al., 2005), and medical diagnosis (Salem et al.,
2013; Schlegl et al., 2017). As with many fields, the data in
these domains is growing rapidly in size and dimensionality
and thus we require effective and efficient ways to detect
anomalies in large quantities of high-dimensional data.
Classical AD methods such as the One-Class SVM (OCSVM) (Schölkopf et al., 2001) or Kernel Density Estimation
(KDE) (Parzen, 1962), often fail in high-dimensional, datarich scenarios due to bad computational scalability and the
curse of dimensionality. To be effective, such shallow methods typically require substantial feature engineering. In
comparison, deep learning (LeCun et al., 2015; Schmidhuber, 2015) presents a way to learn relevant features automatically, with exceptional successes over classical methods
(Collobert et al., 2011; Hinton et al., 2012), especially in
computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016).
How to transfer the benefits of deep learning to AD is less
clear, however, since finding the right unsupervised deep
objective is hard (Bengio et al., 2013). Current approaches
to deep AD have shown promising results (Hawkins et al.,
2002; Sakurada & Yairi, 2014; Xu et al., 2015; Erfani et al.,
2016; Andrews et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2017), but none
of these methods are trained by optimizing an AD based
objective function and typically rely on reconstruction error
based heuristics.
In this work we introduce a novel approach to deep AD
inspired by kernel-based one-class classification and minimum volume estimation. Our method, Deep Support Vector
Data Description (Deep SVDD), trains a neural network
while minimizing the volume of a hypersphere that encloses
the network representations of the data (see Figure 1). Minimizing the volume of the hypersphere forces the network to

