Stochastic Proximal Algorithms for AUC Maximization

Michael Natole Jr. 1 Yiming Ying 1 Siwei Lyu 2

Abstract
Stochastic optimization algorithms such as
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) update the
model sequentially with cheap per-iteration
costs, making them amenable for large-scale data
analysis. Most of the existing studies focus on
the classification accuracy. However, these can
not be directly applied to the important problems
of maximizing the Area under the ROC curve
(AUC) in imbalanced classification and bipartite ranking. In this paper, we develop a novel
stochastic proximal algorithm for AUC maximization which is referred to as SPAM. Compared with the previous literature, our algorithm
SPAM applies to a non-smooth penalty function,
and achieves a convergence rate of O( logt t ) for
strongly convex functions while both space and
per-iteration costs are of one datum.

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient algorithms (Robbins & Monro, 1951;
Bottou & Cun, 2004; Srebro & Tewari, 2010; Moulines &
Bach, 2011; Duchi et al., 2011) and online learning algorithms (e.g. (Bottou & Cun, 2004; Srebro & Tewari, 2010;
Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2011; Hazan & Kale, 2012; Rakhlin
et al., 2012a; Orabona, 2014)) can update the model sequentially with computationally cheap per-iteration costs,
making them amenable for large-scale streaming data analysis. Most of the existing studies focus on classification
error or prediction accuracy where the empirical objective
function is a summation of losses over individual samples.
However, accuracy is not suitable for important learning
tasks such as imbalanced classification (Elkan, 2001). Area
under the ROC curve (AUC) (Hanley & McNeil, 1982;
Bradley, 1997; Fawcett, 2006) is a widely used metric
1
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, SUNY at Albany,
Albany, NY, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, SUNY at
Albany, Albany, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Yiming Ying
<yying@albany.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

for measuring the performance in these tasks. In particular, minimization of the rank loss in bipartite ranking is
equivalent to maximizing the AUC criterion (Kotlowski
et al., 2011). There are considerable efforts (Herschtal &
Raskutti, 2004; Rakotomamonjy, 2004; Joachims, 2005;
Zhang et al., 2012) that have been devoted to developing
batch AUC maximization algorithms. These appealing
 algorithms have a convergence rate of O min 1ε , √1λε , but
have a high per-iteration cost of O(nd). Here, λ, n, and d
are the regularization parameter, the number of samples,
and the dimension of the data, respectively. Such algorithms train the model on the whole training data which
are not suitable for analyzing massive streaming data that
arrives sequentially.
Recently, there is considerable progress on online learning
algorithms (Zhao et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2012; Kar et al.,
2013) for AUC maximization. Due to the fact that the empirical risk for AUC maximization is a summation of pairwise losses over pairs of samples, such algorithms, at time
t, need to pair the currently-received data (xt , yt ) with all
previous data {(xi , yi ) : i = 1, . . . , t − 1}. As such, one
needs to access all previous examples which leads to expensive space and per-iteration complexity of O(td) for ddimensional data at iteration t. The studies (Zhao et al.,
2011; Kar et al., 2013) introduced the technique of buffering to alleviate the above hurdle which reduces the periteration space and time complexity to O(Bd). However, to
achieve good generalization performance, the size
√ B needs
to be sufficiently large which is typically of O( T ) if the
size T of the finite training data is known. The work (Gao
et al., 2013) requires to update the covariance matrix of the
training data with the space and per-iteration complexity
O(d2 ) which is inefficient for high-dimensional data.
The most recent work (Ying et al., 2016) reformulated the
problem of AUC maximization with the least square loss as
a stochastic saddle point problem (SPP). They proposed an
online learning algorithm which conducts stochastic gradient descent/ascent on both the primal and dual variables.
The convergence of such first-order primal-dual algorithms
for solving stochastic SPPs is at most O( √1t ) as argued
in (e.g. Chen et al. (2014)). This is, however, inferior
to the optimal rate of O( 1t ), up to a logarithmic term, of
SGDs for the accuracy as a performance measure (Rakhlin
et al., 2012a; Shamir & Zhang, 2013). In addition, the work

