Inductive Two-layer Modeling with Parametric Bregman Transfer

Vignesh Ganapathiraman 1 Zhan Shi 1 Xinhua Zhang 1 Yaoliang Yu 2

Abstract
Latent prediction models, exemplified by multilayer networks, employ hidden variables that automate abstract feature discovery. They typically
pose nonconvex optimization problems and effective semi-definite programming (SDP) relaxations have been developed to enable global solutions (Aslan et al., 2014). However, these models
rely on nonparametric training of layer-wise kernel representations, and are therefore restricted to
transductive learning which slows down test prediction. In this paper, we develop a new inductive learning framework for parametric transfer
functions using matching losses. The result for
ReLU utilizes completely positive matrices, and
the inductive learner not only delivers superior
accuracy but also offers an order of magnitude
speedup over SDP with constant approximation
guarantees.

1. Introduction
The past decade has witnessed advances of deep learning
in a broad range of application areas such as game playing
(Silver et al., 2016), natural language processing (Sutskever
et al., 2014), image processing and computer vision (He
et al., 2016). Its effectiveness is often attributed to the automated learning of latent representations, in that salient and
discriminative features are highly beneficial for the overall learning task. With abstract and semantic features synthesized, the predictive relations between observations can
be captured with more ease despite the possible complications in the correlation. In unsupervised learning, latent models have been widely used for clustering (Banerjee
et al., 2005), dimensionality reduction (Lawrence, 2005),
and transformation-invariant visual data analysis (Ranzato
et al., 2012).
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois
at Chicago, USA 2 School of Computer Science, University
of Waterloo, Canada. Correspondence to: Xinhua Zhang
<zhangx@uic.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

The focus of this paper is conditional modeling for supervised learning, where latent variables are learned in the
context of output information, so that accurate reconstruction of outputs can be facilitated through predictive intervening features. Such features can characterize latent clusters (Tishby et al., 1999), sparse coding (Elad & Aharon,
2006), invariant representation (Rifai et al., 2011), amongst
others.
Despite their advantages in modeling and success in applications, latent models remain hard to train. The key
challenge originates from the coupling of model parameter learning and latent variable inference, which in general leads to a nonconvex optimization problem. Although
empirical performance has been the major focus of deep
learning, recently substantial progress has been made towards the analysis of global training and the structure of the
optimization problem. For example, Choromanska et al.
(2014) and Dauphin et al. (2014) showed that the lowest
critical values of the random loss function are close to the
global minimum, and Kawaguchi (2016) showed, under
certain assumptions, that every local minimum is a global
minimum for an expected loss function of a deep nonlinear neural network. Similar global trainability results have
been derived for gradient descent on two-node ReLU networks (Tian, 2017), quadratic activations (Soltanolkotabi
et al., 2017), and one-hidden-layer non-overlapping convolution nets (Brutzkus & Globerson, 2017). The global
minima in over-parameterized settings were characterized
on deep and wide nets and convolutional nets (Nguyen &
Hein, 2017a;b). However most analyses are still limited,
especially with assumptions on the model and data distribution that are hard to verify in practice.
Along a different line of methodology, reformulations of latent models have been studied which admit tractable global
solutions. Examples include boosting (Bengio et al., 2005),
spectral methods (Anandkumar et al., 2014; Zhong et al.,
2017), kernel methods (Zhang et al., 2016; 2017), polynomial networks and sum-product networks (Livni et al.,
2014; Gens & Domingos, 2012), and semidefinite relaxations (Fogel et al., 2015). Unfortunately, they either impose restrictions on the model space (e.g. polynomial network, recursive inverse kernels), or require tractability of
underlying oracles, or rely on realizability assumptions.

