Learning in Reproducing Kernel Kreı̆n Spaces

Dino Oglic 1 2 Thomas Gärtner 1

Abstract
We formulate a novel regularized risk minimization problem for learning in reproducing kernel
Kreı̆n spaces and show that the strong representer
theorem applies to it. As a result of the latter, the
learning problem can be expressed as the minimization of a quadratic form over a hypersphere
of constant radius. We present an algorithm that
can find a globally optimal solution to this nonconvex optimization problem in time cubic in the
number of instances. Moreover, we derive the
gradient of the solution with respect to its hyperparameters and, in this way, provide means for
efficient hyperparameter tuning. The approach
comes with a generalization bound expressed in
terms of the Rademacher complexity of the corresponding hypothesis space. The major advantage
over standard kernel methods is the ability to learn
with various domain specific similarity measures
for which positive definiteness does not hold or is
difficult to establish. The approach is evaluated
empirically using indefinite kernels defined on
structured as well as vectorial data. The empirical
results demonstrate a superior performance of our
approach over the state-of-the-art baselines.

1. Introduction
We build on the work by Ong et al. (2004) and formulate
a novel regularized risk minimization problem for learning
in reproducing kernel Kreı̆n spaces (reviewed in Section 2).
The proposed risk minimization problem is of interest to several applications of machine learning (Laub & Müller, 2004)
where the instance space can be accessed only implicitly,
through a kernel function that outputs a real-value for a pair
of instances. Typically, for a given set of instances the kernel matrix does not exhibit properties required by standard
machine learning algorithms such as positive definiteness
1

School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, UK
Institut für Informatik III, Universität Bonn, Germany. Correspondence to: Dino Oglic <dino.oglic@uni-bonn.de>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

or metricity. A common practice in dealing with such data
is to map the indefinite kernel matrix to a positive definite
one using a spectrum transformation. This conversion can
cause information loss and affect our ability to model a
functional dependence of interest. In particular, Laub &
Müller (2004) have used three real-world datasets to demonstrate that for symmetric kernel functions corresponding to
indefinite kernel matrices, the negative parts of their spectra
contain useful information which gets discarded by some of
the standard procedures that learn by first transforming the
indefinite kernel matrix to a positive definite one.
We show that the strong representer theorem applies to
the proposed risk minimization problem and utilize this
theoretical result to express the learning problem as the
minimization of a quadratic form over a hypersphere of
constant radius (Section 3.1). The optimization problem
is, in general, neither convex nor concave and it can have
exponentially many local optima (with respect to the representation size). Despite this, a globally optimal solution
to this problem can be found in time cubic in the number
of training examples. The algorithm for solving this nonconvex problem relies on the work by Forsythe & Golub
(1965) and Gander et al. (1989), who were first to consider
the optimization of a quadratic form over a hypersphere of
constant radius. The proposed risk minimization problem is
consistent and comes with a generalization bound expressed
in terms of the Rademacher complexity of the corresponding
hypothesis space, which is a subset of a reproducing kernel
Kreı̆n space of functions (Section 3.2). In Section 3.3, we
derive the gradient of an optimal solution to the risk minimization problem with respect to the hyperparameters of
the model (e.g., the regularization parameters, hypersphere
radius, and/or kernel-specific parameters). The derived solution gradient allows one to tune the hyperparameters of the
model using an off-the-shelf optimization algorithm (e.g.,
L - BFGS - B minimization procedure, available in most numerical packages). In Section 4, we place our work in the
context of relevant existing approaches for learning in reproducing kernel Kreı̆n spaces. The effectiveness of the
approach is evaluated empirically using indefinite kernels
defined on structured and vectorial data. The results show a
superior performance of our approach over the state-of-theart baselines and indicate that on some problems indefinite
kernels can be more effective than the positive definite ones.

