Can Deep Reinforcement Learning Solve Erdos-Selfridge-Spencer Games?

Maithra Raghu 1 2 Alex Irpan 1 Jacob Andreas 3 Robert Kleinberg 2 Quoc Le 1 Jon Kleinberg 2

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning has achieved many
recent successes, but our understanding of its
strengths and limitations is hampered by the lack
of rich environments in which we can fully characterize optimal behavior, and correspondingly
diagnose individual actions against such a characterization. Here we consider a family of combinatorial games, arising from work of Erdos, Selfridge, and Spencer, and we propose their use
as environments for evaluating and comparing
different approaches to reinforcement learning.
These games have a number of appealing features: they are challenging for current learning
approaches, but they form (i) a low-dimensional,
simply parametrized environment where (ii) there
is a linear closed form solution for optimal behavior from any state, and (iii) the difficulty of
the game can be tuned by changing environment
parameters in an interpretable way. We use these
Erdos-Selfridge-Spencer games not only to compare different algorithms, but test for generalization, make comparisons to supervised learning,
analyze multiagent play, and even develop a self
play algorithm.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning has seen many remarkable successes over the past few years (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver
et al., 2017). But developing learning algorithms that are
robust across tasks and policy representations remains a
challenge (Henderson et al., 2017). Standard benchmarks
like MuJoCo and Atari provide rich settings for experimentation, but the specifics of the underlying environments differ
from each other in multiple ways, and hence determining
the principles underlying any particular form of sub-optimal
1

Google Brain 2 Cornell University 3 University of California, Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Maithra Raghu
<maithrar@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

behavior is difficult. Optimal behavior in these environments is generally complex and not fully characterized, so
algorithmic success is generally associated with high scores,
typically on a copy of the training environment making
it hard to analyze where errors are occurring or evaluate
generalization.
An ideal setting for studying the strengths and limitations
of reinforcement learning algorithms would be (i) a simply parametrized family of environments where (ii) optimal
behavior can be completely characterized and (iii) the environment is rich enough to support interaction and multiagent
play.
To produce such a family of environments, we look in a
novel direction – to a set of two-player combinatorial games
with their roots in work of Erdos and Selfridge (Erdos &
Selfridge, 1973), and placed on a general footing by Spencer
(1994). Roughly speaking, these Erdos-Selfridge-Spencer
(ESS) games are games in which two players take turns
selecting objects from some combinatorial structure, with
the feature that optimal strategies can be defined by potential functions derived from conditional expectations over
random future play.
These ESS games thus provide an opportunity to capture the
general desiderata noted above, with a clean characterization
of optimal behavior and a set of instances that range from
easy to very hard as we sweep over a simple set of tunable
parameters. We focus in particular on one of the best-known
games in this genre, Spencer’s attacker-defender game (also
known as the “tenure game”; Spencer, 1994), in which —
roughly speaking — an attacker advances a set of pieces
up the levels of a board, while a defender destroys subsets
of these pieces to try prevent any of them from reaching
the final level (Figure 1). An instance of the game can be
parametrized by two key quantities. The first is the number
of levels K, which determines both the size of the state space
and the approximate length of the game; the latter is directly
related to the sparsity of win/loss signals as rewards. The
second quantity is a potential function φ, whose magnitude
characterizes whether the instance favors the defender or
attacker, and how much “margin of error” there is in optimal
play.
The environment therefore allows us to study learning by
the defender and attacker, separately or concurrently in mul-

