Distributed Nonparametric Regression under Communication Constraints
Yuancheng Zhu 1 John Lafferty 2

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of nonparametric
estimation of a smooth function with data distributed across multiple machines. We assume an
independent sample from a white noise model is
collected at each machine, and an estimator of the
underlying true function needs to be constructed
at a central machine. We place limits on the number of bits that each machine can use to transmit
information to the central machine. Our results
give both asymptotic lower bounds and matching
upper bounds on the statistical risk under various
settings. We identify three regimes, depending on
the relationship among the number of machines,
the size of data available at each machine, and the
communication budget. When the communication budget is small, the statistical risk depends
solely on this communication bottleneck, regardless of the sample size. In the regime where the
communication budget is large, the classic minimax risk in the non-distributed estimation setting
is recovered. In an intermediate regime, the statistical risk depends on both the sample size and the
communication budget.

1. Introduction
Classic statistical theory studies the difficulty of estimation
under various models, and attempts to find the optimal estimation procedures. Such studies usually assume that all of
the collected data are available to construct the estimators.
In this paper, we study the problem of statistical estimation with data residing at multiple machines. Estimation in
distributed settings is becoming common in modern data
analysis tasks, as the data can be collected or stored at different locations. In order to obtain an estimate of some
statistical functional, information needs to be gathered and
1
Department of Statistics, Wharton School, University
of Pennsylvania 2 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University. Correspondence to: Yuancheng Zhu
<yuancheng.zhu@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

aggregated from the multiple locations to form the final estimate. However, the communication between machines may
be limited. For instance, there may be a communication
budget that limits how much information can be transmitted. In this setting, it is important to understand how the
statistical risk of estimation degrades as the communication
budget becomes more limited.
A similar problem, called the CEO problem, was first
studied in the electrical engineering community from
a rate-distortion-theory perspective (Berger et al., 1996;
Viswanathan & Berger, 1997). More recently, several studies have focused on more specific statistical tasks and models; see, for example, Zhang et al. (2013a); Shamir (2014);
Battey et al. (2015); Braverman et al. (2016); Diakonikolas
et al. (2017); Fan et al. (2017); Lee et al. (2017) treating
mean estimation, regression, principal eigenspace estimation, discrete density estimation and other problems. Most
of this existing research focuses on parametric and discrete
models, where the parameter of interest has a finite dimension. While there are also studies of nonparametric problems
and models (Zhang et al., 2013b; Blanchard & Mücke, 2016;
Chang et al., 2017; Shang & Cheng, 2017), the fundamental limits of distributed nonparametric estimation are still
under-explored.
In this paper, we consider a fundamental nonparametric
estimation task—estimating a smooth function in the white
noise model. We assume observation of the random process
1
dY (t) = f (t)dt + √ dW (t),
n

0 ≤ t ≤ 1,

(1.1)

where √1n is the noise level, W (t) is a standard Wiener process, and f is the underlying function to be estimated. The
white noise model is a centerpiece of nonparametric estimation, being asymptotically equivalent to nonparametric regression and density estimation (Brown & Low, 1996; Nussbaum, 1996). We intentionally express the noise level as √1n
to reflect the connection between the white noise model and
a nonparametric regression problem with n evenly spaced
observations. We focus on the important case where the regression function lies in the Sobolev space F(α, c) of order
α and radius c; the exact definition of this function space is
given in the following section.
In a distributed setting, instead of observing a single sample

