Adversarially Regularized Autoencoders

Jake (Junbo) Zhao * 1 2 Yoon Kim * 3 Kelly Zhang 1 Alexander M. Rush 3 Yann LeCun 1 2

Abstract
Deep latent variable models, trained using variational autoencoders or generative adversarial networks, are now a key technique for representation learning of continuous structures. However,
applying similar methods to discrete structures,
such as text sequences or discretized images, has
proven to be more challenging. In this work, we
propose a flexible method for training deep latent
variable models of discrete structures. Our approach is based on the recently-proposed Wasserstein autoencoder (WAE) which formalizes the adversarial autoencoder (AAE) as an optimal transport problem. We first extend this framework to
model discrete sequences, and then further explore different learned priors targeting a controllable representation. This adversarially regularized autoencoder (ARAE) allows us to generate
natural textual outputs as well as perform manipulations in the latent space to induce change in the
output space. Finally we show that the latent representation can be trained to perform unaligned
textual style transfer, giving improvements both in
automatic/human evaluation compared to existing
methods.

1. Introduction
Recent work on deep latent variable models, such as variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014) and generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014), has
shown significant progress in learning smooth representations of complex, high-dimensional continuous data such as
images. These latent variable representations facilitate the
ability to apply smooth transformations in latent space in order to produce complex modifications of generated outputs,
while still remaining on the data manifold.
Unfortunately, learning similar latent variable models of
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, New
York University 2 Facebook AI Research 3 School of Engineering
and Applied Sciences, Harvard University. Correspondence to:
Jake Zhao <jakezhao@cs.nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

discrete structures, such as text sequences or discretized
images, remains a challenging problem. Initial work on
VAEs for text has shown that optimization is difficult, as the
generative model can easily degenerate into a unconditional
language model (Bowman et al., 2016). Recent work on
generative adversarial networks (GANs) for text has mostly
focused on dealing with the non-differentiable objective
either through policy gradient methods (Che et al., 2017;
Hjelm et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2017) or with the GumbelSoftmax distribution (Kusner & Hernandez-Lobato, 2016).
However, neither approach can yet produce robust representations directly.
In this work, we extend the adversarial autoencoder (AAE)
(Makhzani et al., 2015) to discrete sequences/structures.
Similar to the AAE, our model learns an encoder from an
input space to an adversarially regularized continuous latent
space. However unlike the AAE which utilizes a fixed
prior, we instead learn a parameterized prior as a GAN.
Like sequence VAEs, the model does not require using
policy gradients or continuous relaxations. Like GANs,
the model provides flexibility in learning a prior through a
parameterized generator.
This adversarially regularized autoencoder (ARAE) can further be formalized under the recently-introduced Wasserstein autoencoder (WAE) framework (Tolstikhin et al.,
2018), which also generalizes the adversarial autoencoder.
This framework connects regularized autoencoders to an
optimal transport objective for an implicit generative model.
We extend this class of latent variable models to the case of
discrete output, specifically showing that the autoencoder
cross-entropy loss upper-bounds the total variational distance between the model/data distributions. Under this
setup, commonly-used discrete decoders such as RNNs, can
be incorporated into the model. Finally to handle non-trivial
sequence examples, we consider several different (fixed
and learned) prior distributions. These include a standard
Gaussian prior used in image models and in the AAE/WAE
models, a learned parametric generator acting as a GAN in
latent variable space, and a transfer-based parametric generator that is trained to ignore targeted attributes of the input.
The last prior can be directly used for unaligned transfer
tasks such as sentiment or style transfer.
Experiments apply ARAE to discretized images and text

