On the Relationship between Data Efficiency and Error
for Uncertainty Sampling

Stephen Mussmann 1 Percy Liang 1

Abstract
While active learning offers potential cost savings, the actual data efficiency—the reduction
in amount of labeled data needed to obtain the
same error rate—observed in practice is mixed.
This paper poses a basic question: when is active learning actually helpful? We provide an
answer for logistic regression with the popular
active learning algorithm, uncertainty sampling.
Empirically, on 21 datasets from OpenML, we
find a strong inverse correlation between data
efficiency and the error rate of the final classifier. Theoretically, we show that for a variant
of uncertainty sampling, the asymptotic data efficiency is within a constant factor of the inverse
error rate of the limiting classifier.

1. Introduction
Active learning offers potential label cost savings by adaptively choosing the data points to label. Over the past two
decades, a large number of active learning algorithms have
been proposed (Seung et al., 1992; Lewis & Gale, 1994;
Freund et al., 1997; Tong & Koller, 2001; Roy & McCallum, 2001; Brinker, 2003; Hoi et al., 2009). Much of the
community’s focus is on comparing the merits of different
active learning algorithms (Schein & Ungar, 2007; Yang &
Loog, 2016).
This paper is motivated by the observation that even for
a fixed active learning algorithm, its effectiveness varies
widely across datasets. Tong & Koller (2001) show a
dataset where uncertainty sampling achieves 5x data efficiency, meaning that active learning achieves the same error rate as random sampling with one-fifth of the labeled
data. For this same algorithm, different datasets yield a
mixed bag of results: worse performance than random sam1

Stanford University, Stanford, CA. Correspondence to:
Stephen Mussmann <mussmann@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

pling (Yang & Loog, 2016), no gains (Schein & Ungar,
2007), gains of 2x (Tong & Koller, 2001), and gains of 3x
(Brinker, 2003).
In what cases and to what extent is active learning superior
to naive random sampling? This is an important question
to address for active learning to be effectively used in practice. In this paper, we provide both empirical and theoretical answers for the case of logistic regression and uncertainty sampling, “the simplest and most commonly used”
active learning algorithm in practice (Settles, 2010) and the
best algorithm given in the benchmark experiments of Yang
& Loog (2016).
Empirically, in Section 3, we study 21 binary classification datasets from OpenML. We found that the data efficiency for uncertainty sampling and inverse error achieved
by training on the full dataset are correlated with a Pearson correlation of 0.79 and a Spearman rank correlation of
0.67.
Theoretically, in Section 4, we analyze a two-stage variant
of uncertainty sampling, which first learns a rough classifier via random sampling and then samples near the decision boundary of that classifier. We show that the asymptotic data efficiency of this algorithm compared to random
sampling is within a small constant factor of the inverse
limiting error rate. The argument follows by comparing
the Fisher information of the passive and active estimators,
formalizing the intuition that in low error regimes, random
sampling wastes many samples that the model is already
confident about. Note that this result is different in kind
than the log(1/) versus 1/ rates often studied in statistical active learning theory (Balcan et al., 2009; Hanneke,
2014), which focuses on convergence rates as opposed to
the dependence on error. Together, our empirical and theoretical results provide a strong link between the data efficiency and the limiting error rate.

2. Setup
Consider a binary classification problem where the goal
is to learn a predictor f from input x ∈ Rd to output
y ∈ {−1, +1} that has low expected error (0-1 loss),
Err(f ) = Pr[f (x) 6= y] with respect to an underlying

