Data-Dependent Stability of Stochastic Gradient Descent

Ilja Kuzborskij 1 Christoph H. Lampert 2

Abstract
We establish a data-dependent notion of algorithmic stability for Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD), and employ it to develop novel generalization bounds. This is in contrast to previous
distribution-free algorithmic stability results for
SGD which depend on the worst-case constants.
By virtue of the data-dependent argument, our
bounds provide new insights into learning with
SGD on convex and non-convex problems. In
the convex case, we show that the bound on the
generalization error depends on the risk at the
initialization point. In the non-convex case, we
prove that the expected curvature of the objective
function around the initialization point has crucial influence on the generalization error. In both
cases, our results suggest a simple data-driven
strategy to stabilize SGD by pre-screening its initialization. As a corollary, our results allow us
to show optimistic generalization bounds that exhibit fast convergence rates for SGD subject to a
vanishing empirical risk and low noise of stochastic gradient.

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has become one of the
workhorses of modern machine learning. In particular, it
is the optimization method of choice for training highly
complex and non-convex models, such as neural networks.
When it was observed that these models generalize better
(suffer less from overfitting) than classical machine learning
theory suggests, a large theoretical interest emerged to explain this phenomenon. Given that SGD at best finds a local
minimum of the non-convex objective function, it has been
argued that all such minima might be equally good. However, at the same time, a large body of empirical work and
tricks of trade, such as early stopping, suggests that in prac1
University of Milan, Italy 2 IST Austria. Correspondence to:
Ilja Kuzborskij <ilja.kuzborskij@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

tice one might not even reach a minimum, yet nevertheless
observes excellent performance.
In this work we follow an alternative route that aims to
directly analyze the generalization ability of SGD by studying how sensitive it is to small perturbations in the training
set. This is known as algorithmic stability approach (Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2002) and was used recently (Hardt et al.,
2016) to establish generalization bounds for both convex
and non-convex learning settings. To do so they employed
a rather restrictive notion of stability that does not depend
on the data, but captures only intrinsic characteristics of the
learning algorithm and global properties of the objective
function. Consequently, their analysis results in worst-case
guarantees that in some cases tend to be too pessimistic. As
recently pointed out in (Zhang et al., 2017), deep learning
might indeed be such a case, as this notion of stability is
insufficient to give deeper theoretical insights, and a less
restrictive one is desirable.
As our main contribution in this work we establish that a
data-dependent notion of algorithmic stability, very similar
to the On-Average Stability (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2010),
holds for SGD when applied to convex as well as nonconvex learning problems. As a consequence we obtain new
generalization bounds that depend on the data-generating
distribution and the initialization point of an algorithm. For
convex loss functions, the bound on the generalization error
is essentially multiplicative in the risk at the initialization
point when noise of stochastic gradient is not too high. For
the non-convex loss functions, besides the risk, it is also critically controlled by the expected second-order information
about the objective function at the initialization point. We
further corroborate our findings empirically and show that,
indeed, the data-dependent generalization bound is tighter
than the worst-case counterpart on non-convex objective
functions. Finally, the nature of the data-dependent bounds
allows us to state optimistic bounds that switch to the faster
rate of convergence subject to the vanishing empirical risk.
In particular, our findings justify the intuition that SGD is
more stable in less curved areas of the objective function
and link it to the generalization ability. This also backs up
numerous empirical findings in the deep learning literature
that solutions with low generalization error occur in less
curved regions. At the same time, in pessimistic scenarios,

