Message Passing Stein Variational Gradient Descent

Jingwei Zhuo 1 Chang Liu 1 Jiaxin Shi 1 Jun Zhu 1 Ning Chen 1 Bo Zhang 1

Abstract
Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) is a recently proposed particle-based Bayesian inference
method, which has attracted a lot of interest due to
its remarkable approximation ability and particle
efficiency compared to traditional variational inference and Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods.
However, we observed that particles of SVGD
tend to collapse to modes of the target distribution, and this particle degeneracy phenomenon becomes more severe with higher dimensions. Our
theoretical analysis finds out that there exists a
negative correlation between the dimensionality
and the repulsive force of SVGD which should be
blamed for this phenomenon. We propose Message Passing SVGD (MP-SVGD) to solve this
problem. By leveraging the conditional independence structure of probabilistic graphical models
(PGMs), MP-SVGD converts the original highdimensional global inference problem into a set
of local ones over the Markov blanket with lower
dimensions. Experimental results show its advantages of preventing vanishing repulsive force in
high-dimensional space over SVGD, and its particle efficiency and approximation flexibility over
other inference methods on graphical models.

1. Introduction
Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) (Liu & Wang,
2016) is a recently proposed inference method. To approximate an intractable but differentiable target distribution, it
constructs a set of particles iteratively along the optimal
gradient direction in a vector-valued reproducing kernel
Hilbert space (RKHS) towards minimizing the KL divergence. SVGD does not confine the approximation within
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, State
Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys., THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China. Correspondence to: Jingwei Zhuo <zjw15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Jun Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

parametric families as commonly done in traditional variational inference (VI) methods. Besides, SVGD is more
particle efficient than traditional Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) methods: it generates diverse particles due to the
deterministic repulsive force induced by kernels instead of
Monte Carlo randomness. These benefits make SVGD an
appealing method and gain a lot of interest (Pu et al., 2017;
Haarnoja et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017; Feng et al., 2017).
As a kernel-based method, the performance of SVGD relies
on the choice of kernels and corresponding RKHS. In previous work, an isotropic vector-valued RKHS with a kernel
defined by some distance metric (Euclidean distance) over
all the dimensions is used. Examples include the RBF kernel (Liu & Wang, 2016) and the IMQ kernel (Gorham &
Mackey, 2017). However, as discussed in Aggarwal et al.
(2001) and Ramdas et al. (2015), distance metrics and corresponding kernels suffer from the curse of dimensionality.
Thus, a natural question is, is the performance of SVGD
also affected by the dimensionality?
We observe that the dimensionality negatively affects the performance of SVGD: its particles tend to collapse to modes
and this phenomenon becomes more severe with higher
dimensions. To understand this phenomenon, we analyze
the impact of dimensionality on the repulsive force, which
is critical for SVGD to work as an inference method for
minimizing the KL divergence, and attribute the reason
partially to the negative correlation between the repulsive
force and the dimensionality under some assumption about
the variational distribution through theoretical analysis and
experimental verifications. Our analysis takes an initial
step towards understanding the non-asymptotic behavior of
SVGD with a finite number of particles, which is important
since inferring high dimensional distributions with a limited
computational and storage resource is common in practice.
We propose Message Passing SVGD (MP-SVGD) to solve
this problem when the target distribution is compactly described via a probabilistic graphical model (PGM) and thus
the conditional independence structure can be leveraged.
MP-SVGD converts the original high-dimensional inference problem into a set of local ones with lower dimensions
according to a decomposition of the KL divergence, and
solves each local problem iteratively in an RKHS with a
local kernel defined over the Markov blanket. Experimental

