Testing Sparsity over Known and Unknown Bases

Siddharth Barman 1 Arnab Bhattacharyya 1 Suprovat Ghoshal 1

Abstract
Sparsity is a basic property of real vectors that is
exploited in a wide variety of machine learning
applications. In this work, we describe property
testing algorithms for sparsity that observe a lowdimensional projection of the input. We consider
two settings. In the first setting, we test sparsity
with respect to an unknown basis: given input
vectors y1 , . . . , yp ∈ Rd whose concatenation as
columns forms Y ∈ Rd×p , does Y = AX for
matrices A ∈ Rd×m and X ∈ Rm×p such that
each column of X is k-sparse, or is Y “far” from
having such a decomposition? In the second setting, we test sparsity with respect to a known basis: for a fixed design matrix A ∈ Rd×m , given
input vector y ∈ Rd , is y = Ax for some ksparse vector x or is y “far” from having such a
decomposition? We analyze our algorithms using tools from high-dimensional geometry and
probability.

As evident from these surveys, research in property testing
has largely focused on properties of combinatorial and algebraic structures, such as bipartiteness of graphs, linearity of
Boolean functions on the hypercube, membership in errorcorrecting codes or representability of functions as concise
Boolean formulae. In this work, we study the question
of testing properties of continuous structures, specifically
properties of vectors and matrices over the reals.
Our computational model is a natural extension of the standard property testing framework by allowing queries to be
linear measurements of the input. Let P ⊂ Rd be a property
of real vectors. Let dist : Rd → R⩾0 be a “distance” function such that dist(x) = 0 for all x ∈ P. We say that an
algorithm A is a tester for P with respect to dist and with
parameters ε, δ > 0 if for any input y ∈ Rn , the algorithm
A observes My where M ∈ Rq×d is a randomized matrix
and has the following guarantee:
(i) If y ∈ P, PrM [A(My) accepts] ⩾ 1 − δ.
(ii) If dist(y) > ε, PrM [A(My) accepts] ⩽ δ.

1. Introduction
Property testing is the study of algorithms that query their
input a small number of times and distinguish between
whether their input satisfies a given property or is “far”
from satisfying that property. The quest for efficient testing
algorithms was initiated by (Blum et al., 1993) and (Babai
et al., 1991) and later explicitly formulated by (Rubinfeld &
Sudan, 1996) and (Goldreich et al., 1998). Property testing
can be viewed as a relaxation of the traditional notion of
a decision problem, where the relaxation is quantified in
terms of a distance parameter. There has been extensive
work in this area over the last couple of decades; see, for
instance, the surveys (Ron, 2008) and (Rubinfeld & Shapira,
2006) for some different perspectives.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Automation, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.
Correspondence to: Siddharth Barman <barman@iisc.ac.in>,
Arnab Bhattacharyya <arnabb@iisc.ac.in>, Suprovat Ghoshal
<suprovat@iisc.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

We call each inner product between the rows of M and y
a (linear) query, and the number of rows q = q(ε, δ) is
the query complexity of the tester. The running time of the
tester A is its running time on the outcome of its queries.
As typical in property testing, we do not count the time
needed to evaluate the queries. If P ⊂ Rd×p is a property of real matrices with an associated distance function
dist : Rd×p → R⩾0 , testing is defined similarly: given an
input matrix Y ∈ Rd×p , the algorithm observes MY for
a random matrix M ∈ Rq×d with analogous completeness
and soundness properties. A linear projection of an input
vector or matrix to a low-dimensional space is also called
a linear sketch or a linear measurement. The technique of
obtaining small linear sketches of high-dimensional vectors
has been used to great effect in algorithms for streaming
(e.g., (Alon et al., 1996; McGregor, 2014)) and numerical
linear algebra (see (Woodruff, 2014) for an excellent survey). Because GPUs are specially designed to optimize
matrix-vector computation, many modern optimization and
learning algorithms work with linear sketches of their input.
We focus on testing whether a vector is sparse with respect

