Thompson Sampling for Combinatorial Semi-Bandits

Siwei Wang 1 Wei Chen 2

Abstract
We study the application of the Thompson sampling (TS) methodology to the stochastic combinatorial multi-armed bandit (CMAB) framework.
We analyze the standard TS algorithm for the
general CMAB, and obtain the first distributiondependent regret bound of O(m log T /∆min ) for
TS under general CMAB, where m is the number
of arms, T is the time horizon, and ∆min is the
minimum gap between the expected reward of the
optimal solution and any non-optimal solution.
We also show that one cannot use an approximate
oracle in TS algorithm for even MAB problems.
Then we expand the analysis to matroid bandit,
a special case of CMAB and for which we could
remove the independence assumption across arms
and achieve a better regret bound. Finally, we
use some experiments to show the comparison of
regrets of CUCB and CTS algorithms.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandit (MAB) (Berry & Fristedt, 1985; Sutton
& Barto, 1998) is a classical online learning model typically
described as a game between a learning agent (player) and
the environment with m arms. In each step, the environment
generates an outcome, and the player uses a policy (or an
algorithm), which takes the feedback from the previous
steps as input, to select an arm to pull. After pulling an arm,
the player receives a reward based on the pulled arm and the
environment outcome. In this paper, we consider stochastic
MAB problem, which means the environment outcome is
drawn from an unknown distribution (Lai & Robbins, 1985),
not generated by an adversary (Auer et al., 2002b). The goal
of the player is to cumulate as much reward as possible over
a total of T steps (T may be unknown). The performance
metric is the (expected) regret, which is the cumulative
1
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Microsoft Research, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to:
Siwei
Wang <wangsw15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Wei Chen
<weic@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

difference over T steps between always playing the arm
with the optimal expected reward and playing the arms
according to the policy.
MAB models the key tradeoff between exploration — continuing exploring new arms not observed often, and exploitation — sticking to the best performed arm based on
the observation so far. A famous MAB algorithm is the
upper confidence bound (UCB) policy (Gittins, 1989; Auer
et al., 2002a), which achieves O(m log T /∆) distributiondependent regret, where ∆ is the minimum gap in the expected reward between an optimal arm and any non-optimal
arm, and it matches the lower bound (Lai & Robbins, 1985).
Combinatorial multi-armed bandit (CMAB) problem has
recently become an active research area (Gai et al., 2012;
Chen et al., 2016b; Gopalan et al., 2014a; Kveton et al.,
2014; 2015a;b; Wen et al., 2015; Combes et al., 2015; Chen
et al., 2016a; Wang & Chen, 2017). In CMAB, the environment contains m base arms, but the player needs to pull
a set of base arms S in each time slot, where S is called
a super arm (or an action). The kind of reward and feedback varies in different settings. In this paper, we consider
the semi-bandit setting, where the feedback includes the
outcomes of all base arms in the played super arm, and the
reward is a function of S and the observed outcomes of arms
in S. CMAB has found applications in many areas such
as wireless networking, social networks, online advertising,
etc. Thus it is important to investigate different approaches
to solve CMAB problems.
An alternative approach different from UCB is the Thompson sampling (TS) approach, which is introduced much
earlier by Thompson (1933), but the theoretical analysis of
the TS policy comes much later — Kaufmann et al. (2012)
and Agrawal & Goyal (2012) give the first regret bound for
the TS policy, which essentially matches the UCB policy
theoretically. Moreover, TS policy often performs better
than UCB in empirical simulation results, making TS an
attractive policy for further studies.
TS policy follows the Bayesian inference framework to
solve the MAB problems. The unknown distribution of
environment outcomes is parameterized, with an assumed
prior distribution. TS updates the prior distribution in each
step with two phases: first it uses the prior distribution to
sample a parameter, which is used to determine the action to

