AutoPrognosis: Automated Clinical Prognostic Modeling
via Bayesian Optimization with Structured Kernel Learning

Ahmed M. Alaa 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2 3

Abstract
Clinical prognostic models derived from largescale healthcare data can inform critical diagnostic and therapeutic decisions. To enable off-theshelf usage of machine learning (ML) in prognostic research, we developed AUTO P ROGNOSIS:
a system for automating the design of predictive modeling pipelines tailored for clinical prognosis. AUTO P ROGNOSIS optimizes ensembles of
pipeline configurations efficiently using a novel
batched Bayesian optimization (BO) algorithm
that learns a low-dimensional decomposition of
the pipelines’ high-dimensional hyperparameter
space in concurrence with the BO procedure.
This is achieved by modeling the pipelines’ performances as a black-box function with a Gaussian process prior, and modeling the “similarities” between the pipelines’ baseline algorithms
via a sparse additive kernel with a Dirichlet prior.
Meta-learning is used to warmstart BO with external data from “similar” patient cohorts by calibrating the priors using an algorithm that mimics
the empirical Bayes method. The system automatically explains its predictions by presenting
the clinicians with logical association rules that
link patients’ features to predicted risk strata. We
demonstrate the utility of AUTO P ROGNOSIS using
9 major patient cohorts representing various aspects of cardiovascular patient care.

1. Introduction
In clinical medicine, prognosis refers to the risk of future
health outcomes in patients with given features. Prognostic research aims at building actionable predictive models
that can inform clinicians about future course of patients’
1

University of California, Los Angeles, USA 2 University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK 3 Alan Turing Institute, London, UK. Correspondence to: Ahmed M. Alaa <ahmedmalaa@ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

clinical conditions in order to guide screening and therapeutic decisions. With the recent abundance of data linkages, electronic health records, and bio-repositories, clinical researchers have become aware that the value conferred
by big, heterogeneous clinical data can only be realized
with prognostic models based on flexible machine learning (ML) approaches. There is, however, a concerning gap
between the potential and actual utilization of ML in prognostic research; the reason being that clinicians with no expertise in data science find it hard to manually design and
tune ML pipelines (Luo et al., 2017).
To fill this gap, we developed AUTO P ROGNOSIS, an automated ML (AutoML) framework tailored for clinical prognostic modeling. AUTO P ROGNOSIS takes as an input data
from a patient cohort, and uses such data to automatically
configure ML pipelines. Every ML pipeline comprises all
stages of prognostic modeling: missing data imputation,
feature preprocessing, prediction, and calibration. The system handles different types of clinical data, including longitudinal and survival (time-to-event) data, and automatically explains its predictions to the clinicians via an “interpreter” module which outputs clinically interpretable associations between patients’ features and predicted risk strata.
An overview of the system is provided in Figure 1.
The core component of AUTO P ROGNOSIS is an algorithm
for configuring ML pipelines using Bayesian optimization
(BO) (Snoek et al., 2012). Our BO algorithm models the
pipelines’ performances as a black-box function, the input
to which is a “pipeline configuration”, i.e. a selection of
algorithms and hyperparameter settings, and the output of
which is the performance (predictive accuracy) achieved
by such a configuration. We implement BO with a Gaussian process (GP) prior on the black-box function. To deal
with the high-dimensionality of the pipeline configuration
space, we capitalize on the fact that for a given dataset,
the performance of one ML algorithm may not be correlated with that of another algorithm. For instance, it
may be the case that the observed empirical performance
of logistic regression on a given dataset does not tell us
much information about how a neural network would perform on the same dataset. In such a case, both algorithms
should not share the same GP prior, but should rather be

