DVAE++: Discrete Variational Autoencoders with
Overlapping Transformations
Arash Vahdat 1 William G. Macready 1 Zhengbing Bian 1 Amir Khoshaman 1 Evgeny Andriyash 1

Abstract
Training of discrete latent variable models remains challenging because passing gradient information through discrete units is difﬁcult. We
propose a new class of smoothing transformations
based on a mixture of two overlapping distributions, and show that the proposed transformation
can be used for training binary latent models with
either directed or undirected priors. We derive
a new variational bound to efﬁciently train with
Boltzmann machine priors. Using this bound,
we develop DVAE++, a generative model with
a global discrete prior and a hierarchy of convolutional continuous variables. Experiments on
several benchmarks show that overlapping transformations outperform other recent continuous
relaxations of discrete latent variables including
Gumbel-Softmax (Maddison et al., 2016; Jang
et al., 2016), and discrete variational autoencoders
(Rolfe, 2016).

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen rapid progress in generative modeling made possible by advances in deep learning and
stochastic variational inference. The reparameterization
trick (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014) has
made stochastic variational inference efﬁcient by providing lower-variance gradient estimates. However, reparameterization, as originally proposed, does not easily extend
to semi-supervised learning, binary latent attribute models, topic modeling, variational memory addressing, hard
attention models, or clustering, which require discrete latentvariables.
Continuous relaxations have been proposed for accommodating discrete variables in variational inference (Maddison
et al., 2016; Jang et al., 2016; Rolfe, 2016). The Gumbel1

Quadrant.ai, D-Wave Systems Inc., Burnaby, BC, Canada.
Correspondence to: Arash Vahdat <arash@quadrant.ai>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Softmax technique (Maddison et al., 2016; Jang et al., 2016)
deﬁnes a temperature-based continuous distribution that in
the zero-temperature limit converges to a discrete distribution. However, it is limited to categorical distributions and
does not scale to multivariate models such as Boltzmann machines (BM). The approach presented in (Rolfe, 2016) can
train models with BM priors but requires careful handling
of the gradients during training.
We propose a new class of smoothing transformations for relaxing binary latent variables. The method relies on two distributions with overlapping support that in the zero temperature limit converge to a Bernoulli distribution. We present
two variants of smoothing transformations using a mixture
of exponential and a mixture of logistic distributions.
We demonstrate that overlapping transformations can be
used to train discrete directed latent models as in (Maddison
et al., 2016; Jang et al., 2016), and models with BMs in
their prior as in (Rolfe, 2016). In the case of BM priors,
we show that the Kullback-Leibler (KL) contribution to the
variational bound can be approximated using an analytic
expression that can be optimized using automatic differentiation without requiring the special treatment of gradients in
(Rolfe, 2016).
Using this analytic bound, we develop a new variational
autoencoder (VAE) architecture called DVAE++, which uses
a BM prior to model discontinuous latent factors such as
object categories or scene conﬁguration in images. DVAE++
is inspired by (Rolfe, 2016) and includes continuous local
latent variables to model locally smooth features in the data.
DVAE++ achieves comparable results to the state-of-the-art
techniques on several datasets and captures semantically
meaningful discrete aspects of the data. We show that even
when all continuous latent variables are removed, DVAE++
still attains near state-of-the-art generative likelihoods.
1.1. Related Work
Training of models with discrete latent variables z requires low-variance estimates of gradients of the form
∇φ Eqφ (z ) [f (z )]. Only when z has a modest number of conﬁgurations (as in semi-supervised learning (Kingma et al.,
2014) or semi-supervised generation (Maaløe et al., 2017))

