Learning Binary Latent Variable Models: A Tensor Eigenpair Approach

Ariel Jaffe 1 Roi Weiss 1 Shai Carmi 2 Yuval Kluger 3 Boaz Nadler 1

Abstract

For simplicity we assume it is Gaussian, though our method
can be modified to handle other noise distributions.

Latent variable models with hidden binary units
appear in various applications. Learning such
models, in particular in the presence of noise, is a
challenging computational problem. In this paper
we propose a novel spectral approach to this problem, based on the eigenvectors of both the second
order moment matrix and third order moment tensor of the observed data. We prove that under
mild non-degeneracy conditions, our method consistently estimates the model parameters at the
optimal parametric rate. Our tensor-based method
generalizes previous orthogonal tensor decomposition approaches, where the hidden units were
assumed to be either statistically independent or
mutually exclusive. We illustrate the consistency
of our method on simulated data and demonstrate
its usefulness in learning a common model for
population mixtures in genetics.

The model in (1) appears, for example, in overlapping clustering (Banerjee et al., 2005; Baadel et al., 2016), in various
problems in bioinformatics (Segal et al., 2002; Becker et al.,
2011; Slawski et al., 2013), and in blind source separation
(Van der Veen, 1997). A special instance of model (1) is
the Gaussian-Bernoulli restricted Boltzmann machine (GRBM) where the distribution Ph is further assumed to have
a parametric energy-based structure (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006; Cho et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2012). G-RBMs
were used, e.g., in modeling human motion (Taylor et al.,
2007) and natural image patches (Melchior et al., 2017).

1. Introduction
In this paper we propose a spectral method for learning the
following binary latent variable model, shown in Figure 1.
The hidden layer, h = (h1 , . . . , hd ), consists of d binary
random variables with an unknown joint distribution Ph :
{0, 1}d → [0, 1]. The observed vector x ∈ Rm with m ≥ d
features is modeled as
x = W > h + σξ,

(1)

where W ∈ Rd×m is an unknown weight matrix assumed to
be full rank d. Here, σ ≥ 0 is the noise level and ξ is an additive noise vector independent of h, whose m coordinates
are all i.i.d. zero mean and unit variance random variables.
1

Dept. of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel. 2 Braun School
of Public Health and Community Medicine, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 9112102, Israel. 3 Program of Applied
Mathematics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA. Correspondence to: Ariel Jaffe <ariel.jaffe@weizmann.ac.il>, Roi
Weiss <roi.weiss@weizmann.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Given n i.i.d. samples x1 , . . . , xn from model (1), the goal
is to estimate the weight matrix W . A common approach for
learning W is by maximum likelihood. As this function is
non-convex, common optimization schemes include the EM
algorithm and alternating least squares (ALS). In addition,
several works developed iterative methods specialized to GRBMs (Hinton, 2010; Cho et al., 2011). All these methods,
however, often lack consistency guarantees and may not
be well suited for large datasets due to their potential slow
convergence. This is not surprising, as learning W under
model (1) is believed to be computationally hard; see for
example Mossel & Roch (2005).
Over the past years, several works considered variants and
specific instances of model (1) under additional assumptions on the distribution Ph or on the weight matrix W . For
example, when Ph is a product distribution, the learning
problem becomes that of independent component analysis
(ICA) with binary signals (Hyvärinen et al., 2004). In this
case, several methods were derived for estimating W and
under suitable non-degeneracy conditions were proven to
be both computationally efficient and statistically consistent
(Shalvi & Weinstein, 1993; Frieze et al., 1996; Regalia &
Kofidis, 2003; Hyvärinen et al., 2004; Anandkumar et al.,
2014; Jain & Oh, 2014). Similarly, when the hidden units are
mutually exclusive, namely Ph has support h ∈ {ei }di=1 ,
the model is a Gaussian mixture (GMM) with d spherical
components with linearly independent means. Efficient and
consistent algorithms were derived for this case as well
(Moitra & Valiant, 2010; Anandkumar et al., 2012a;b; Hsu
& Kakade, 2013). Among those, most relevant to this work

