Clustering Semi-Random Mixtures of Gaussians

Pranjal Awasthi 1 Aravindan Vijayaraghavan 2

Abstract
Gaussian mixture models (GMM) are the most
widely used statistical model for the k-means clustering problem and form a popular framework for
clustering in machine learning and data analysis.
In this paper, we propose a natural robust model
for k-means clustering that generalizes the Gaussian mixture model, and that we believe will be
useful in identifying robust algorithms. Our first
contribution is a polynomial time algorithm that
provably recovers the ground-truth up to small
classification error w.h.p., assuming certain separation between the components. Perhaps surprisingly, the algorithm we analyze is the popular
Lloyd’s algorithm for k-means clustering that is
the method-of-choice in practice. Our second
result complements the upper bound by giving
a nearly matching lower bound on the number
of misclassified points incurred by any k-means
clustering algorithm on the semi-random model.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a ubiquitous task in machine learning and data
mining for partitioning a data set into groups of similar
points. The k-means clustering problem is arguably the
most well-studied problem in machine learning. However,
designing provably optimal k-means clustering algorithms
is a challenging task as the k-means clustering objective is
NP-hard to optimize (Williamson & Shmoys, 2011) (in fact,
it is also NP-hard to find near-optimal solutions (Awasthi
et al., 2015; Lee et al., 2017)). A popular approach to cope
with this intractability is to study average-case models for
the k-means problem. The most widely used such statistical
model for clustering is the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM),
that has a long and rich history (Teicher, 1961; Pearson,
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Rutgers University, USA. 2 EECS Department, Northwestern University, USA. Correspondence to: Pranjal Awasthi
<pranjal.awasthi@rutgers.edu>, Aravindan Vijayaraghavan <aravindv@northwestern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1894; Dasgupta, 1999; Arora & Kannan, 2001; Vempala &
Wang, 2004; Dasgupta & Schulman, 2007).
In this model there are k clusters, and the points from cluster i are generated from a Gaussian in d dimensions with
mean µi ∈ Rd , and covariance matrix Σi ∈ Rd×d with
spectral norm kΣi k ≤ σ 2 . Each of the N points in the
instance is now generated independently at random, and is
drawn from the ith component with probability wi ∈ [0, 1]
(w1 , w2 , . . . , wk are also called mixing weights). If the
means of the underlying Gaussians are separated enough,
the ground truth clustering is well defined1 . The algorithmic
task is to recover the ground truth clustering for any data set
generated from such a model (note that the parameters of
the Gaussians, mixing weights and the cluster memberships
of the points are unknown).
Starting from the seminal work of Dasgupta (Dasgupta,
1999), there have been a variety of algorithms to provably
cluster data from a GMM model. Algorithms based on
PCA and distance-based clustering (Arora & Kannan, 2001;
Vempala & Wang, 2004; Achlioptas & McSherry, 2005;
Kannan et al., 2008) provably recover the clustering when
there is adequate separation between every pair of components (parameters)2 . Other algorithmic approaches include
the method-of-moments (Moitra & Valiant, 2010; Belkin
& Sinha, 2010), and algebraic methods based on tensor decompositions (Hsu & Kakade, 2012).(Please see Section 1
in Supplementary material for a more detailed comparison
of related work like (Tang & Monteleoni, 2016; Dutta et al.,
2017) and guarantees).
On the other hand, the method-of-choice in practice are
iterative algorithms like the Lloyd’s algorithm (also called
k-means algorithm) (Lloyd, 1982) and the k-means++ algorithm (Lloyd’s algorithm initialized with centers from
distance-based D2 -sampling). D2 -sampling based initialization schemes were first theoretically analyzed in (Ostrovsky
et al., 2006; Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007). In the absence of
good worst-case guarantees, a compelling direction is to use
p
A separation of kµi − µj k2 ≥ Ω(σ log(N k)) for i 6= j ∈
[k] suffices w.h.p.
2
The best known guarantees along these lines for non-spherical
Gaussians (Kumar & Kannan, 2010;
√ Awasthi & Sheffet, 2012)
requires a separation of order σ k log N between any pair of
means, where σ is the maximum variance among all clusters along
any direction.
1

