The Hierarchical Adaptive Forgetting Variational Filter

Vincent Moens 1

Abstract
A common problem in Machine Learning and
statistics consists in detecting whether the current sample in a stream of data belongs to the
same distribution as previous ones, is an isolated
outlier or inaugurates a new distribution of data.
We present a hierarchical Bayesian algorithm that
aims at learning a time-specific approximate posterior distribution of the parameters describing the
distribution of the data observed. We derive the
update equations of the variational parameters of
the approximate posterior at each time step for
models from the exponential family, and show
that these updates find interesting correspondents
in Reinforcement Learning (RL). In this perspective, our model can be seen as a hierarchical RL
algorithm that learns a posterior distribution according to a certain stability confidence that is, in
turn, learned according to its own stability confidence. Finally, we show some applications of
our generic model, first in a RL context, next with
an adaptive Bayesian Autoregressive model, and
finally in the context of Stochastic Gradient Descent optimization.

1. Introduction
Learning in a changing environment is a difficult albeit ubiquitous task. One key issue for learning in such context is
to discriminate between isolated, unexpected events and
a prolonged contingency change. This discrimination is
challenging with conventional techniques because they rely
on prior assumptions about environment stability. When
assuming fluctuating context, past experience will be forgotten immediately when an unexpected event occurs, but
if that event was just noise, this erroneous forgetting might
be very costly. In less variable contexts, model parameters
will tend to change more gradually, thus sometimes missing
1

COSY, Institute of Neuroscience, Université Catholique de
Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. Correspondence to: Vincent Moens
<vincent.moens@uclouvain.be>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

fluctuations when they happen faster than expected. Most
models cover one of the two possibilities, and either gradually adapt their predictions to the new contingency or do it
abruptly, but not both.
One classical solution to the problem of change detection is
to compare the likelihood of the current observation given
the previous posterior distribution with a default probability distribution (Kulhavy & Karny, 1984), representing an
initial, naive state of the learner. Usually, the mixing coefficient (or forgetting factor) that is used to weight these two
hypotheses is adapted to the current data in order to detect
and account for the possible contingency change. This mixing coefficient can be implemented in a linear or exponential
manner (Kulhavý & Kraus, 1996). We will focus here on
the exponential case.
In the past decade, several Bayesian solutions to this problem based on the aforementioned strategy have been proposed (Smidl, 2004; Smidl & Gustafsson, 2012; Azizi &
Quinn, 2015). However, they usually suffer from several
drawbacks: many of them put a restrictive prior on the mixing coefficient, e.g. (Smidl, 2004; Masegosa et al., 2017),
and cannot account for the fact that an unexpected event
is unlikely to be caused by a contingency change if the
environment has been stable for a long time.
We propose the Hierarchical Adaptive Forgetting Variational
Filter (HAFVF). The core idea of the model is that the the
mixing coefficient can be learned as a latent variable with
its own mixing coefficient. It is inspired by the observation
that animals tend to decrease their flexibility (i.e. their capacity to adapt to a new contingency) when they are trained
in a stable environment and that this flexibility is inversely
correlated with the training length (Dickinson, 1985). We
suggest that this strategy may be beneficial in many environments, where the stability of the system identified by a
learner is a variable that can be learned as an independent
variable with a certain confidence: in certain environments,
contingency changes are inherently more less than in others.
Although this assumption may not hold in every case, we
show that it helps the algorithm to stabilize and discriminate
contingency changes from accidents.
Accordingly, we frame our algorithm in a RL framework
(Dearden & Russell, 1998). We explore how the forward
learning algorithm can be extended to the forward-backward

