Constraining the Dynamics of Deep Probabilistic Models

Marco Lorenzi 1 Maurizio Filippone 2

Abstract
We introduce a novel generative formulation of
deep probabilistic models implementing “soft”
constraints on their function dynamics. In particular, we develop a flexible methodological framework where the modeled functions and derivatives
of a given order are subject to inequality or equality constraints. We then characterize the posterior
distribution over model and constraint parameters through stochastic variational inference. As
a result, the proposed approach allows for accurate and scalable uncertainty quantification on the
predictions and on all parameters. We demonstrate the application of equality constraints in the
challenging problem of parameter inference in
ordinary differential equation models, while we
showcase the application of inequality constraints
on the problem of monotonic regression of count
data. The proposed approach is extensively tested
in several experimental settings, leading to highly
competitive results in challenging modeling applications, while offering high expressiveness, flexibility and scalability.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning methods have demonstrated stateof-art performance in representing complex functions in a
variety of applications. Nevertheless, the translation of complex learning methods in natural sciences and in the clinical
domain is still challenged by the need of interpretable solutions. To this end, several approaches have been proposed
in order to constrain the solution dynamics to plausible
forms such as boundedness (Da Veiga & Marrel, 2012),
monotonicity (Riihimäki & Vehtari, 2010), or mechanistic
behaviors (Alvarez et al., 2013). This is a crucial require*

Equal contribution 1 University of Cote d’Azur, INRIA Sophia
Antipolis, EPIONE research group, France 2 EURECOM, Department of Data Science, Sophia Antipolis, France. Correspondence
to: Marco Lorenzi <marco.lorenzi@inria.fr>, Maurizio Filippone
<maurizio.filippone@eurecom.fr>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

ment to provide a more precise and realistic description of
natural phenomena. For example, monotonicity of the interpolating function is a common assumption when modeling
disease progression in neurodegenerative diseases (Lorenzi
et al., 2017; Donohue et al., 2014), while bio-physical or
mechanistic models are necessary when analyzing and simulating experimental data in bio-engineering (Vyshemirsky
& Girolami, 2007; Konukoglu et al., 2011).
However, accounting for the complex properties of biological systems in data-driven modeling approaches poses
important challenges. For example, functions are often
non-smooth and characterized by nonstationaries which are
difficult to encode in “shallow” models. Complex cases can
arise already in classical ODE systems for certain configurations of the parameters, where functions can exhibit sudden temporal changes (Goel et al., 1971; FitzHugh, 1955).
Within this context, approaches based on stationary models, even when relaxing the smoothness assumptions, may
lead to suboptimal results for both data modeling (interpolation), and estimation of dynamics parameters. To provide
insightful illustrations of this problem we anticipate the
results of Section 4.4.1 and Figure 5. Moreover, the application to real data requires to account for the uncertainty
of measurements and underlying model parameters, as well
as for the – often large – dimensionality characterizing the
experimental data. Within this context, deep probabilistic
approaches may represent a promising modeling tool, as
they combine the flexibility of deep models with a systematic way to reason about uncertainty in model parameters
and predictions. The flexibility of these approaches stems
from the fact that deep models implement compositions of
functions, which considerably extend the complexity of signals that can be represented with “shallow” models (LeCun
et al., 2015). Meanwhile, their probabilistic formulation
introduces a principled approach to quantify uncertainty in
parameters estimation and predictions, as well as to model
selection problems (Neal, 1996; Ghahramani, 2015).
In this work, we aim at extending deep probabilistic models
to account for constraints on their dynamics. In particular,
we focus on a general and flexible formulation capable of
imposing a rich set of constraints on functions and derivatives of any order. We focus on: i) equality constraints on
the function and its derivatives, required when the model
should satisfy given physical laws implemented through

