Mix & Match – Agent Curricula for Reinforcement Learning

Wojciech Marian Czarnecki * 1 Siddhant M. Jayakumar * 1 Max Jaderberg 1 Leonard Hasenclever 1
Yee Whye Teh 1 Simon Osindero 1 Nicolas Heess 1 Razvan Pascanu 1

Abstract
We introduce Mix & Match (M&M) – a training framework designed to facilitate rapid and
effective learning in RL agents, especially those
that would be too slow or too challenging to train
otherwise. The key innovation is a procedure
that allows us to automatically form a curriculum over agents. Through such a curriculum we
can progressively train more complex agents by,
effectively, bootstrapping from solutions found
by simpler agents. In contradistinction to typical curriculum learning approaches, we do not
gradually modify the tasks or environments presented, but instead use a process to gradually alter how the policy is represented internally. We
show the broad applicability of our method by
demonstrating significant performance gains in
three different experimental setups: (1) We train
an agent able to control more than 700 actions
in a challenging 3D first-person task; using our
method to progress through an action-space curriculum we achieve both faster training and better
final performance than one obtains using traditional methods. (2) We further show that M&M
can be used successfully to progress through a
curriculum of architectural variants defining an
agents internal state. (3) Finally, we illustrate
how a variant of our method can be used to improve agent performance in a multitask setting.

1

Introduction

The field of deep reinforcement learning has seen significant advances in the recent past. Innovations in environment design have led to a range of exciting, challenging and
visually rich 3D worlds (e.g. Beattie et al., 2016; Kempka
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: W Czarnecki <lejlot@google.com>, S Jayakumar
<sidmj@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Figure 1. Scheme of Mix & Match– each box represents a policy.
The blue πmm is the control policy, optimised with the true RL
objective. White boxes represent policies used for the curriculum,
while the red policy is the final agent.

et al., 2016; Brockman et al., 2016). These have in turn led
to the development of more complex agent architectures
and necessitated massively parallelisable policy gradient
and Q-learning based RL algorithms (e.g. Mnih et al., 2016;
Espeholt et al., 2018). While the efficacy of these methods
is undeniable, the problems we consider increasingly require more powerful models, complex action spaces and
challenging training regimes for learning to occur.
Curriculum learning is a powerful instrument in the deep
learning toolbox (e.g. Bengio et al., 2009; Graves et al.,
2017). In a typical setup, one trains a network sequentially
on related problems of increasing difficulty, with the end
goal of maximizing final performance on a desired task.
However, such task-oriented curricula pose some practical difficulties for reinforcement learning. For instance,
they require a certain understanding of and control over
the generation process of the environment, such that simpler variants of the task can be constructed. And in situations where this is possible, it is not always obvious how to
construct useful curricula – simple intuitions from learning in humans do not always apply to neural networks.
Recently (e.g. Sutskever & Zaremba, 2014; Graves et al.,
2017) proposes randomised or automated curricula to cir-

