L EAPS A ND B OUNDS: A Method for Approximately Optimal Algorithm
Configuration

Gellért Weisz 1 András György 1 2 Csaba Szepesvári 1 3

Abstract
We consider the problem of configuring generalpurpose solvers to run efficiently on problem instances drawn from an unknown distribution. The
goal of the configurator is to find a configuration
that runs fast on average on most instances, and
do so with the least amount of total work. It can
run a chosen solver on a random instance until
the solver finishes or a timeout is reached. We
propose L EAPS A ND B OUNDS, an algorithm that
tests configurations on randomly selected problem instances for longer and longer time. We
prove that the capped expected runtime of the
configuration returned by L EAPS A ND B OUNDS
is close to the optimal expected runtime, while
our algorithm’s running time is near-optimal. Our
results show that L EAPS A ND B OUNDS is more efficient than the recent algorithm of Kleinberg et al.
(2017), which, to our knowledge, is the only other
algorithm configuration method with non-trivial
theoretical guarantees. Experimental results on
configuring a public SAT solver on a new benchmark dataset also stand witness to the superiority
of our method.

1. Introduction
For computational problems of major practical interest (satisfiability, planning, etc.) the computing science community has developed a large number of highly configurable
“solvers.” The reason is that while the hardest problem instances take a long time to solve by any of the solvers, the
instances that one encounters in practical applications may
exhibit specific properties so that the appropriate solver
1

DeepMind, London, UK. 2 On leave from Imperial
College London, London, UK. 3 On leave from University
of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. Correspondence to:
Gellért Weisz <gellert@google.com>, András György <agyorgy@google.com>, Csaba Szepesvári <szepi@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

with an appropriate configuration may finish much faster.
The plethora of solvers and their configurations, which for
simplicity of presentation we will just treat as configurations from this point on, is explained by the diversity of
applications. Which configuration to use in a specific application can then be treated as a learning problem, where
an application is identified with an unknown distribution
over problem instances that one can sample from, the learning algorithm can run any configuration on any sampled
instance until a timeout of its choice, and the goal is to find
a configuration with nearly optimal expected runtime while
using the least amount of time during the search.1 There
has been much practical success on designing such blackbox configuration search methods, especially in the context
of satisfiability problems. Examples of successful methods include ParamILS (Hutter, 2007; Hutter et al., 2009),
SMAC (Hutter et al., 2011; 2013), irace (Birattari et al.,
2002; López-Ibánez et al., 2011), and GGA (Ansótegui
et al., 2009; 2015). These methods themselves rely on many
heuristics and as such lack theoretical guarantees.
Recently, Kleinberg et al. (2017) explored this problem,
presenting a general-purpose configuration optimizer called
Structured Procrastination, with guarantees on both (i) how
close to the optimal configuration the algorithm’s result is,
and (ii) how long it takes to find such a configuration. For
(ii), Kleinberg et al. (2017) prove that the expected runtime
of their algorithm is within a logarithmic factor of the optimal runtime in a worst-case sense. Furthermore, they show
that the gap between worst-case runtimes of existing algorithms (SMAC, ROAR, ParamILS, GGA, irace) and their
solution can be arbitrarily large. Structured Procrastination
attempts to refine the runtime guarantee for the empirically
fastest solver and solves tasks in increasing order of difficulty, postponing difficult tasks until all simpler tasks have
been solved. The main novelty of their work is that it comes
with theoretical guarantees (lower and upper bounds on the
runtime), but no empirical illustration is provided.
This paper builds on the results of Kleinberg et al. (2017),
and our problem statement closely follows theirs. Our
1
Related, but different problems are considered, e.g., by Luby
et al. (1993); Adam (2001); Mnih et al. (2008); Audibert & Bubeck
(2010); György & Kocsis (2011); Li et al. (2016).

