Learning Long Term Dependencies via Fourier Recurrent Units∗

Jiong Zhang 1 Yibo Lin 2 Zhao Song 3 Inderjit S. Dhillon 4

Abstract
It is a known fact that training recurrent neural
networks for tasks that have long term dependencies is challenging. One of the main reasons
is the vanishing or exploding gradient problem,
which prevents gradient information from propagating to early layers. In this paper we propose
a simple recurrent architecture, the Fourier Recurrent Unit (FRU), that stabilizes the gradients
that arise in its training while giving us stronger
expressive power. Specifically, FRU summarizes
the hidden states h(t) along the temporal dimension with Fourier basis functions. This allows
gradients to easily reach any layer due to FRU’s
residual learning structure and the global support
of trigonometric functions. We show that FRU
has gradient lower and upper bounds independent of temporal dimension. We also show the
strong expressivity of sparse Fourier basis, from
which FRU obtains its strong expressive power.
Our experimental study also demonstrates that
with fewer parameters the proposed architecture outperforms other recurrent architectures on
many tasks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown remarkably better performance than classical models on a wide range of
problems, including speech recognition, computer vision
and natural language processing. Despite DNNs having
tremendous expressive power to fit very complex functions,
training them by back-propagation can be difficult. Two
main issues are vanishing and exploding gradients. These
1

UT-Austin, zhangjiong724@utexas.edu
2
UT-Austin, yibolin@utexas.edu
3
Harvard & UT-Austin, zhaos@seas.harvard.edu
4
UT-Austin & Amazon, inderjit@cs.utexas.edu
∗
Full version is available at https://arxiv.org/
pdf/1803.06585.
Correspondence to: Jiong Zhang
<zhangjiong724@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

issues become particularly troublesome for recurrent neural networks (RNNs) since the weight matrix is identical
at each layer and any small changes get amplified exponentially through the recurrent layers (Bengio et al., 1994).
Although exploding gradients can be somehow mitigated
by tricks like gradient clipping or normalization (Pascanu
et al., 2013), vanishing gradients are harder to deal with. If
gradients vanish, there is little information propagated back
through back-propagation. This means that deep RNNs
have great difficulty learning long-term dependencies.
Many models have been proposed to address the vanishing/exploding gradient issue for DNNs. For example Long
Short Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997) tries to solve it by adding additional memory gates,
while residual networks (He et al., 2016) add a short cut to
skip intermediate layers. Recently the approach of directly
obtaining the statistical summary of past layers has drawn
attention, such as statistical recurrent units (SRU) (Oliva
et al., 2017). However, as we show later, they still suffer
from vanishing gradients and have limited access to past
layers.
In this paper, we present a novel recurrent architecture,
Fourier Recurrent Units (FRU) that use Fourier basis to
summarize the hidden statistics over past time steps. We
show that this solves the vanishing gradient problem and
gives us access to any past time step region. In more detail,
we make the following contributions:
• We propose a method to summarize hidden states
through past time steps in a recurrent neural network
with Fourier basis (FRU). Thus any statistical summary of past hidden states can be approximated by a
linear combination of summarized Fourier statistics.
• Theoretically, we show the expressive power of sparse
Fourier basis and prove that FRU can solve the vanishing gradient problem by looking at gradient norm
bounds. Specifically, we show that in the linear setting, SRU only improves the gradient lower/upper
bound of RNN by a constant factor of the exponent (i.e, both have the form (eaT , ebT )), while FRU
(lower and upper) bounds the gradient by constants
independent of the temporal dimension.
• We tested FRU together with RNN, LSTM and SRU

