Improved nearest neighbor search using auxiliary information and priority
functions
Omid Keivani 1 Kaushik Sinha 1

Abstract
Nearest neighbor search using random projection trees has recently been shown to achieve superior performance, in terms of better accuracy
while retrieving less number of data points, compared to locality sensitive hashing based methods.
However, to achieve acceptable nearest neighbor search accuracy for large scale applications,
where number of data points and/or number of
features can be very large, it requires users to
maintain, store and search through large number of such independent random projection trees,
which may be undesirable for many practical applications. To address this issue, in this paper we
present different search strategies to improve nearest neighbor search performance of a single random projection tree. Our approach exploits properties of single and multiple random projections,
which allows us to store meaningful auxiliary information at internal nodes of a random projection
tree as well as to design priority functions to guide
the search process that results in improved nearest
neighbor search performance. Empirical results
on multiple real world datasets show that our proposed method improves the search accuracy of a
single tree compared to baseline methods.

1. Introduction
Nearest neighbor search is extensively used as a subroutine
for k-nn classifier and many complex graph based methods
in wide range of domains such as machine learning, computer vision, pattern recognition and robotics. The basic
problem of nearest neighbor search is as follows: given a set
of n d-dimensional data points S = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } ⊂ Rd
and a query point q ∈ Rd , one needs to build a data structure
using S, so that nearest point (when measured using appropriate distance metric) to q from S can be found quickly.
1

Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science,
Wichita State University, KS, USA. Correspondence to: Kaushik
Sinha <kaushik.sinha@wichita.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

The naive linear time solution, that scans through each data
point xi ∈ S, often becomes impractical for large n and
d. Towards this end, in recent years there has been a conscious effort towards designing sub-linear time algorithms
for solving this problem. Most of these efforts can broadly
be classified into two groups, namely, (a) tree based methods ((Bentley, 1975; Uhlmann, 1991; Ciaccia et al., 1997;
Katayama & Satoh, 1997; Liu et al., 2004; Beygelzimer
et al., 2006; Dasgupta & Sinha, 2013; Sinha, 2015; Sinha &
Keivani, 2017; Babenko & Lempitsky, 2017)) and (b) methods based on hashing ((Gionis et al., 1999; Andoni & Indyk,
2008; Datar et al., 2004)). Basic principle for both these
approaches is to quickly retrieve a smaller subset S 0 ⊂ S
and perform linear scan within S 0 to answer a nearest neighbor search query. Locality sensitive hashing (LSH) (Gionis
et al., 1999; Andoni & Indyk, 2008; Datar et al., 2004) is a
representative of these hashing based methods that provides
a sub-linear time solution for approximate nearest neighbor search with some theoretical guarantee. Unfortunately,
many recent studies (Sinha, 2014; Muja & Lowe, 2009; Liu
et al., 2004) have reported that nearest neighbor search using
LSH is outperformed by tree based methods.
Nearest neighbor search methods that use space partition
trees hierarchically partition the search space into a large
number of regions corresponding to tree leaves, where each
leaf contains only a small subset of the database points.
Most of these partition trees thus constructed are binary in
nature. Using such partition tree, a nearest neighbor query is
answered by adopting either (a) a defeatist search strategy or
(b) a guided depth first search (DFS) strategy. In a defeatist
search strategy, a query is routed from the root node of the
tree to a leaf node, by applying a simple test function at each
internal node along the route that dictates whether to follow
left or right branch at that node. Once at leaf node, a linear
scan is performed within the points lying in the leaf node
to answer a nearest neighbor search query. If the partition
tree is (approximately) balanced, depth of such a tree is
O(log n) and therefore a query can reach a leaf node fairly
quickly and subsequently performing a liner scan within
a constant number of data points lying in that leaf node,
nearest neighbor query can be answered in sub-linear (in
n) time. Unfortunately, defeatist search strategy often fails
to find exact nearest neighbor of the query because the leaf

