Learning a Mixture of Two Multinomial Logits

Flavio Chierichetti 1 Ravi Kumar 2 Andrew Tomkins 2

Abstract
The classical Multinomial Logit (MNL) is a behavioral model for user choice. In this model, a
user is offered a slate of choices (a subset of a finite universe of n items), and selects exactly one
item from the slate, each with probability proportional to its (positive) weight. Given a set
of observed slates and choices, the likelihoodmaximizing item weights are easy to learn at
scale, and easy to interpret. However, the model
fails to represent common real-world behavior.
As a result, researchers in user choice often turn
to mixtures of MNLs, which are known to approximate a large class of models of rational user
behavior. Unfortunately, the only known algorithms for this problem have been heuristic in nature. In this paper we give the first polynomialtime algorithms for exact learning of uniform
mixtures of two MNLs. Interestingly, the parameters of the model can be learned for any n by
sampling the behavior of random users only on
slates of sizes 2 and 3; in contrast, we show that
slates of size 2 are insufficient by themselves.

1. Introduction
In this paper we study the problem of learning a uniform
mixture of two multinomial logistic models from data. Our
work is situated in the literature of discrete choice as follows. The most well-studied class of “rational” choice
behavior is the class of Random Utility Models, introduced by Marschak (1960), and described below. Mixtures of multinomial logistic models have been widely used
in discrete choice since 1980 (Boyd & Mellman, 1980;
Cardell & Dunbar, 1980), and are of particular interest because they are known to -approximate any Random Utility Model (McFadden & Train, 2000). However, despite a
long history of study and broad use in practice, there are
*

Equal contribution 1 Sapienza University, Rome, Italy
2
Google, Mountain View, CA. Correspondence to: Flavio
Chierichetti <flavio@di.uniroma1.it>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

no known polynomial-time algorithms to learn (exactly or
approximately) any non-trivial mixture of multinomial logistic models. We give the first such result: an algorithm to
learn uniform mixtures of two multinomial logistic models.
We now give a little more background.
A multinomial logistic model (usually called an MNL) over
a universe U of items provides a specific mapping from
any non-empty subset S ⊆ U to a distribution over S. The
model requires a weight function w : U → R+ that gives
a positive weight to each item in the universe. The model
then assigns probability to each
P u ∈ S proportional to its
weight: Pr[u | S] = w(u)/ v∈S w(v).
These models are frequently employed in the setting of discrete choice, in which a user must select exactly one item
from a set of alternatives. If S ⊆ U gives the alternatives,
the MNL then provides a distribution representing the likelihood that each item in S will be selected. Such models
are employed in many settings: selection of a piece of music, a mode of transportation, a brand of toothpaste, and so
forth. We note in passing that the weight function may be
generalized in many ways. Rather than mapping from u to
w(u), it may instead be defined in terms of features of u (allowing easy generalization to unseen objects) or in terms of
features of the particular situation (for instance depending
on properties of the user making the choice). In our work
we do not consider such generalizations; we assume that w
simply maps an item to a positive real-valued weight.
Given sufficient examples of subsets S with resulting
choices of a particular u ∈ S, it is possible to estimate the
weight function w using maximum likelihood estimation.
The estimation is convex and is easily solved at large scale
by gradient ascent methods. As a result, MNL is widely
used in practice. Furthermore, in the context of the rapid
changes underway in machine learning due to deep networks, it is the standard top layer of multiclass classification networks, where it goes by the name softmax layer.
A problematic example. The definition of MNL posits
a single fixed weight function, which imposes certain restrictions on the behavior of the model across related subsets. For example, consider a distribution of authors, each
of whom wishes to submit a paper to a conference. The
slate of available options is {ICML, CVPR}, and based on
the distribution, 60% of authors work in vision, and submit

