Deep k-Means: Re-Training and Parameter Sharing with Harder Cluster
Assignments for Compressing Deep Convolutions

Junru Wu 1 Yue Wang 2 Zhenyu Wu 1 Zhangyang Wang 1 Ashok Veeraraghavan 2 Yingyan Lin 2

Abstract

The current trend of pushing CNNs deeper with
convolutions has created a pressing demand to
achieve higher compression gains on CNNs where
convolutions dominate the computation and parameter amount (e.g., GoogLeNet, ResNet and
Wide ResNet). Further, the high energy consumption of convolutions limits its deployment on mobile devices. To this end, we proposed a simple
yet effective scheme for compressing convolutions though applying k-means clustering on the
weights, compression is achieved through weightsharing, by only recording K cluster centers and
weight assignment indexes. We then introduced a
novel spectrally relaxed k-means regularization,
which tends to make hard assignments of convolutional layer weights to K learned cluster centers
during re-training. We additionally propose an improved set of metrics to estimate energy consumption of CNN hardware implementations, whose
estimation results are verified to be consistent
with previously proposed energy estimation tool
extrapolated from actual hardware measurements.
We finally evaluated Deep k-Means across several CNN models in terms of both compression ratio and energy consumption reduction, observing
promising results without incurring accuracy loss.
The code is available at https://github.
com/Sandbox3aster/Deep-K-Means

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas
A&M University, College Station, TX, USA; 2 Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University, Houston, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Zhangyang Wang <atlaswang@tamu.edu>, Yingyan Lin <yingyan.lin@rice.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have gained considerable interest due to their record-breaking performance in
many recognition tasks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Girshick
et al., 2013; Taigman et al., 2014). In parallel, there has been
a tremendously growing need to bring CNNs into resourceconstrained mobile devices in line with the recent surge of
edge computing in which raw data are processed locally in
edge devices using their embedded machine learning algorithms (Shi et al., 2016) (Lin et al., 2017). The advantage
lies in that local processing avoids transferring data back
and forth between data centers and edge devices, thus reducing communication cost, latency, and enhancing privacy.
However, deploying CNNs into resource-constrained platforms is a non-trivial task. Devices at the edge, such as
smart phones and wearables, have limited energy, computation and storage resources since they are battery-powered
and have a small form factor. In contrast, powerful CNNs
require a large number of weights that corresponds to considerable storage and memory bandwidth. For example, the
amount of weights in state-of-the-art CNNs AlexNet and
VGG-16 are over 200MB and 500MB, respectively (Han
et al., 2016). Further, CNN-based applications can drain a
battery very quickly if executed frequently. For example,
smartphones nowadays cannot even run classification using
AlexNet in real-time for more than one hour (Yang et al.,
2017).
To close the gap between the constrained resources of edge
devices and the growing complexity of CNNs, compression techniques have been widely investigated to reduce
the precision of weights and the number of operations during or after CNN training in order to shrink their large implementation cost while maintaining the desired inference
performance. Various CNN compression techniques have
been proposed, such as weight compression (Bhattacharya
& Lane, 2016) (Han et al., 2016) (Lane et al., 2016) and decomposition (Changpinyo et al., 2017) (Howard et al., 2017)
(Wang et al., 2015), and compact architectures (Iandola
et al., 2016) (Lin et al., 2014). However, there are two major
shortcomings in existing CNN compression techniques.
• A myriad of CNN compression techniques focus on
the fully-connected layers of CNNs which convention-

