SMAC: Simultaneous Mapping and Clustering Using Spectral Decompositions

Chandrajit Bajaj 1 Tingran Gao 2 Zihang He 3 Qixing Huang 1 Zhenxiao Liang 3

Abstract
We introduce a principled approach for simultaneous mapping and clustering (SMAC) for establishing consistent maps across heterogeneous object
collections (e.g., 2D images or 3D shapes). Our
approach takes as input a heterogeneous object
collection and a set of maps computed between
some pairs of objects, and outputs a homogeneous
object clustering together with a new set of maps
possessing optimal intra- and inter-cluster consistency. Our approach is based on the spectral
decomposition of a data matrix storing all pairwise maps in its blocks. We additionally provide
tight theoretical guarantees for the accuracy of
SMAC under established noise models. We also
demonstrate the usefulness of our approach on
synthetic and real datasets.

1. Introduction
Establishing maps (e.g. pointwise correspondences) across
object collections is a fundamental problem spanning many
scientific domains. High-quality maps facilitating information propagation and transformation are key to applications
ranging from 3D reconstruction with partial scans (Huber
& Hebert, 2001), data-driven geometry completion and reconstruction (Pauly et al., 2005), texture transfer (Schreiner
et al., 2004; Kraevoy & Sheffer, 2004), to comparative biology (Boyer et al., 2011; Gao et al., 2017), joint dataanalysis (Huang et al., 2011; Kim et al., 2012; Wang et al.,
2013; 2014; Huang et al., 2014), and data exploration and
organization (Kim et al., 2012; Huang et al., 2014).
High quality object maps are generally difficult to compute.
Prior work on map computation focused on optimizing maps
between pairs of objects; see (van Kaick et al., 2010) for
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of
Texas at Austin 2 Department of Statistics, The University of
Chicago 3 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua Univesity. Correspondence to: Chandrajit Bajaj <bajaj@cs.utexas.edu>, Qixing Huang <huangqx@cs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

a standard survey and (Kim et al., 2011; Mandad et al.,
2017) for some recent advances. Despite the significant
progress, state-of-the-art techniques tends to hit a barrier on
the quality of maps that are computed in a pairwise manner.
Building upon the availability of big-data, a recent line of
research (Kim et al., 2012; Nguyen et al., 2011; Ovsjanikov
et al., 2012; Huang et al., 2012; Huang & Guibas, 2013;
Huang et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2015a;b;
Shen et al., 2016; Leonardos et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2017)
considered computing many pairwise maps jointly among
a collection of objects. The promise of these approaches
hinges upon the observation that one way to obtain a high
quality pairwise map between dissimilar objects is to choose
a path connecting these objects but consisting of consecutive
similar shapes: maps between similar objects are typically
of higher quality, and so is the resulted composed map.
From a regularization perspective, joint map computation
leverages the generic consistency of a network of maps
among multiple objects, in which composition of maps
along cycles are expected to be close to the identity map.
However, the performance of these data-driven approaches
relies predominantly on the homogeneity of the object collection, i.e. the input objects fall into the same category or
sub-category (e.g. Chairs, Cars, and Human models). In
the presence of heterogeneous data, where the input objects
fall into multiple underlying categories, applying existing
data-driven approaches without the category label information tend to produce unsatisfactory results. In this setting,
even though existing methods are able to suppress the noise
in intra-cluster maps within a single cluster, jointly computed maps for the entire object collection leads are often
significantly worse. One explanation is that high fraction
of incorrect inter-cluster maps tends to “contaminate” the
regularization effect of intra-cluster maps. A natural resolution is to employ a two-stage cascadic strategy that identifies the underlying clusters before computing the intra- and
inter-cluster maps. Unfortunately, such clustering requires
accurate quantification of the object similarities, which is
a difficult problem in its own right. Meanwhile, the error
produced in the clustering stage is unlikely remedied by the
consistency-based regularization.
In this paper, we propose to solve the mapping and clustering problems simultaneously. Instead of explicitly relying on certain pairwise similarity and/or map distortion

