Scalable Deletion-Robust Submodular Maximization:
Data Summarization with Privacy and Fairness Constraints
Ehsan Kazemi 1 Morteza Zadimoghaddam 2 Amin Karbasi 1

Abstract
Can we efficiently extract useful information from
a large user-generated dataset while protecting
the privacy of the users and/or ensuring fairness
in representation? We cast this problem as an
instance of a deletion-robust submodular maximization where part of the data may be deleted
or masked due to privacy concerns or fairness
criteria. We propose the first memory-efficient
centralized, streaming, and distributed methods
with constant-factor approximation guarantees
against any number of adversarial deletions. We
extensively evaluate the performance of our algorithms on real-world applications, including
(i) Uber-pick up locations with location privacy
constraints; (ii) feature selection with fairness constraints for income prediction and crime rate prediction; and (iii) robust to deletion summarization
of census data, consisting of 2,458,285 feature
vectors. Our experiments show that our solution
is robust against even 80% of data deletion.

1. Introduction
It has long been known that solutions obtained from optimization methods can demonstrate striking sensitivity to the
parameters of the problem (Bertsimas et al., 2011). Robust
optimization, in contrast, is a paradigm in the mathematical
programming community with the aim of safeguarding the
solutions from the changes in the underlying parameters.
In this paper, we consider submodular maximization, a very
well studied discrete optimization problem defined over a
finite set of items (e.g., images, videos, blog posts, sensors,
etc). Submodularity formalizes the notion of diminishing
returns, stating (informally) that selecting an item earlier
results in a higher utility than selecting it later. This notion has found far-reaching applications in machine learning
1

Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New
Haven, Connecticut, USA 2 Google Research, Zurich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Ehsan Kazemi <ehsan.kazemi@yale.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

(Bach et al., 2013), web search and mining (Borodin et al.,
2017), social network (Kempe et al., 2003), crowdsourcing
(Singla et al., 2016), and user modeling (Yue & Guestrin,
2011), to name a few. However, almost all the existing
methods for submodular maximization, ranging from centralized (Nemhauser et al., 1978; Feldman et al., 2017) to
streaming (Badanidiyuru et al., 2014; Feldman et al., 2018),
to distributed (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2013; Mirrokni & Zadimoghaddam, 2015; Barbosa et al., 2015), rely on greedy
selection of elements. As a result, the returned solution
of such methods are remarkably sensitive to even a single
deletion from the set of items.
The need for efficient deletion-robust optimization methods is wide-spread across many data-driven applications.
With access to big and massive data (usually generated by
millions of users), along with strong machine learning techniques, many service providers have been able to exploit
these new resources in order to improve the accuracy of
their data analytics. At the same time, it has been observed
that many such inference tasks may leak very sensitive information about the data providers (i.e., personally identifiable
information, protected health information, legal or financial
data, etc). Similarly these algorithms can encode hidden biases that disproportionately and adversely impact members
with certain characteristics (e.g., gender and race).
In order to reduce the effect of information extraction on
privacy and fairness, one needs to be able to remove sensitive data points (e.g., geolocations) or discard sensitive
data features (e.g., skin color) from the dataset without incurring too much loss in performance. For instance, Article
17 of European “General Data Protection Regulation” states
obligations with respect to providing individuals with the
“Right to erasure (or Right to be forgotten)”. By exercising
this right, individuals may enforce the service providers
to delete their personal data or put restrictions from using
part of it. Similarly, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
American anti-discrimination law prohibits employment discrimination against certain characteristics (such as color and
sex). Thus, to obtain fairer machine learning algorithms, we
need to reduce the bias inherent in the training examples due
to the lack of certain types of information, not being representative, or reflecting historical biases. This can be done
by either removing protected attributes from training data

