Transfer Learning via Learning to Transfer

Ying Wei 1 2 Yu Zhang 1 Junzhou Huang 2 Qiang Yang 1

Abstract
In transfer learning, what and how to transfer are
two primary issues to be addressed, as different
transfer learning algorithms applied between a
source and a target domain result in different
knowledge transferred and thereby the performance improvement in the target domain. Determining the optimal one that maximizes the performance improvement requires either exhaustive exploration or considerable expertise. Meanwhile, it
is widely accepted in educational psychology that
human beings improve transfer learning skills of
deciding what to transfer through meta-cognitive
reﬂection on inductive transfer learning practices.
Motivated by this, we propose a novel transfer
learning framework known as Learning to Transfer (L2T) to automatically determine what and
how to transfer are the best by leveraging previous transfer learning experiences. We establish
the L2T framework in two stages: 1) we learn
a reﬂection function encrypting transfer learning
skills from experiences; and 2) we infer what and
how to transfer are the best for a future pair of domains by optimizing the reﬂection function. We
also theoretically analyse the algorithmic stability
and generalization bound of L2T, and empirically
demonstrate its superiority over several state-ofthe-art transfer learning algorithms.

1. Introduction
Inspired by human beings’ capabilities to transfer knowledge across tasks, transfer learning aims to leverage knowledge from a source domain to improve the learning performance or minimize the number of labeled examples required in a target domain. It is of particular signiﬁcance
when tackling tasks with limited labeled examples. Transfer
learning has proved its wide applicability in, for example,
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Ying Wei
<judyweiying@gmail.com>, Qiang Yang <qyang@cse.ust.hk>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

image classiﬁcation (Long et al., 2015), sentiment classiﬁcation (Blitzer et al., 2006), dialog systems (Mo et al., 2016),
and urban computing (Wei et al., 2016).
Three key research issues in transfer learning, pointed
by Pan & Yang, are when to transfer, how to transfer, and
what to transfer. Once transfer learning from a source domain is considered to beneﬁt a target domain (when to transfer), an algorithm (how to transfer) discovers the transferable knowledge across domains (what to transfer). Different algorithms are likely to discover different transferable
knowledge, and thereby lead to uneven transfer learning
effectiveness which is evaluated by the performance improvement over non-transfer baselines in a target domain.
To achieve the optimal performance improvement for a target domain given a source domain, researchers may try
tens to hundreds of transfer learning algorithms covering
instance (Dai et al., 2007), parameter (Tommasi et al., 2014),
and feature (Pan et al., 2011) based algorithms. Such bruteforce exploration is computationally expensive and practically impossible. As a tradeoff, a sub-optimal improvement
is usually obtained from a heuristically selected algorithm,
which unfortunately requires considerable expertise in an
ad-hoc and unsystematic manner.
Exploring different algorithms is not the only way to optimize what to transfer. Previous transfer learning experiences
do also help, which has been widely accepted in educational
psychology (Luria, 1976; Belmont et al., 1982). Human
beings sharpen transfer learning skills of deciding what to
transfer by conducting meta-cognitive reﬂection on diverse
transfer learning experiences. For example, children who
are good at playing chess may transfer mathematical skills,
visuospatial skills, and decision making skills learned from
chess to solve arithmetic problems, to solve pattern matching puzzles, and to play basketball, respectively. At a later
age, it will be easier for them to decide to transfer mathematical and decision making skills learned from chess, rather
than visuospatial skills, to market investment. Unfortunately, all existing transfer learning algorithms transfer from
scratch and ignore previous transfer learning experiences.
Motivated by this, we propose a novel transfer learning
framework called Learning to Transfer (L2T). The key idea
of the L2T is to enhance the transfer learning effectiveness
from a source to a target domain by leveraging previous

