Reinforcing Adversarial Robustness using Model Confidence
Induced by Adversarial Training

Xi Wu * 1 Uyeong Jang * 2 Jiefeng Chen 2 Lingjiao Chen 2 Somesh Jha 2

Abstract
In this paper we study leveraging confidence information induced by adversarial training to reinforce adversarial robustness of a given adversarially trained model. A natural measure of confidence is kF (x)k∞ (i.e. how confident F is about
its prediction?). We start by analyzing an adversarial training formulation proposed by Madry et
al.. We demonstrate that, under a variety of instantiations, an only somewhat good solution to
their objective induces confidence to be a discriminator, which can distinguish between right
and wrong model predictions in a neighborhood
of a point sampled from the underlying distribution. Based on this, we propose Highly Confident
Near Neighbor (HCNN), a framework that combines confidence information and nearest neighbor search, to reinforce adversarial robustness of
a base model. We give algorithms in this framework and perform a detailed empirical study. We
report encouraging experimental results that support our analysis, and also discuss problems we
observed with existing adversarial training.

1. Introduction
In the adversarial-perturbation problem for neural networks, an adversary starts with a neural network model F
and a point x that F classifies correctly (we assume that
F ends with a softmax layer, which is common in the literature), and crafts a small perturbation to produce another
point x0 that F classifies incorrectly. (Szegedy et al., 2013)
first noticed the vulnerability of existing neural networks
to adversarial perturbations, which is somewhat surprising
given their great generalization capability. Since then, a
line of research (e.g., (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Papernot
et al., 2016b; Miyato et al., 2017; Madry et al., 2017)) has
*
Equal contribution 1 Google 2 University of WisconsinMadison. Correspondence to: Xi Wu <xiwu@cs.wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

been devoted to hardening neural networks against adversarial perturbation. While modest progress has been made,
until now there is still a large gap in successfully defending
against more advanced attacks, such as the attack by (Carlini & Wagner, 2017a).
In this paper we study leveraging confidence information
induced by adversarial training, to reinforce adversarial robustness of a given adversarially trained model. A natural measure of confidence is kF (x)k∞ (i.e. how confident F is about its prediction?). Our motivation comes
from a thought experiment based on the manifold assumption (Zhu & Goldberg, 2009) made in unsupervised and
semi-supervised learning, which states that natural data
points lie on (or near to) separate low dimensional manifolds for different classes. If one believes that a good
deep neural network model can approximate well the natural manifolds, then ideally it should have the property that it
can confidently distinguish points from natural manifolds,
while not claiming confidence for points that are far away
from the natural manifolds. Since natural manifolds are
assumed to be separate, it follows that for a good model,
confident model predictions for different classes must be
separate from each other.
Taking this perspective, we formalize a probabilistic property on the separation of confident model predictions for
different classes, and use it to examine existing adversarial training formulations. Somewhat surprisingly, we find
that a natural min-max formulation proposed by (Madry
et al., 2017), under a variety of instantiations, encourages
training a model that satisfies our property well. At a high
level, the reason for this is that a good solution to the inner
maximization of the min-max formulation encourages that
there is no confident wrong prediction in a neighborhood of
a point sampled from the underlying distribution.
Our key observation is that, even if a model is only a somewhat good solution under Madry et al.’s adversarial training formulation, it induces confidence to be a discriminator
which can distinguish between right and wrong model predictions. That is, a model prediction of higher confidence
is more likely to be correct. As a result, even though a
somewhat good adversarially trained model may still have
many wrong predictions with low confidence, one can use

