Spurious Local Minima are Common
in Two-Layer ReLU Neural Networks

Itay Safran 1 Ohad Shamir 1

Abstract
We consider the optimization problem associated
with training simple ReLU neural networks of
Pk
the form x 7→ i=1 max{0, wi> x} with respect
to the squared loss. We provide a computerassisted proof that even if the input distribution
is standard Gaussian, even if the dimension is arbitrarily large, and even if the target values are
generated by such a network, with orthonormal
parameter vectors, the problem can still have spurious local minima once 6 ≤ k ≤ 20. By a concentration of measure argument, this implies that
in high input dimensions, nearly all target networks of the relevant sizes lead to spurious local minima. Moreover, we conduct experiments
which show that the probability of hitting such
local minima is quite high, and increasing with
the network size. On the positive side, mild
over-parameterization appears to drastically reduce such local minima, indicating that an overparameterization assumption is necessary to get
a positive result in this setting.

1. Introduction
One of the biggest mysteries of deep learning is why
neural networks are successfully trained in practice using gradient-based methods, despite the inherent nonconvexity of the associated optimization problem. For example, non-convex problems can have poor local minima,
which will cause any local search method (and in particular, gradient-based ones) to fail. Thus, it is natural to ask
what types of assumptions, in the context of training neural
networks, might mitigate such problems. For example, recent work has shown that other non-convex learning problems, such as phase retrieval, matrix completion, dictionary
1

Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. Correspondence to: Itay Safran <itay.safran@weizmann.ac.il>, Ohad
Shamir <ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

learning, and tensor decomposition, do not have spurious
local minima under suitable assumptions, in which case local search methods have a chance of succeeding (e.g., (Ge
et al., 2015; Sun et al., 2015; Ge et al., 2016; Bhojanapalli
et al., 2016)). Is it possible to prove similar positive results
for neural networks?
In this paper, we focus on perhaps the simplest non-trivial
ReLU neural networks, namely predictors of the form
x 7→

k
X

[wi> x]+

i=1

for some k > 1, where [z]+ = max{0, z} is the ReLU
function, x is a vector in Rd , and w1 , . . . , wk are parameter vectors. We consider directly optimizing the expected
squared loss, where the input is standard Gaussian, and in
the realizable case – namely, that the target values are generated by a network of a similar architecture:

!2 
k
k
X
X
1
.
[vi> x]+
[w> x]+ −
min Ex∼N (0,I) 
w1 ,...,wk
2 i=1 i
i=1
(1)
Note that here, the choice wi = vσ(i) (for all i = 1, . . . , k
and any permutation σ) is a global minimum with zero expected loss. Several recent papers analyzed such objectives, in the hope of showing that it does not suffer from
spurious local minima (see related work below for more
details).
Our main contribution is to prove that unfortunately, this
conjecture is false, and that Eq. (1) indeed has spurious
local minima once 6 ≤ k ≤ 20. Moreover, this is true
even if the dimension is arbitrarily large, and even if we
assume that v1 , . . . , vk are orthonormal vectors. In fact,
since in high dimensions randomly-chosen vectors are approximately orthogonal, and the landscape of the objective
function is robust to small perturbations, we can show that
spurious local minima exist for nearly all neural network
problems as in Eq. (1), in high enough dimension (with
respect to, say, a Gaussian distribution over v1 , . . . , vk ).
Moreover, we show experimentally that these local minima
are not pathological, and that standard gradient descent can
easily get trapped in them, with a probability which seems
to increase towards 1 with the network size.

