Efficient and Consistent Adversarial Bipartite Matching

Rizal Fathony * 1 Sima Behpour * 1 Xinhua Zhang 1 Brian D. Ziebart 1

Abstract
Many important structured prediction problems, including learning to rank items,
correspondence-based natural language processing, and multi-object tracking, can be formulated
as weighted bipartite matching optimizations.
Existing structured prediction approaches have
significant drawbacks when applied under
the constraints of perfect bipartite matchings.
Exponential family probabilistic models, such
as the conditional random field (CRF), provide
statistical consistency guarantees, but suffer
computationally from the need to compute
the normalization term of its distribution over
matchings, which is a #P-hard matrix permanent
computation. In contrast, the structured support
vector machine (SSVM) provides computational
efficiency, but lacks Fisher consistency, meaning
that there are distributions of data for which it
cannot learn the optimal matching even under
ideal learning conditions (i.e., given the true
distribution and selecting from all measurable
potential functions). We propose adversarial
bipartite matching to avoid both of these limitations. We develop this approach algorithmically,
establish its computational efficiency and Fisher
consistency properties, and apply it to matching
problems that demonstrate its empirical benefits.

1

Introduction

How can the elements from two sets be paired one-to-one
to have the largest sum of pairwise utilities? This maximum
weighted perfect bipartite matching problem is a classical
combinatorial optimization problem in computer science.
It can be formulated and efficiently solved in polynomial
time as a linear program or using more specialized Hungarian algorithm techniques (Kuhn, 1955). This has made it an
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago. Correspondence to: Rizal Fathony
<rfatho2@uic.edu>, Sima Behpour <sbehpo2@uic.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

attractive formalism for posing a wide range of problems,
including recognizing correspondences in similar images
(Belongie et al., 2002; Liu et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2008;
Rui et al., 2007), finding word alignments in text (Chan &
Ng, 2008), and providing ranked lists of items for information retrieval tasks (Amini et al., 2008).
Machine learning methods seek to estimate the pairwise
utilities of bipartite graphs so that the maximum weighted
complete matching is most compatible with the (distribution of) ground truth matchings of training data. When
these utilities are learned abstractly, they can be employed
to make predictive matchings for test samples. Unfortunately, important measures of incompatibility (e.g., the
Hamming loss) are often non-continuous with many local
optima in the predictors’ parameter spaces, making direct
minimization intractable. Given this difficulty, two natural
desiderata for any predictor are:
• Efficiency: learning from training data and making predictions must be computed efficiently in (lowdegree) polynomial time; and
• Consistency: the predictor’s training objectives must
also minimize the underlying Hamming loss, at least
under ideal learning conditions (given the true distribution and fully expressive model parameters).
Existing methods for learning bipartite matchings fail in
one or the other of these desiderata; exponentiated potential
fields models (Lafferty et al., 2001; Petterson et al., 2009)
are intractable for large sets of items, while maximum margin methods based on the hinge loss surrogate (Taskar et al.,
2005a; Tsochantaridis et al., 2005) lack Fisher consistency
(Tewari & Bartlett, 2007; Liu, 2007). We discuss these limitations formally in Section 2.
Given the deficiencies of the existing methods, we contribute the first approach for learning bipartite matchings
that is both computationally efficient and Fisher consistent. Our approach is based on an adversarial formulation for learning (Topsøe, 1979; Grünwald & Dawid, 2004;
Asif et al., 2015) that poses prediction-making as a dataconstrained zero-sum game between a player seeking to
minimize the expected loss and an adversarial data approximator seeking to maximize the expected loss. We present
two approaches for solving the corresponding zero-sum
game arising from our formulation: (1) using the double

