Deep Bayesian Nonparametric Tracking

Aonan Zhang 1 John Paisley 1

Abstract
Time-series data often exhibit irregular behavior,
making them hard to analyze and explain with a
simple dynamic model. For example, information
in social networks may show change-point-like
bursts that then diffuse with smooth dynamics.
Powerful models such as deep neural networks
learn smooth functions from data, but are not
as well-suited in off-the-shelf form for discovering and explaining sparse, discrete and bursty
dynamic patterns. Bayesian models can do this
well by encoding the appropriate probabilistic assumptions in the model prior. We propose an
integration of Bayesian nonparametric methods
within deep neural networks for modeling irregular patterns in time-series data. We use Bayesian
nonparametrics to model change-point behavior
in time, and a deep neural network to model nonlinear latent space dynamics. We compare with
a non-deep linear version of the model also proposed here. Empirical evaluations demonstrates
improved performance and interpretable results
when tracking stock prices and Twitter trends.

1. Introduction
Irregular behaviors such as bursts and nonlinearity repeatedly show up in time-series data. For example, the past
decades have seen several crashes of the stock market, in
which a latent continuous-like process is interrupted by a
change-point-like event (Adams & MacKay, 2007). Another
example is information diffusion in social media, which exhibits initial bursts followed by smoother diffusion (Guille
et al., 2013; Leskovec et al., 2009). Traditional tracking
models such as the linear Kalman filter (Bishop et al., 2001)
are not ideally-suited for these tasks, in part because of
their incompatibility with bursts and underlying nonlinearity (Doucet & Johansen, 2009; Andrieu et al., 2010). More
1

Department of Electrical Engineering & Data Science Institute,
Columbia University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Aonan
Zhang <az2385@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

complex machine learning techniques such as deep neural
networks (LeCun et al., 2015) usually fit smooth nonlinear functions to the data, and require more thought when
handling bursty patterns in dynamic data.
On the other hand, Bayesian methods are good at handling
discrete and bursty latent structures in data through explicit
probabilistic modeling. Typical examples such as learning
latent features (Griffiths & Ghahramani, 2011) and latent
state transitions (Fox et al., 2011) have proven useful in
multiple applications. Moreover, Bayesian nonparametric
(BNP) methods are naturally suited for large scale learning
problems due to their infinite dimensional nature. Recent
inference techniques such as online learning (Hoffman et al.,
2013), streaming learning (Broderick et al., 2013), and parallelization (Ge et al., 2015) further scale up these methods. To model complex and nonlinear structures, recent
probabilistic generative models mimic the behavior of neural networks (Ranganath et al., 2015; Schein et al., 2016).
However, these models require carefully designed inference
methods. Current ongoing research largely focuses on generalizing the scope of these models (Ranganath et al., 2016;
Tran et al., 2017). Other methods incorporate the power of
neural networks in Bayesian models, such as the variational
auto-encoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014). However,
in contrast to traditional Bayesian methods, which are good
at learning interpretable patterns through latent variables,
VAE’s sacrifice interpretability for inference tractability.
In this paper, we aim to integrate the merits of Bayesian
models and neural networks when analyzing irregular timeseries data. Our strategy is to model streaming data at two
different resolutions through a dynamic change-point model.
To be more precise, we partition the entire time horizon
into mini-batches and model the bursty dynamics between
mini-batches using BNP methods. We model nonlinearity
within each mini-batch with a deep neural network. In this
way we are able to capture bursts and nonlinearity while
also achieving interpretable results.
In Section 2 we introduce the modeling idea. In Section 3
we discuss a variational inference method. Section 4 introduces a physics-based extension and derives the predictive
distributions. Section 5 demonstrates empirical results on
stock and Twitter data.

