Data Summarization at Scale:
A Two-Stage Submodular Approach

Marko Mitrovic * 1 Ehsan Kazemi * 1 Morteza Zadimoghaddam 2 Amin Karbasi 1

Abstract
The sheer scale of modern datasets has resulted
in a dire need for summarization techniques that
can identify representative elements in a dataset.
Fortunately, the vast majority of data summarization tasks satisfy an intuitive diminishing returns
condition known as submodularity, which allows
us to find nearly-optimal solutions in linear time.
We focus on a two-stage submodular framework
where the goal is to use some given training functions to reduce the ground set so that optimizing
new functions (drawn from the same distribution)
over the reduced set provides almost as much
value as optimizing them over the entire ground
set. In this paper, we develop the first streaming
and distributed solutions to this problem. In addition to providing strong theoretical guarantees, we
demonstrate both the utility and efficiency of our
algorithms on real-world tasks including image
summarization and ride-share optimization.

1. Introduction
In the context of machine learning, it is not uncommon to
have to repeatedly optimize a set of functions that are fundamentally related to each other. In this paper, we focus on
a class of functions called submodular functions. These
functions exhibit a mathematical diminishing returns property that allows us to find nearly-optimal solutions in linear
time. However, modern datasets are growing so large that
even linear time solutions can be computationally expensive. Ideally, we want to find a sublinear summary of the
given dataset so that optimizing these related functions over
this reduced subset is nearly as effective, but not nearly as
expensive, as optimizing them over the full dataset.
As a concrete example, suppose Uber is trying to give their
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Yale
University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA 2 Google Research,
Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Ehsan Kazemi
<ehsan.kazemi@yale.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

drivers suggested waiting locations across New York City
based on historical rider pick-ups. Even if they discretize the
potential waiting locations to just include points at which
pick-ups have occurred in the past, there are still hundreds
of thousands, if not millions, of locations to consider. If
they wish to update these ideal waiting locations every day
(or at any routine interval), it would be invaluable to be able
to drastically reduce the number of locations that need to be
evaluated, and still achieve nearly optimal results.
In this scenario, each day would have a different function
that quantifies the value of a set of locations for that particular day. For example, in the winter months, spots near ice
skating rinks would be highly valuable, while in the summer
months, waterfront venues might be more prominent. On
the other hand, major tourist destinations like Times Square
will probably be busy year-round.
In other words, although the most popular pick-up locations
undoubtedly vary over time, there is also some underlying
distribution of the user behavior that remains relatively constant and ties the various days together. This means that
even though the functions for future days are technically
unknown, if we can select a good reduced subset of candidate locations based on the functions derived from historical
data, then this same reduced subset should perform well on
future functions that we cannot explicitly see yet.
In more mathematical terms, consider some unknown distribution of functions D and a ground set Ω of n elements
to pick from. We want to select a subset S of ` elements
(with `  n) such that optimizing functions (drawn from
this distribution D) over the reduced subset S is comparable
to optimizing them over the entire ground set Ω.
This problem was first introduced by Balkanski et al.
(2016) as two-stage submodular maximization. This
name comes from the idea that the overall framework can
be viewed as two separate stages. First, we want to use
the given functions to select a representative subset S, that
is ideally sublinear in size of the entire ground set Ω. In
the second stage, for any functions drawn from this same
distribution, we can optimize over S, which will be much
faster than optimizing over Ω.
Our Contributions. In today’s era of massive data, an
algorithm is rarely practical if it is not scalable. In this

