Matrix Norms in Data Streams: Faster, Multi-Pass and Row-Order

Vladimir Braverman 1 Stephen Chestnut 2 Robert Krauthgamer 3 Yi Li 4 David Woodruff 5 Lin Yang 6

Abstract
Given the prevalence of large scale linear algebra
problems in machine learning, recently there has
been considerable effort in characterizing which
functions can be approximated efficiently of a
matrix in the data stream model. We study a
number of aspects of estimating matrix norms
– an important class of matrix functions – in
a stream that have not previously been considered: (1) multi-pass algorithms, (2) algorithms
that see the underlying matrix one row at a time,
and (3) time-efficient algorithms. Our multi-pass
and row-order algorithms use less memory than
what is provably required in the single-pass and
entrywise-update models, and thus give separations between these models (in terms of memory). Moreover, all of our algorithms are considerably faster than previous ones. We also prove a
number of lower bounds, and obtain for instance,
a near-complete characterization of the memory
required of row-order algorithms for estimating
Schatten p-norms of sparse matrices. We complement our results with numerical experiments.

1. Introduction
Modern datasets, from text documents and images to social
graphs, are often represented as a large matrix A ∈ Rm×n .
In many application domains, including database queries,
data mining, network transactions and sensor networks
(see e.g. (Liberty, 2013; Wei et al., 2016; Huang & Kasiviswanathan, 2015) for recent examples), the input matrix
A is presented to the algorithm as a data stream, i.e., a sequence of items/updates that can take several forms. In the
entry-wise (or insertion-only) model, each item specifies
(i, j, Aij ) and provides the value of one entry, in arbitrary
order (and the unspecified entries are set to 0). The roworder model is similar, except that the items follow the nat*
Equal contribution 1 Johns Hopkins University 2 ETH Zurich
Weizmann Institute of Science 4 Nanyang Technological University 5 Carnegie Mellon University 6 Princeton University. Correspondence to: Lin F. Yang <lin.yang@princeton.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

ural order (sorted with i as the primary key, and j as the secondary one). In the turnstile model, each stream item has
the form (i, j, δ) and represents an update Aij ← Aij + δ
for δ ∈ R (after initializing A to the all-zeros matrix).
These models capture different access patterns, but all three
can represent sparse matrices quite efficiently, because zero
entries are implicit. As usual, the key parameters of an
algorithm in the data-stream model are its memory (also
referred to as storage/space requirements) and its running
time (per update and to report its output).
Many properties of a matrix are directly related to its spectral characteristics, i.e., its singular values. For example,
the number of non-zero singular values is just the matrix
rank, which determines the degrees of freedom of a corresponding linear system; the maximum and minimum singular values of a matrix determine its condition number,
which in turn determines the hardness of many problems,
such as optimization problems; the leading singular values
of a matrix determine how well a matrix can be represented
by the principal components; and so forth. It is generally
hard to compute directly the singular values of a matrix,
especially in the streaming model, but luckily, the Schatten norms of the matrix can often be used as surrogates for
its spectrum, see e.g. (Zhang et al., 2015; Kong & Valiant,
2016; Di Napoli et al., 2016; Khetan & Oh, 2017). Formally, the Schatten p-norm of a matrix A ∈ Rm×n is defined, for every p ≥ 1, as
1/p
P
p
,
kAkSp :=
j≥1 σj
where σ1 ≥ · · · ≥ σmin(m,n) are the singular values of
A. This definition naturally extends to all 0 < p < 1
although then it is not a norm, and also to p = 0, ∞ by
taking the limit. This is a very important family of matrix norms, and includes as special
P cases the well-known
trace/nuclear norm ||A||∗ =
j≥1 σj = kAkS1 , the

P
2 1/2
Frobenius norm ||A||F =
= kAkS2 , and
j≥1 σj
the spectral/operator norm kAkop = σ1 (A) = ||A||S∞ .
We study algorithms that approximate the Schatten p-norm
of a matrix A presented in a data stream. While this problem has attracted significant attention lately (Andoni &
Nguyên, 2013; Li et al., 2014; Li & Woodruff, 2016a;b;
2017), our results address three new aspects. First, we design faster and more space-efficient multi-pass algorithms.
Second, we consider the row-order model, which is a com-

