Configurable Markov Decision Processes

Alberto Maria Metelli 1 * Mirco Mutti 1 * Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract
In many real-world problems, there is the possibility to configure, to a limited extent, some environmental parameters to improve the performance
of a learning agent. In this paper, we propose
a novel framework, Configurable Markov Decision Processes (Conf-MDPs), to model this new
type of interaction with the environment. Furthermore, we provide a new learning algorithm,
Safe Policy-Model Iteration (SPMI), to jointly
and adaptively optimize the policy and the environment configuration. After having introduced
our approach and derived some theoretical results,
we present the experimental evaluation in two
explicative problems to show the benefits of the
environment configurability on the performance
of the learned policy.

1. Introduction
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Puterman, 2014) are
a popular formalism to model sequential decision-making
problems. Solving an MDP means to find a policy, i.e., a
prescription of actions, that maximizes a given utility function. Typically, the environment dynamics is assumed to be
fixed, unknown and out of the control of the agent. Several
exceptions to this scenario can be found in the literature,
especially in the context of Markov Decision Processes
with imprecise probabilities (MDPIPs) (Satia & Lave Jr,
1973; White III & Eldeib, 1994; Bueno et al., 2017) and
non-stationary environments (Bowerman, 1974; Hopp et al.,
1987). In the former case, the transition kernel is known
under uncertainty. Therefore, it cannot be specified using a
conditional probability distribution, but it must be defined
through a set of probability distributions (Delgado et al.,
2009). In this context, Bounded-parameter Markov Decision Processes (BMDPs) consider a special case in which
upper and lower bounds on transition probabilities are spec*

Equal contribution 1 Politecnico di Milano, 32, Piazza
Leonardo da Vinci, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Alberto
Maria Metelli <albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

ified (Givan et al., 1997; Ni & Liu, 2008). A common
approach is to solve a minimax problem to find a robust
policy maximizing the expected return under the worst possible transition model (Osogami, 2015). In non-stationary
environments, the transition probabilities (possibly also the
reward function) change over time (Bowerman, 1974). Several works tackle the problem of defining an optimality
criterion (Hopp et al., 1987) and finding optimal policies in
non-stationary environments (Garcia & Smith, 2000; Cheevaprawatdomrong et al., 2007; Ghate & Smith, 2013).
Although the environment is no longer fixed, both Markov
decision processes with imprecise probabilities and nonstationary Markov decision processes do not admit the possibility to dynamically alter the environmental parameters.
However, there exist several real-world scenarios in which
the environment is partially controllable and, therefore, it
might be beneficial to configure some of its features in order
to select the most convenient MDP to solve. For instance, a
human car driver has at her/his disposal a number of possible
vehicle configurations she/he can act on (e.g., seasonal tires,
stability and vehicle attitude, engine model, automatic speed
control, parking aid system) to improve the driving style
or quicken the process of learning a good driving policy.
Another example is the interaction between a student and
an automatic teaching system: the teaching model can be
tailored to improve the student’s learning experience (e.g.,
increasing or decreasing the difficulties of the questions or
the speed at which the concepts are presented). It is worth
noting that the active entity in the configuration process
might be the agent itself or an external supervisor guiding
the learning process. In the latter case, for instance, a supervisor can dynamically adapt where to place the products in a
supermarket in order to maximize the customer (agent) satisfaction. Similarly, the design of a street network could be
configured, by changing the semaphore transition times or
the direction of motion, to reduce the drivers’ journey time.
In a more abstract sense, the possibility to act on the environmental parameters can have essentially two benefits: i)
it allows improving the agent performance; ii) it may allow
to speed up the learning process. This second instance has
been previously addressed in (Ciosek & Whiteson, 2017;
Florensa et al., 2017), where the transition model and the
initial state distribution are altered in order to reach a faster
convergence to the optimal policy. However, in both the

