Learning Diffusion using Hyperparameters

Dimitris Kalimeris 1 Yaron Singer 1 Karthik Subbian 2 Udi Weinsberg 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
For well over a decade there has been extensive work on
learning social network influence models (Liben-Nowell
& Kleinberg, 2003; Netrapalli & Sanghavi, 2012; Abrahao
et al., 2013; Friggeri et al., 2014; Anderson et al., 2015;
Subbian et al., 2017), and the independent cascade model
in particular (Saito et al., 2008; Gomez Rodriguez et al.,
2010; Goyal et al., 2010; Gomez Rodriguez et al., 2011;
Du et al., 2014; Lemonnier et al., 2014; Bourigault et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Harvard
University 2 Facebook, Menlo Park. Correspondence to: Dimitris
Kalimeris <kalimeris@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Lookback

0.8

7
15
30
60

0.7

ECDF

In this paper we advocate for a hyperparametric
approach to learn diffusion in the independent
cascade (IC) model. The sample complexity of
this model is a function of the number of edges in
the network and consequently learning becomes
infeasible when the network is large. We study
a natural restriction of the hypothesis class using
additional information available in order to dramatically reduce the sample complexity of the
learning process. In particular we assume that diffusion probabilities can be described as a function
of a global hyperparameter and features of the
individuals in the network. One of the main challenges with this approach is that training a model
reduces to optimizing a non-convex objective. Despite this obstacle, we can shrink the best-known
sample complexity bound for learning IC by a
factor of |E|/d where |E| is the number of edges
in the graph and d is the dimension of the hyperparameter. We show that under mild assumptions
about the distribution generating the samples one
can provably train a model with low generalization error. Finally, we use large-scale diffusion
data from Facebook to show that a hyperparametric model using approximately 20 features per
node achieves remarkably high accuracy.

1
0.9

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0

50

100

150

200

Number of edge interactions

250

Figure 1. The plot shows the empirical CDF of the number of per
edge interactions in Facebook (Events dataset, see Section 5.3).

2014; Narasimhan et al., 2015). Independent cascade (IC)
was popularized by the seminal work of Kempe, Kleinberg,
and Tardos (Kempe et al., 2003) and is a stochastic model
that predicts the likelihood of information diffusing from
one individual to another in a social network. In this model
for every pair of individuals connected in the network u, v
there is a probability pu,v that v adopts the behavior of u
(i.e. information is diffused from u to v).
The main challenge with learning the IC model is that the
sample complexity is often overwhelmingly large or simply infeasible. To illustrate this point, Figure 1 shows the
cumulative distribution of edge interactions for millions of
public events on Facebook over varying periods of time,
ranging from one week to two months (see detailed description of the dataset in Section 5). The vertical line marks the
minimal number of observations per edge required to infer
the likelihood of influence with error 0.1 and confidence
95%. In this data set, more than 90% of the edges do not
have enough observations to learn the respective diffusion
probabilities accurately, even over a period of two months.
Furthermore, in a single week (the timeframe in which inference about an event is often most relevant), none of the
edges in the data set have sufficiently many observations.
Given that even with the data available on Facebook there
are not enough observations to learn the model, one needs
to impose additional assumptions. A natural approach is to
assume that the diffusion probabilities are a function of network and individuals’ characteristics and some underlying

