Learning with Abandonment

Sven Schmit 1 Ramesh Johari 2

Abstract
Consider a platform that wants to learn a personalized policy for each user, but the platform
faces the risk of a user abandoning the platform if
they are dissatisfied with the actions of the platform. For example, a platform is interested in
personalizing the number of newsletters it sends,
but faces the risk that the user unsubscribes forever. We propose a general thresholded learning model for scenarios like this, and discuss
the structure of optimal policies. We describe
salient features of optimal personalization algorithms and how feedback the platform receives
impacts the results. Furthermore, we investigate
how the platform can efficiently learn the heterogeneity across users by interacting with a population and provide performance guarantees.

1. Introduction
Machine learning algorithms are increasingly intermediating interactions between platforms and their users. As a result, users’ interaction with the algorithms will impact optimal learning strategies; we investigate this consequence
in our work. In the setting we consider, a platform wants to
personalize service to each user. The distinctive feature in
this work is that the platform faces the risk of a user abandoning the platform if they are dissatisfied with the actions
of the platform. Algorithms designed by the platform thus
need to be careful to avoid losing users.
There are many examples of such settings. In the near
future, smart energy meters will be able to throttle consumers’ energy consumption to increase efficiency of the
power grid during peak demand, e.g., by raising or lowering the level of air conditioning. This can lead to cost
savings for both utility companies and consumers. How1
Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 2 Management Science
& Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.. Correspondence to: Sven Schmit <schmit@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

ever, if the utility company is too aggressive in its throttling of energy, a user might abandon the program. Due
to heterogeneity in housing, appliances and preferences of
customers, it is important that utility companies learn personalized strategies for each consumer.
Content creators (e.g., news sites, blogs, etc.) face a similar
problem with e-mail dissemination. There is value in sending more e-mails, but each e-mail also risks the recipient
unsubscribing, taking away any opportunity of the creator
to interact with the user in the future. Yet another example
is that of mobile app notifications. These can be used to
improve user engagement and experience. However if the
platform sends too many notifications, an upset user might
turn off notifications from the application.
In all of the above scenarios, we face a decision problem
where “more is better;” however, there is a threshold beyond which the user abandons and no further rewards are
gained. This work focuses on developing insight into the
structure of optimal learning strategies in such settings.
We are particularly interested in understanding when such
strategies take on a “simple” structure, as we elaborate below.
In Section 2, we introduce a benchmark model of learning
with abandonment. In the initial model we consider, a platform interacts with a single user over time. The user has a
threshold θ drawn from a distribution F , and at each time
t = 0, 1, 2, . . . the platform chooses an action xt . If xt ever
exceeds θ, the user abandons; otherwise, the user stays, and
the platform earns some reward dependent on xt .
We first consider the case where the distribution F and the
reward function are known (say, from prior estimation),1
and the challenge is finding an optimal strategy for a given
new user. We consider the problem of maximizing expected discounted reward. Intuitively, we might expect that
the optimal policy is increasing and depends on the discount factor: in particular, we might try to serve the user
at increasing levels of xt as long as we see they did not
abandon. Surprisingly, our main result shows this is not the
case: that in fact, the static policy of maximizing one-step
reward is optimal for this problem. Essentially, because the
user abandons if the threshold is ever crossed, there is no
1

We also use F to denote the CDF.

