High Performance Zero-Memory Overhead Direct Convolutions

Jiyuan Zhang 1 Franz Franchetti 1 Tze Meng Low 1

Abstract
The computation of convolution layers in deep
neural networks typically rely on high performance routines that trade space for time by using
additional memory (either for packing purposes or
required as part of the algorithm) to improve performance. The problems with such an approach
are two-fold. First, these routines incur additional
memory overhead which reduces the overall size
of the network that can fit on embedded devices
with limited memory capacity. Second, these high
performance routines were not optimized for performing convolution, which means that the performance obtained is usually less than conventionally expected. In this paper, we demonstrate
that direct convolution, when implemented correctly, eliminates all memory overhead, and yields
performance that is between 10% to 400% times
better than existing high performance implementations of convolution layers on conventional and
embedded CPU architectures. We also show that
a high performance direct convolution exhibits
better scaling performance, i.e. suffers less performance drop, when increasing the number of
threads.

1. Introduction
Conventional wisdom suggests that computing convolution
layers found in deep neural nets via direct convolution is
not efficient. As such, many existing methods for computing convolution layers (Jia et al., 2014; Cho & Brand,
2017) in deep neural networks are based on highly optimized routines (e.g. matrix-matrix multiplication) found
in computational libraries such as the Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms (BLAS) (Dongarra et al., 1990). In order
to utilize the matrix-matrix multiplication routine, these
frameworks reshape and selectively duplicate parts of the
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Jiyuan
Zhang <jiyuanz@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Performance normalized to OpenBLAS GEMM on AMD PileDriver
4.0 GHz, 4/4 cores/threads
Normalized Performance [Gflop/s]
1.8
1.6

OpenBLAS+Packing

Direct CNN

1.4

1.2
1

Packing
0.6 overheads
0.8

0.4
0.2
0

Conv1

Conv2

Conv3

Conv4

Conv5

Alexnet Layers

Figure 1. High performance direct convolution implementation
achieves higher performance than a high performance matrix multiplication routine, whereas matrix-multiplication based convolution
implementations suffers from packing overheads and is limited by
the performance of the matrix multiplication routine

original input data (collectively known as packing); thereby
incurring additional memory space for performance.
There are two problems with this approach: First, the additional work of reshaping and duplicating elements of the
input data is a bandwidth-bounded operation that incurs
an additional, and non-trivial time penalty on the overall
system performance. Second, and more importantly, matrices arising from convolution layers often have dimensions
that are dissimilar from matrices arising from traditional
high performance computing (HPC) application. As such,
the matrix-matrix multiplication routine typically does not
achieve as good a performance on convolution matrices as
compared to HPC matrices.
To illustrate these drawbacks of existing methods, consider
the 4-thread performance attained on various convolution
layers in AlexNet using an AMD Piledriver architecture
shown in Figure 1. In this plot, we present performance
of 1) a traditional matrix-multiply based convolution implementation linked to OpenBLAS1 (OpenBLAS) (blue) and
2) our proposed high performance direct convolution implementation (yellow). Performance of both implementations
are normalized to the performance of only the matrix-matrix
multiplication routine (dashed line). This dashed line is
1

OpenBLAS is an open-source implementation of the GotoBLAS algorithm, the de-facto algorithm for matrix multiplication
on CPUs (Goto & van de Geijn, 2008).

