Fast and Sample Efficient Inductive Matrix Completion via Multi-Phase
Procrustes Flow
Xiao Zhang * 1 Simon S. Du * 2 Quanquan Gu 3

Abstract
We revisit the inductive matrix completion problem that aims to recover a rank-r matrix with
ambient dimension d given n features as the side
prior information. The goal is to make use of the
known n features to reduce sample and computational complexities. We present and analyze
a new gradient-based non-convex optimization
algorithm that converges to the true underlying
matrix at a linear rate with sample complexity
only linearly depending on n and logarithmically
depending on d. To the best of our knowledge,
all previous algorithms either have a quadratic
dependency on the number of features in sample
complexity or a sub-linear computational convergence rate. In addition, we provide experiments
on both synthetic and real world data to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm.

1. Introduction
Matrix completion method has been used in a wide range of
applications such as collaborative filtering for recommendation (Koren et al., 2009), multi-label learning (Cabral et al.,
2011) and clustering (Hsieh et al., 2012). In these applications, every entry is modeled as the inner product between
factors corresponding to the row and column variables. For
example, in movie recommendation, each row factor represents the latent representation of a user and each column
factor represents the latent representation of a movie.
In many applications of significant interest, besides the partially observed matrix, side information, in the form of
features, is also available. These might correspond to de*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA. 2 Machine Learning
Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
USA. 3 Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

mographic information (genders, occupation) for users or
product information (genre, director) in a movie recommender system for example. With such features at hand,
one can model an observation as a specific linear interaction
between features to reduce the model complexity. Formally,
let L∗ ∈ Rd1 ×d2 be the unknown low-rank matrix with rank
r, and let XL ∈ Rd1 ×n1 and XR ∈ Rd2 ×n2 be the known
feature matrices with d1 ≥ n1 ≥ r and d2 ≥ n2 ≥ r. We
assume the unknown rank-r matrix L∗ can be represented
∗
n1 ×n2
by XL M∗ X>
.
R for some unknown matrix M ∈ R
∗
Thus instead of learning a large d1 × d2 matrix L , we only
need to recover a smaller low-rank matrix M∗ . This inductive approach has been applied successfully in many applications including collaborative filtering (Abernethy et al.,
2009; Menon et al., 2011; Chen et al., 2012), multi-label
learning (Xu et al., 2013; Si et al., 2016), semi-supervised
clustering (Yi et al., 2013; Si et al., 2016), gene-disease
prediction (Natarajan & Dhillon, 2014) and blog recommendation (Shin et al., 2015).
From the theoretical point of view, side information allows
us to reduce the overall sample and computational complexities. Xu et al. (2013) and Jain & Dhillon (2013) pioneered the theoretical investigation in this direction. Specifically, Xu et al. (2010) adapted the convex relaxation approach (Candès & Recht, 2009; Candès & Tao, 2010) and
requires only O(rn log n log d)1 samples to recover the underlying matrix, which we believe is tight up to logarithmic
factors. However, the computational cost is usually high because they need to solve a nuclear norm minimization problem, which is inherently slow due to its high per-iteration
complexity and non-strongly convex objective function (c.f.
Equation (2) in Xu et al. (2013)), which does not have linear
convergence rate. On the other hand, Jain & Dhillon (2013)
(also see Zhong et al. (2015)) proposed an algorithm which
first does a spectral initialization to obtain a coarse estimate,
then uses alternating minimization to refine the estimate.
Their algorithm has a locally linear rate of convergence but
requires O(r3 n2 log n log(1/)) samples, which has an unsatisfactory quadratic dependency on n and cannot achieve
exact recovery because sample complexity also depends on
the target accuracy . A natural and open question is:
1

For the ease of presentation, we assume d1 = d2 = d and
n1 = n2 = n when discussing complexities.

