DCFNet: Deep Neural Network with Decomposed Convolutional Filters

Qiang Qiu 1 Xiuyuan Cheng 1 Robert Calderbank 1 Guillermo Sapiro 1

Abstract
Filters in a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
contain model parameters learned from enormous
amounts of data. In this paper, we suggest to
decompose convolutional filters in CNN as a truncated expansion with pre-fixed bases, namely
the Decomposed Convolutional Filters network
(DCFNet), where the expansion coefficients remain learned from data. Such a structure not only
reduces the number of trainable parameters and
computation, but also imposes filter regularity by
bases truncation. Through extensive experiments,
we consistently observe that DCFNet maintains
accuracy for image classification tasks with a significant reduction of model parameters, particularly with Fourier-Bessel (FB) bases, and even
with random bases. Theoretically, we analyze the
representation stability of DCFNet with respect to
input variations, and prove representation stability under generic assumptions on the expansion
coefficients. The analysis is consistent with the
empirical observations.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has become one of
the most successful computational models in machine learning and artificial intelligence. Remarkable progress has been
achieved in the design of successful CNN network structures, such as the VGG-Net (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014),
ResNet (He et al., 2016), and DenseNet (Huang et al., 2016).
Less attention has been paid to the design of filter structures
in CNNs. Filters, namely the weights in the convolutional
layers, are one of the most important ingredients of a CNN
model, as filters contain the actual model parameters learned
from enormous amounts of data. Filters in CNNs are typically randomly initialized, and then updated using variants
and extensions of gradient descent (“back-propagation”).
1

Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA. Work partially supported by NSF, DoD, NIH and AFOSR. Correspondence
to: Xiuyuan Cheng <xiuyuan.cheng@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Figure 1. In a DCFNet, an L × L × M 0 × M convolutional layer
is decomposed into the product of K bases of size L × L (Ψ)
and KM 0 × M coefficients (a), where Ψ is pre-fixed, and a is
learned from data. The basis can carry prior (explainable) structure
if available.

As a result, trained CNN filters have no specific structures,
which often leads to significant redundancy in the learned
model (Denton et al., 2014; Han et al., 2015; Iandola et al.,
2016). Filters with improved properties will have a direct
impact on the accuracy and efficiency of CNN, and the theoretical analysis of filters is also of central importance to the
mathematical understanding of deep networks.
This paper suggests to decompose convolutional filters in
CNN into a truncated expansion with pre-fixed bases in
the spatial domain, namely the Decomposed Convolutional
Filters network (DCFNet), where the expansion coefficients
remain learned from data. By representing the filters in
terms of functional bases, which can come from prior data
or task knowledge, rather than as pixel values, the number of
trainable parameters is reduced to the expansion coefficients;
and furthermore, regularity conditions can be imposed on
the filters via the truncated expansion. For image classification tasks, we empirically observe that DCFNet is able
to maintain the accuracy with a significant reduction in the
number of parameters. Such observation holds even when
random bases are used.
In particular, we adopt in DCFNet the leading FourierBessel (FB) bases (Abramowitz & Stegun, 1964), which
correspond to the low-frequency components in the input.
We experimentally observe the superior performance of
DCFNet with FB bases (DCF-FB) in both image classification and denoising tasks. DCF-FB network reduces the
response to the high-frequency components in the input,
which are least stable under image variations such as deformation and often do not affect recognition after being

