Clipped Action Policy Gradient

Yasuhiro Fujita 1 Shin-ichi Maeda 1

Abstract
Many continuous control tasks have bounded action spaces. When policy gradient methods are
applied to such tasks, out-of-bound actions need
to be clipped before execution, while policies are
usually optimized as if the actions are not clipped.
We propose a policy gradient estimator that exploits the knowledge of actions being clipped to
reduce the variance in estimation. We prove that
our estimator, named clipped action policy gradient (CAPG), is unbiased and achieves lower
variance than the conventional estimator that ignores action bounds. Experimental results demonstrate that CAPG generally outperforms the conventional estimator, indicating that it is a better
policy gradient estimator for continuous control
tasks. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/pfnet-research/capg.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in recent years in a wide range of challenging tasks,
such as games (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; 2017),
robotic manipulation (Levine et al., 2016), and locomotion
(Schulman et al., 2015; 2017; Heess et al., 2017), with the
help of deep neural networks. Policy gradient methods are
among the most successful model-free RL algorithms (Mnih
et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2015; 2017; Gu et al., 2017b).
They are particularly suitable for continuous control tasks,
i.e., environments with continuous action spaces, because
they directly improve policies that represent continuous distributions of actions to maximize expected returns. For
continuous control tasks, policies are typically represented
by Gaussian distributions conditioned on current and past
observations.

uous control tasks often have bounded action sets that they
can execute (Duan et al., 2016; Brockman et al., 2016; Tassa
et al., 2018). For example, when controlling the torques
of motors, effective torque values will be physically constrained. Policies with unbounded support like Gaussian
policies are usually applied to such tasks by clipping sampled actions into their bounds (Duan et al., 2016; Dhariwal
et al., 2017). Policy gradients for such policies are estimated
as if actions were not clipped (Chou et al., 2017).
In this study, we demonstrate that we can improve policy
gradient methods by exploiting the knowledge of actions
being clipped. We prove that the variance of policy gradient
estimates can be strictly reduced under mild assumptions
that hold for popular policy representations such as Gaussian
policies with diagonal covariance matrices. Our proposed
algorithm, named clipped action policy gradient (CAPG),
is an alternative unbiased policy gradient estimator with a
lower variance than the conventional estimator. Our experimental results on MuJoCo-simulated continuous control
benchmark problems (Todorov et al., 2012; Brockman et al.,
2016) show that CAPG can improve the performance of
existing policy gradient-based deep RL algorithms.

2. Preliminaries
We consider a Markov decision process (MDP) defined by
the tuple (S, U, P, r, ρ0 , γ), where S is a set of possible
states, U is a set of possible actions, P is a state-transition
probability distribution, r : S ×U → R is a reward function,
ρ0 is a distribution of the initial state s0 , and γ ∈ (0, 1] is a
discount factor.
A probability distribution of action conditioned on state
is referred to as a policy. The probability density function
(PDF) of a policy is denoted by π. RL algorithms aim to find
a policy that maximizes the expected cumulative discounted
reward from initial states,

Although Gaussian policies have unbounded support, contin1

Preferred Networks, Inc., Japan.
Correspondence
to: Yasuhiro Fujita <fujita@preferred.jp>, Shin-ichi Maeda
<ichi@preferred.jp>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

η(π) = Es0 ,u0 ,...

hX

i
γ t r(st , ut ) π ,

t

where Es0 ,u0 ,... [·|π] denotes an expected value with respect
to a state-action sequence s0 ∼ ρ0 (·), u0 ∼ π(·|s0 ), s1 ∼
P (·|s0 , u0 ), u1 ∼ π(·|s1 ), . . . .

