Crowdsourcing with Arbitrary Adversaries

Matthäus Kleindessner 1 Pranjal Awasthi 1

Abstract
Most existing works on crowdsourcing assume
that the workers follow the Dawid-Skene model,
or the one-coin model as its special case, where
every worker makes mistakes independently of
other workers and with the same error probability
for every task. We study a significant extension of
this restricted model. We allow almost half of the
workers to deviate from the one-coin model and
for those workers, their probabilities of making
an error to be task-dependent and to be arbitrarily
correlated. In other words, we allow for arbitrary
adversaries, for which not only error probabilities
can be high, but which can also perfectly collude.
In this adversarial scenario, we design an efficient
algorithm to consistently estimate the workers’
error probabilities.

1. Introduction
Crowdsourcing is an omnipresent phenomenon: it has
emerged as an integral part of the machine learning pipeline
in recent years, and one reason for the great advances in
deep learning is the presence of large data sets that have been
labeled by the crowd (e.g., Deng et al., 2009; Krizhevsky,
2009). Crowdsourcing is also at the heart of peer grading
systems (e.g., Alfaro & Shavlovsky, 2014), which help with
rising enrollment at universities, and online rating systems
(e.g., Liao et al., 2014), which many of us rely on when
choosing the next restaurant, to provide just a few examples.
A crowdsourcing scenario consists of a set of workers and a
set of tasks that need to be solved. A data curator utilizing
crowdsourcing can aim at estimating various quantities of
interest. The first goal might be to estimate the true labels
or answers for the tasks at hand. Typically, additional constraints are involved here such as a worker not being willing
1
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, Piscataway Township, New Jersey, USA. Correspondence to: Matthäus
Kleindessner <matthaeus.kleindessner@rutgers.edu>, Pranjal
Awasthi <pranjal.awasthi@rutgers.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

to solve too many tasks and the data curator wanting to get
high-quality labels at a low price. The canonical example
of this case is the Amazon Mechanical TurkTM . There one
cannot track specific workers as they are fleeting. However,
in scenarios such as peer grading or online rating systems, a
second goal might be to estimate worker qualities, especially
if workers can be reused at a later time.
In a seminal paper, Dawid & Skene (1979) proposed a
formal model that involves worker quality parameters for
crowdsourcing scenarios in the context of classification.
The Dawid-Skene model has become a standard theoretical
framework and has led to a flurry of research over the past
few years (Liu et al., 2012; Raykar & Yu, 2012; Li et al.,
2013; Gao et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2016; Khetan et al.,
2017), in particular in its special symmetric form usually
referred to as one-coin model (Ghosh et al., 2011; Karger
et al., 2011a;b; Dalvi et al., 2013; Gao & Zhou, 2013; Karger
et al., 2014; Bonald & Combes, 2017; Ma et al., 2017). In its
general form for binary classification problems, the DawidSkene model assumes that for each worker, the probability
of providing the wrong label only depends on the true label
of the task, but not on the task itself. Moreover, given the
true label, the responses provided by different workers are
independent. The one-coin model additionally assumes that
for each worker, the probability of providing the wrong label
is the same for both classes. We will formally introduce the
one-coin model in Section 2. A discussion of prior work
work is provided in Section 5 and Appendix A.
The crucial limitation of the Dawid-Skene and one-coin
model is the assumption that workers’ error probabilities are
task-independent. In particular, this excludes the possibility
of colluding adversaries (other than those that provide the
wrong label all of the time), which might make these models
a poor approximation of the real world encountered in such
applications as peer grading or online rating. In this paper, we study a significant extension of the one-coin model
that allows for arbitrary, highly colluding adversaries. We
provide an algorithm for estimating the workers’ error probabilities and prove that it asymptotically recovers the true
error probabilities. Using our estimates of the error probabilities in weighted majority votes, we also provide strategies
to estimate ground-truth labels of the tasks. Experiments on
both synthetic and real data show that our approach clearly
outperforms existing methods in the presence of adversaries.

