Beyond the One-Step Greedy Approach in Reinforcement Learning

Yonathan Efroni 1 Gal Dalal 1 Bruno Scherrer 2 Shie Mannor 1

Abstract
The famous Policy Iteration algorithm alternates
between policy improvement and policy evaluation. Implementations of this algorithm with
several variants of the latter evaluation stage, e.g,
n-step and trace-based returns, have been analyzed in previous works. However, the case of
multiple-step lookahead policy improvement, despite the recent increase in empirical evidence of
its strength, has to our knowledge not been carefully analyzed yet. In this work, we introduce the
first such analysis. Namely, we formulate variants of multiple-step policy improvement, derive
new algorithms using these definitions and prove
their convergence. Moreover, we show that recent
prominent Reinforcement Learning algorithms fit
well into our unified framework. We thus shed
light on their empirical success and give a recipe
for deriving new algorithms for future study.

1. Introduction
Policy Iteration (PI) lies at the core of Reinforcement Learning (RL) and of many planning and on-line learning methods
(Konda & Borkar, 1999; Kakade & Langford, 2002; Schulman et al., 2015a; Mnih et al., 2016; Silver et al., 2017b).
The classic PI algorithm repeats consecutive stages of i)
1-step greedy policy improvement with respect to (w.r.t.)
a value function estimate, and ii) evaluation of the value
function w.r.t. the greedy policy. Although multiple variants
of the evaluation task have been considered (Puterman &
Shin, 1978; Bertsekas & Ioffe, 1996; Sutton & Barto, 1998),
the usually considered policy update is the 1-step greedy
improvement.
Conducting policy improvement using the common 1-step
greedy approach is a specific choice, which is not necessarily
the most appropriate one. Indeed, it was empirically recently
1

Technion, Israel Institute of Technology 2 INRIA, Villers-lèsNancy, F-54600, France. Correspondence to: Yonathan Efroni
<jonathan.efroni@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

suggested that greedy approaches w.r.t. multiple steps perform better than w.r.t. 1-step. Notable examples are AlphaGo and Alpha-Go-Zero (Silver et al., 2016; 2017b;a). There,
an approximate online version of multiple-step greedy improvement is implemented via Monte Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) (Browne et al., 2012). The celebrated MCTS algorithm, which instantiates several steps of lookahead improvement, encompasses additional historical impressive
accomplishments dating back to the past century and previous decade (Tesauro & Galperin, 1997; Sheppard, 2002;
Bouzy & Helmstetter, 2004; Veness et al., 2009). To the
best of our knowledge, and despite such empirical successes,
the use of a multiple-step greedy policy improvement has
never been rigorously studied before. The motivation of this
work is to fill this gap, and suggest new possible algorithms
in this spirit.
The paper is organized as follows. We start by defining the
h-greedy policy, a policy that is greedy w.r.t. a horizon of h
steps. Using this definition, we introduce the h-PI algorithm,
a class of PI algorithms with multiple-step greedy policy
improvement and a guarenteed convergence to the optimal
policy. We stress that the term “n-step return” often refered
to in the literature, is used in the context of policy evaluation
(Sutton & Barto, 1998; Seijen & Sutton, 2014). Therefore,
to avoid confusion, we choose to denote the multiple-step
greedy policy by the letter h.
We then introduce a novel class of optimal Bellman operators, which is controlled by a continuous parameter
κ ∈ [0, 1]. This operator is used to define a new greedy
policy, the κ-greedy policy, leading to a new PI algorithm
which we name κ-PI. This is analogous to the famous TD(λ)
algorithm (Sutton, 1988) for the improvement stage. In the
TD(λ) algorithm, the λ parameter interpolates between the
single-step evaluation update for λ = 0 and the infinitehorizon (Monte Carlo) evaluation update for λ = 1. Similarly, for κ = 0, we recover the traditional 1-step greedy
policy for the improvement update and for κ = 1 we get
the infinite-horizon greedy policy, i.e. the optimal policy.
Roughly speaking, the κ-greedy policy can be viewed as
allowing to make an ‘interpolation’ over all h-greedy policies. Similarly to the previous paragraph, we use the letter
κ to avoid confusion with the parameter λ of TD(λ). Remarkably, we show that computing the κ-greedy policy is
equivalent to solving the optimal policy of a surrogate κγ-

