Composable Planning with Attributes
Amy Zhang * 1 Adam Lerer * 1 Sainbayar Sukhbaatar 2 Rob Fergus 1 2 Arthur Szlam 1

Abstract
The tasks that an agent will need to solve often
are not known during training. However, if the
agent knows which properties of the environment
are important then, after learning how its actions
affect those properties, it may be able to use this
knowledge to solve complex tasks without training specifically for them. Towards this end, we
consider a setup in which an environment is augmented with a set of user defined attributes that
parameterize the features of interest. We propose
a method that learns a policy for transitioning between “nearby” sets of attributes, and maintains a
graph of possible transitions. Given a task at test
time that can be expressed in terms of a target set
of attributes, and a current state, our model infers
the attributes of the current state and searches over
paths through attribute space to get a high level
plan, and then uses its low level policy to execute
the plan. We show in 3D block stacking, gridworld games, and StarCraft that our model is able
to generalize to longer, more complex tasks at test
time by composing simpler learned policies.

1. Introduction
Researchers have demonstrated impressive successes in
building agents that can achieve excellent performance in
difficult tasks, e.g. (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016).
However, these successes have mostly been confined to situations where it is possible to train a large number of times on
a single known task. On the other hand, in some situations,
the tasks of interest are not known at training time or the
space of tasks is so large that an agent will not realistically
be able to train many times on any single task in the space.
We might hope that the tasks of interest are compositional:
for example, cracking an egg is the same whether one is
*

Equal contribution 1 Facebook AI Research, New York, NY,
USA 2 New York University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence
to: Adam Lerer <alerer@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

making pancakes or an omelette. If the space of tasks we
want an agent to be able to solve has compositional structure,
then a state abstraction that exposes this structure could
be used both to specify instructions to the agent, and to
plan through sub-tasks that allow the agent to complete its
instructions.
In this work we show how to train agents that can solve
complex tasks by planning over a sequence of previously
experienced simpler ones. The training protocol relies on
a state abstraction that is manually specified, consisting of
a set of binary attributes designed to capture properties of
the environment we consider important. These attributes,
learned at train time from a set of (state, attribute) pairs,
provide a natural way to specify tasks, and a natural state
abstraction for planning. Once the agent learns how its
actions affect the environment in terms of the attribute representation, novel tasks can be solved compositionally by
executing a plan consisting of a sequence of transitions between abstract states defined by those attributes. Thus, as in
(Dayan & Hinton, 1992; Dietterich, 2000; Vezhnevets et al.,
2017), temporal abstractions are explicitly linked with state
abstractions.
Our approach is thus a form of model-based planning, where
the agent first learns a model of its environment (the mapping from states to attributes, and the attribute transition
graph), and then later uses that model for planning. There
is no supervision or reward given for completing the tasks
of interest; outside of the (state, attribute) pairs, the agent
receives no other reward or extrinsic supervision. In the experiments below, we will show empirically that this kind of
approach can be useful on problems that can be challenging
for standard reinforcement learning.
We evaluate compositional planning in several environments.
We first consider 3D block stacking, and show that we can
compose single-action tasks seen during training to perform
multi-step tasks. Second, we plan over multi-step policies
in 2-D grid world tasks. Finally, we see how our approach
scales to a unit-building task in StarCraft.

2. The Attribute Planner Model
We consider an agent in a Markov environment, i.e. at
each time the agent observes the state s and takes action

