Budgeted Experiment Design for Causal Structure Learning
AmirEmad Ghassami 1 Saber Salehkaleybar 2 Negar Kiyavash 1 Elias Bareinboim 3

Abstract
We study the problem of causal structure learning
when the experimenter is limited to perform at
most k non-adaptive experiments of size 1. We
formulate the problem of finding the best intervention target set as an optimization problem, which
aims to maximize the average number of edges
whose directions are resolved. We prove that the
corresponding objective function is submodular
and a greedy algorithm suffices to achieve (1 1e )approximation of the optimal value. We further
present an accelerated variant of the greedy algorithm, which can lead to orders of magnitude
performance speedup. We validate our proposed
approach on synthetic and real graphs. The results
show that compared to the purely observational
setting, our algorithm orients the majority of the
edges through a considerably small number of
interventions.

1. Introduction
The problem of learning the causal relations underlying
a complex system is of great interest in AI and throughout the empirical sciences. Causal systems are commonly
represented by directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), where the
vertices are random variables and an edge from variable X
to Y indicates that variable X is a direct cause of Y (Pearl,
2009; Spirtes et al., 2000; Bareinboim & Pearl, 2016).
To uncover the causal relations among a set of variables,
if restricted to work with only observational data from the
variables, one can use a constraint-based algorithm such as
IC, IC⇤ (Pearl, 2009), and PC, FCI (Spirtes et al., 2000), or
a score-based methods, including (Meek, 1997; Chickering,
2002; Tian et al., 2012; Solus et al., 2017). Such purely
1
Department of ECE, and Coordinated Science Laboratory,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran 3 Department of Computer Science, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. Correspondence to: AmirEmad Ghassami <ghassam2@illinois.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

observational approaches reconstruct the causal graph up
to Markov equivalence class, and hence, the investigator is
commonly left with some (or in some cases many) unresolved causal relations. Albeit, under some extra assumptions, full structure learning using merely observational data
is feasible (Mooij et al., 2016; Shimizu et al., 2006; Hoyer
et al., 2009; Peters & Bühlmann, 2012; Ghassami et al.,
2017; Quinn et al., 2015; Sun et al., 2015).
On the other hand, it is well-understood that whenever the
investigator can perform sufficient number of interventions,
the causal graph representing the underlying system can
be fully recovered. There is a growing body of research
on learning causal structures using interventional data in
causally sufficient (Eberhardt, 2007; Hauser & Bühlmann,
2012; Cooper & Yoo, 1999; He & Geng, 2008), and causally
insufficient systems (i.e., with latent confounders) (Kocaoglu et al., 2017b). An interventional structure learning
approach requires performing a set of experiments, each
intervening on a subset of the variables, and subsequently
collecting data from the intervened system. In this setting,
two natural questions arise:
1. What is the smallest required number of experiments
in order to fully learn the underlying causal graph?
2. For a fixed number of experiments (budget), what portion of the causal graph is learnable?
The first problem has been addressed in the literature under
different assumptions. (Eberhardt et al., 2005) obtained the
worst case bounds on the number of required experiments.
Connections between the experiment design problem and
the problem of finding a separating system in a graph was
studied in (Eberhardt, 2007; Hyttinen et al., 2013). Adaptive algorithms for experiment design were proposed in
(Hauser & Bühlmann, 2014; Shanmugam et al., 2015). In
(Shanmugam et al., 2015), the authors present informationtheoretic lower bounds on the number of required experiments for both deterministic and randomized adaptive approaches. In (Kocaoglu et al., 2017a), the authors considered costs for intervening on each variable and derived an
experiment design algorithm with minimum total cost that
reconstructs the whole structure.
The second question mentioned above has received less attention. We address the second question herein. Specifically,
we consider a setup with budget limitation of k experiments.
In some applications (for instance, reconstructing gene regu-

