A Robust Approach to Sequential Information Theoretic Planning

Sue Zheng 1 Jason Pacheco 1 John W. Fisher, III 1

Abstract
In many sequential planning applications a natural approach to generating high quality plans is
to maximize an information reward such as mutual information (MI). Unfortunately, MI lacks
a closed form in all but trivial models, and so
must be estimated. In applications where the cost
of plan execution is expensive, one desires planning estimates which admit theoretical guarantees. Through the use of robust M-estimators we
obtain bounds on absolute deviation of estimated
MI. Moreover, we propose a sequential algorithm
which integrates inference and planning by maximally reusing particles in each stage. We validate the utility of using robust estimators in the
sequential approach on a Gaussian Markov Random Field wherein information measures have a
closed form. Lastly, we demonstrate the benefits of our integrated approach in the context of
sequential experiment design for inferring causal
regulatory networks from gene expression levels.
Our method shows improvements over a recent
method which selects intervention experiments
based on the same MI objective.

1. Introduction
In many applications of Bayesian inference one is faced
with the following challenges: (1) exact inference is intractable, and (2) the cost of measurement far exceeds the
cost of inference. The former challenge is well studied,
however the latter so-called planning problem has received
comparatively little attention within machine learning. We
consider a formulation analogous to sequential Bayesian
experiment design, whereby actions lead to observations
that maximize a reward. Observations are chosen to maximize information gain over some latent variables, known
as information theoretic planning.
1

Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Sue Zheng <szheng@csail.mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

The Bayesian perspective on information planning largely
arises from statistics with the classic work of Blackwell (1950), Lindley (1956) and later Bernardo (1979).
In these works, information rewards are considered to
quantify the expected reduction in posterior uncertainty
(Ali & Silvey, 1966). Subsequent analyses (Basseville,
1989; Bartlett et al., 2003; Nguyen et al., 2009) link
such measures to bounds on risk. More recently their
use has been considered for sensor planning (Ertin et al.,
2003; Kreucher et al., 2005; Williams et al., 2007), experiment design (Drovandi et al., 2014), and active learning (MacKay, 1992; Settles, 2012).
When performing closed-loop planning over T -stages,
where observed values for an action are incorporated before
choosing the next action, the policy with highest expected
reward can be determined using a dynamic programming
approach (Bertsekas, 1995) which leverages backwards recursion to reduce computational complexity. This approach has exponential complexity in planning horizon T
and combinatorial complexity in the number of actionobservation pairs. Consequently, tractable greedy heuristics, which have computational complexity linear in the
number of actions and in the planning horizon, are often
applied instead.
While the greedy heuristic greatly reduces computation,
consideration must also be given to the cost of evaluating
the information reward. In many problems exact evaluation of MI lacks a closed-form expression and so must
be estimated. Moreover, the ability to accurately estimate rewards, and characterize estimation error, is crucial to making high quality decisions. For this reason,
we propose a sample-based approach that employs Mestimators (Catoni, 2012) to yield MI estimates that are
robust to outliers and facilitates both asymptotic and finitesample analysis of estimator properties. In a comprehensive analysis we: formulate the estimator bias, establish
a central limit theorem and consistency, show probabilistic bounds of estimator deviation for finite samples, and
present a probabilistic statement of plan quality.
Most existing work and guarantees on entropy estimation
assume nonparametric estimates of the data generating process (Beirlant et al., 1997), for example using kernel density estimators (Paninski & Yajima, 2008) or kNN density

