SQL-Rank: A Listwise Approach to Collaborative Ranking
Liwei Wu 1 2 Cho-Jui Hsieh 1 2 James Sharpnack 1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a listwise approach for
constructing user-specific rankings in recommendation systems in a collaborative fashion. We
contrast the listwise approach to previous pointwise and pairwise approaches, which are based on
treating either each rating or each pairwise comparison as an independent instance respectively.
By extending the work of (Cao et al., 2007), we
cast listwise collaborative ranking as maximum
likelihood under a permutation model which applies probability mass to permutations based on a
low rank latent score matrix. We present a novel
algorithm called SQL-Rank, which can accommodate ties and missing data and can run in linear
time. We develop a theoretical framework for analyzing listwise ranking methods based on a novel
representation theory for the permutation model.
Applying this framework to collaborative ranking,
we derive asymptotic statistical rates as the number of users and items grow together. We conclude
by demonstrating that our SQL-Rank method
often outperforms current state-of-the-art algorithms for implicit feedback such as WeightedMF and BPR and achieve favorable results when
compared to explicit feedback algorithms such as
matrix factorization and collaborative ranking.

1. Introduction
We study a novel approach to collaborative ranking—the personalized ranking of items for users based on their observed
preferences—through the use of listwise losses, which are
dependent only on the observed rankings of items by users.
We propose the SQL-Rank algorithm, which can handle ties
and missingness, incorporate both explicit ratings and more
implicit feedback, provides personalized rankings, and is
1
Department of Statistics, University of California, Davis,
CA, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, University of
California, Davis, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Liwei Wu
<liwu@ucdavis.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

based on the relative rankings of items. To better understand
the proposed contributions, let us begin with a brief history
of the topic.
1.1. A brief history of collaborative ranking
Recommendation systems, found in many modern web applications, movie streaming services, and social media, rank
new items for users and are judged based on user engagement (implicit feedback) and ratings (explicit feedback) of
the recommended items. A high-quality recommendation
system must understand the popularity of an item and infer a
user’s specific preferences with limited data. Collaborative
filtering, introduced in (Hill et al., 1995), refers to the use
of an entire community’s preferences to better predict the
preferences of an individual (see (Schafer et al., 2007) for
an overview). In systems where users provide ratings of
items, collaborative filtering can be approached as a pointwise prediction task, in which we attempt to predict the
unobserved ratings (Pan et al., 2017). Low rank methods,
in which the rating distribution is parametrized by a low
rank matrix (meaning that there are a few latent factors)
provides a powerful framework for estimating ratings (Mnih
& Salakhutdinov, 2008; Koren, 2008). There are several
issues with this approach. One issue is that the feedback
may not be representative of the unobserved entries due to
a sampling bias, an effect that is prevalent when the items
are only ‘liked’ or the feedback is implicit because it is inferred from user engagement. Augmenting techniques like
weighting were introduced to the matrix factorization objective to overcome this problem (Hsieh et al., 2015; Hu et al.,
2008). Many other techniques are also introduced (Kabbur
et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2016). Another
methodology worth noting is the CofiRank algorithm of
(Weimer et al., 2008) which minimizes a convex surrogate
of the normalized discounted cumulative gain (NDCG). The
pointwise framework has other flaws, chief among them is
that in recommendation systems we are not interested in
predicting ratings or engagement, but rather we must rank
the items.
Ranking is an inherently relative exercise. Because users
have different standards for ratings, it is often desirable for
ranking algorithms to rely only on relative rankings and not
absolute ratings. A ranking loss is one that only considers a
user’s relative preferences between items, and ignores the

