Max-Mahalanobis Linear Discriminant Analysis Networks

Tianyu Pang 1 Chao Du 1 Jun Zhu 1

Abstract
A deep neural network (DNN) consists of a nonlinear transformation from an input to a feature
representation, followed by a common softmax
linear classifier. Though many efforts have been
devoted to designing a proper architecture for
nonlinear transformation, little investigation has
been done on the classifier part. In this paper, we
show that a properly designed classifier can improve robustness to adversarial attacks and lead
to better prediction results. Specifically, we define a Max-Mahalanobis distribution (MMD) and
theoretically show that if the input distributes as
a MMD, the linear discriminant analysis (LDA)
classifier will have the best robustness to adversarial examples. We further propose a novel MaxMahalanobis linear discriminant analysis (MMLDA) network, which explicitly maps a complicated data distribution in the input space to a
MMD in the latent feature space and then applies
LDA to make predictions. Our results demonstrate that the MM-LDA networks are significantly more robust to adversarial attacks, and have
better performance in class-biased classification.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown state-of-the-art
performance in different tasks (Goodfellow et al., 2016). A
typical feed-forward DNN is a combination of a nonlinear
transformation from the input x to the latent feature vector z
and a linear classifier acting on z to return a prediction for x.
Many different architectures for neural networks have been
proposed, e.g., VGG nets (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014),
Resnets (He et al., 2016a;b) and Google nets (Szegedy et al.,
2016) for powerful nonlinear transformation, while leaving
the linear classifier part under-explored, which is by default
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, State Key
Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys., THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China. Correspondence to: Jun Zhu <dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

defined as a softmax regression (SR) (or logistic regression
(LR) for binary classification). Some work has tried to
instead use linear (or kernel) SVMs as the classifier (Huang
& LeCun, 2006; Ngiam et al., 2010; Coates et al., 2011;
Tang, 2013). But, such techniques either do not fine-tune the
lower level features w.r.t. the SVM’s objective or only result
in marginal improvements. Thus, SR is still the default
choice, given its simplicity and smoothness.
However, the SR (or LR) classifier is not problemless. Efron
(1975) shows that if the input x arises from a 2-center mixture of Gaussian distribution, then LR is less efficient than
linear discriminant analysis (LDA), i.e., LR needs more
training samples than LDA does to obtain a certain error
rate. The relative efficiency of LR to LDA depends on the
Mahalanobis distance ∆ between the two Gaussian components and the log-ratio of class priors ζ. Generally, a larger
value of ∆ or |ζ| will lead to a lower relative efficiency of
LR to LDA. Furthermore, it has been widely recognized
that the DNNs with a SR classifier are vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al.,
2015; Nguyen et al., 2015; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016),
where human imperceivable images can be crafted to fool
a high-accuracy network. Though many efforts have been
devoted to improving the robustness, such as using adversarial training (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015;
Kurakin et al., 2017b), it still remains open on how to design
a robust classifier by itself.
In this paper, we draw inspirations from Efron’s analysis
and design a robust classifier that is generally applicable
to feedforward networks. Specifically, we define the MaxMahalanobis distribution (MMD) for multi-class classification, which is a special mixture of Gaussian distribution.
We theoretically show that if the input samples distribute as
a MMD, the LDA classifier will have the best robustness to
adversarial attacks. Though distributing as a MMD is not
likely to hold for complex data (e.g., images in the pixel
space), it may be true if we properly transform the data.
Based on this result, we propose a novel Max-Mahalanobis
linear discriminant analysis (MM-LDA) network, which
explicitly learns a powerful nonlinear transformation network to turn the complex inputs to match the MMD in a
latent feature space, and then uses the LDA principle to
make predictions on the latent features. Besides robustness,
since a large value of |ζ| for the data distribution indicates

