Improving Optimization for Models With Continuous Symmetry Breaking

Robert Bamler 1 Stephan Mandt 1

Abstract
Many loss functions in representation learning are
invariant under a continuous symmetry transformation. For example, the loss function of word
embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013b) remains unchanged if we simultaneously rotate all word and
context embedding vectors. We show that representation learning models for time series possess
an approximate continuous symmetry that leads
to slow convergence of gradient descent. We propose a new optimization algorithm that speeds
up convergence using ideas from gauge theory in
physics. Our algorithm leads to orders of magnitude faster convergence and to more interpretable
representations, as we show for dynamic extensions of matrix factorization and word embedding
models. We further present an example application of our proposed algorithm that translates
modern words into their historic equivalents.

1. Introduction
Symmetries frequently occur in machine learning. They
express that the loss function of a model is invariant under a certain group of transformations. For example, the
loss function of matrix factorization or word embedding
models remains unchanged if we simultaneously rotate all
embedding vectors with the same rotation matrix. This is
an example of a continuous symmetry, since the rotations
are parameterized by a continuum of real-valued angles.
Sometimes, the symmetry of a loss function is broken, e.g.,
due to the presence of an additional term that violates the
symmetry. For example, this may be a weak regularizer.
In this paper, we show that such symmetry breaking may
induce slow convergence problems in gradient descent, in
particular when the symmetry breaking is weak. We solve
this problem with a new optimization algorithm.

Weak continuous symmetry breaking leads to an illconditioned optimization problem. When a loss function is
invariant under a continuous symmetry, it has a manifold
of degenerate (equivalent) minima. This is usually not a
problem because any such minimum is a valid solution of
the optimization problem. However, adding a small symmetry breaking term to the loss function lifts the degeneracy
and forces the model to prefer one minimum over all others.
As we show, this leads to an ill-conditioned Hessian of the
loss, with a small curvature along symmetry directions and
a large curvature perpendicular to them. The ill-conditioned
Hessian results in slow convergence of gradient descent.
We propose an optimization algorithm that speeds up convergence by separating the optimization in the symmetry
directions from the optimization in the remaining directions.
At regular intervals, the algorithm efficiently minimizes
the small symmetry breaking term in such a way that the
minimization does not degrade the symmetry invariant term.
Symmetries can be broken explicitly, e.g., due to an additional term such as an L1 regularizer in a word embedding
model (Sun et al., 2016). However, perhaps more interestingly, symmetries can also be broken by couplings between
model parameters. This is known as spontaneous symmetry
breaking in the physics community.
One of our main findings is that spontaneous symmetry
breaking occurs in certain time series models, such as dynamic matrix factorizations and dynamic word embedding
models (Lu et al., 2009; Koren, 2010; Charlin et al., 2015;
Bamler & Mandt, 2017; Rudolph & Blei, 2018). In these
models, it turns out that model parameters may be smoothly
twisted along the time axis, and that these twists contribute
only little to the loss, thus leading to a small gradient. These
inexpensive smooth twists are known in the physics community as Goldstone modes (Altland & Simons, 2010).
Our contributions are as follows:

Disney Research, Glendale, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Robert Bamler <robert.bamler@gmail.com>, Stephan Mandt
<stephan.mandt@gmail.com>.

• We identify a broad class of models that suffer from
slow convergence of gradient descent due to Goldstone
modes. We explain both mathematically and pictorially
how Goldstone modes lead to slow convergence.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

• Using ideas from gauge theories in physics, we propose Goldstone Gradient Descent (Goldstone-GD), an

1

