Interpretability Beyond Feature Attribution:
Quantitative Testing with Concept Activation Vectors (TCAV)

Been Kim Martin Wattenberg Justin Gilmer Carrie Cai James Wexler
Fernanda Viegas Rory Sayres

Abstract
The interpretation of deep learning models is a
challenge due to their size, complexity, and often
opaque internal state. In addition, many systems,
such as image classifiers, operate on low-level features rather than high-level concepts. To address
these challenges, we introduce Concept Activation Vectors (CAVs), which provide an interpretation of a neural net’s internal state in terms of
human-friendly concepts. The key idea is to view
the high-dimensional internal state of a neural net
as an aid, not an obstacle. We show how to use
CAVs as part of a technique, Testing with CAVs
(TCAV), that uses directional derivatives to quantify the degree to which a user-defined concept
is important to a classification result–for example, how sensitive a prediction of zebra is to the
presence of stripes. Using the domain of image
classification as a testing ground, we describe how
CAVs may be used to explore hypotheses and generate insights for a standard image classification
network as well as a medical application.

1. Introduction
Understanding the behavior of modern machine learning
(ML) models, such as neural networks, remains a significant
challenge. Given the breadth and importance of ML applications, however, it is important to address this challenge.
In addition to ensuring accurate predictions, and giving scientists and engineers better means of designing, developing,
and debugging models, interpretability is also important to
ensure that ML models reflect our values.
One natural approach to interpretability is to describe an
ML model’s predictions in terms of the input features it
considers. For instance, in logistic regression classifiers,
. Correspondence to: Been Kim <beenkim@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

coefficient weights are often interpreted as the importance
of each feature. Similarly, saliency maps give importance
weights to pixels based on first-order derivatives (Smilkov
et al., 2017; Selvaraju et al., 2016; Sundararajan et al., 2017;
Erhan et al., 2009; Dabkowski & Gal, 2017).
A key difficulty, however, is that most ML models operate on
features, such as pixel values, that do not correspond to highlevel concepts that humans easily understand. Furthermore,
a model’s internal values (e.g., neural activations) can seem
incomprehensible. We can express this difficulty mathematically, viewing the state of an ML model as a vector space
Em spanned by basis vectors em which correspond to data
such as input features and neural activations. Humans work
in a different vector space Eh spanned by implicit vectors
eh corresponding to an unknown set of human-interpretable
concepts.
From this standpoint, an “interpretation” of an ML model
can be seen as function g : Em → Eh . When g is linear, we
call it a linear interpretability. In general, an interpretability function g need not be perfect (Doshi-Velez, 2017); it
may fail to explain some aspects of its input domain Em and
it will unavoidably not cover all possible human concepts in
Eh .
In this work, the high-level concepts of Eh are defined using sets of example input data for the ML model under
inspection. For instance, to define concept ‘curly’, a set of
hairstyles and texture images can be used. Note the concepts
of Eh are not constrained to input features or training data;
they can be defined using new, user-provided data. Examples are shown to be effective means of interfacing with ML
models for both non-expert and expert users (Koh & Liang,
2017; Kim et al., 2014; 2015; Klein, 1989).
This work introduces the notion of a Concept Activation Vector (CAV) as a way of translating between Em and Eh . A
CAV for a concept is simply a vector in the direction of the
values (e.g., activations) of that concept’s set of examples.
In this paper, we derive CAVs by training a linear classifier
between a concept’s examples and random counterexamples
and then taking the vector orthogonal to the decision boundary. This simple approach is supported by recent work using

