Solving Partial Assignment Problems using Random Clique Complexes

Charu Sharma 1 Deepak Nathani 1 Manohar Kaul 1

Abstract
We present an alternate formulation of the partial
assignment problem as matching random clique
complexes, that are higher-order analogues of random graphs, designed to provide a set of invariants that better detect higher-order structure. The
proposed method creates random clique adjacency
matrices for each k-skeleton of the random clique
complexes and matches them, taking into account
each point as the affine combination of its geometric neighborhood. We justify our solution
theoretically, by analyzing the runtime and storage complexity of our algorithm along with the
asymptotic behavior of the quadratic assignment
problem (QAP) that is associated with the underlying random clique adjacency matrices. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets,
containing severe occlusions and distortions, provide insight into the accuracy, efficiency, and robustness of our approach. We outperform diverse
matching algorithms by a significant margin.

1. Introduction
The assignment problem finds an assignment, or matching,
between two finite sets U and V , each of cardinality n,
such that the total cost of all matched pairs is minimized.
The assignment problem can also be generalized to finding
matchings between more than two sets. This is a fundamental problem in computer science and has been motivated
by a wide gamut of research areas spanning diverse areas
such as structural biology (Singer & Shkolnisky, 2011), protein structure comparisons in bioinformatics (Zaslavskiy
et al., 2009), and computer vision (Conte et al., 2004). Computer vision especially boasts a broad range of applications
that include object matching, image registration (Shen &
Davatzikos, 2002), stereo matching (Goesele et al., 2007),
shape matching (Petterson et al., 2009; Berg et al., 2005),
1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Indian Institute
of Technology Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India. Correspondence to:
Charu Sharma <charusharma1991@gmail.com>, Deepak Nathani
<deepakn1019@gmail.com>, Manohar Kaul <mkaul@iith.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Figure 1. Matching cliques of two houses with 1-cliques (red), 2cliques (green), 3-cliques (blue). Violet and yellow lines show the
matchings of d-cliques where d = 2, 3 respectively.

structure from motion (SfM) (Szeliski, 2010), and object
detection (Jiang et al., 2011), to name a few.
Various assignment approaches can broadly be classified
as those that find a bijective assignment in the form of
a permutation matrix by posing the problem as a linear
assignment problem (LP) versus ones that solve a quadratic
assignment problem (QAP) via graph matching, where each
graph’s nodes represent the objects and the edges encode
their corresponding distances; the goal of QAP then is to
find node-wise correspondences between the graphs so that
the overall discrepancy between their corresponding edgewise counterparts is minimized and the overall relational
structure is best preserved.
Partial assignment implies that only subsets of U and V
can actually be assigned to each other successfully. This
phenomenon is of particular interest to applications where
either objects are absent due to incomplete observations,
undergo deformations, and/or the objects in question cannot
clearly be disambiguated because the objects in question
along with their related objects are embedded in clutter. This
variant of the assignment problem is widely accepted as a
formidable challenge.
Although graph matching methods were found to be instrumental, they too perform poorly when faced with nonsimilar geometric transformations or transformations that
produce degenerate triangulations. This is attributed to assigning weights to only node and edge assignments, while
ignoring the interplay of higher-order connections/relations.
For example, using triplet weights can alleviate the above

