Composite Functional Gradient Learning of Generative Adversarial Models

Rie Johnson * 1 Tong Zhang * 2

Abstract
This paper first presents a theory for generative
adversarial methods that does not rely on the traditional minimax formulation. It shows that with
a strong discriminator, a good generator can be
learned so that the KL divergence between the
distributions of real data and generated data improves after each functional gradient step until it
converges to zero. Based on the theory, we propose a new stable generative adversarial method.
A theoretical insight into the original GAN from
this new viewpoint is also provided. The experiments on image generation show the effectiveness
of our new method.

1. Introduction
We consider observed real data x∗1 , . . . , x∗n ∈ Rr from an
unknown distribution p∗ on Rr . Moreover, assume that we
are given a random variable Z with a known distribution
such as a Gaussian. We are interested in learning a random
variable transformation G(Z) so that the generated data
G(Z) has a probability density function that is close to the
real distribution p∗ . This is the setting considered in generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014),
and the transformation G(Z) is often referred to as a generator. While GAN has been widely used, it is also known
that GAN is difficult to train due to its instability, which has
led to numerous studies, e.g., Wasserstein GAN (WGAN)
and its extensions to pursue a different minimax objective
(Arjovsky et al., 2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017; Mroueh &
Sercu, 2017), mode-regularized GAN to tackle the issue of
mode collapse (Che et al., 2017), unrolled GAN (Metz et al.,
2017), AdaGAN (Tolstikhin et al., 2017), MMD GAN (Li
et al., 2017), and references therein.
An important concept introduced by GAN is the idea of adversarial learner, denoted here by d, which tries to discrim*

Equal contribution 1 RJ Research Consulting, Tarrytown, NY,
USA 2 Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Rie
Johnson <riejohnson@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

inate real data from generated data. Mathematically, GAN
solves thefollowing minimax optimization problem:

X
X
max min 
lnd(x∗ )+
ln(1−d(G(z))) .
d

G

x∗ ∈real data

G(z)∈fake data

(1)
Parameterizing d and G, (1) can be viewed as a saddle
point problem in optimization, which can be solved using a
stochastic gradient method, where one takes a gradient step
with respect to the parameters in d and G (see Algorithm 4
below). However, the practical procedure, suggested by
the original work (Goodfellow et al., 2014), replaces minimization of log(1 − d(G(z))) with respect to G in (1) with
maximization of log(d(G(z))) with respect to G, called the
logd trick. Thus, GAN with the logd trick, though often
more effective, can not directly be explained by the theory
based on the minimax formulation (1).
This paper presents a new theory for generative adversarial
methods which does not rely on the minimax formulation
(1). Our theory shows that one can learn a good generator
G(Z) where ‘goodness’ is measured by the KL-divergence
between the distributions of real data and generated data,
by using functional gradient learning greedily, similar to
gradient boosting (Friedman, 2001). However, unlike the
standard gradient boosting, which uses additive models, we
consider functional compositions in the following form
Gt (Z) = Gt−1 (Z)+ηt gt (Gt−1 (Z)), (t = 1, . . . , T ) (2)
to obtain G(Z) = GT (Z). Here ηt is a small learning rate,
and each gt is a function to be estimated from data. An
initial generator G0 (Z) ∈ Rr is assumed to be given. We
learn from data gt greedily from t = 1 to t = T so that
improvement (in terms of the KL-divergence) is guaranteed.
Our theory leads to a new stable generative adversarial
method. It also provides a new theoretical insight into the
original GAN both with and without the logd trick. The
experiments show the effectiveness of our new method on
image generation in comparison with GAN variants.
Notation Throughout the paper, we use x to denote data
in Rr , and in particular, we use x∗ to denote real data. The
probability density function of real data is denoted by p∗ .
We use k · k to denote the vector 2-norm and ∇h(x) to
denote the gradient w.r.t. x of a scalar function h(x).

