Geodesic Convolutional Shape Optimization

Pierre Baque * 1 Edoardo Remelli * 1 François Fleuret 2 1 Pascal Fua 1

Abstract

Xtrain

Fωy (Xtrain )

Fωz (Xtrain )

Fωy (Xtest )

Fωz (Xtest )

GCNN

Aerodynamic shape optimization has many industrial applications. Existing methods, however, are
so computationally demanding that typical engineering practices are to either simply try a limited
number of hand-designed shapes or restrict oneself to shapes that can be parameterized using
only few degrees of freedom. In this work, we
introduce a new way to optimize complex shapes
fast and accurately. To this end, we train Geodesic
Convolutional Neural Networks to emulate a fluidynamics simulator. The key to making this approach practical is remeshing the original shape
using a poly-cube map, which makes it possible
to perform the computations on GPUs instead of
CPUs. The neural net is then used to formulate
an objective function that is differentiable with
respect to the shape parameters, which can then
be optimized using a gradient-based technique.
This outperforms state-of-the-art methods by 5 to
20% for standard problems and, even more importantly, our approach applies to cases that previous
methods cannot handle.

1. Introduction
Optimizing the aerodynamic or hydrodynamic properties
is key to designing shapes, such as those of aircraft wings,
windmill blades, hydrofoils, car bodies, bicycle shells, or
submarine hulls. However, it remains challenging and computationally demanding because existing Computational
Fluid Dynamics (CFD) techniques rely either on solving the
Navier-Stokes equations or on Lattice Boltzmann methods.
Since the simulation must be re-run each time an engineer
wishes to change the shape, this makes the design process
slow and costly. A typical engineering approach is therefore
to test only a few designs without a fine-grained search in
the space of potential variations.
*

Equal contribution 1 CVLab, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
Machine Learning Group, Idiap, Martigny, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Pierre Baque <pierre.baque@epfl.ch>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

(a)

Xtest
GCNN

(b)

(c)

G(X)
−∇X G

−∇X G
G(X)

G(X)

Figure 1. Car shape optimization. (a) We train a GCNN to emulate
a CFD simulator and predict from the shape on the left pressures
shown as colors in the middle and drag shown as a gray vertical bar
on the right. (b) Convolutional layers enable the GCNN to make
accurate predictions on previously unseen shapes, such as those
of cars. (c) We use the GCNN to express drag as a differentiable
function of the mesh vertex positions. Finally, we minimize it
under constraints to produce the rightmost shape.

This is a severe limitation and there have been many attempts at overcoming it, but none has been entirely successful yet. Most current algorithms rely on combining
evolutionary algorithms with heuristic local search (Orman
& Durmus, 2016) and complex adjoint methods (Allaire,
2015; Gao et al., 2017), which requires rerunning a simulation at each iteration step and therefore remains costly. A
classical approach to reduce the computational complexity
is to use Gaussian Process (GP) regressors trained to interpolate the performance landscape given a low dimensional
parametrization of the shape space. This interpolator is
then used as a proxy for the true objective to speed-up the
computation, which is referred to as Kriging in the CFD literature (Toal & Keane, 2011; Xu et al., 2017). However, those
regressors are only effective for shape deformations that can
be parameterized using relatively few parameters (Bengio
et al., 2006) and their performance therefore hinges on a
well-designed parameterization. Furthermore, the regressors
are specific to a particular parameterization and pre-existing
computed simulation data using different ones cannot be
easily leveraged.
By contrast, we propose an approach to optimizing the aero-

