Revealing Common Statistical Behaviors in Heterogeneous Populations

Andrey Zhitnikov 1 Rotem Mulayoff 1 Tomer Michaeli 1

Abstract
In many areas of neuroscience and biological data
analysis, it is desired to reveal common patterns
among a group of subjects. Such analyses play important roles e.g., in detecting functional brain networks from fMRI scans and in identifying brain
regions which show increased activity in response
to certain stimuli. Group level techniques usually assume that all subjects in the group behave
according to a single statistical model, or that deviations from the common model have simple parametric forms. Therefore, complex subject-specific
deviations from the common model severely impair the performance of such methods. In this
paper, we propose nonparametric algorithms for
estimating the common covariance matrix and
the common density function of several variables
in a heterogeneous group of subjects. Our estimates converge to the true model as the number of
subjects tends to infinity, under very mild conditions. We illustrate the effectiveness of our methods through extensive simulations as well as on
real-data from fMRI scans and from arterial blood
pressure and photoplethysmogram measurements.

1. Introduction
Revealing common statistical behaviors among a group of
subjects is fundamental to neuroscience and bio-medical
data analysis. For example, in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) research (Bullmore et al., 1996;
Smith et al., 2011; Varoquaux & Craddock, 2013), group
level analyses are used for detecting brain networks from
resting-state recordings (Fox et al., 2005), for detecting
activities of specific regions in response to various stimuli (Haxby et al., 2001), for studying the connectivity of a
specific brain region to other regions through seed based
1
Electrical Engineering Dept., Technion, Israel. Correspondence to: Andrey Zhitnikov <andreyz@campus.technion.ac.il>,
Rotem
Mulayoff
<smulayof@campus.technion.ac.il>,
Tomer Michaeli <tomer.m@ee.technion.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

analysis (Hagler et al., 2006), etc. Group analyses often
rely on the assumption that all subjects in the group behave
according to the same statistical model. For example, to estimate the covariance (or partial covariance) matrix of several
variables, a popular approach is to average the covariance
matrices estimated for each of the individual subjects in the
group (Power et al., 2011). This is done using either the
Euclidean mean (arithmetic average) or the intrinsic (Riemannian) mean (Förstner & Moonen, 2003), (Fletcher &
Joshi, 2007), which respects the geometry of the manifold
of positive definite matrices (Varoquaux et al., 2010a).
Real data, however, rarely conform to this assumption. Often times, each subject in a group deviates from the common
model in a different way. For example, it has been shown
that estimates of connectivity patterns from fMRI scans,
tend to vary significantly between subjects (Moussa et al.,
2012). Subject-specific deviations may even be more dominant than the common model itself. Therefore, if ignored,
these deviations may severely degrade the quality of the estimate of the common model. This phenomenon is illustrated
in Fig. 1 in the context of nonparametric density estimation
of two variables (brain regions). In this example, the deviations from the common model are additive and have a
different distribution for each subject. Thus, as can be seen
on the right, kernel density estimation (KDE) applied to the
entire group, fails to reveal the common behavior.
Approaches for accounting for subject-specific deviations often make limiting assumptions. For example, in the context
of covariance estimation, (Varoquaux et al., 2010b) assumed
that the precision matrices of all subjects in the group have
the same sparsity pattern, and proposed a modified graph
Lasso technique (Friedman et al., 2008) for simultaneously
estimating those matrices. In (Marrelec et al., 2006), the
authors assumed that each subject’s samples follow a Gaussian distribution with a covariance matrix that follows an
inverse Wishart distribution around the group covariance. In
the context of regression, a popular strategy is to use a linear
mixed-effects model (Friston et al., 2005; Chen et al., 2013),
which relies on a Gaussian distribution assumption for the
subject specific factors. Similar lines of work include grouplevel independent component analysis (ICA) (Calhoun et al.,
2001; Beckmann & Smith, 2005; Varoquaux et al., 2010c),
dictionary learning (Varoquaux et al., 2011; Mensch et al.,
2016), and causal structure estimation (Ramsey et al., 2010).

