Spline Filters For End-to-End Deep Learning

Randall Balestriero * 1 Romain Cosentino * 1 Hervé Glotin 2 Richard Baraniuk 1

Abstract
We propose to tackle the problem of end-to-end
learning for raw waveform signals by introducing learnable continuous time-frequency atoms.
The derivation of these filters is achieved by
defining a functional space with a given smoothness order and boundary conditions. From this
space, we derive the parametric analytical filters.
Their differentiability property allows gradientbased optimization. As such, one can utilize any
Deep Neural Network (DNN) with these filters.
This enables us to tackle in a front-end fashion
a large scale bird detection task based on the
freefield1010 dataset known to contain key challenges, such as the dimensionality of the inputs
data (> 100, 000) and the presence of additional
noises: multiple sources and soundscapes.

1. Introduction
Numerous learning tasks can be formed in a pattern recognition framework. Some of these applications are in speech,
bioacoustic, and healthcare where the data have been exposed to different types of nuisances. For example, colored
noises, multiple sources, measurements errors are a few to
name. Recently, DNNs have provided an end-to-end learnable pipeline (from raw input data to the final prediction).
In particular, convolutional-based DNNs are state-of-the-art
in computer vision and other areas (LeCun et al., 2015; He
et al., 2016; Leung et al., 2014). This approach reduces the
need of designing hand-crafted features which involves an
expert knowledge and a tedious search over the set of all
possible features. Such paradigm shift opens the door to
novel algorithms that encapsulate the learning of both, the
features and the decision.
*
Equal contribution 1 ECE Department, Rice University, Houston, TX 2 Univ. Toulon, Aix Marseille Univ., CNRS, LIS,
DYNI, Marseille, France. Correspondence to: Romain Cosentino
<rom.cosentino@gmail.com>, Randall Balestriero <randallbalestriero@gmail.com>, H. Glotin <herve.glotin@univ-tln.fr>,
R. Baraniuk <richb@rice.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

While providing a fully automated approach, DNNs’ performances depend on the number of perturbations such as
noise and inherent nuisances contained in the dataset. This
is mainly due to the use of greedy optimization schemes
applied on a very high-dimensional parametric model as
well as the lack of explicit perturbation modeling in DNNs
(Cohen & Welling, 2016). This effect is amplified with the
dimensionality of the input and the dimensionality of the
filters.
Thus, it is particularly detrimental for time-series data, especially for bio-accoustic signals. In fact, those signals
can be sampled at a high-frequency rate (up to 2,000 kHz
()). To add, the signals are recorded for long durations and
exhibited non-stationary nuisances including sensor noise,
background noise, and variant sources (Ramli & Jaafar,
2016; Glotin et al., 2017; Trone et al., 2015). In addition,
features of interest can lie at many different frequencies and
in small time windows, adding complexity to the learning
task.
Overall, current solutions to tackle bio-acoustic signals still
rely on hand-crafted features providing representations that
are input to the DNNs. Considered representations are often
based on a time-frequency framework as they stretch and
reveal crucial information embedded in the time-amplitude
domain (Jaffard et al., 2001). Moreover, decomposing signals in the time-frequency plane leverage the capability of
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). In fact, this feature is now considered as an image where CNNs are known
to perform (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). In addition, the design
and selection of the filter enabling the time-frequency representation of the signal is directed by the prior knowledge on
the feature of interest.
For instance, in the case of wavelet transform, one selects
the most suitable wavelet family (i.e: Seismic data: Morlet
wavelet, Speech: Gammatone wavelet (Lostanlen, 2017;
Serizel et al., 2018)). Since the generalization capability
of handcrafted features is only proportional to the amount
of data witnessed by the designer. In (Cosentino et al.,
2016; Megahed et al., 2008), they developed algorithms
that were able to automate the search for the optimal filter.
However, these pre-processing techniques were derived for
goals not necessarily aligned with the current tasks at hand
(reconstruction, compression, classification) and thus do not

