Analyzing Uncertainty in Neural Machine Translation

Myle Ott 1 Michael Auli 1 David Grangier 1 Marc’Aurelio Ranzato 1

Abstract
Machine translation is a popular test bed for research in neural sequence-to-sequence models
but despite much recent research, there is still a
lack of understanding of these models. Practitioners report performance degradation with large
beams, the under-estimation of rare words and
a lack of diversity in the final translations. Our
study relates some of these issues to the inherent
uncertainty of the task, due to the existence of
multiple valid translations for a single source sentence, and to the extrinsic uncertainty caused by
noisy training data. We propose tools and metrics
to assess how uncertainty in the data is captured
by the model distribution and how it affects search
strategies that generate translations. Our results
show that search works remarkably well but that
models tend to spread too much probability mass
over the hypothesis space. Next, we propose tools
to assess model calibration and show how to easily fix some shortcomings of current models. As
part of this study, we release multiple human reference translations for two popular benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Machine translation (MT) is an interesting task not only
for its practical applications but also for the formidable
learning challenges it poses, from how to transduce variable
length sequences, to searching for likely sequences in an
intractably large hypothesis space, to dealing with the multimodal nature of the prediction task, since typically there are
several correct ways to translate a given sentence.
The research community has made great advances on this
task, recently focusing the effort on the exploration of several variants of neural models (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Luong
et al., 2015; Gehring et al., 2017; Vaswani et al., 2017) that
have greatly improved the state of the art performance on
1
Facebook AI Research, USA. Correspondence to: Myle Ott
<myleott@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

public benchmarks. However, several open questions remain (Koehn & Knowles, 2017). In this work, we analyze
top-performing trained models in order to answer some of
these open questions. We target better understanding to help
prioritize future exploration towards important aspects of
the problem and therefore speed up progress.
For instance, according to conventional wisdom neural
machine translation (NMT) systems under-estimate rare
words (Koehn & Knowles, 2017), why is that? Is the model
poorly calibrated? Is this due to exposure bias (Ranzato
et al., 2016), i.e., the mismatch between the distribution of
words observed at training and test time? Or is this due
to the combination of uncertainty in the prediction of the
next word and inference being an arg max selection process, which always picks the most likely/frequent word?
Similarly, it has been observed (Koehn & Knowles, 2017)
that performance degrades with large beams. Is this due
to poor fitting of the model which assigns large probability
mass to bad sequences? Or is this due to the heuristic nature
of this search procedure which fails to work for large beam
values? In this paper we will provide answers and solutions
to these and other related questions.
The underlying theme of all these questions is uncertainty,
i.e. the one-to-many nature of the learning task. In other
words, for a given source sentence there are several target
sequences that have non negligible probability mass. Since
the model only observes one or very few realizations from
the data distribution, it is natural to ask the extent to which
an NMT model trained with token-level cross-entropy is
able to capture such a rich distribution, and whether the
model is calibrated. Also, it is equally important to understand the effect that uncertainty has on search and whether
there are better and more efficient search strategies.
Unfortunately, NMT models have hundreds of millions of
parameters, the search space is exponentially large and we
typically observe only one reference for a given source sentence. Therefore, measuring fitness of a NMT model to
the data distribution is a challenging scientific endeavor,
which we tackle by borrowing and combining tools from
the machine learning and statistics literature (Kuleshov &
Liang, 2015; Guo et al., 2017). With these tools, we show
that search works surprisingly well, yielding highly likely
sequences even with relatively narrow beams. Even if we

