Katyusha X: Practical Momentum Method for
Stochastic Sum-of-Nonconvex Optimization

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu 1

Abstract
The problem of minimizing sum-of-nonconvex
functions (i.e., convex functions that are average of non-convex ones) is becoming increasingly important in machine learning, and is the
core machinery for PCA, SVD, regularized Newton’s method, accelerated non-convex optimization, and more. We show how to provably obtain an accelerated stochastic algorithm for minimizing sum-of-nonconvex functions, by adding
one additional line to the well-known SVRG
method. This line corresponds to momentum,
and shows how to directly apply momentum to
the finite-sum stochastic minimization of sumof-nonconvex functions. As a side result, our
method enjoys linear parallel speed-up using
mini-batch.1

1. Introduction
The diverse world of non-convex machine learning tasks
have given rise to numerous non-convex optimization problems. Some of them are perhaps as hard as minimizing
general non-convex objectives (such as deep learning), but
some others may be only slightly harder than convex optimization (such as matrix completion, principal component
analysis, dictionary learning, etc). Therefore, it is both interesting and challenging to identify classes of optimization problems that interplay between non-convex and convex optimization, and (hopefully) optimally and practically
1

Microsoft Research AI. Correspondence to: Zeyuan AllenZhu <zeyuan@csail.mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).
1
This paper is related to the Katyusha method (Allen-Zhu,
2017a) which gives direct accelerated method for minimizing a
function that is an average of convex functions fi (x). The new
method KatyushaX tackles the more challenging case when fi (x)
is non-convex but the average is convex. We borrow the name
from Katyusha because the two papers tackle questions of the
same type, but the algorithms are different.
Full and future versions can be found on https://arxiv.
org/abs/1802.03866.

solving them.
At least tracing back to 2015, Shalev-Shwartz (2016) identified a class of functions that are convex, but can be written
as finite average of non-convex functions. That is,2
n

1X
min f (x) =
fi (x)
(1.1)
n i=1
x∈Rd
where each fi (x)Pis smooth and non-convex, but their avn
erage f (x) = n1 i=1 fi (x) is convex.
We say f (x) a sum-of-nonconvex (but convex) function following (Garber et al., 2016; Allen-Zhu & Yuan, 2016).
In this paper, we show how to provably obtain an accelerated and stochastic method for minimizing (1.1). Our new
method is based on adding only one additional line to the
well-known SVRG (stochastic variance-reduction gradient) method (Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Zhang et al., 2013).
This additional line corresponds to momentum. To the best
of our knowledge, this explains for the first time how to directly apply momentum to the stochastic minimization of
sum-of-nonconvex functions. We hope this new algorithm
and the new insight of this paper could facilitate our understanding towards how to correctly and provably apply
momentum to non-convex machine learning tasks.
1.1. Motivating Examples
There is an increasing number of machine learning tasks
that are found reducible to minimizing sum-of-nonconvex
functions. For most such tasks, the only known approach
for achieving accelerated stochastic performance is by reformulating them as multiple instances of Problem (1.1)
where f is a convex sum of non-convex functions.
Perhaps the most famous example is the shift-and-invert
approach
to solve PCA (Saad, 1992).
Let A =
Pn
1
>
d×d
be some covariance matrix and λ
i=1 ai ai ∈ R
n
be its largest eigenvalue. Then, computing A’s top eigenvector reduces to applying power method to a new matrix
B = (µI − A)−1 with µ = λmax (A) · (1 + δ) for some
approximation parameter δ > 0 (Garber et al., 2016). In
2

In fact, westudy a more generalP
composite minimization setting minx∈Rd F (x) := ψ(x) + n1 i∈[n] fi (x) where ψ(x) is
some proper convex function. In this high-level introduction, we
ignore the ψ(·) term for simplicity.

