Optimal Distributed Learning with Multi-pass Stochastic Gradient Methods

Junhong Lin 1 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract
We study generalization properties of distributed
algorithms in the setting of nonparametric regression over a reproducing kernel Hilbert space
(RKHS). We investigate distributed stochastic
gradient methods (SGM), with mini-batches and
multi-passes over the data. We show that optimal generalization error bounds can be retained
for distributed SGM provided that the partition
level is not too large. Our results are superior to
the state-of-the-art theory, covering the cases that
the regression function may not be in the hypothesis spaces. Particularly, our results show that
distributed SGM has a smaller theoretical computational complexity, compared with distributed
kernel ridge regression (KRR) and classic SGM.

1. Introduction
In statistical learning theory, a set of N input-output pairs
from an unknown distribution is observed. The aim is to
learn a function which can be used to predict future outputs
given the corresponding inputs. The quality of a predictor is
often measured in terms of the mean-squared error. In this
case, the conditional mean, which is called as the regression
function, is optimal among all the measurable functions
(Cucker & Zhou, 2007; Steinwart & Christmann, 2008).
In nonparametric regression problems, the properties of the
function to be estimated are not known a priori. Nonparametric approaches, which can adapt their complexity to the
problem at hand, are key to good results. Kernel methods is
one of the most common nonparametric approaches to learning (Schölkopf & Smola, 2002; Shawe-Taylor & Cristianini,
2004). It is based on choosing a RKHS as the hypothesis
space in the design of learning algorithms. With an appropriate reproducing kernel, RKHS can be used to approximate
any smooth function.
1
Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems, École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Junhong Lin <junhong.lin@epfl.ch>, Volkan
Cevher <volkan.cevher@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

The classical algorithms to perform learning task are regularized algorithms, such as KRR, kernel principal component
regression (KPCR), and more generally, spectral regularization algorithms (SRA). From the point of view of inverse
problems, such approaches amount to solving an empirical,
linear operator equation with the empirical covariance operator replaced by a regularized one (Engl et al., 1996; Bauer
et al., 2007; Gerfo et al., 2008). Here, the regularization
term is used for controlling the complexity of the solution
to against over-fitting and for ensuring best generalization
ability. Statistical results on generalization error had been
developed in (Smale & Zhou, 2007; Caponnetto & De Vito,
2007) for KRR and in (Caponnetto, 2006; Bauer et al., 2007)
for SRA.
Another type of algorithms to perform learning tasks is
based on iterative procedure (Engl et al., 1996). In this kind
of algorithms, an empirical objective function is optimized
in an iterative way with no explicit constraint or penalization, and the regularization against overfitting is realized by
early-stopping the empirical procedure. Statistical results on
generalization error and the regularization roles of the number of iterations/passes have been investigated in (Zhang
& Yu, 2005; Yao et al., 2007) for gradient methods (GM,
also known as Landweber algorithm in inverse problems),
in (Caponnetto, 2006; Bauer et al., 2007) for accelerated
gradient methods (AGM, known as ν-methods in inverse
problems) in (Blanchard & Krämer, 2010) for conjugate
gradient methods (CGM), and in (Lin & Rosasco, 2017b)
for (multi-pass) SGM.
Statistical results have been well studied for these algorithms; however, these algorithms suffer from computational
burdens at least of order O(N 2 ) due to the nonlinearity of
kernel methods, where N is the sample size. Indeed, a standard execution of KRR requires O(N 2 ) in space and O(N 3 )
in time, while SGM after T -iterations requires O(N ) in
space and O(N T ) (or T 2 ) in time. Such approaches would
be prohibitive when dealing with large-scale learning problems, especially in the case where data cannot be stored
on a single machine. These thus motivate one to study distributed learning algorithms (Mcdonald et al., 2009; Zhang
et al., 2012). The basic idea of distributed learning is very
simple: randomly divide a dataset of size N into m subsets
of equal size, compute an independent estimator using a
fixed algorithm on each subset, and then average the local
solutions into a global predictor. Interestingly, distributed

