Delayed Impact of Fair Machine Learning

Lydia T. Liu 1 Sarah Dean 1 Esther Rolf 1 Max Simchowitz 1 Moritz Hardt 1

Abstract
Fairness in machine learning has predominantly
been studied in static classification settings without concern for how decisions change the underlying population over time. Conventional wisdom
suggests that fairness criteria promote the longterm well-being of those groups they aim to protect. We study how static fairness criteria interact
with temporal indicators of well-being, such as
long-term improvement, stagnation, and decline
in a variable of interest. We demonstrate that even
in a one-step feedback model, common fairness
criteria in general do not promote improvement
over time, and may in fact cause harm in cases
where an unconstrained objective would not. We
completely characterize the delayed impact of
three standard criteria, contrasting the regimes in
which these exhibit qualitatively different behavior. In addition, we find that a natural form of
measurement error broadens the regime in which
fairness criteria perform favorably. Our results
highlight the importance of measurement and temporal modeling in the evaluation of fairness criteria, suggesting a range of new challenges and
trade-offs.

1. Introduction
Machine learning commonly considers static objectives defined on a snapshot of the population at one instant in time;
consequential decisions, in contrast, reshape the population
over time. Lending practices, for example, can shift the
distribution of debt and wealth in the population. Job advertisements allocate opportunity. School admissions shape the
level of education in a community.
Existing scholarship on fairness in automated decisionmaking criticizes unconstrained machine learning for its
potential to harm historically underrepresented or disad1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA.
Correspondence to: Lydia T. Liu <lydiatliu@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

vantaged groups in the population (Executive Office of the
President, 2016; Barocas & Selbst, 2016). Consequently,
a variety of fairness criteria have been proposed as constraints on standard learning objectives. Even though, in
each case, these constraints are clearly intended to protect
the disadvantaged group by an appeal to intuition, a rigorous
argument to that effect is often lacking.
In this work, we formally examine under what circumstances fairness criteria do indeed promote the long-term
well-being of disadvantaged groups measured in terms of
a temporal variable of interest. Going beyond the standard classification setting, we introduce a one-step feedback model of decision-making that exposes how decisions
change the underlying population over time.
Our running example is a hypothetical lending scenario.
There are two groups in the population with features described by a summary statistic, such as a credit score, whose
distribution differs between the two groups. The bank can
choose thresholds for each group at which loans are offered. While group-dependent thresholds may face legal
challenges (Ross & Yinger, 2006), they are generally inevitable for some of the criteria we examine. The impact
of a lending decision has multiple facets. A default event
not only diminishes profit for the bank, it also worsens the
financial situation of the borrower as reflected in a subsequent decline in credit score. A successful lending outcome
leads to profit for the bank and also to an increase in credit
score for the borrower.
When thinking of one of the two groups as disadvantaged, it
makes sense to ask what lending policies (choices of thresholds) lead to an expected improvement in the score distribution within that group. An unconstrained bank would
maximize profit, choosing thresholds that meet a break-even
point above which it is profitable to give out loans. One
frequently proposed fairness criterion, sometimes called demographic parity, requires the bank to lend to both groups
at an equal rate. Subject to this requirement the bank would
continue to maximize profit to the extent possible. Another
criterion, originally called equality of opportunity, equalizes
the true positive rates between the two groups, thus requiring the bank to lend in both groups at an equal rate among
individuals who repay their loan. Other criteria are natural,
but for clarity we restrict our attention to these three.

