Improving Sign Random Projections With Additional Information

Keegan Kang * 1 Wong Wei Pin * 1

Abstract
Sign random projections (SRP) is a technique
which allows the user to quickly estimate the angular similarity and inner products between data.
We propose using additional information to improve these estimates which is easy to implement
and cost efficient. We prove that the variance of
our estimator is lower than the variance of SRP.
Our proposed method can also be used together
with other modifications of SRP, such as SuperBit LSH (SBLSH). We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on the MNIST test dataset
and the Gisette dataset. We discuss how our proposed method can be extended to random projections or even other hashing algorithms.

1. Introduction
One of the first appearances of SRP was in graph theory
(Goemans & Williamson, 1995) where the authors looked
at the probability of a random hyperplane separating two
vectors. This probability was used to come up with an
improved algorithm to approximate the maximum cut in
a graph. Today, this probability is also used for distance
based learning algorithms given high dimensional data.
Consider a data matrix Xn×p with n observations, and p
features. Computing pairwise distances between each observation takes at least O(n2 p) of time which is computationally costly when n, p are large.
It was a few years later when the fact that the probability of the separation was proportional to the angle θ behind the vectors was used in a locality sensitive hashing
(LSH) scheme (Charikar, 2002). High dimensional data in
Rp would be mapped to lower dimensional binary vectors
in Rk under SRP, and the computed Hamming distance between the binary pairs would give an estimate of their an-

gular similarity with high probability. The time taken under
this technique would be reduced to O(npk + n2 k).
By going one step further and storing the norms of vectors
(Li et al., 2006), SRP could also be used to recover the inner
products between these vectors. This proved to be competitive with conventional random projections under certain
conditions. Binary codes require 1 bit of storage per entry
under SRP, but storing real numbers as doubles could take
64 bits per entry under conventional random projections.
If the variance of the inner product estimates using SRP is
lower than the variance of the inner product estimates using conventional random projections for the same amount
of bits, then SRP would be highly preferred.
These results gave rise to an efficient Approximate Nearest
Neighbor (ANN) algorithm as computing Hamming distances in the lower dimensional space would be faster than
computing angles in the higher dimensional one. An example of this could be image classification, where a 1024 ×
1024 pixel image would mean working with vectors in Rp ,
p = 1048576. Transforming these vectors to binary codes
of length k, k  p would drastically reduce the time taken.
Moreover, these estimates can be used in conjunction with
the “kernel trick”, where (estimates of) inner products are
used within algorithms such as support vector machines
(SVM) to further reduce the computational cost.
1.1. Sign Random Projections
Given a data matrix Xn×p , consider a random matrix
Rp×k with entries i.i.d from N (0, 1). We compute V =
sgn(XR), where we define

1 x≥0
sgn(x) =
(1)
0 x<0
and apply sgn to every element in XR. We set sgn(x) =
0 when x < 0 for convenience of notation in Figures 2
and 8.

Equal contribution 1 Singapore University Of Technology And Design. Correspondence to: Keegan Kang <keegan kang@sutd.edu.sg>.

Theorem 1.1. The estimate for the angle θ between vectors
xi , xj is given by the Hamming distance between vi , vj
multiplied by π/k.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Proof. This proof is given in (Goemans & Williamson,
1995).

*

