SparseMAP: Differentiable Sparse Structured Inference

Vlad Niculae 1 André F. T. Martins 2 Mathieu Blondel 3 Claire Cardie 1
⋆

Abstract
Structured prediction requires searching over a
combinatorial number of structures. To tackle
it, we introduce SparseMAP: a new method for
sparse structured inference, and its natural loss
function. SparseMAP automatically selects only
a few global structures: it is situated between
MAP inference, which picks a single structure,
and marginal inference, which assigns nonzero
probability to all structures, including implausible ones. SparseMAP can be computed using
only calls to a MAP oracle, making it applicable
to problems with intractable marginal inference,
e.g., linear assignment. Sparsity makes gradient
backpropagation efficient regardless of the structure, enabling us to augment deep neural networks
with generic and sparse structured hidden layers. Experiments in dependency parsing and natural language inference reveal competitive accuracy, improved interpretability, and the ability to
capture natural language ambiguities, which is
attractive for pipeline systems.

1. Introduction
Structured prediction involves the manipulation of discrete, combinatorial structures, e.g., trees and alignments
(Bakır et al., 2007; Smith, 2011; Nowozin et al., 2014). Such
structures arise naturally as machine learning outputs, and
as intermediate representations in deep pipelines. However,
the set of possible structures is typically prohibitively large.
As such, inference is a core challenge, often sidestepped
by greedy search, factorization assumptions, or continuous
relaxations (Belanger & McCallum, 2016).
1

Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 2 Unbabel & Instituto
de Telecomunicações, Lisbon, Portugal 3 NTT Communication Science Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan.
Correspondence to:
Vlad Niculae <vlad@vene.ro>, André
MathF. T.
Martins
<andre.martins@unbabel.com>,
ieu Blondel <mathieu@mblondel.org>, Claire Cardie
<cardie@cs.cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

argmax

MAP
SparseMAP

(1, 0, 0)

Marginal
(.6, .4, 0)

⋆

⋆

sparsemax
softmax
(.5, .3, .2)

△

M

Figure 1. Left: in the unstructured case, softmax and sparsemax
can be interpreted as regularized, differentiable arg max approximations; softmax returns dense solutions while sparsemax favors
sparse ones. Right: in this work, we extend this view to structured
inference, which consists of optimizing over a polytope M, the
convex hull of all possible structures (depicted: the arborescence
polytope, whose vertices are trees). We introduce SparseMAP as a
structured extension of sparsemax: it is situated in between MAP
inference, which yields a single structure, and marginal inference,
which returns a dense combination of structures.

In this paper, we propose an appealing alternative: a new
inference strategy, dubbed SparseMAP, which encourages
sparsity in the structured representations. Namely, we seek
solutions explicitly expressed as a combination of a small,
enumerable set of global structures. Our framework departs
from the two most common inference strategies in structured prediction: maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference,
which returns the highest-scoring structure, and marginal
inference, which yields a dense probability distribution over
structures. Neither of these strategies is fully satisfactory:
for latent structure models, marginal inference is appealing,
since it can represent uncertainty and, unlike MAP inference,
it is continuous and differentiable, hence amenable for use
in structured hidden layers in neural networks (Kim et al.,
2017). It has, however, several limitations. First, there are
useful problems for which MAP is tractable, but marginal inference is not, e.g., linear assignment (Valiant, 1979; Taskar,
2004). Even when marginal inference is available, case-bycase derivation of the backward pass is needed, sometimes
producing fairly complicated algorithms, e.g., second-order
expectation semirings (Li & Eisner, 2009). Finally, marginal
inference is dense: it assigns nonzero probabilities to all
structures and cannot completely rule out irrelevant ones.
This can be statistically and computationally wasteful, as
well as qualitatively harder to interpret.

