Neural Autoregressive Flows
Chin-Wei Huang 1 2 * David Krueger 1 2 * Alexandre Lacoste 2 Aaron Courville 1 3

Abstract
Normalizing flows and autoregressive models
have been successfully combined to produce
state-of-the-art results in density estimation, via
Masked Autoregressive Flows (MAF) (Papamakarios et al., 2017), and to accelerate stateof-the-art WaveNet-based speech synthesis to
20x faster than real-time (Oord et al., 2017),
via Inverse Autoregressive Flows (IAF) (Kingma
et al., 2016). We unify and generalize these approaches, replacing the (conditionally) affine univariate transformations of MAF/IAF with a more
general class of invertible univariate transformations expressed as monotonic neural networks.
We demonstrate that the proposed neural autoregressive flows (NAF) are universal approximators for continuous probability distributions, and
their greater expressivity allows them to better
capture multimodal target distributions. Experimentally, NAF yields state-of-the-art performance
on a suite of density estimation tasks and outperforms IAF in variational autoencoders trained on
binarized MNIST. 1

1. Introduction
Invertible transformations with a tractable Jacobian, also
known as normalizing flows, are useful tools in many machine learning problems, for example: (1) In the context
of deep generative models, training necessitates evaluating data samples under the model’s inverse transformation
(Dinh et al., 2017). Tractable density is an appealing property for these models, since it allows the objective of interest
to be directly optimized; whereas other mainstream methods
rely on alternative losses, in the case of intractable density
models (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014), or
*

Equal contribution 1 MILA, University of Montreal 2 Element
AI CIFAR fellow. Correspondence to: Chin-Wei Huang <chinwei.huang@umontreal.ca>.
3

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).
1
Implementation can be found at https://github.com/CWHuang/NAF/

implicit losses, in the case of adversarial models (Goodfellow et al., 2014). (2) In the context of variational inference
(Rezende & Mohamed, 2015), they can be used to improve
the variational approximation to the posterior by parameterizing more complex distributions. This is important since
a poor variational approximation to the posterior can fail
to reflect the right amount of uncertainty, and/or be biased
(Turner & Sahani, 2011), resulting in inaccurate and unreliable predictions. We are thus interested in improving
techniques for normalizing flows.
Recent work by Kingma et al. (2016) reinterprets autoregressive models as invertible transformations suitable for
constructing normalizing flows. The inverse transformation
process, unlike sampling from the autoregressive model, is
not sequential and thus can be accelerated via parallel computation. This allows multiple layers of transformations to
be stacked, increasing expressiveness for better variational
inference (Kingma et al., 2016) or better density estimation
for generative models (Papamakarios et al., 2017). Stacking
also makes it possible to improve on the sequential conditional factorization assumed by autoregressive models such
as PixelRNN or PixelCNN (Oord et al., 2016), and thus
define a more flexible joint probability.
We note that the normalizing flow introduced by Kingma
et al. (2016) only applies an affine transformation of each
scalar random variable. Although this transformation is
conditioned on preceding variables, the resulting flow can
still be susceptible to bad local minima, and thus failure to
capture the multimodal shape of a target density; see Figure
1 and 2.
1.1. Contributions of this work
We propose replacing the conditional affine transformation
of Kingma et al. (2016) with a more rich family of transformations, and note the requirements for doing so. We
determine that very general transformations, for instance
parametrized by deep neural networks, are possible. We
then propose and evaluate several specific monotonic neural
network architectures which are more suited for learning
multimodal distributions. Concretely, our method amounts
to using an autoregressive model to output the weights of
multiple independent transformer networks, each of which
operates on a single random variable, replacing the affine

