Learning in Integer Latent Variable Models
with Nested Automatic Differentiation
Daniel Sheldon 1 2 Kevin Winner 1 Debora Sujono 1

Abstract
We develop nested automatic differentiation (AD)
algorithms for exact inference and learning in
integer latent variable models. Recently, Winner, Sujono, and Sheldon showed how to reduce
marginalization in a class of integer latent variable models to evaluating a probability generating
function which contains many levels of nested
high-order derivatives. We contribute faster and
more stable AD algorithms for this challenging
problem and a novel algorithm to compute exact
gradients for learning. These contributions lead
to significantly faster and more accurate learning algorithms, and are the first AD algorithms
whose running time is polynomial in the number
of levels of nesting.

1. Introduction
In a recent line of work, Winner & Sheldon (2016) and
Winner et al. (2017) developed the first exact inference algorithms for a class of hidden Markov models (HMMs) with
integer latent variables. Such models are used to model
populations that change over time in ecology or epidemiology (Dail & Madsen, 2011; Heathcote, 1965). Standard
inference techniques do not apply to these models because
marginalization would require summing over the infinite
support of the latent variables. Instead, they showed how to
reformulate the forward algorithm for HMMs to use probability generating functions (PGFs) as its internal representation of probability distributions and messages. These PGFs
can be represented compactly and encode all the information about the infinite-support distributions. Inference tasks
such as computing the likelihood are reduced to evaluating
PGFs and their derivatives.
1
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of
Massachusetts Amherst 2 Department of Computer Science, Mount
Holyoke College. Correspondence to: Daniel Sheldon <sheldon@cs.umass.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

()
(*)

…

-

(+
($ +

!"%'

!"%&
*

!"
$

#

Figure 1. Function with nested high-order derivatives.

However, the PGFs are complex functions that are defined
recursively in terms of high-order derivatives of other PGFs.
Figure 1 illustrates such a function. The function fk , on
input x, first computes a value u, then computes the pth
derivative of fk 1 with respect to u, and then uses the result to compute its own output value y. The function fk 1
itself involves nested derivatives of fk 2 , and so on, with k
total levels of nesting. The goal is to compute the function
fk (x), and possibly derivatives thereof. It is natural to consider automatic differentiation (AD) techniques for this task.
However, this is a very difficult setting for AD. There are
many levels of nesting and the total order of differentation
may number in the hundreds or thousands.
In this paper we subtantially improve AD algorithms for
inference in integer latent variable models, and develop
new AD algorithms to support learning. For inference, we
conceptually simplify the AD techniques of (Winner et al.,
2017) and root them more firmly in the AD literature. We
show that nested derivatives of univariate functions can be
handled by an extension to the basic AD computation model
that allows nested derivative nodes, which are just derivatives of another function defined by a computation graph
@p
(e.g., the “node” @u
p fk 1 (u) in Figure 1). The AD algorithm needs only a thin adapter to handle the change of scope
between the inner and outer functions. For the inference
application, this places nearly all of the complexity in the
general-purpose AD toolkit and simplifies the application.
We also make substantial stability and speed improvements
to the AD algorithms. We show that implementing core
AD operations using the logarithmic number system (LNS)
to accurately represent signed real numbers with high dy-

