Dynamic Regret of Strongly Adaptive Methods

Lijun Zhang 1 Tianbao Yang 2 Rong Jin 3 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract
To cope with changing environments, recent developments in online learning have introduced
the concepts of adaptive regret and dynamic regret independently. In this paper, we illustrate
an intrinsic connection between these two concepts by showing that the dynamic regret can be
expressed in terms of the adaptive regret and the
functional variation. This observation implies
that strongly adaptive algorithms can be directly
leveraged to minimize the dynamic regret. As a
result, we present a series of strongly adaptive algorithms that have small dynamic regrets for convex functions, exponentially concave functions,
and strongly convex functions, respectively. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that
exponential concavity is utilized to upper bound
the dynamic regret. Moreover, all of those adaptive algorithms do not need any prior knowledge
of the functional variation, which is a significant
advantage over previous specialized methods for
minimizing dynamic regret.

incurred by the learner and that of the best fixed decision in
hindsight, i.e.,

Online convex optimization is a powerful paradigm for sequential decision making (Zinkevich, 2003). It can be viewed as a game between a learner and an adversary: In the
t-th round, the learner selects a decision wt ∈ Ω, simultaneously the adversary chooses a function ft (·) : Ω 7→ R,
and then the learner suffers an instantaneous loss ft (wt ).
This study focuses on the full-information setting, where the
learner can query the value and gradient of ft (Cesa-Bianchi
& Lugosi, 2006). The goal of the learner is to minimize the
cumulative loss over T periods . The standard performance
measure is regret, which is the difference between the loss
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 Department of
Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA
3
Alibaba Group, Seattle, USA. Correspondence to: Lijun Zhang
<zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

ft (wt ) − min

T
X

w∈Ω

t=1

ft (w).

t=1

The above regret is typically referred to as static regret in the
sense that the comparator is time-invariant. The rationale
behind this evaluation metric is that one of the decision in
Ω is reasonably good over the T rounds. However, when
the underlying distribution of loss functions changes, the
static regret may be too optimistic and fails to capture the
hardness of the problem.
To address this limitation, new forms of performance measure, including adaptive regret (Hazan & Seshadhri, 2007;
2009) and dynamic regret (Zinkevich, 2003; Hall & Willett,
2013), were proposed and received significant interest recently. Following the terminology of Daniely et al. (2015),
we define the strongly adaptive regret as the maximum static
regret over intervals of length τ , i.e.,
SA-Regret(T, τ )
=

1. Introduction

T
X

Regret(T ) =

max

[s,s+τ −1]⊆[T ]

s+τ
−1
X

ft (wt ) − min

s+τ
−1
X

w∈Ω

t=s

!
ft (w) .

t=s

(1)
Minimizing the adaptive regret enforces the learner to have
a small static regret over any interval of length τ . Since the
best decision for different intervals could be different, the
learner is essentially competing with a changing comparator.
A parallel line of research introduces the concept of dynamic
regret, where the cumulative loss of the learner is compared
against a comparator sequence u1 , . . . , uT ∈ Ω, i.e.,
D-Regret(u1 , . . . , uT ) =

T
X
t=1

ft (wt ) −

T
X

ft (ut ). (2)

t=1

It is well-known that in the worst case, a sublinear dynamic
regret is impossible unless we impose some regularities on
the comparator sequence or the function sequence (Jadbabaie et al., 2015). A representative example is the functional
variation defined below
VT =

T
X
t=2

max |ft (w) − ft−1 (w)|.
w∈Ω

(3)

