Not All Samples Are Created Equal:
Deep Learning with Importance Sampling

Angelos Katharopoulos 1 2 François Fleuret 1 2

Abstract
Deep neural network training spends most of the
computation on examples that are properly handled, and could be ignored. We propose to mitigate this phenomenon with a principled importance sampling scheme that focuses computation
on “informative” examples, and reduces the variance of the stochastic gradients during training.
Our contribution is twofold: first, we derive a
tractable upper bound to the per-sample gradient norm, and second we derive an estimator of
the variance reduction achieved with importance
sampling, which enables us to switch it on when
it will result in an actual speedup. The resulting scheme can be used by changing a few lines
of code in a standard SGD procedure, and we
demonstrate experimentally, on image classification, CNN fine-tuning, and RNN training, that
for a fixed wall-clock time budget, it provides
a reduction of the train losses of up to an order
of magnitude and a relative improvement of test
errors between 5% and 17%.

1. Introduction
The dramatic increase in available training data has made
the use of deep neural networks feasible, which in turn has
significantly improved the state-of-the-art in many fields, in
particular computer vision and natural language processing.
However, due to the complexity of the resulting optimization
problem, computational cost is now the core issue in training
these large architectures.
When training such models, it appears to any practitioner
that not all samples are equally important; many of them are
properly handled after a few epochs of training, and most
could be ignored at that point without impacting the final
1

Idiap Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland 2 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Angelos Katharopoulos
<firstname.lastname@idiap.ch>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

model. To this end, we propose a novel importance sampling
scheme that accelerates the training of any neural network
architecture by focusing the computation on the samples
that will introduce the biggest change in the parameters
which reduces the variance of the gradient estimates.
For convex optimization problems, many works (Bordes
et al., 2005; Zhao & Zhang, 2015; Needell et al., 2014;
Canévet et al., 2016; Richtárik & Takáč, 2013) have taken
advantage of the difference in importance among the samples to improve the convergence speed of stochastic optimization methods. On the other hand, for deep neural
networks, sample selection methods were mainly employed
to generate hard negative samples for embedding learning
problems or to tackle the class imbalance problem (Schroff
et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2017; Simo-Serra et al., 2015).
Recently, researchers have shifted their focus on using importance sampling to improve and accelerate the training of
neural networks (Alain et al., 2015; Loshchilov & Hutter,
2015; Schaul et al., 2015). Those works, employ either the
gradient norm or the loss to compute each sample’s importance. However, the former is prohibitively expensive to
compute and the latter is not a particularly good approximation of the gradient norm.
Compared to the aforementioned works, we derive an upper
bound to the per sample gradient norm that can be computed
in a single forward pass. This results in reduced computational requirements of more than an order of magnitude
compared to Alain et al. (2015). Furthermore, we quantify
the variance reduction achieved with the proposed importance sampling scheme and associate it with the batch size
increment required to achieve an equivalent variance reduction. The benefits of this are twofold, firstly we provide
an intuitive metric to predict how useful importance sampling is going to be, thus we are able to decide when to
switch on importance sampling during training. Secondly,
we also provide theoretical guarantees for speedup, when
variance reduction is above a threshold. Based on our analysis, we propose a simple to use algorithm that can be used
to accelerate the training of any neural network architecture.
Our implementation is generic and can be employed by
adding a single line of code in a standard Keras model

