Composite Marginal Likelihood Methods for Random Utility Models

Zhibing Zhao 1 Lirong Xia 1

Abstract
We propose a novel and flexible rank-breakingthen-composite-marginal-likelihood (RBCML)
framework for learning random utility models
(RUMs), which include the Plackett-Luce model.
We characterize conditions for the objective function of RBCML to be strictly log-concave by proving that strict log-concavity is preserved under
convolution and marginalization. We characterize
necessary and sufficient conditions for RBCML
to satisfy consistency and asymptotic normality.
Experiments on synthetic data show that RBCML
for Gaussian RUMs achieves better statistical efficiency and computational efficiency than the
state-of-the-art algorithm and our RBCML for the
Plackett-Luce model provides flexible tradeoffs
between running time and statistical efficiency.

1. Introduction
How to model rank data and how to make optimal statistical
inferences from rank data are important topics at the interface of statistics, computer science, and economics. Random
utility models (RUMs) (Thurstone, 1927) are one of the most
widely-applied statistical models for rank data. In an RUM,
each alternative ai is parameterized by a utility distribution
µi . Agents’ rankings are generated in two steps. In the first
step, a latent utility ui for each alternative ai is generated
from µi . In the second step, the alternatives are ranked
w.r.t. their utilities ui in descending order. The logit model
and the probit model, which are very popular in statistics
and economics, both have random utility interpretations.
While providing better fitness to the rank data (Azari Soufiani et al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2018b), general RUMs are computationally hard to tackle due to the lack of closed-form
formulas for the likelihood function. The only known exception is the Plackett-Luce model (Plackett, 1975; Luce, 1959),
1

Computer Science Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Zhibing Zhao
<zhaoz6@rpi.edu>, Lirong Xia <xial@cs.rpi.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

which is the RUM with Gumbel distributions. RUMs, especially the Plackett-Luce model, have been widely applied
to model and predict human behavior (McFadden, 2000),
where the standard case of discrete choice models can be
viewed as the Plackett-Luce model restricted to top choices.
Other notable recent applications include elections (Gormley & Murphy, 2008), crowdsourcing (Pfeiffer et al., 2012),
recommender systems (Wang et al., 2016), preference elicitation (Azari Soufiani et al., 2013b; Zhao et al., 2018a), marketing (Berry et al., 1995), health care (Bockstael, 1999),
transportation (Bhat et al., 2007), and security (Yang et al.,
2011).
Recently there has been a growing interest in designing
faster and more accurate algorithms for RUMs. Many algorithms in previous work share the following rank-breakingthen-optimization architecture. First, rank data are converted to pairwise comparison data. Second, based on
the pairwise comparisons, various optimization algorithms
are designed to estimate the ground truth (Negahban et al.,
2012; Azari Soufiani et al., 2013a; 2014; Chen & Suh, 2015;
Khetan & Oh, 2016b;a).
Pairwise data are often obtained from rank data by applying rank-breaking, which allows for a smooth tradeoff between computational efficiency and statistical efficiency (Azari Soufiani et al., 2013a; 2014; Khetan & Oh,
2016b;a). Given m alternatives, a rank-breaking scheme is
modeled by a weighted undirected graph G (see Figure 1 for
an example) over {1, . . . , m} (the vertices are positions in
a ranking), such that for any ranking R over the m alternatives and any distinct i1 , i2 ≤ m, we obtain gi1 i2 (the weight
on the edge {i1 , i2 } in G) pairwise comparisons between
alternatives at positions i1 and i2 of R.
Our Contributions. By leveraging the celebrated composite marginal likelihood (CML) methods (Lindsay, 1988;
Varin, 2008), we propose a novel and flexible rank-breakingthen-CML framework. Given an RUM, our framework,
denoted by RBCML(G, W), is defined by a weighted rankbreaking graph G and a CML-weight vector W = {wi1 i2 :
i1 , i2 ≤ m, i1 6= i2 }, which contains one non-negative
weight for each pair of alternatives (ai1 , ai2 ). We note that
both G and W are the algorithm designer’s choices. Given
rank data P , we compute θ~ to maximize the following com-

