Entropy-SGD optimizes the prior of a PAC-Bayes bound:
Generalization properties of Entropy-SGD and data-dependent priors

Gintare Karolina Dziugaite 1 2 Daniel M. Roy 3 2

Abstract
We show that Entropy-SGD (Chaudhari et al.,
2017), when viewed as a learning algorithm,
optimizes a PAC-Bayes bound on the risk of
a Gibbs (posterior) classifier, i.e., a randomized classifier obtained by a risk-sensitive perturbation of the weights of a learned classifier.
Entropy-SGD works by optimizing the bound’s
prior, violating the hypothesis of the PAC-Bayes
theorem that the prior is chosen independently of
the data. Indeed, available implementations of
Entropy-SGD rapidly obtain zero training error
on random labels and the same holds of the Gibbs
posterior. In order to obtain a valid generalization bound, we rely on a result showing that datadependent priors obtained by stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) yield valid PACBayes bounds provided the target distribution of
SGLD is ε-differentially private. We observe that
test error on MNIST and CIFAR10 falls within
the (empirically nonvacuous) risk bounds computed under the assumption that SGLD reaches
stationarity. In particular, Entropy-SGLD can be
configured to yield relatively tight generalization
bounds and still fit real labels, although these
same settings do not obtain state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Optimization is central to much of machine learning, but
generalization is the ultimate goal. Despite this, the generalization properties of many optimization-based learning
algorithms are poorly understood. The standard example is
1 Dept. of Engineering, Univ. of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK 2 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada 3 Dept. of Statistical Sciences, Univ. of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to:
Gintare Karolina Dziugaite <gkd22@cam.ac.uk>, Daniel M. Roy
<droy@utstat.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

stochastic gradient descent (SGD), one of the workhorses
of deep learning, which has good generalization performance in many settings, even under overparametrization
(Neyshabur et al., 2014), but rapidly overfits in others
(Zhang et al., 2017). Can we develop high performance
learning algorithms with provably strong generalization
guarantees? Or is there a limit?
In this work, we study an optimization algorithm called
Entropy-SGD (Chaudhari et al., 2017), which was designed
to outperform SGD in terms of generalization error when
optimizing an empirical risk. Entropy-SGD minimizes an
objective f : R p → R indirectly by approximating stochastic gradient ascent on the so-called local entropy
def

F(w) = C(τ) + log Eξ ∼Nτ [e−τ f (w+ξ ) ]
{z
}
|R
exp(− f (w+x))Nτ(dx)

where τ > 0 is an inverse temperature, C(τ) is an additive
constant, and Nτ denotes a zero-mean isotropic multivariate normal distribution on R p whose scale depends on τ.
Our first contribution is connecting Entropy-SGD to results in statistical learning theory, showing that maximizing the local entropy corresponds to minimizing a PACBayes bound (McAllester, 1999) on the risk of the socalled Gibbs posterior. The distribution of w + ξ is the
PAC-Bayesian “prior”, and so optimizing the local entropy
optimizes the bound’s prior. This connection between local entropy and PAC-Bayes follows from a result due to
Catoni (2007, Lem. 1.1.3) in the case of bounded risk. (See
Theorem 3.1.) In the special case where τ f is the empirical cross entropy, the local entropy is literally a Bayesian
log marginal density. The connection between minimizing PAC-Bayes bounds under log loss and maximizing log
marginal densities is the subject of recent work by Germain et al. (2016). Similar connections have been made
by Zhang (2006a;b); Grünwald (2012); Grünwald & Mehta
(2016).
Despite the connection to PAC-Bayes, as well as theoretical results by Chaudhari et al. suggesting that EntropySGD may be more stable than SGD, we demonstrate that
Entropy-SGD (and its corresponding Gibbs posterior) can
rapidly overfit, just like SGD. We identify two changes,
motivated by theoretical analysis, that prevent overfitting.

