Adversarial Distillation of Bayesian Neural Network Posteriors
Kuan-Chieh Wang 1 2 Paul Vicol 1 2 James Lucas 1 2 Li Gu 1 Roger Grosse 1 2 Richard Zemel 1 2

Abstract
Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) allow us to
reason about uncertainty in a principled way.
Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD)
enables efficient BNN learning by drawing samples from the BNN posterior using mini-batches.
However, SGLD and its extensions require storage of many copies of the model parameters, a
potentially prohibitive cost, especially for large
neural networks. We propose a framework,
Adversarial Posterior Distillation, to distill the
SGLD samples using a Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN). At test-time, samples are generated by the GAN. We show that this distillation
framework incurs no loss in performance on recent BNN applications including anomaly detection, active learning, and defense against adversarial attacks. By construction, our framework
distills not only the Bayesian predictive distribution, but the posterior itself. This allows one
to compute quantities such as the approximate
model variance, which is useful in downstream
tasks. To our knowledge, these are the first results applying MCMC-based BNNs to the aforementioned applications.

1. Introduction
Neural networks (NNs) are often viewed as powerful blackbox systems whose behaviors are difficult to interpret and
control. Despite significant progress made on supervised
learning with Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), users are
still apprehensive when applying NNs in safety-critical systems. Moreover, recent work has shown that modern neural
networks can be miscalibrated and may be over-confident
about their predictions (Guo et al., 2017). The overarching
motivation of this research is to have reliable estimates of
uncertainty when making predictions with a NN.
1
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 2 Vector Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Correspondence to: KuanChieh Wang <wangkua1@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Uncertainty is important in many scenarios. For example, designers of autonomous cars might want passengers
to take control when the system is uncertain about the
scene. Uncertainty can also be used to understand a system,
such as in the prediction of basketball player movements;
a player’s offensive skill can be gauged by the amount of
uncertainty he is able to induce by his movements.
Bayesian methods provide a principled way to model uncertainty through the posterior distribution over model parameters. Most approaches for learning Bayesian Neural
Networks (BNNs) (MacKay, 1992) fall into one of two categories: variational inference (VI) or Markov chain MonteCarlo (MCMC). The disadvantage of MCMC methods is
their computational cost, both in terms of time and storage,
and the difficulty in evaluation. However, MCMC methods
are appealing because, in the limit, they produce samples
from the true posterior. In contrast, VI methods require one
to choose a family of approximating distributions, and thus
can only produce samples from an approximate posterior.
The main goal of our work is to reduce the storage overhead involved in maintaining MCMC samples, and to show
the usefulness of MCMC methods in modern BNN applications. We employ Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014a) to model the MCMC
samples. This yields a parametric approximation (i.e., the
generator) of the distribution of MCMC samples, that eliminates the storage overhead while providing access to the
posterior at test-time. We evaluate our approach on a range
of applications including classification, anomaly detection,
active learning, and defense against adversarial examples,
and show that the distilled samples perform as well as the
original MCMC samples. We also analyze the suitability
of GANs for this distillation process, taking into account
recent advances in stabilizing GANs.

2. Background
In this section, we provide a brief overview of BNNs and
the technical background required for our study.
2.1. Uncertainty Estimates with BNNs
In the standard deterministic NN setup, we aim to optimize
the network parameters ✓ given a loss function L and a
dataset of input-output pairs D = {(xi , yi )}N
i=1 as follows:

