The Dynamics of Learning: A Random Matrix Approach
Zhenyu Liao 1 Romain Couillet 1 2

Abstract
Understanding the learning dynamics of neural
networks is one of the key issues for the improvement of optimization algorithms as well as for
the theoretical comprehension of why deep neural nets work so well today. In this paper, we
introduce a random matrix-based framework to
analyze the learning dynamics of a single-layer
linear network on a binary classification problem,
for data of simultaneously large dimension and
size, trained by gradient descent. Our results provide rich insights into common questions in neural
nets, such as overfitting, early stopping and the
initialization of training, thereby opening the door
for future studies of more elaborate structures and
models appearing in today’s neural networks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks trained with backpropagation have
commonly attained superhuman performance in applications of computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and many
others (Schmidhuber, 2015) and are thus receiving an unprecedented research interest. Despite the rapid growth
of the list of successful applications with these gradientbased methods, our theoretical understanding, however, is
progressing at a more modest pace.
One of the salient features of deep networks today is that
they often have far more model parameters than the number
of training samples that they are trained on, but meanwhile
some of the models still exhibit remarkably good generalization performance when applied to unseen data of similar
nature, while others generalize poorly in exactly the same
setting. A satisfying explanation of this phenomenon would
be the key to more powerful and reliable network structures.
1

Laboratoire des Signaux et Systèmes (L2S), CentraleSupélec,
Université Paris-Saclay, France; 2 G-STATS Data Science Chair,
GIPSA-lab, University Grenobles-Alpes, France. Correspondence
to: Zhenyu Liao <zhenyu.liao@l2s.centralesupelec.fr>, Romain
Couillet <romain.couillet@centralesupelec.fr>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

To answer such a question, statistical learning theory has
proposed interpretations from the viewpoint of system complexity (Vapnik, 2013; Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002; Poggio
et al., 2004). In the case of large numbers of parameters, it
is suggested to apply some form of regularization to ensure
good generalization performance. Regularizations can be
explicit, such as the dropout technique (Srivastava et al.,
2014) or the l2 -penalization (weight decay) as reported in
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012); or implicit, as in the case of the
early stopping strategy (Yao et al., 2007) or the stochastic
gradient descent algorithm itself (Zhang et al., 2016).
Inspired by the recent line of works (Saxe et al., 2013; Advani & Saxe, 2017), in this article we introduce a random
matrix framework to analyze the training and, more importantly, the generalization performance of neural networks,
trained by gradient descent. Preliminary results established
from a toy model of two-class classification on a single-layer
linear network are presented, which, despite their simplicity,
shed new light on the understanding of many important aspects in training neural nets. In particular, we demonstrate
how early stopping can naturally protect the network against
overfitting, which becomes more severe as the number of
training sample approaches the dimension of the data. We
also provide a strict lower bound on the training sample
size for a given classification task in this simple setting. A
byproduct of our analysis implies that random initialization,
although commonly used in practice in training deep networks (Glorot & Bengio, 2010; Krizhevsky et al., 2012),
may lead to a degradation of the network performance.
From a more theoretical point of view, our analyses allow
one to evaluate any functional of the eigenvalues of the
sample covariance matrix of the data (or of the data representation learned from previous layers in a deep model),
which is at the core of understanding many experimental
observations in today’s deep networks (Glorot & Bengio,
2010; Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015). Our results are envisioned
to generalize to more elaborate settings, notably to deeper
models that are trained with the stochastic gradient descent
algorithm, which is of more practical interest today due to
the tremendous size of the data.
Notations: Boldface lowercase (uppercase) characters stand
for vectors (matrices), and non-boldface for scalars respectively. 0p is the column vector of zeros of size p, and Ip

