Mean Field Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Yaodong Yang 1 * Rui Luo 1 * Minne Li 1 Ming Zhou 2 Weinan Zhang 2 Jun Wang 1

Abstract
Existing multi-agent reinforcement learning methods are limited typically to a small number of
agents. When the agent number increases largely,
the learning becomes intractable due to the curse
of the dimensionality and the exponential growth
of agent interactions. In this paper, we present
Mean Field Reinforcement Learning where the
interactions within the population of agents are
approximated by those between a single agent
and the average effect from the overall population
or neighboring agents; the interplay between the
two entities is mutually reinforced: the learning
of the individual agent’s optimal policy depends
on the dynamics of the population, while the dynamics of the population change according to the
collective patterns of the individual policies. We
develop practical mean field Q-learning and mean
field Actor-Critic algorithms and analyze the convergence of the solution to Nash equilibrium. Experiments on Gaussian squeeze, Ising model, and
battle games justify the learning effectiveness of
our mean field approaches. In addition, we report the first result to solve the Ising model via
model-free reinforcement learning methods.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is concerned
with a set of autonomous agents that share a common environment (Busoniu et al., 2008). Learning in MARL is
fundamentally difficult since agents not only interact with
the environment but also with each other. Independent Qlearning (Tan, 1993) that considers other agents as a part of
the environment often fails as the multi-agent setting breaks
the theoretical convergence guarantee and makes the learning unstable: changes in the policy of one agent will affect
that of the others, and vice versa (Matignon et al., 2012).
1

University College London, London, United Kingdom.
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. ∗ Equal Contribution. Correspondence to: Jun Wang <j.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk>,
Yaodong Yang <yaodong.yang@cs.ucl.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 t h International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Instead, accounting for the extra information from conjecturing the policies of other agents is beneficial to each single
learner (Foerster et al., 2017; Lowe et al., 2017a). Studies
show that an agent who learns the effect of joint actions has
better performance than those who do not in many scenarios,
including cooperative games (Panait & Luke, 2005), zerosum stochastic games (Littman, 1994), and general-sum
stochastic games (Littman, 2001; Hu & Wellman, 2003).
The existing equilibrium-solving approaches, although principled, are only capable of solving a handful of agents (Hu
& Wellman, 2003; Bowling & Veloso, 2002). The computational complexity of directly solving (Nash) equilibrium
would prevent them from applying to the situations with a
large group or even a population of agents. Yet, in practice,
many cases do require strategic interactions among a large
number of agents, such as the gaming bots in Massively
Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game (Jeong et al., 2015),
the trading agents in stock markets (Troy, 1997), or the
online advertising bidding agents (Wang et al., 2017).
In this paper, we tackle MARL when a large number of
agents co-exist. We consider a setting where each agent is
directly interacting with a finite set of other agents; through
a chain of direct interactions, any pair of agents is interconnected globally (Blume, 1993). The scalability is solved by
employing Mean Field Theory (Stanley, 1971) – the interactions within the population of agents are approximated by
that of a single agent played with the average effect from
the overall (local) population. The learning is mutually reinforced between two entities rather than many entities: the
learning of the individual agent’s optimal policy is based
on the dynamics of the agent population, meanwhile, the
dynamics of the population is updated according to the individual policies. Based on such formulation, we develop
practical mean field Q-learning and mean field Actor-Critic
algorithms, and discuss the convergence of our solution
under certain assumptions. Our experiment on a simple
multi-agent resource allocation shows that our mean field
MARL is capable of learning over many-agent interactions
when others fail. We also demonstrate that with temporaldifference learning, mean field MARL manages to learn and
solve the Ising model without even explicitly knowing the
energy function. At last, in a mixed cooperative-competitive
battle game, we show that the mean field MARL achieves
high winning rates against other baselines previously reported for many agent systems.

