Distributed Clustering via LSH Based Data Partitioning

Aditya Bhaskara 1 Maheshakya Wijewardena 1

Abstract
Given the importance of clustering in the analysis
of large scale data, distributed algorithms for formulations such as k-means, k-median, etc. have
been extensively studied. A successful approach
here has been the “reduce and merge” paradigm,
in which each machine reduces its input size to
e
O(k),
and this data reduction continues (possibly
iteratively) until all the data fits on one machine,
at which point the problem is solved locally. This
approach has the intrinsic bottleneck that each
machine must solve a problem of size ≥ k, and
needs to communicate at least Ω(k) points to the
other machines. We propose a novel data partitioning idea to overcome this bottleneck, and in
effect, have different machines focus on “finding
different clusters”. Under the assumption that we
know the optimum value of the objective up to
a poly(n) factor (arbitrary polynomial), we establish worst-case approximation guarantees for
our method. We see that our algorithm results in
lower communication as well as a near-optimal
number of ‘rounds’ of computation (in the popular
MapReduce framework).

1. Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental problem in the analysis and
understanding of data, and is used widely in different areas of science. The broad goal of clustering is to divide
a (typically large) dataset into groups that such that data
points within a group are “similar” to one another. In most
applications, there is a measure of similarity between any
two objects, which typically forms a metric. The problem
can be formalized in many different ways, depending on
the properties desired of the obtained clustering. While a
“perfect” formulation may not exist (see (Kleinberg, 2002)),
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computing, University
of Utah. Correspondence to: Aditya Bhaskara <bhaskaraaditya@gmail.com>, Maheshakya Wijewardena <pmaheshakya4@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

many formulations have been very successful in applications, including k-means, k-median, k-center, and various
notions of hierarchical clustering (see (Hastie et al., 2009;
Dasgupta, 2016) and references there-in).
In this paper, we focus on k-means clustering, in which the
input is a set of n points in Euclidean space. Here the goal
is to partition the points into k clusters, so as to minimize
the sum of squared distances from the points to the respective cluster centers (see Section 2 for a formal definition).
k-means is one of the most well-studied clustering variants.
Lloyd’s algorithm (Lloyd, 1982), developed over 35 years
ago, has been extremely successful in practice (the success
has been ‘explained’ in many recent works; see (Arthur et al.,
2011; Awasthi & Sheffet, 2012; Kumar & Kannan, 2010)
and references there-in). Despite the success, Lloyd’s algorithm can have an arbitrarily bad approximation ratio in the
worst case. To address this, constant factor approximation
algorithms have been developed, which are more involved
but have worst case guarantees (see (Kanungo et al., 2004)
and (Ahmadian et al., 2017)). In another direction, works
by (Ostrovsky et al., 2006; Jaiswal et al., 2012; Arthur &
Vassilvitskii, 2007) have shown how to obtain simple bicriteria approximation algorithms for k-means. (Arthur &
Vassilvitskii, 2007) also proposed a variant of Lloyd’s algorithm, termed “k-means++”, which also comes with a
theoretical approximation factor guarantee of O(log k) approximation.
All the algorithms above assume that data fits in a single
machine. However, with the ubiquity of large data sets,
there has been a lot of interest in distributed algorithms
where data is spread across several machines. The goal is to
use available distributed models of computation to design
algorithms that can (a) work with machines having access
only to their local data set, (b) use small amount of memory
and only a few “rounds” of communication, and (c) have
approximation guarantees for the solution they output.
For k-means and related objectives, the paradigm of iterative
‘data reduction’ has been remarkably successful. The main
idea is that in each round, a machine chooses a small subset
of its input, and only this subset is carried to the next round.
Thus the total number of points reduces by a significant
factor in every round, and this results in a small number
of rounds overall. Such an algorithm can be implemented

