Deep Linear Networks with Arbitrary Loss: All Local Minima Are Global

Thomas Laurent * 1 James H. von Brecht * 2

Abstract

deep nonlinear networks during training (Saxe et al., 2014).
Results of this sort provide a small piece of evidence that
DLNs can provide a decent simplified model of more realistic networks with nonlinearities.

We consider deep linear networks with arbitrary
convex differentiable loss. We provide a short and
elementary proof of the fact that all local minima
are global minima if the hidden layers are either
1) at least as wide as the input layer, or 2) at least
as wide as the output layer. This result is the
strongest possible in the following sense: If the
loss is convex and Lipschitz but not differentiable
then deep linear networks can have sub-optimal
local minima.

From an analytical point-of-view, the simplicity of DLNs allows for a rigorous, in-depth study of their loss surfaces.
These models typically employ a convex loss function
`(ŷ, y), and so with one layer (i.e. L = 1) the loss L(W1 )
is convex and the resulting optimization problem (1) has
no sub-optimal local minimizers. With multiple layers (i.e.
L ≥ 2) the loss L(W1 , . . . , WL ) is not longer convex, and
so the question of paramount interest concerns whether this
addition of depth and the subsequent loss of convexity creates sub-optimal local minimizers. Indeed, most analytical
treatments of DLNs focus on this question.

1. Introduction
Deep linear networks (DLN) are neural networks that have
multiple hidden layers but have no nonlinearities between
layers. That is, for given data points {x(i) }N
i=1 the outputs
of such networks are computed via a series

We resolve this question in full for arbitrary convex differentiable loss functions. Specifically, we consider deep linear
networks satisfying the two following hypotheses:

ŷ(i) = WL WL−1 · · · W1 x(i)

(i) The loss function ŷ 7→ `(y, ŷ) is convex and differentiable.

of matrix multiplications. Given a target y(i) for the ith data
point and a pairwise loss function `(ŷ(i) , y(i) ), forming the
usual summation
L(W1 , . . . , WL ) =

N
X

1
`(ŷ(i) , y(i) )
N i=1

(1)

then yields the total loss.
Such networks have few direct applications, but they frequently appear as a class of toy models used to understand
the loss surfaces of deep neural networks (Saxe et al., 2014;
Kawaguchi, 2016; Lu & Kawaguchi, 2017; Hardt & Ma,
2017). For example, numerical experiments indicate that
DLNs exhibit some behavior that resembles the behavior of
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, Loyola Marymount University, Los Angeles, CA 90045, USA 2 Department
of Mathematics and Statistics, California State University, Long
Beach, Long Beach, CA 90840, USA. Correspondence to:
Thomas Laurent <tlaurent@lmu.edu>, James H. von Brecht
<james.vonbrecht@csulb.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

(ii) The thinnest layer is either the input layer or the output
layer.
Many networks of interest satisfy both of these hypotheses.
The first hypothesis (i) holds for nearly all network criteria, such as the mean squared error loss, the logistic loss
or the cross entropy loss, that appear in applications. In
a classification scenario, the second hypothesis (ii) holds
whenever each hidden layer has more neurons than the number of classes. Thus both hypotheses are often satisfied
when using a deep linear network (1) to model its nonlinear
counterpart. In any such situation we resolve the deep linear
problem in its entirety.
Theorem 1. If hypotheses (i) and (ii) hold then (1) has no
sub-optimal minimizers, i.e. any local minimum is global.
We provide a short, transparent proof of this result. It is
easily accessible to any reader with a basic understanding
of the singular value decomposition, and in particular, it
does not rely on any sophisticated machinery from either
optimization or linear algebra. Moreover, this theorem is
the strongest possible in the following sense —
Theorem 2. There exists a convex, Lipschitz but not differentiable function ŷ 7→ `(y, ŷ) for which (1) has sub-optimal

