Massively Parallel Algorithms and Hardness for Single-Linkage Clustering
under `p Distances

Grigory Yaroslavtsev 1 Adithya Vadapalli 1

Abstract
We present first massively parallel (MPC) algorithms and hardness of approximation results for
computing Single-Linkage Clustering of n input
d-dimensional vectors under Hamming, `1 , `2
and `∞ distances. All our algorithms run in
O(log n) rounds of MPC for any fixed d and
achieve (1 + )-approximation for all distances
(except Hamming for which we show an exact
algorithm). We also show constant-factor inapproximability results for o(log n)-round algorithms under standard MPC hardness assumptions (for sufficiently large dimension depending
on the distance used). Efficiency of implementation of our algorithms in Apache Spark is demonstrated through experiments on the largest available vector datasets from the UCI machine learning repository exhibiting speedups of several orders of magnitude.

We consider the problem of constructing a Single-Linkage
Clustering for large-scale data. Given a dataset consisting
of n real-valued d-dimensional vectors v1 , . . . , vn ∈ Rd the
goal of Single-Linkage Clustering is to construct a partition
of these vectors into k clusters C1 , . . . , Ck such that the
smallest distance between two vectors in different clusters
is maximized. Formally, for i 6= j let the single-linkage
distance between two clusters Ci and Cj under `p distance be dp (Ci , Cj ) = minva ∈Ci ,vb ∈Cj kva − vb kp where
P
kxkp = ( i |xi |p )1/p is the standard p-norm. Then in
the k-Single-Linkage Clustering (k-SLC) problem under `p
distance we aim to find a partition into k clusters that maximizes mini6=j dp (Ci , Cj ). It is well-known that k-SLC can
be constructed from the Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) of
the underlying metric by taking as clusters connected components resulting from removal of k −1 longest MST edges
(see Figure 1 for an example).

a = d2 (C1 , C )
2

1. Introduction

C1

b = d2 (C1 , C

C2
c = d2

3)

C3
(C 2,

)

1.1. Single-linkage clustering
Single-Linkage Clustering is one of the oldest methods for
clustering multi-dimensional vectors based on the nearestneighbor rule and has been studied since 1951, see e.g.
(Zahn, 1971). It can be used for hierarchical clustering and
is one of the cornerstone techniques in data mining (see
e.g. Chapter 17 of a classic text on information retrieval by
Manning, Raghavan and Schütze (Manning et al., 2008)).
Applications of Single-Linkage Clustering include reconstruction of semantic relationships from word embeddings
such as Word2Vec (Malak & East, 2016), phylogenetic tree
reconstruction (Gower & Ross, 1969), etc.
1
Department of Computer Science, Indiana University,
Bloomington, Indiana, United States.
Correspondence to:
Grigory Yaroslavstev <grigory@grigory.us>, Adithya Vadapalli
<avadapal@iu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

C3
Figure 1. 3-SLC objective is min(a, b, c), MST shown in solid.

Note that with this approach once the MST is constructed it
can be used to compute k-SLC for any value of k. Furthermore, it induces a hierarchical clustering structure that is
often desirable in practice. According to Manning, Raghavan and Schütze (Manning et al., 2008) the main impediment to this approach in practice that motivates the use of
various heuristics is that for large-scale data no practically
feasible techniques are currently known for constructing an
exact MST. Our work overcomes this challenge by leveraging two observations: 1) inexact but close to optimum solutions can suffice in practice due to the fact that real-valued
data always contains rounding errors, 2) while exact MST
algorithms are very sequential, approximate solutions can
be computed in parallel on a distributed cluster.

