Knowledge Transfer with Jacobian Matching

Suraj Srinivas 1 François Fleuret 1

Abstract
Classical distillation methods transfer representations from a “teacher” neural network to a “student” network by matching their output activations. Recent methods also match their Jacobians,
or the gradient of output activations with the input.
However, this involves making some ad hoc decisions, in particular, the choice of the loss function.
In this paper, we first establish an equivalence
between Jacobian matching and distillation with
input noise, from which we derive appropriate
loss functions for Jacobian matching. We then
rely on this analysis to apply Jacobian matching
to transfer learning by establishing equivalence
of a recent transfer learning procedure to distillation. We then show experimentally on standard
image datasets that Jacobian-based penalties improve distillation, robustness to noisy inputs, and
transfer learning.

1. Introduction
Consider that we are given a neural network A trained on a
particular dataset, and want to train another neural network
B on a similar (or related) dataset. Is it possible to leverage
A to train B more efficiently? We call this the problem of
knowledge transfer. Distillation (Hinton et al., 2015) is a
form of knowledge transfer where A and B are trained on
the same dataset, but have different architectures. Transfer
Learning (Pan & Yang, 2010) is another form of knowledge
transfer where A and B are trained on different (but related)
datasets. If the architectures are the same, we can in both
cases simply copy weights from A to B. The problem
becomes more challenging when A and B have different
architectures.
A perfect distillation method would enable us to easily transform one neural network architecture into another, while
preserving generalization. This capability would allow us
1

Idiap Research Institute & EPFL, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Suraj Srinivas <suraj.srinivas@idiap.ch>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

to easily explore the space of neural network architectures,
which can be used for neural network architecture search,
model compression, or creating diverse ensembles. A perfect transfer learning method, on the other hand, would use
little data to train B, optimally using the limited samples at
its disposal.
This paper deals with improving knowledge transfer by
matching the Jacobians of the networks’ outputs with respect to their inputs. This approach has also been recently explored for the case of distillation by Czarnecki
et al. (2017), who considered the general idea of matching
Jacobians, and by Zagoruyko & Komodakis (2017) who
viewed Jacobians as attention maps. However it was unclear
how these methods were related to classical distillation approaches (Ba & Caruana, 2014; Hinton et al., 2015), making
it difficult to identify reasons for improved performance.
Recently Li & Hoiem (2016) proposed a distillation-like
approach to perform transfer learning. However its precise
relationship to distillation was unclear, making it difficult to
predict whether improvements in distillation would lead to
improvements in transfer learning.
The overall contributions of our paper are:
1. We show that matching Jacobians is a special case of
classical distillation, where noise is added to the inputs.
2. We show that a recent transfer learning method (LwF
by Li & Hoiem, 2016) can be viewed as distillation,
which allows us to match Jacobians for this case.
3. We provide methods to match Jacobians of practical
deep networks, where architecture of both networks
are arbitrary.
We experimentally validate these results by providing evidence that Jacobian matching helps both distillation and
transfer learning, and that Jacobian-norm penalties can be
used to learn models robust to noise.

2. Related Work
Several Jacobian-based regularizers have been proposed
in recent times. Sobolev training (Czarnecki et al., 2017),
showed that using higher order derivatives along with the targets can help in training with less data. This work is similar

