Tropical Geometry of Deep Neural Networks

Liwen Zhang 1 Gregory Naitzat 2 Lek-Heng Lim 2 3

Abstract
We establish, for the first time, explicit connections between feedforward neural networks with
ReLU activation and tropical geometry — we
show that the family of such neural networks is
equivalent to the family of tropical rational maps.
Among other things, we deduce that feedforward
ReLU neural networks with one hidden layer can
be characterized by zonotopes, which serve as
building blocks for deeper networks; we relate
decision boundaries of such neural networks to
tropical hypersurfaces, a major object of study
in tropical geometry; and we prove that linear
regions of such neural networks correspond to
vertices of polytopes associated with tropical rational functions. An insight from our tropical formulation is that a deeper network is exponentially
more expressive than a shallow network.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have recently received much limelight
for their enormous success in a variety of applications across
many different areas of artificial intelligence, computer vision, speech recognition, and natural language processing
(LeCun et al., 2015; Hinton et al., 2012; Krizhevsky et al.,
2012; Bahdanau et al., 2014; Kalchbrenner & Blunsom,
2013). Nevertheless, it is also well-known that our theoretical understanding of their efficacy remains incomplete.
There have been several attempts to analyze deep neural networks from different perspectives. Notably, earlier studies
have suggested that a deep architecture could use parameters
more efficiently and requires exponentially fewer parameters to express certain families of functions than a shallow architecture (Delalleau & Bengio, 2011; Bengio & Delalleau,

2011; Montufar et al., 2014; Eldan & Shamir, 2016; Poole
et al., 2016; Telgarsky, 2016; Arora et al., 2018). Recent
work (Zhang et al., 2016) showed that several successful
neural networks possess a high representation power and
can easily shatter random data. However, they also generalize well to data unseen during training stage, suggesting that
such networks may have some implicit regularization. Traditional measures of complexity such as VC-dimension and
Rademacher complexity fail to explain this phenomenon.
Understanding this implicit regularization that begets the
generalization power of deep neural networks remains a
challenge.
The goal of our work is to establish connections between
neural network and tropical geometry in the hope that they
will shed light on the workings of deep neural networks.
Tropical geometry is a new area in algebraic geometry that
has seen an explosive growth in the recent decade but remains relatively obscure outside pure mathematics. We will
focus on feedforward neural networks with rectified linear
units (ReLU) and show that they are analogues of rational
functions, i.e., ratios of two multivariate polynomials f, g in
variables x1 , . . . , xd ,
f (x1 , . . . , xd )
,
g(x1 , . . . , xd )
in tropical algebra. For standard and trigonometric polynomials, it is known that rational approximation — approximating a target function by a ratio of two polynomials
instead of a single polynomial — vastly improves the quality
of approximation without increasing the degree. This gives
our analogue: An ReLU neural network is the tropical ratio
of two tropical polynomials, i.e., a tropical rational function.
More precisely, if we view a neural network as a function
ν : Rd → Rp , x = (x1 , . . . , xd ) 7→ (ν1 (x), . . . , νp (x)),
then ν is a tropical rational map, i.e., each νi is a tropical
rational function. In fact, we will show that:

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 2 Department of Statistics, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 3 Computational and Applied Mathematics Initiative,
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL. Correspondence to: Lek-Heng
Lim <lekheng@galton.uchicago.edu>.

the family of functions represented by feedforward
neural networks with rectified linear units and
integer weights is exactly the family of tropical
rational maps.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

It immediately follows that there is a semifield structure on
this family of functions. More importantly, this establishes a

