Optimal Tuning for Divide-and-conquer Kernel Ridge Regression with Massive
Data
Ganggang Xu 1 Zuofeng Shang 2 Guang Cheng 3

Abstract
Divide-and-conquer is a powerful approach for
large and massive data analysis. In the nonparameteric regression setting, although various theoretical frameworks have been established to achieve
optimality in estimation or hypothesis testing,
how to choose the tuning parameter in a practically effective way is still an open problem. In this
paper, we propose a data-driven procedure based
on divide-and-conquer for selecting the tuning parameters in kernel ridge regression by modifying
the popular Generalized Cross-validation (GCV,
Wahba, 1990). While the proposed criterion is
computationally scalable for massive data sets, it
is also shown under mild conditions to be asymptotically optimal in the sense that minimizing the
proposed distributed-GCV (dGCV) criterion is
equivalent to minimizing the true global conditional empirical loss of the averaged function estimator, extending the existing optimality results of
GCV to the divide-and-conquer framework.

1. Introduction
Massive data made available in various research areas have
imposed new challenges for data scientists. With a large
to massive sample size, many sophisticated statistical tools
are no longer applicable simply due to formidable computational costs and/or memory requirements. Even when the
computation is possible on more advanced machines, it is
still appealing to develop accurate statistical procedures at
much lower computational costs. The divide-and-conquer
strategy has become a popular tool for regression models.
With carefully designed algorithms, such a strategy has
1
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Binghamton University, the State University of New York, Binghamton, NY,
USA 2 Department of Mathematical Sciences, IUPUI, Indianapolis, IN, USA 3 Department of Statistics, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, IN, USA . Correspondence to: Ganggang Xu
<gang@math.binghamton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

proven to be effective in Linear models (Chen & Xie, 2014;
Lu et al., 2016), Partially linear models (Zhao et al., 2016)
and Nonparametric regression models (Zhang et al., 2015;
Lin et al., 2017; Shang & Cheng, 2017; Guo et al., 2017). In
this paper, we shall focus on the divide-and-conquer kernel
ridge regression where the selection of the penalty parameter
is of vital importance but still remains unsettled.
Suppose we have independent and identically distributed
samples {(xi , yi ) ∈ X × R}i=1,...N from a joint probability
measure PY,X . The goal is to study the association between
the covariate xi and the response yi through the following
nonparametric model
yi = f0 (xi ) + εi ,

i = 1, . . . , N,

(1)

where f0 (·) : X → R is the function of interest and εi is a
random error term with mean zero and a common variance
σ 2 . One popular method to estimate f0 (·) is the Kernel
Ridge Regression (Shawe-Taylor & Cristianini, 2004) which
essentially aims at finding a projection of f0 (·) into a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), denoted as H, with
a norm k · kH . Specifically, the kernel ridge regression
estimator is then defined as
(
)
N
X
1
2
(yi − f (xi )) + λkf kH ,
fb = arg min
(2)
f ∈H
N i=1
where λ ≥ 0 controls trade-off between goodness-of-fit and
smoothness of f .
It is well known that computing fb requires O(N 3 ) floating
operations and O(N 2 ) memory; see (5). When N is large,
such requirements can be prohibitive. To overcome this,
Zhang et al. (2015) proposed the following “divide-andconquer” algorithm: (i) Randomly divide the entire sample
{(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xN , yN )} to m disjoint “smaller” subsets,
b
denoted by Sn1 , . . . , Sm ; (ii) For each subset Sk , find
o fk =
P
1
2
arg minf ∈H nk i∈Sk (yi − f (xi )) + λkf kH , where
nk is the size of Sk ; (iii) The final nonparametric estimator
is given by
1
f¯(x) =
m

m
X
k=1

fbk (x).

(3)

