Modeling Sparse Deviations for Compressed Sensing using Generative Models

Manik Dhar 1 Aditya Grover 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
In compressed sensing, a small number of linear measurements can be used to reconstruct an
unknown signal. Existing approaches leverage
assumptions on the structure of these signals,
such as sparsity or the availability of a generative model. A domain-specific generative model
can provide a stronger prior and thus allow for
recovery with far fewer measurements. However,
unlike sparsity-based approaches, existing methods based on generative models guarantee exact
recovery only over their support, which is typically only a small subset of the space on which
the signals are defined. We propose Sparse-Gen, a
framework that allows for sparse deviations from
the support set, thereby achieving the best of both
worlds by using a domain specific prior and allowing reconstruction over the full space of signals.
Theoretically, our framework provides a new class
of signals that can be acquired using compressed
sensing, reducing classic sparse vector recovery to
a special case and avoiding the restrictive support
due to a generative model prior. Empirically, we
observe consistent improvements in reconstruction accuracy over competing approaches, especially in the more practical setting of transfer
compressed sensing where a generative model
for a data-rich, source domain aids sensing on a
data-scarce, target domain.

1. Introduction
In many real-world domains, data acquisition is costly. For
instance, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) requires scan
times proportional to the number of measurements, which
can be significant for patients (Lustig et al., 2008). Geophysical applications like oil drilling require expensive simulation of seismic waves (Qaisar et al., 2013). Such appli1

Computer Science Department, Stanford University, CA, USA.
Correspondence to: Manik Dhar <dmanik@cs.stanford.edu>,
Aditya Grover <adityag@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

cations, among many others, can benefit significantly from
compressed sensing techniques to acquire signals efficiently
(Candès & Tao, 2005; Donoho, 2006; Candès et al., 2006).
In compressed sensing, we wish to acquire an n-dimensional
signal x ∈ Rn using only m  n measurements linear in x.
The measurements could potentially be noisy, but even in
the absence of any noise we need to impose additional structure on the signal to guarantee unique recovery. Classical
results on compressed sensing impose structure by assuming the underlying signal to be approximately l-sparse in
some known basis, i.e., the l-largest entries dominate the
rest. For instance, images and audio signals are typically
sparse in the wavelet and Fourier basis respectively (Mallat,
2008). If the matrix of linear vectors relating the signal and
measurements satisfies certain mild conditions, then one
can provably recover x with only m = O(l log nl ) measurements using LASSO (Tibshirani, 1996; Candès & Tao, 2005;
Donoho, 2006; Candès et al., 2006; Bickel et al., 2009).
Alternatively, structural assumptions on the signals being
sensed can be learned from data, e.g., using a dataset of
typical signals (Baraniuk et al., 2010; Peyre, 2010; Chen
et al., 2010; Yu & Sapiro, 2011). Particularly relevant to this
work, Bora et al. (2017) proposed an approach where structure is provided by a deep generative model learned from
data. Specifically, the underlying signal x being sensed is assumed to be close to the range of a deterministic function expressed by a pretrained, latent variable model G : Rk → Rn
such that x ≈ G(z) where z ∈ Rk denote the latent variables. Consequently, the signal x is recovered by optimizing
for a latent vector z that minimizes the `2 distance between
the measurements corresponding to G(z) and the actual
ones. Even though the objective being optimized in this
case is non-convex, empirical results suggest that the reconstruction error decreases much faster than LASSO-based
recovery as we increase the number of measurements.
A limitation of the above approach is that the recovered
signal is constrained to be in the range of the generator function G. Hence, if the true signal being sensed is not in the
range of G, the algorithm cannot drive the reconstruction
error to zero even when m ≥ n (even if we ignore error
due to measurement noise and non-convex optimization).
This is also observed empirically, as the reconstruction error
of generative model-based recovery saturates as we keep

