Efficient Neural Architecture Search via Parameter Sharing

Hieu Pham * 1 2 Melody Y. Guan * 3 Barret Zoph 1 Quoc V. Le 1 Jeff Dean 1

Abstract
We propose Efficient Neural Architecture Search
(ENAS), a fast and inexpensive approach for automatic model design. ENAS constructs a large
computational graph, where each subgraph represents a neural network architecture, hence forcing
all architectures to share their parameters. A controller is trained with policy gradient to search for
a subgraph that maximizes the expected reward on
a validation set. Meanwhile a model corresponding to the selected subgraph is trained to minimize
a canonical cross entropy loss. Sharing parameters among child models allows ENAS to deliver
strong empirical performances, whilst using much
fewer GPU-hours than existing automatic model
design approaches, and notably, 1000x less expensive than standard Neural Architecture Search.
On Penn Treebank, ENAS discovers a novel architecture that achieves a test perplexity of 56.3,
on par with the existing state-of-the-art among
all methods without post-training processing. On
CIFAR-10, ENAS finds a novel architecture that
achieves 2.89% test error, which is on par with the
2.65% test error of NASNet (Zoph et al., 2018).

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) has been successfully applied to design model architectures for image classification
and language models (Zoph & Le, 2017; Zoph et al., 2018;
Cai et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2017; 2018). In NAS, a controller is trained in a loop: the controller first samples a
candidate architecture, i.e. a child model, trains it to convergence, and measure its performance on the task of desire.
The controller then uses the performance as a guiding signal
to find more promising architectures. This process is repeated for many iterations. Despite its impressive empirical
performance, NAS is computationally expensive and time
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Brain 2 Language Technology Institute, Carnegie Mellon University 3 Department of Computer
Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Hieu Pham
<hyhieu@cmu.edu>, Melody Y. Guan <mguan@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

consuming, e.g. Zoph et al. (2018) use 450 GPUs for 3-4
days (i.e. 32,400-43,200 GPU hours). Meanwhile, using
less resource tends to produce less compelling results (Negrinho & Gordon, 2017; Baker et al., 2017a). We observe
that the computational bottleneck of NAS is the training
of each child model to convergence, only to measure its
accuracy whilst throwing away all the trained weights.
The main contribution of this work is to improve the efficiency of NAS by forcing all child models to share weights
to eschew training each child model from scratch to convergence. The idea has apparent complications, as different
child models might utilize their weights differently, but was
encouraged by previous work on transfer learning and multitask learning, which established that parameters learned for
a particular model on a particular task can be used for other
models on other tasks, with little to no modifications (Razavian et al., 2014; Zoph et al., 2016; Luong et al., 2016).
We empirically show that not only is sharing parameters
among child models possible, but it also allows for very
strong performance. Specifically, on CIFAR-10, our method
achieves a test error of 2.89%, compared to 2.65% by NAS.
On Penn Treebank, our method achieves a test perplexity of
56.3, which significantly outperforms NAS’s test perplexity
of 62.4 (Zoph & Le, 2017) and which is on par with the
existing state-of-the-art among Penn Treebank’s approaches
that do not utilize post-training processing (56.0; Yang et al.
(2018)). Importantly, in all of our experiments, for which
we use a single Nvidia GTX 1080Ti GPU, the search for
architectures takes less than 16 hours. Compared to NAS,
this is a reduction of GPU-hours by more than 1000x. Due
to its efficiency, we name our method Efficient Neural Architecture Search (ENAS).

2. Methods
Central to the idea of ENAS is the observation that all of
the graphs which NAS ends up iterating over can be viewed
as sub-graphs of a larger graph. In other words, we can
represent NAS’s search space using a single directed acyclic
graph (DAG). Figure 2 illustrates a generic example DAG,
where an architecture can be realized by taking a subgraph
of the DAG. Intuitively, ENAS’s DAG is the superposition
of all possible child models in a search space of NAS, where
the nodes represent the local computations and the edges

