SIGN SGD: Compressed Optimisation for Non-Convex Problems

Jeremy Bernstein 1 2 Yu-Xiang Wang 2 3 Kamyar Azizzadenesheli 4 Anima Anandkumar 1 2

Abstract
Training large neural networks requires distributing learning across multiple workers, where the
cost of communicating gradients can be a significant bottleneck. SIGN SGD alleviates this problem by transmitting just the sign of each minibatch
stochastic gradient. We prove that it can get the
best of both worlds: compressed gradients and
SGD-level convergence rate. The relative `1 /`2
geometry of gradients, noise and curvature informs whether SIGN SGD or SGD is theoretically
better suited to a particular problem. On the practical side we find that the momentum counterpart
of SIGN SGD is able to match the accuracy and
convergence speed of A DAM on deep Imagenet
models. We extend our theory to the distributed
setting, where the parameter server uses majority
vote to aggregate gradient signs from each worker
enabling 1-bit compression of worker-server communication in both directions. Using a theorem
by Gauss (1823) we prove that majority vote can
achieve the same reduction in variance as full
precision distributed SGD. Thus, there is great
promise for sign-based optimisation schemes to
achieve fast communication and fast convergence.
Code to reproduce experiments is to be found at
https://github.com/jxbz/signSGD.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have learnt to solve numerous natural human tasks (LeCun et al., 2015; Schmidhuber, 2015).
Training these large-scale models can take days or even
weeks. The learning process can be accelerated by distributing training over multiple processors—either GPUs
linked within a single machine, or even multiple machines
linked together. Communication between workers is typically handled using a parameter-server framework (Li et al.,
1

Caltech 2 Amazon AI 3 UC Santa Barbara 4 UC Irvine. Correspondence to: Jeremy Bernstein <bernstein@caltech.edu>, YuXiang Wang <yuxiangw@amazon.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Algorithm 1 SIGN SGD
Input: learning rate , current point xk
g̃k
stochasticGradient(xk )
xk+1
xk
sign(g̃k )
Algorithm 2 S IGNUM
Input: learning rate , momentum constant
current point xk , current momentum mk
g̃k
stochasticGradient(xk )
mk+1
mk + (1
)g̃k
xk+1
xk
sign(mk+1 )

2 (0, 1),

2014), which involves repeatedly communicating the gradients of every parameter in the model. This can still be
time-intensive for large-scale neural networks. The communication cost can be reduced if gradients are compressed
before being transmitted. In this paper, we analyse the theory of robust schemes for gradient compression.
An elegant form of gradient compression is just to take the
sign of each coordinate of the stochastic gradient vector,
which we call SIGN SGD. The algorithm is as simple as
throwing away the exponent and mantissa of a 32-bit floating point number. Sign-based methods have been studied at
least since the days of R PROP (Riedmiller & Braun, 1993).
This algorithm inspired many popular optimisers—like RMS PROP (Tieleman & Hinton, 2012) and A DAM (Kingma &
Ba, 2015). But researchers were interested in R PROP and
variants because of their robust and fast convergence, and
not their potential for gradient compression.
Until now there has been no rigorous theoretical explanation
for the empirical success of sign-based stochastic gradient
Algorithm 3 Distributed training by majority vote
Input: learning rate , current point xk , # workers M
each with an independent gradient estimate g̃m (xk )
on server
pull sign(g̃hm ) from each worker
i
PM
push sign
sign(g̃
)
to each worker
m
m=1
on each worker
hP
i
M
xk+1
xk
sign
m=1 sign(g̃m )

