Provable Variable Selection for Streaming Features

Jing Wang 1 Jie Shen 2 Ping Li 3

Abstract
In large-scale machine learning applications and
high-dimensional statistics, it is ubiquitous to address a considerable number of features among
which many are redundant. As a remedy, online feature selection has attracted increasing attention in recent years. It sequentially reveals
features and evaluates the importance of them.
Though online feature selection has proven an elegant methodology, it is usually challenging to
carry out a rigorous theoretical characterization.
In this work, we propose a provable online feature selection algorithm that utilizes the online
leverage score. The selected features are then fed
to k-means clustering, making the clustering step
memory and computationally efficient. We prove
that with high probability, performing k-means
clustering based on the selected feature space does
not deviate far from the optimal clustering using
the original data. The empirical results on realworld data sets demonstrate the effectiveness of
our algorithm.

1. Introduction
For retailers, brick-and-mortar stores and internet-based
stores, various recommendation methods are proposed in
an attempt to sell products. The recommendation model
is usually updated in a timely manner or it includes new
valuable features of products which are not previously available. For example, during the Apple WWDC 2018 keynote,
Apple has introduced new features of their platforms to fight
“fingerprinting”, a technique which tracks users based on
identifying computers. With the available of new features, a
feature selection model is employed to determine whether
the new features will drive sales of products in the future
1

Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA. 2 Rutgers
University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA. 3 Baidu Research, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA. Jing Wang <jiw2026@med.cornell.edu>,
Ping Li <pingli98@gmail.com>. Correspondence to: Jie Shen
<js2007@rutgers.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

and only related features will be included in the recommendation model. Hence, in real-world applications, features
are usually revealed in a continuous stream. It is necessary
to evaluate new features immediately and output intermediate result. The feature evaluation process in a stream is
called online feature selection (Perkins & Theiler, 2003;
Zhou et al., 2005; Wu et al., 2010). We first formulate this
problem.
Suppose that there are n samples but initially we do not observe all of the features. We call the sequence a1 , a2 , · · · ∈
Rn is a feature stream, with each ai ∈ Rn being the ith
feature, or the ith covariate of n samples. Note that in our
setting, the feature ai is revealed at time stamp i. If ai is
selected, we update the observation matrix A as follows:
A ← [A θi ai ] .

(1.1)

where the parameter θi 6= 0 is chosen in an online manner.
In the literature, a large number of online methods have been
proposed based on statistical measurements or optimization
techniques (Perkins & Theiler, 2003; Zhou et al., 2005;
Wang et al., 2015). For example, Perkins & Theiler (2003)
added a new feature which contributes to a predictor learning and optimization analysis into the model. Zhou et al.
(2005) proposed an adaptive complexity penalty method to
evaluate a new feature based on its p-value. Wu et al. (2010)
utilized the Markov blanket to measure the relationship between a new feature and the selected feature subset. Yet
successful, most of the results in this line of research are
empirical in nature.
On the other hand, feature selection method can be categorized into either supervised or unsupervised. For instance,
Shen & Li (2017) recently proposed a non-convex supervised approach for variable selection with favorable iteration
complexity. Unsupervised methods, however, are with great
practical importance to many areas such as Cardiology, as
annotated data is usually precious and limited due to genetic
privacy issue and the medical background requirement for
annotators.
Summary of Contributions. In this paper, we consider
the high-dimensional regime that the number of features is
much larger than the sample size, and the features are revealed in an online manner. We propose an unsupervised algorithm termed Online leverage scores for Feature Selection

