Minimax Concave Penalized Multi-Armed Bandit Model with
High-Dimensional Convariates

Xue Wang * 1 Mike Mingcheng Wei * 2 Tao Yao * 1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Minimax Concave
Penalized Multi-Armed Bandit (MCP-Bandit)
algorithm for a decision-maker facing highdimensional data with latent sparse structure in
an online learning and decision-making process.
We demonstrate that the MCP-Bandit algorithm
asymptotically achieves the optimal cumulative
regret in the sample size T , O(log T ), and further attains a tighter bound in both the covariates dimension d and the number of significant
covariates s, O(s2 (s + log d)). In addition, we
develop a linear approximation method, the 2step Weighted Lasso procedure, to identify the
MCP estimator for the MCP-Bandit algorithm
under non-i.i.d. samples. Using this procedure,
the MCP estimator matches the oracle estimator
with high probability. Finally, we present two experiments to benchmark our proposed the MCPBandit algorithm to other bandit algorithms. Both
experiments demonstrate that the MCP-Bandit algorithm performs favorably over other benchmark
algorithms, especially when there is a high level
of data sparsity or when the sample size is not too
small.

1. Introduction
Individual-level data have become increasingly accessible
in the Internet era, and decision-makers have accelerated
data accumulation with extraordinary speed in a variety of
industries, such as health-care, retail, and advertising. The
growing availability of user-specific data, such as medical records, demographics, geographic, browsing/shopping
history, etc., provides decision-makers with unprecedented
opportunities to tailor decisions to individual users. For
*
Equal contribution 1 Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, PA, USA 2 University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Xue Wang <xzw118@psu.edu>, Mike Mingcheng
Wei <mcwei@buffalo.edu>, Tao Yao <taoyao@psu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

example, doctors (i.e., decision-makers) can personalize
treatments for patients (i.e., users) based on their medical
history, clinical tests, and biomarkers (i.e., user-specific
data). These data are often collected sequentially over time,
during which decision-makers adaptively learn to predict
users’ responses to each decision as a function of users’
covariates (i.e., the exploration phase) and optimally adjust
decisions to maximize their rewards (i.e., the exploitation
phase) – an online learning and decision-making process.
We will adopt the multi-armed bandit model (Robbins 1952)
to study this process.
Individual-level data are typically presented in a highdimensional fashion, which poses significant computational
and statistical challenges. In particular, traditional statistic
methods, such as Ordinary Least Squares (OLS), require a
substantial number of samples (e.g., the sample size must be
larger than the covariates dimension) in order to be deemed
computationally feasible. Yet, under the high-dimensional
data structure, learning the accurate predictive models requires even more data samples, which are obtained through
costly trials or experiments. Learning algorithms, such as
Lasso (Tibshirani 1996) and Minimax Concave Penalized
(MCP) (Zhang et al. 2010), have been developed to recover
the latent sparse data structure for high-dimensional data.
Therefore, compared to traditional statistic methods, Lasso
and MCP use significantly fewer data samples and deliver
better performance in high-dimensional settings.
In this paper, we propose a new algorithm, the MCP-Bandit
algorithm, for online learning and decision-making processes in high-dimensional settings. Our algorithm follows
the ideas of the bandit model to balance the explorationand-exploitation trade-off and adopts the MCP estimator
to expedite the convergence of our parameter estimations
to their true values and to improve their statistical performances. Since we focus on the multi-arm bandit model
that mixes the exploitation and exploration phases, samples generated under the exploitation phase are typically not
i.i.d., which significantly challenges the existing MCP literature. Therefore, we adopt a matrix perturbation technique to
derive new oracle inequalities for MCP under non-i.i.d samples. To our best knowledge, our work is the first one which
applies the MCP techniques to handle non-i.i.d samples. In

