Deep Models of Interactions Across Sets

Jason Hartford * 1 Devon R Graham * 1 Kevin Leyton-Brown 1 Siamak Ravanbakhsh 1

Abstract
We use deep learning to model interactions across
two or more sets of objects, such as user–movie
ratings, protein–drug bindings, or ternary useritem-tag interactions. The canonical representation of such interactions is a matrix (or a higherdimensional tensor) with an exchangeability property: the encoding’s meaning is not changed
by permuting rows or columns. We argue that
models should hence be Permutation Equivariant (PE): constrained to make the same predictions across such permutations. We present a
parameter-sharing scheme and prove that it could
not be made any more expressive without violating PE. This scheme yields three benefits. First,
we demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on
multiple matrix completion benchmarks. Second,
our models require a number of parameters independent of the numbers of objects, and thus
scale well to large datasets. Third, models can be
queried about new objects that were not available
at training time, but for which interactions have
since been observed. In experiments, our models achieved surprisingly good generalization performance on this matrix extrapolation task, both
within domains (e.g., new users and new movies
drawn from the same distribution used for training) and even across domains (e.g., predicting
music ratings after training on movies).

1. Introduction
Suppose we are given a set of users N = {1, . . . , N }, a set of
movies M = {1, . . . , M }, and their interaction in the form
of tuples X = ⟨n, m, x⟩ with n ∈ N, m ∈ M and x ∈ R.
Our goal is to learn a function that models the interaction
between users and movies, i.e., mapping from N × M to
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Canada. Correspondence to: Devon Graham <drgraham@cs.ubc.ca>, Jason Hartford <jasonhar@cs.ubc.ca>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

R. The canonical representation of such a function is a
matrix X ∈ RN ×M ; of course, we want Xn,m = x for each
⟨n, m, x⟩ ∈ X. Learning our function corresponds to matrix
completion: using patterns in X to predict values for the
remaining elements of X. X is what we will call an exchangeable matrix: any row- and column-wise permutation
of X represents the same set of ratings and hence the same
matrix completion problem.
Exchangeability has a long history in machine learning and
statistics. de Finetti’s theorem states that exchangeable
sequences are the product of a latent variable model. Extensions of this theorem characterize distributions over other
exchangeable structures, from matrices to graphs; see Orbanz & Roy (2015) for a detailed treatment. In machine
learning, a variety of frameworks formalize exchangeability
in data, from plate notation to statistical relational models (Raedt et al., 2016; Getoor & Taskar, 2007). When
dealing with exchangeable arrays (or tensors), a common
approach is tensor factorization. In particular, one thread
of work leverages tensor decomposition for inference in
latent variable models (Anandkumar et al., 2014). However, in addition to having limited expressive power, tensor
factorization requires retraining models for each new input.
We call a learning algorithm Permutation Equivariant (PE)
if it is constrained to give the same answer across all exchangeable inputs; we argue that PE is an important form
of inductive bias in exchangeable domains. However, it is
not trivial to achieve; indeed, all existing parametric factorization and matrix/tensor completion methods associate
parameters with each row and column, and thus are not PE.
How can we enforce this property? One approach is to augment the input with all M ! × N ! permutations of rows and
columns. However, this is computationally wasteful and becomes infeasible for all but the smallest N and M . Instead,
we show that a simple parameter-sharing scheme suffices to
ensure that a deep model can represent only PE functions.
The result is analogous to the idea of a convolution layer: a
lower-dimensional effective parameter space that enforces a
desired equivariance property. Indeed, parameter-sharing is
a generic and efficient approach for achieving equivariance
in deep models (Ravanbakhsh et al., 2017).
When the matrix models the interaction between the
members of the same group, one could further con-

