An Efficient, Generalized Bellman Update For
Cooperative Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Dhruv Malik * 1 Malayandi Palaniappan * 1 Jaime F. Fisac 1 Dylan Hadfield-Menell 1 Stuart Russell 1
Anca D. Dragan 1

Abstract
Our goal is for AI systems to correctly identify
and act according to their human user’s objectives. Cooperative Inverse Reinforcement Learning (CIRL) formalizes this value alignment problem as a two-player game between a human and
robot, in which only the human knows the parameters of the reward function: the robot needs
to learn them as the interaction unfolds. Previous work showed that CIRL can be solved as a
POMDP, but with an action space size exponential
in the size of the reward parameter space. In this
work, we exploit a specific property of CIRL—the
human is a full information agent—to derive an
optimality-preserving modification to the standard
Bellman update; this reduces the complexity of
the problem by an exponential factor and allows
us to relax CIRL’s assumption of human rationality. We apply this update to a variety of POMDP
solvers and find that it enables us to scale CIRL to
non-trivial problems, with larger reward parameter spaces, and larger action spaces for both robot
and human. In solutions to these larger problems,
the human exhibits pedagogic behavior, while the
robot interprets it as such and attains higher value
for the human.

1. Introduction
As AI agents improve in their ability to optimize for a
given objective, it becomes increasingly important that these
agents pursue the right objective. The value alignment problem (Hadfield-Menell et al., 2016; Bostrom, 2014) is that of
ensuring that robots optimize for what people want—that
robot objectives are aligned with their end-users’ objectives.
(We henceforth use robot to refer generically to an AI agent.)
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Dhruv Malik <dhruvmalik@berkeley.edu>, Malayandi
Palaniappan <malayandi@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Figure 1. A CIRL game. The human H and the robot R need to
work together to prepare a meal. R starts off unaware of which
meal H wants, but both H and R get rewarded only if they prepare
H’s desired meal. Solving such a CIRL game has thus far been
intractable. In Section 3, we derive a modified Bellman update for
computing optimal solutions to CIRL games that achieves an exponential reduction in running time and relaxes CIRL’s assumption
of human rationality.

A highly-capable autonomous agent working towards the
wrong goal can cause undesired effects, the magnitude of
which will tend to increase with the capabilities of the agent.
Unfortunately, we humans have a hard time specifying what
it is that we actually want. For example, customers may
give mistaken instructions to an AI system and system designers may select simple, but potentially incorrect, reward
functions to optimize (Amodei & Clark, 2016). Optimizing
for the wrong objective can lead to unintended and negative
consequences (Amodei et al., 2016).
Rather than optimize a pre-specified reward function, a robot
may instead attempt to infer what people internally want
but cannot perfectly explicate. The robot can use a person’s
actions to learn about the reward function over time. The
most common approach for this is Inverse Reinforcement
Learning (IRL) (Ng & Russell, 2000). IRL makes two
implicit assumptions: 1) that the robot is a passive observer,
watching the human, and 2) that the human acts as an expert
in isolation, ignoring that the robot needs to learn.
Cooperative Inverse Reinforcement Learning (CIRL)
(Hadfield-Menell et al., 2016) relaxes these two assumptions. It proposes a formulation in which the human H and
the robot R are on the same team and collaborate to achieve
the same goal. CIRL is a two-player game between H and

