Quickshift++: Provably Good Initializations for Sample-Based Mean Shift

Heinrich Jiang 1 Jennifer Jang 2 Samory Kpotufe 3

Abstract
We provide initial seedings to the Quick Shift clustering algorithm, which approximate the locally
high-density regions of the data. Such seedings
act as more stable and expressive cluster-cores
than the singleton modes found by Quick Shift.
We establish statistical consistency guarantees for
this modification. We then show strong clustering
performance on real datasets as well as promising
applications to image segmentation.

1. Introduction
Quick Shift (Vedaldi & Soatto, 2008) is a mode-seeking
based clustering algorithm that has a growing popularity in
computer vision. It proceeds by repeatedly moving each
sample to its closest sample point that has higher empirical
density if one exists within a τ -radius ball, otherwise we
stop. Thus each path ends at a point which can be viewed
as a local mode of the empirical density. Then, points that
end up at the same mode are assigned to the same cluster.
The most popular choice of empirical density function is
the Kernel Density Estimator (KDE) with Gaussian Kernel.
The algorithm also appears in Rodriguez & Laio (2014).
Quick Shift was designed as a faster alternative to the wellknown Mean Shift algorithm (Cheng, 1995; Comaniciu &
Meer, 2002). Mean Shift is equivalent to performing a
gradient ascent of the KDE starting at each sample until
convergence (Arias-Castro et al., 2016). Samples that correspond to the same points of convergence are in the same
cluster and the points of convergence are taken to be the
estimates of the modes. Thus, both procedures hill-climb
to the local modes of the empirical density function and
cluster based on these modes. The key differences are that
Quick Shift restricts the steps to sample points (and thus is
a sample-based version of Mean Shift) and has the extra τ
parameter which allows it to merge close segments together.
1

Google Research, Mountain View, CA 2 Uber Inc, San Francisco, CA 3 Princeton University, Princeton, NJ. Correspondence
to: Heinrich Jiang <heinrich.jiang@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

One of the drawbacks of these two procedures, as well as
many mode-seeking based clustering algorithms, is that the
point-modes of the density functions are often poor representations of the clusters. This will happen when the
high-density regions within a cluster are of arbitrary shape
and have some variations causing the underlying density
function to have possibly many apparent, but not so salient
modes. In this case, such procedures asymptotically recover
all of the modes separately, leading to over-segmentation.
To combat this effect, practitioners often increase the kernel
bandwidth, which makes the density estimate more smooth.
However, this can cause the density estimate to deviate too
far from the original density we are intending to cluster
based on.1 Thus, practitioners may not wish to identify
the clusters based on the point-modes of the density function, but rather identify them based on locally high density
regions of the dataset (See Figure 1).2
We propose modeling these locally high-density regions as
cluster-cores (to be precisely defined later), which can be of
arbitrary shape, size, and density level, and are thus better
suited at capturing the possibly complex topological properties of clusters that can arise in practice. In other words,
these cluster-cores are better at expressing the clusters and
are more stable as they are less sensitive to the small fluctuations that can arise in the empirical density function. We
parameterize the cluster-core by β where 0 < β < 1, which
determines how much the density is allowed to vary within
the cluster-core. We estimate them from a finite sample using a minor modification of the MCores algorithm of Jiang
& Kpotufe (2017).
We introduce Quickshift++, which first estimates these
cluster-cores, and then runs the Quick Shift based hillclimbing procedure on each remaining sample until it
reaches a cluster-core. Samples that end up in the
same cluster-core are assigned to the same cluster; thus,
1

KDE with Gaussian kernel and bandwidth h approximates the
underlying density convolved with a Gaussian with mean 0 and
covariance h2 I. Thus, the higher h is, the more the KDE deviates
from the original density.
2
Over-segmentation is also dealt with in Quick Shift via the
τ parameter, but a threshold for the distance between two modes
which should be clustered together is hard to determine in practice.
Moreover, there may not even be a good setting of τ which works
everywhere in the input space.

