Stein Variational Gradient Descent Without Gradient
Jun Han 1 Qiang Liu 2

Abstract
Stein variational gradient decent (SVGD) has
been shown to be a powerful approximate inference algorithm for complex distributions. However, the standard SVGD requires calculating the
gradient of the target density and cannot be applied when the gradient is unavailable. In this
work, we develop a gradient-free variant of SVGD
(GF-SVGD), which replaces the true gradient
with a surrogate gradient, and corrects the induced
bias by re-weighting the gradients in a proper
form. We show that our GF-SVGD can be viewed
as the standard SVGD with a special choice of
kernel, and hence directly inherits the theoretical properties of SVGD. We shed insights on the
empirical choice of the surrogate gradient and
propose an annealed GF-SVGD that leverages the
idea of simulated annealing to improve the performance on high dimensional complex distributions.
Empirical studies show that our method consistently outperforms a number of recent advanced
gradient-free MCMC methods.

1. Introduction

Unfortunately, gradient information of the target distribution
is not always available in practice. In some cases, the distribution of interest is only available as a black-box density
function and the gradient cannot be calculated analytically;
in other cases, it may be computationally too expensive to
calculate the gradient (Beaumont, 2003; Andrieu & Roberts,
2009; Filippone & Girolami, 2014). The goal of this paper
is to extend SVGD to gradient-free settings.
Our Results We propose a simple gradient-free variant
of SVGD that replaces the true gradient with a surrogate
gradient and uses a form of importance weighting to correct
the bias introduced by the surrogate gradient. To give a
very quick overview of our method, recall that the standard
SVGD approximates a given distribution p on Rd with a
set of particles {xi }ni=1 iteratively updated by xi ← xi +

n ∆xi , where
∆xi =

Approximate inference of complex distributions is a longstanding fundamental computational task in machine learning and statistics. Traditional methods are based on either
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) (Neal et al., 2011;
Hoffman & Gelman, 2014), or variational inference (VI)
(Blei et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017), both of which have
their own inherent pros and cons: MCMC is theoretically
sound and asymptotically consistent, but is often slow to
converge in practice; VI is practically faster but has been
known to lack theoretical consistency guarantees.
Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) (Liu & Wang,
2016) is recently developed to integrate the advantages of
1

MCMC and VI. By leveraging a new type of functional gradient descent of KL divergence on the space of distributions,
SVGD directly fits a set of non-parametric particles to the
distribution of interest, without introducing additional parametric forms. This makes SVGD both theoretically sound
(Liu, 2017), practically fast and sample-efficient thanks to
its optimization-based formulation.

2

Computer Science, Dartmouth College Computer Science,
The University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Jun
<jun.han.gr@dartmouth.edu>, Qiang <lqiang@cs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the authors.

n
X

[∇ log p(xj )k(xj , xi ) + ∇xj k(xj , xi )],

(1)

j=1

where k(x, x0 ) is any positive definite kernel; the term with
gradient ∇ log p drives the particles to the high probability
regions of p, and the term with ∇k(x, x0 ) acts as a repulsive
force to keep the particles away from each other to quantify
the uncertainty.
Our gradient-free SVGD is based on the following generalization of the SVGD update rule:
∆xi ∝

n
X



wj ∇ log ρ(xj )k(xj , xi ) + ∇xj k(xj , xi ) , (2)

j=1

which replaces the true gradient ∇ log p with a surrogate
gradient ∇ log ρ of an arbitrary auxiliary distribution ρ(x),
and then uses an importance weight wj := ρ(xj )/p(xj )
to correct the bias introduced by the surrogate. Perhaps
surprisingly, we show that the new update can be derived as
a standard SVGD update by using an importance weighted

