Equivalence of Multicategory SVM and Simplex Cone SVM:
Fast Computations and Statistical Theory
Guillaume A. Pouliot 1

Abstract
The multicategory SVM (MSVM) of Lee et al.
(2004) is a natural generalization of the classical,
binary support vector machines (SVM). However,
its use has been limited by computational difficulties. The simplex-cone SVM (SCSVM) of
Mroueh et al. (2012) is a computationally efficient multicategory classifier, but its use has
been limited by a seemingly opaque interpretation. We show that MSVM and SCSVM are in
fact exactly equivalent, and provide a bijection
between their tuning parameters. MSVM may
then be entertained as both a natural and computationally efficient multicategory extension of
SVM. We further provide a Donsker theorem for
finite-dimensional kernel MSVM and partially
answer the open question pertaining to the very
competitive performance of One-vs-Rest methods against MSVM. Furthermore, we use the derived asymptotic covariance formula to develop
an inverse-variance weighted classification rule
which improves on the One-vs-Rest approach.

1. Introduction
Support vector machines (SVM) is an established algorithm
for classification with two categories (Vapnik, 1998; Smola
and Schlkopf, 1998; Steinwart and Christmann, 2008; Friedman et al., 2009). The method finds the maximum margin
separating hyperplane; it finds the hyperplane dividing the
input space (perhaps after mapping the data to a higher dimensional space) into two categories and maximizing the
minimum distance from a point to the hyperplane. SVM
can also be adapted to allow for imperfect classification, in
which case we speak of soft margin SVM.
Given the success of SVM at binary classification, many
1

Harris School of Public Policy, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Guillaume A. Pouliot
<guillaumepouliot@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

attempts have been made at extending the methodology to
accommodate classification with K > 2 categories (Sun et
al., 2017; Dogan et al., 2016; Lopez et al., 2016; Kumar
et al., 2017, survey available in Ma and Guo, 2014). Lee,
Lin and Wahba (2004) propose what is arguably the natural
multicategory generalization of binary SVM. For instance,
their multicategory SVM (MSVM) is Fisher consistent (i.e.,
the classification rule it produces converges to the Bayes
rule), which is a key property and motivation for the use
standard SVM. Furthermore, it encompasses standard SVM
as a special case.
However, the method has not been widely used in application, nor has it been studied from a statistical perspective,
the way SVM has been. Amongst the machine learning
community, MSVM has not gathered popularity commensurate to that of SVM. Likewise, three major publications
(Jiang et al., 2008; Koo et al., 2008; Li et al., 2011) have
established Donsker theorems for SVM, and none have done
so for MSVM.
Interestingly, computation and statistical analysis of MSVM
are hindered by the same obstable. The optimization problem which MSVM consists of is done under a sum-to-zero
constraint on the vector argument. This makes both the
numerical optimization task and the statistical asymptotic
analysis of the estimator more challenging. The numerical
optimization is substantially slowed down by the equality
constraint1 as detailed in Table 1. Likewise, standard methods for deriving Donsker theorems and limit distribution
theory do not apply to such constrained vectors of random
variables.2
In a separate strain of literature, Mroueh, Poggio, Rosasco
and Slotine (2012) have proposed the simplex-cone SVM
(SC-SVM), a multicategory classifier developped within the
vector reproducing kernel Hilbert space set-up. The SCSVM optimization program is computationally tractable,
and in particular does away with the equality constraint slowing down the primal and dual formulations of MSVM (Lee
1
In fact, a “hack” sometimes used is to ignore the equality
constraint in the primal or dual formulation. This can result in
arbitrarily large distorsions of the optimal solution.
2
For instance, the covariance matrix of a vector of random
variables constrained to sum to zero is not positive definite.

