Learning Equations for Extrapolation and Control

Subham S. Sahoo 1 Christoph H. Lampert 2 Georg Martius 3

Abstract
We present an approach to identify concise equations from data using a shallow neural network
approach. In contrast to ordinary black-box regression, this approach allows understanding functional relations and generalizing them from observed data to unseen parts of the parameter space.
We show how to extend the class of learnable
equations for a recently proposed equation learning network to include divisions, and we improve the learning and model selection strategy
to be useful for challenging real-world data. For
systems governed by analytical expressions, our
method can in many cases identify the true underlying equation and extrapolate to unseen domains.
We demonstrate its effectiveness by experiments
on a cart-pendulum system, where only 2 random
rollouts are required to learn the forward dynamics and successfully achieve the swing-up task.

1. Introduction
In machine learning, models are typically treated as blackbox function approximators that are only judged by their
ability to predict correctly for unseen data (from the same
distribution). In contrast, in the natural sciences, one
searches for interpretable models that provide a deeper understanding of the system of interest and allow formulating
hypotheses about unseen situations. The latter is only possible if the true underlying functional relationship behind
the data has been identified. Therefore, when scientists construct models, they do not only minimize a training error but
also impose constraints based on prior knowledge: models
should be plausible, i. e. consist of components that have
physical expressions in the real world, and they should be
interpretable, which typically means that they consist only
of a small number of interacting units.
1
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India 2 IST Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria 3 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent
Systems, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Georg Martius
<georg.martius@tuebingen.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Machine learning research has only very recently started
to look into related techniques. As a first work, Martius &
Lampert (2016) recently proposed EQL, a neural network
architecture for identifying functional relations between observed inputs and outputs. Their networks represent only
plausible functions through a specific choice of activation
functions and it prefers simple over complex solutions by
imposing sparsity regularization. However, EQL has two
significant shortcomings: first, it is not able to represent divisions, thereby severely limiting to which physical systems
it can be applied, and second, its model selection procedure
is unreliable in identifying the true functional relation out
of multiple plausible candidates.
In this paper, we propose an improved network for
equation learning, EQL÷ , that overcomes the limitation
of the earlier works. In particular, our main contributions are
1. we propose a network architecture that can handle divisions as well as techniques to keep training stable,
2. we improve model/instance selection to be more effective in identifying the right network/equation,
3. we demonstrate how to reliably control a dynamical
robotic system by learning its forward dynamics equations from very few random tryouts/tails.
The following section describes the equation learning
method by Martius & Lampert (2016) and introduces our
improvements. Afterwards, we discuss its relation to other
prior work. In Section 4 we present experimental results
on identifying equations and in Section 5 we show its application to robot control. We close with a discussion and
outlook.

2. Identifying equation with a network
We consider a regression problem, where the data originates
from a system that can be described by an (unknown) analytical function, φ : Rn → Rm . A typical example could be
a system of ordinary differential equations that describes the
dynamics of a robot, or the predator-prey equations of an
ecosystem. The observed data, {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xN , yN )}
is assumed to originate from y = φ(x) + ξ with additive
zero-mean noise ξ. Since φ is unknown, we model the inputoutput relationship with a function ψ : Rn → Rm and aim
to find an instance that minimizes the empirical error on

