Efficient Bias-Span-Constrained Exploration-Exploitation
in Reinforcement Learning

Ronan Fruit * 1 Matteo Pirotta * 1 Alessandro Lazaric 2 Ronald Ortner 3

Abstract
We introduce SCAL, an algorithm designed to perform efficient exploration-exploitation in any unknown weakly-communicating Markov decision
process (MDP) for which an upper bound c on the
span of the optimal bias function is known. For
an MDP with S states, A actions and Γ ≤ S
possible√ next states, we prove a regret bound
e
of O(c
ΓSAT ), which significantly improves
over existing algorithms (e.g., UCRL and PSRL),
whose regret scales linearly with the MDP diameter D. In fact, the optimal bias span is finite
and often much smaller than D (e.g., D = ∞ in
non-communicating MDPs). A similar result was
originally derived by Bartlett and Tewari (2009)
for R EGAL .C, for which no tractable algorithm is
available. In this paper, we relax the optimization problem at the core of R EGAL .C, we carefully
analyze its properties, and we provide the first
computationally efficient algorithm to solve it. Finally, we report numerical simulations supporting
our theoretical findings and showing how SCAL
significantly outperforms UCRL in MDPs with
large diameter and small span.

1. Introduction
While learning in an unknown environment, a reinforcement
learning (RL) agent must trade off the exploration needed
to collect information about the dynamics and reward, and
the exploitation of the experience gathered so far to gain
as much reward as possible. In this paper, we focus on
the regret framework (Jaksch et al., 2010), which evaluates
the exploration-exploitation performance by comparing the
rewards accumulated by the agent and an optimal policy. A
common approach to the exploration-exploitation dilemma
is the optimism in face of uncertainty (OFU) principle: the
agent maintains optimistic estimates of the value function
*

Equal contribution 1 SequeL Team, INRIA Lille, France
Facebook AI Research, Paris, France 3 Montanuniversität Leoben,
Austria. Correspondence to: Ronan Fruit <ronan.fruit@inria.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

and, at each step, it executes the policy with highest optimistic value (e.g., Brafman and Tennenholtz, 2002; Jaksch
et al., 2010; Bartlett and Tewari, 2009). An alternative
approach is posterior sampling (Thompson, 1933), which
maintains a Bayesian distribution over MDPs (i.e., dynamics and expected reward) and, at each step, samples an MDP
and executes the corresponding optimal policy (e.g., Osband
et al., 2013; Abbasi-Yadkori and Szepesvári, 2015; Osband
and Roy, 2017; Ouyang et al., 2017; Agrawal and Jia, 2017).
Given a finite MDP with S states, A actions, and diameter D
(i.e., the time needed to connect any two states), Jaksch et al.
(2010) proved
that no algorithm can achieve regret smaller
√
than Ω( DSAT ). While recent work successfully closed
the gap between upper and lower bounds w.r.t. the dependency on the number of states (e.g., Agrawal and Jia, 2017;
Azar et al., 2017), relatively little attention has been devoted
to the dependency on D. While the diameter quantifies the
number of steps needed to “recover” from a bad state in the
worst case, the actual regret incurred while “recovering” is
related to the difference in potential reward between “bad”
and “good” states, which is accurately measured by the span
(i.e., the range) sp {h∗ } of the optimal bias function h∗ .
While the diameter is an upper bound on the bias span,
it could be arbitrarily larger (e.g., weakly-communicating
MDPs may have finite span and infinite diameter) thus suggesting that algorithms whose regret scales with the span
may perform significantly better.1 Building on the idea that
the OFU principle should be mitigated by the bias span of
the optimistic solution, Bartlett and Tewari (2009) proposed
three different algorithms (referred to as R EGAL) achieving
regret scaling with sp {h∗ } instead of D. The first algorithm
defines a span regularized problem, where the regularization constant needs to be carefully tuned depending on the
state-action pairs visited in the future, which makes it unfeasible in practice. Alternatively, they propose a constrained
variant, called R EGAL .C, where the regularized problem is
replaced by a constraint on the span. Assuming that an
upper-bound c on the bias span of the optimal policy is
1
The proof of the lower bound relies on the construction of an
MDP whose diameter actually coincides with the bias span (up to a
multiplicative numerical constant), thus leaving the open question
whether the “actual” lower bound depends on D or the bias span.
See (Osband and Roy, 2016) for a more thorough discussion.

