Alternating Randomized Block Coordinate Descent

Jelena Diakonikolas 1 Lorenzo Orecchia 1

Abstract
Block-coordinate descent algorithms and alternating minimization methods are fundamental optimization algorithms and an important
primitive in large-scale optimization and machine learning. While various block-coordinatedescent-type methods have been studied extensively, only alternating minimization – which applies to the setting of only two blocks – is known
to have convergence time that scales independently of the least smooth block. A natural question is then: is the setting of two blocks special?
We show that the answer is “no” as long as the
least smooth block can be optimized exactly –
an assumption that is also needed in the setting
of alternating minimization. We do so by introducing a novel algorithm AR-BCD, whose convergence time scales independently of the least
smooth (possibly non-smooth) block. The basic
algorithm generalizes both alternating minimization and randomized block coordinate (gradient)
descent, and we also provide its accelerated version – AAR-BCD.

1. Introduction
First-order methods for minimizing smooth convex functions are a cornerstone of large-scale optimization and machine learning. Given the size and heterogeneity of the data
in these applications, there is a particular interest in designing iterative methods that, at each iteration, only optimize
over a subset of the decision variables (Wright, 2015).
This paper focuses on two classes of methods that constitute important instantiations of this idea. The first class
is that of block-coordinate descent methods, i.e., methods
that partition the set of variables into n ≥ 2 blocks and
perform a gradient descent step on a single block at every
1

Department of Computer Science, Boston University, Boston,
MA, USA. Correspondence to: Jelena Diakonikolas <jelenad@bu.edu>, Lorenzo Orecchia <orecchia@bu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

iteration, while leaving the remaining variable blocks fixed.
A paradigmatic example of this approach is the randomized Kaczmarz algorithm of (Strohmer & Vershynin, 2009)
for linear systems and its generalization (Nesterov, 2012).
The second class is that of alternating minimization methods, i.e., algorithms that partition the variable set into only
n = 2 blocks and alternate between exactly optimizing one
block or the other at each iteration (see, e.g., (Beck, 2015)
and references therein).
Besides the computational advantage in only having to update a subset of variables at each iteration, methods in these
two classes are also able to exploit better the structure of
the problem, which, for instance, may be computationally
expensive only in a small number of variables. To formalize this statement, assume that the set of variables is partitioned into n ≤ N mutually disjoint blocks, where the
ith block of variable x is denoted by xi , and the gradient
corresponding to the ith block is denoted by ∇i f (x). Each
block i will be associated with a smoothness parameter Li ,
I.e., ∀x, y ∈ RN :
i
∥∇i f (x + IN
y) − ∇i f (x)∥∗ ≤ Li ∥yi ∥,

(1.1)

i
is a diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries equal
where IN
one for coordinates from block i, and are zero otherwise.

In this setting, the convergence time of standard randomized block-coordinate descent( methods,
) such as those
∑
i Li
in (Nesterov, 2012), scales as O
, where ϵ is the
ϵ
desired additive error. By contrast, when n = 2, the convergence time of the alternating
(
) minimization method (Beck,
2015) scales as O Lmin
, where Lmin is the minimum
ϵ
smoothness parameter of the two blocks. This means that
one of the two blocks can have arbitrarily poor smoothness (including ∞), as long as it is easy to optimize over
it. Some important examples with a nonsmooth block
(with smoothness parameter equal to infinity) can be found
in (Beck, 2015). Additional examples of problems for
which exact optimization over the least smooth block can
be performed efficiently are provided in Appendix B.
In this paper, we address the following open question,
which was implicitly raised by (Beck & Tetruashvili, 2013):
can we design algorithms that combine the features of
randomized block-coordinate descent and alternating minimization? In particular, assuming we can perform ex-

