Firing Bandits: Optimizing Crowdfunding

Lalit Jain 1 Kevin Jamieson 1

Abstract
In this paper, we model the problem of optimizing
crowdfunding platforms, such as the non-profit
Kiva or for-profit KickStarter, as a variant of
the multi-armed bandit problem. In our setting,
Bernoulli arms emit no rewards until their cumulative number of successes over any number of
trials exceeds a fixed threshold and then provides
no additional reward for any additional trials - a
process reminiscent to that of a neuron firing once
it reaches the action potential and then saturates.
In the spirit of an infinite armed bandit problem,
the player can add new arms whose expected probability of success is drawn iid from an unknown
distribution – this endless supply of projects models the harsh reality that the number of projects
seeking funding greatly exceeds the total capital
available by lenders. Crowdfunding platforms naturally fall under this setting where the arms are
potential projects, and their probability of success
is the probability that a potential funder decides to
fund it after reviewing it. The goal is to play arms
(prioritize the display of projects on a webpage) to
maximize the number of arms that reach the firing
threshold (meet their goal amount) using as few
total trials (number of impressions) as possible
over all the played arms. We provide an algorithm
for this setting and prove sublinear regret bounds.

1. Introduction
In the crowdfunding paradigm, a crowd of many users
pledge to contribute a small amount of funding toward a
project, but the project is only funded if the total amount
of funding pledged exceeds a known reserve price. This is
reminiscient of the firing of a neuron once it reaches its action potential - where the number of pledges from the crowd
1
Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Washington, Seattle, USA. Correspondence to:
Lalit
Jain
<lalitj@cs.washington.edu>,
Kevin
Jamieson
<jamieson@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

controls the firing. Recent years have seen a huge proliferation of crowdfunding sites, with over 700 platforms in 2012
and an estimated 2000 in 2016. These platforms account
for a significant amount of investment; the World Bank
estimates that $90 billion will be raised through crowdfunding ventures alone in 2020 (Barnett, 2015). This includes
non-profit micro-lending sites such as Kiva, charity organizations DonorsChoose and GoFundMe, and venture capital
efforts such as Kickstarter and IndieGoGo.
Crowdfunding platforms seeking to maximize the number
of projects funded need to decide when and how to show
projects to users visiting their sites. The administrators of a
platform can influence the outcomes of which projects are
more likely to be funded by showing them more or less often
in display results. Naive strategies that do not prioritize
the most likely projects to reach the reserve price within a
reasonable amount of time are doomed to only partially fund
many projects (that fail to fire), versus a preferred outcome
of a moderate number fully funded to the reserve price (and
fire).
An intuitive strategy to maximize the number of projects
that hit their reserve price is to first estimate the popularity of a project by considering the proportion of users who
pledged funding relative to the total number of users that
reviewed the project. Then projects on the webpage can be
prioritized by popularity. This is a challenge because the
popularity cannot be accurately estimated without having
the prioritization to ensure enough reviews are gathered.
Simultaneously, we want to avoid prioritizing unpopular
projects. Through personal correspondences with some of
these popular platforms, we have learned that these companies rely on poorly motivated heuristics. Indeed, we became
aware of this problem from one such platform seeking assistance. Despite the enormous interest, capital investment,
and potential for small improvements to make large impact on the number of projects funded, we are unaware of
any rigorous mathematical study or approaches to optimize
these mechanisms. Our paper seeks to bridge this gap and
is organized as follows. In the next section we specify our
problem statement precisely. We then present our algorithm
in Section 2 and prove a sub-linear regret bound. Finally, we
present both synthetic experiments and real-world scenarios
derived from data on the Kiva platform.

