Gradient Primal-Dual Algorithm Converges to Second-Order Stationary
Solution for Nonconvex Distributed Optimization Over Networks

Mingyi Hong 1 Jason D. Lee 2 Meisam Razaviyayn 3
Abstract
the following problem
In this work, we study two first-order primal-dual
based algorithms, the Gradient Primal-Dual Algorithm (GPDA) and the Gradient Alternating
Direction Method of Multipliers (GADMM), for
solving a class of linearly constrained non-convex
optimization problems. We show that with random initialization of the primal and dual variables,
both algorithms are able to compute second-order
stationary solutions (ss2) with probability one.
This is the first result showing that primal-dual algorithm is capable of finding ss2 when only using
first-order information; it also extends the existing
results for first-order, but primal-only algorithms.
An important implication of our result is that it
also gives rise to the first global convergence result to the ss2, for two classes of unconstrained
distributed non-convex learning problems over
multi-agent networks.

min
v∈R

x∈RN
N

fi (v) + g(v),

(2)

i=1

where fi (v) : R → R is a function local to agent i (note,
for notational simplicity we assume that v is a scalar); g(v)
represents some smooth regularization function known to all
agents. Below we present two problem formulations based
on different topologies and application scenarios.
Scenario 1: The Global Consensus. Suppose that all the
agents are connected to a single central node. The distributed agents can communicate with the controller, but
they are not able to directly communicate among themselves.
In this case problem (2) can be equivalently formulated into
the following global consensus problem (Boyd et al., 2011;
Hong et al., 2016)
min

{xi }N
i=0

1. Introduction
Consider the following linearly constrained problem:
min f (x) s.t. Ax = b

N
X

(1)

where f (x) : R → R is a smooth function; A ∈ RM ×N
is not full column rank; b ∈ RM is a known vector.
An important application of problem (1) is in the non-convex
distributed optimization and learning – a problem that has
gained considerable attention recently, and has found applications in training neural networks (Lian et al., 2017),
distributed information processing and machine learning
(Forero et al., 2011; Hong et al., 2016), and distributed signal processing (Lorenzo & Scutari, 2016). In distributed
optimization and learning, the common setup is that a network consists of N distributed agents collectively optimize
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA. 2 Department
of Data Sciences and Operations, the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089. 3 Department of Industrial and
Systems Engineering, the University of Southern California.. Correspondence to: Mingyi hong <mhong@umn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

N
X

fi (xi ) + g(x0 ),

s.t.

xi = x0 , ∀ i.

(3)

i=1

The setting of the above global consensus problem is popular
in applications such as parallel computing, in which the
existence of central controller can orchestrate the activity of
all agents; see (Li et al., 2013; Zhang & Lin, 2015). To cast
the problem into the form of (1), define
f (x) =

N
X

fi (xi ) + g(x0 ),

i=1

A1 = IN , A2 = 1N , A = [A1 , −A2 ], b = 0, (4)
where IN ∈ RN ×N is the identity matrix; 1N ∈ RN is the
all one vector.
Scenario 2: Distributed Optimization Over Networks.
Suppose that there is no central controller, and the N agents
are connected by a network defined by an undirected graph
G = {V, E}, with |V| = N vertices and |E| = E edges.
Each agent can only communicate with its immediate neighbors, and it can access one component function fi . This
problem has wide applications ranging from distributed
communication networking (Liao et al., 2015), distributed
and parallel machine learning (Forero et al., 2011; Mateos
et al., 2010; Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2013), to distributed
signal processing (Schizas et al., 2008).
Define the node-edge incidence matrix A ∈ RE×N as following: if e ∈ E and it connects vertex i and j with i > j,

