Improving the Gaussian Mechanism for Differential Privacy: Analytical
Calibration and Optimal Denoising
Borja Balle 1 Yu-Xiang Wang 2 3

Abstract
The Gaussian mechanism is an essential building
block used in multitude of differentially private
data analysis algorithms. In this paper we revisit the Gaussian mechanism and show that the
original analysis has several important limitations.
Our analysis reveals that the variance formula for
the original mechanism is far from tight in the
high privacy regime (ε → 0) and it cannot be
extended to the low privacy regime (ε → ∞).
We address these limitations by developing an
optimal Gaussian mechanism whose variance is
calibrated directly using the Gaussian cumulative
density function instead of a tail bound approximation. We also propose to equip the Gaussian
mechanism with a post-processing step based on
adaptive estimation techniques by leveraging that
the distribution of the perturbation is known. Our
experiments show that analytical calibration removes at least a third of the variance of the noise
compared to the classical Gaussian mechanism,
and that denoising dramatically improves the accuracy of the Gaussian mechanism in the highdimensional regime.

1. Introduction
Output perturbation is a cornerstone of mechanism design
in differential privacy (DP). Well-known mechanisms in this
class are the Laplace and Gaussian mechanisms (Dwork
et al., 2006; Dwork & Roth, 2014). More complex mechanisms are often obtained by composing multiple applications of these basic output perturbation mechanisms. For
example, the Laplace mechanism is the basic building block
of the sparse vector mechanism (Dwork et al., 2009), and
1
Amazon Research, Cambridge, UK 2 Amazon Web Services,
Palo Alto, USA 3 University of California, Santa Barbara, USA.
Correspondence to: Borja Balle <pigem@amazon.co.uk>, YuXiang Wang <yuxiangw@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

the Gaussian mechanism is the building block of private
empirical risk minimization algorithms based on stochastic gradient descent (Bassily et al., 2014). Analysing the
privacy of such complex mechanisms turns out to be a delicate and error-prone task (Lyu et al., 2017). In particular,
obtaining tight privacy analyses leading to optimal utility
is one of the main challenges in the design of advanced DP
mechanisms. An alternative to tight a-priori analyses is to
equip complex mechanisms with algorithmic noise calibration and accounting methods. These methods use numerical
computations to, e.g. calibrate perturbations and compute
cumulative privacy losses at run time, without relying on
hand-crafted worst-case bounds. For example, recent works
have proposed methods to account for the privacy loss under
compositions occurring in complex mechanisms (Rogers
et al., 2016; Abadi et al., 2016).
In this work we revisit the Gaussian mechanism and develop
two ideas to improve the utility of output perturbation DP
mechanisms based on Gaussian noise. The first improvement is an algorithmic noise calibration strategy that uses
numerical evaluations of the Gaussian cumulative density
function (CDF) to obtain the optimal variance to achieve DP
using Gaussian perturbation. The analysis and the resulting
algorithm are provided in Section 3. In order to motivate
the need for a numerical approach to calibrate the noise of
a DP Gaussian perturbation mechanism, we start with an
analysis of the main limitations of the classical Gaussian
mechanism in Section 2. A numerical evaluation provided
in Section 5.1 showcases the advantages of our optimal
calibration procedure.
The second improvement equips the Gaussian perturbation
mechanism with a post-processing step which denoises the
output using adaptive estimation techniques from the statistics literature. Since DP is preserved by post-processing
and the distribution of the perturbation added to the desired
outcome is known, this allows a mechanism to achieve the
desired privacy guarantee while increasing the accuracy of
the released value. The relevant denoising estimators and
their utility guarantees are discussed in Section 4. Results
presented in this section are not new: they are the product
of a century’s worth of research in statistical estimation.
Our contribution is to compile relevant results scattered

