Generative Temporal Models with Spatial Memory
for Partially Observed Environments

Marco Fraccaro 1 * Danilo Jimenez Rezende 2 Yori Zwols 2 Alexander Pritzel 2 S. M. Ali Eslami 2 Fabio Viola 2

Abstract
In model-based reinforcement learning, generative and temporal models of environments can be
leveraged to boost agent performance, either by
tuning the agent’s representations during training or via use as part of an explicit planning
mechanism. However, their application in practice has been limited to simplistic environments,
due to the difficulty of training such models in
larger, potentially partially-observed and 3D environments. In this work we introduce a novel
action-conditioned generative model of such challenging environments. The model features a
non-parametric spatial memory system in which
we store learned, disentangled representations of
the environment. Low-dimensional spatial updates are computed using a state-space model that
makes use of knowledge on the prior dynamics
of the moving agent, and high-dimensional visual observations are modelled with a Variational
Auto-Encoder. The result is a scalable architecture capable of performing coherent predictions
over hundreds of time steps across a range of partially observed 2D and 3D environments.

1. Introduction
Consider a setup in which an agent walks and observes an
environment (e.g., a three-dimensional maze) for hundreds
of time steps, and is then asked to predict subsequent observations given a sequence of actions. This is a challenging
task, as it requires the ability to first remember the visual
observations and the position in which they were observed
in the environment, and secondly to predict where a possibly long sequence of actions would bring the agent in the
environment. Building models that can solve this problem
* Work done during an internship at DeepMind. 1 Technical
University of Denmark 2 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence
to: Marco Fraccaro <marfraccaro@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

can be useful for model-based reinforcement learning involving spatial tasks that require long-term memories and
other spatial downstream goals (Sutton, 1990; Deisenroth
& Rasmussen, 2011; Levine & Abbeel, 2014; Watter et al.,
2015; Wahlström et al., 2015; Lenz et al., 2015; Higgins
et al., 2017; Finn & Levine, 2017). This requires however
agents that are able to remember the past over hundreds of
steps, that know both where they are in the environment and
how each action changes their position, and that can coherently predict hundreds of steps into the future. Therefore the
main focus of this work is to develop an action-conditioned
generative model that is able to memorize all the required
information while exploring the environment and successively use it in the prediction phase for long-term generation
of high-dimensional visual observations.
Recently, several powerful generative models for sequential
data have been proposed in a wide range of applications,
such as modelling speech, handwriting, polyphonic music
and videos (Chung et al., 2015; Fraccaro et al., 2016; Oh
et al., 2015; Chiappa et al., 2017). They build on recurrent neural architectures such as Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) or Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) (Chung et al., 2014), that use an internal
state vector to perform computations and store the longterm information needed when making predictions. Since
the number of parameters in these models scales quadratically with the dimensionality of the state vector, they are
not suitable for applications that require high memory capacity, such as the one considered in this paper. The high
dimensional state vector needed to be able to memorize the
hundreds of time steps in which the agent has visited the
whole environment, make these models in practice both very
slow and hard to train. An alternative approach is to use an
external memory architecture, for storing of large amount of
information while drastically reducing the number of parameters with respect to models with similar memory capacity
that build on LSTMs or GRUs. Gemici et al. (2017) present
a general architecture for generative temporal models with
external memory, and test four different types of memories that are dynamically updated at each time step (Graves
et al., 2014; 2016; Santoro et al., 2016). They focus on
differentiable addressing mechanisms for memory storage
and retrieval (soft-attention), that are based on deep neural

