Policy and Value Transfer in Lifelong Reinforcement Learning

David Abel † 1 Yuu Jinnai † 1 Yue Guo 1 George Konidaris 1 Michael L. Littman 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of how best to use prior
experience to bootstrap lifelong learning, where
an agent faces a series of task instances drawn
from some task distribution. First, we identify the
initial policy that optimizes expected performance
over the distribution of tasks for increasingly complex classes of policy and task distributions. We
empirically demonstrate the relative performance
of each policy class’ optimal element in a variety of simple task distributions. We then consider value-function initialization methods that
preserve PAC guarantees while simultaneously
minimizing the learning required in two learning algorithms, yielding M AX QI NIT, a practical
new method for value-function-based transfer. We
show that M AX QI NIT performs well in simple
lifelong RL experiments.

1. Introduction

computed policies from related tasks (Fernández & Veloso,
2006; Taylor & Stone, 2007a; Singh, 1992). While a great
deal of research has been conducted on understanding effective transfer, the field still lacks a fundamental understanding
of what the optimal in-principle approach is in this setting.
We consider the question of how best to initialize an agent’s
policy or value function for task n, given the optimal policies and value functions obtained by solving tasks 1 through
n − 1. We restrict our attention to two kinds of knowledge:
policies and values. We begin with policies, progressing
from the simplest setting of constructing the deterministic
policy that performs best in expectation for task n, to the
stochastic and belief-space policy cases, the latter of which
models learning. In the first two cases, we derive the optimal
way to initialize the policy for two classes of task distributions. We then turn to value-function initialization, focusing
on methods that preserve PAC-MDP guarantees but minimize required learning in R-Max (Brafman & Tennenholtz,
2002) and Delayed Q-Learning (Strehl et al., 2006), both of
which preserve PAC bounds via optimistic value-function
initialization.

The lifelong reinforcement learning (RL) setting formalizes
the problem of building agents that must solve a series of
related tasks drawn from a task distribution, rather than a
single, isolated task. The key question in lifelong RL is the
question of transfer: how can algorithms exploit knowledge
gained by solving previous tasks to improve performance in
the next task?

We evaluate each algorithm empirically in a collection
of simple lifelong RL tasks. Our empirical and theoretical results show that a practical and simple new method,
M AX QI NIT, can lower the sample complexity of lifelong
learning via value-function-based transfer.

The space of methods for transfer in RL is vast. Prior work
has investigated methods for accelerating learning in new environments given partial solutions to related environments,
including approaches that incorporate action priors to incentivize guided exploration (Sherstov & Stone, 2005; Rosman & Ramamoorthy, 2012; Abel et al., 2015) and make
use of succinct representations that enable efficient inference (Walsh et al., 2006), while others reuse elements of

Reinforcement learning models an agent interacting with an
environment to maximize long term expected reward (Sutton
& Barto, 1998). The environment is typically modeled as
a Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Puterman, 2014). An
MDP is a five tuple: hS, A, R, T , γi, where S is a finite
set of states; A is a finite set of actions; R : S × A 7→
[0, RM AX] is a reward function, with a lower and upper
bound 0 and RM AX; T : S × A 7→ Pr(S) is a transition
function, denoting the probability of arriving in state s ∈ S
after executing action a ∈ A in state S; and γ ∈ [0, 1)
is a discount factor, expressing the agent’s preference for
immediate over delayed rewards.

†
1
Equal contribution.
Department of Computer Science, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912. Correspondence to: David Abel <david abel@brown.edu>, Yuu Jinnai
<yuu jinnai@brown.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

2. Background

The agent’s action selection strategy is modeled by a policy,
π : S× 7→ Pr(A), mapping states to rewards. Its goal is to

