Online Learning with Abstention
Corinna Cortes 1 Giulia DeSalvo 1 Claudio Gentile 1 2 Mehryar Mohri 3 1 Scott Yang⇤ 4

Abstract
We present an extensive study of a key problem
in online learning where the learner can opt to abstain from making a prediction, at a certain cost.
In the adversarial setting, we show how existing
online algorithms and guarantees can be adapted
to this problem. In the stochastic setting, we first
point out a bias problem that limits the straightforward extension of algorithms such as UCB - N to
this context. Next, we give a new algorithm, UCB GT, that exploits historical data and time-varying
feedback graphs. We show that this algorithm benefits from more favorable regret guarantees than a
natural extension of UCB - N. We further report the
results of a series of experiments demonstrating
that UCB - GT largely outperforms that extension
of UCB - N, as well as other standard baselines.

1. Introduction
We consider an online learning scenario, prevalent in many
applications, where the learner is granted the option of abstaining from making a prediction, at a certain cost. For
example, in the classification setting, at each round, the
learner can choose to make a prediction and incur a standard zero-one misclassification cost, or elect to abstain, in
which case she incurs an abstention cost, typically less than
one. Abstention can thus represent an attractive option to
avoid a higher cost of misclassification. Note, however, that
when the learner abstains, she does not receive the true label
(correct class), which results in a loss of information.
This scenario of online learning with abstention is relevant
to many real-life problems. As an example, consider the
scenario where a doctor can choose to make a diagnosis
based on the current information available about a patient,
⇤

Work done at the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences.
Google Research, New York, NY. 2 INRIA Lille Nord Europe.
3
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York, NY. 4 D. E.
Shaw & Co., New York, NY. Correspondence to: Giulia DeSalvo
<giuliad@google.com>.
1

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

or abstain and request further laboratory tests, which can
represent both a time delay and a financial cost. In this case,
the abstention cost is usually substantially lower than that
of a wrong diagnosis. The online model is appropriate since
it captures the gradual experience a doctor gains by testing,
examining and following new patients.
Another instance of this problem appears in the design of
spoken-dialog applications such as those in modern personal
assistants. Each time the user asks a question, the assistant
can either offer a direct response to the question, at the risk
of providing an inaccurate response, or choose to say “I am
sorry, I do not understand?”, which results in a longer and
thereby more costly dialog requesting the user to reformulate his question. Similar online learning problems arise in
the context of self-driving cars where, at each instant, the
assistant must determine whether to continue steering the
car or return the control to the driver. Online learning with
abstention also naturally models many problems arising in
electronic commerce platforms such as an Ad Exchange, an
online platform set up by a publisher where several advertisers bid in order to compete for an ad slot, the abstention
cost being the opportunity loss of not bidding for a specific
ad slot.
In the batch setting, the problem of learning with abstention has been studied in a number of publications, starting
with (Chow, 1957; 1970). Its theoretical aspects have been
analyzed by several authors in the last decade. El-Yaniv
& Wiener (2010; 2011) studied the trade-off between the
coverage and accuracy of classifiers. Bartlett & Wegkamp
(2008) introduced a loss function including explicitly an abstention cost and gave a consistency analysis of a surrogate
loss that they used to derive an algorithm. More recently,
Cortes et al. (2016a;b) presented a comprehensive study of
the problem, including an analysis of the properties of a
corresponding abstention (or rejection) loss with a series
of theoretical guarantees and algorithmic results both for
learning with kernel-based hypotheses and for boosting.
This paper presents an extensive study of the problem of
online learning with abstention, in both the adversarial and
the stochastic settings. We consider the common scenario
of prediction with expert advice (Littlestone & Warmuth,
1994) and adopt the same general abstention loss function
as in (Cortes et al., 2016a), with each expert formed by a

