Structured Control Nets for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Mario Srouji* 1 Jian Zhang* 2 Ruslan Salakhutdinov 1 2

Abstract
In recent years, Deep Reinforcement Learning
has made impressive advances in solving several
important benchmark problems for sequential decision making. Many control applications use
a generic multilayer perceptron (MLP) for nonvision parts of the policy network. In this work,
we propose a new neural network architecture for
the policy network representation that is simple
yet effective. The proposed Structured Control
Net (SCN) splits the generic MLP into two separate sub-modules: a nonlinear control module and
a linear control module. Intuitively, the nonlinear
control is for forward-looking and global control,
while the linear control stabilizes the local dynamics around the residual of global control. We
hypothesize that this will bring together the benefits of both linear and nonlinear policies: improve
training sample efficiency, final episodic reward,
and generalization of learned policy, while requiring a smaller network and being generally applicable to different training methods. We validated
our hypothesis with competitive results on simulations from OpenAI MuJoCo, Roboschool, Atari,
and a custom urban driving environment, with various ablation and generalization tests, trained with
multiple black-box and policy gradient training
methods. The proposed architecture has the potential to improve upon broader control tasks by
incorporating problem specific priors into the architecture. As a case study, we demonstrate much
improved performance for locomotion tasks by
emulating the biological central pattern generators
(CPGs) as the nonlinear part of the architecture.

*

Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes
Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. 2 Apple Inc., 1 Infinite Loop, Cupertino, CA 95014. This work is done during Mario’s internship at
Apple. Correspondence to: Jian Zhang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov
<jianz@apple.com, rsalakhutdinov@apple.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Figure 1. The proposed Structured Control Net (SCN) for policy
network that incorporates a nonlinear control module, un , and a
linear control module, ul . o is the observation, s is encoded state,
and a is the action output of the policy network. Here time t is
dropped for notation compactness.

1. Introduction
Sequential decision making is crucial for intelligent system to interact with the world successfully and optimally.
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) recently has made
significant progress on solving several important benchmark
problems, such as Atari (Mnih et al., 2015), the game of Go
(Silver et al., 2017), high-dimensional continuous control
simulations (Schulman et al., 2017; Lillicrap et al., 2015),
and robotics (Levine et al., 2016). Many successful applications, especially control problems, still use generic multilayer perceptron (MLP) for non-vision part of the policy
network. There have been only few efforts exploring adding
specific structures to the policy network as an inductive bias
for improving training sampling efficiency, episodic reward,
generalization, and robustness (Wang et al., 2016).
In this work, we focus on an alternative but complementary
area by introducing a policy network architecture that is
simple yet effective for control problems (Figure 1). Specifically, to improve the policy network architecture, we introduce control-specific priors on the structure of the policy
network. The proposed Structured Control Net (SCN) splits
the generic multilayer perceptron (MLP) into a nonlinear
control stream and a linear control stream that combine additively into the final action. This approach has the benefit
of being easily combined with many existing DRL algorithms and complementary to the methods with structures
for planning (Tamar et al., 2016; Oh et al., 2017).
Without any special treatment, we extensively tested SCN
across 3 types of training method (Evolutionary Strategies (Salimans et al., 2017), PPO (Schulman et al., 2017),
ACKTR (Wu et al., 2017)) and 4 types of environment
(MuJoCo (Brockman et al., 2016; Todorov et al., 2012),
Roboschool (OpenAI, 2017), Atari (Bellemare et al., 2013),

