Preventing Fairness Gerrymandering:
Auditing and Learning for Subgroup Fairness

Michael Kearns 1 Seth Neel 1 Aaron Roth 1 Zhiwei Steven Wu 2

Abstract
We introduce a new family of fairness definitions
that interpolate between statistical and individual notions of fairness, obtaining some of the
best properties of each. We show that checking
whether these notions are satisfied is computationally hard in the worst case, but give practical
oracle-efficient algorithms for learning subject to
these constraints, and confirm our findings with
experiments.

1. Introduction
As machine learning is being deployed in increasingly consequential domains (including policing (Rudin, 2013), criminal sentencing (Barry-Jester et al., 2015), and lending (Koren, 2016)), the problem of ensuring that learned models are
fair has become urgent.
Approaches to fairness in machine learning can coarsely be
divided into two kinds: statistical and individual notions of
fairness. Statistical notions typically fix a small number of
protected demographic groups G (such as racial groups), and
then ask for (approximate) parity of some statistical measure
across all of these groups. One popular statistical measure
asks for equality of false positive or negative rates across all
groups in G (this is also sometimes referred to as an equal
opportunity constraint (Hardt et al., 2016)). Another asks
for equality of classification rates (also known as statistical
parity). These statistical notions of fairness are the kinds
of fairness definitions most common in the literature (see
e.g. (Kamiran & Calders, 2012; Hajian & Domingo-Ferrer,
2013; Kleinberg et al., 2017; Hardt et al., 2016; Friedler
et al., 2016; Zafar et al., 2017; Chouldechova, 2017)).
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA, USA 2 Mcrosoft Research, New York City, NY, USA.
Correspondence to: Michael Kearns <mkearns@cis.upenn.edu>,
Seth
Neel
<sethneel@wharton.upenn.edu>,
Aaron
Roth <aaroth@cis.upenn.edu>,
Zhiwei Steven Wu
<steven7woo@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

One main attraction of statistical definitions of fairness is
that they can in principle be obtained and checked without
making any assumptions about the underlying population,
and hence lead to more immediately actionable algorithmic
approaches. On the other hand, individual notions of fairness ask for the algorithm to satisfy some guarantee which
binds at the individual, rather than group, level. Individual
notions of fairness have attractively strong semantics, but
their main drawback is that achieving them seemingly requires more assumptions to be made about the setting under
consideration.
The semantics of statistical notions of fairness would be
significantly stronger if they were defined over a large number of subgroups, thus permitting a rich middle ground between fairness only for a small number of coarse pre-defined
groups, and the strong assumptions needed for fairness at
the individual level. Consider the kind of fairness gerrymandering that can occur when we only look for unfairness
over a small number of pre-defined groups:
Example 1.1. Imagine a setting with two binary features,
corresponding to race (say black and white) and gender (say
male and female), both of which are distributed independently and uniformly at random in a population. Consider
a classifier that labels an example positive if and only if it
corresponds to a black man, or a white woman. Then the
classifier will appear to be equitable when one considers
either protected attribute alone, in the sense that it labels
both men and women as positive 50% of the time, and labels
both black and white individuals as positive 50% of the time.
But if one looks at any conjunction of the two attributes
(such as black women), then it is apparent that the classifier
maximally violates the statistical parity fairness constraint.
Similar examples for classification are easily constructed.
We remark that the issue raised by this toy example is not
merely hypothetical. In our experiments in Section 5, we
show that similar violations of fairness on subgroups of the
pre-defined groups can result from the application of standard machine learning methods applied to real datasets. To
avoid such problems, we would like to be able to satisfy a
fairness constraint not just for the small number of protected
groups defined by single protected attributes, but for a combinatorially large or even infinite collection of structured

