Policy Optimization as Wasserstein Gradient Flows

Ruiyi Zhang 1 Changyou Chen 2 Chunyuan Li 1 Lawrence Carin 1

Abstract
Policy optimization is a core component of reinforcement learning (RL), and most existing RL
methods directly optimize parameters of a policy
based on maximizing the expected total reward,
or its surrogate. Though often achieving encouraging empirical success, its underlying mathematical principle on policy-distribution optimization
is unclear. We place policy optimization into the
space of probability measures, and interpret it as
Wasserstein gradient flows. On the probabilitymeasure space, under specified circumstances,
policy optimization becomes a convex problem in
terms of distribution optimization. To make optimization feasible, we develop efficient algorithms
by numerically solving the corresponding discrete
gradient flows. Our technique is applicable to several RL settings, and is related to many state-ofthe-art policy-optimization algorithms. Empirical
results verify the effectiveness of our framework,
often obtaining better performance compared to
related algorithms.

1. Introduction
There is recent renewed interest in reinforcement learning
(Sutton & Barto, 1998; Kaelbling et al., 1996), largely as a
consequence of the success of deep reinforcement learning
(deep RL) (Mnih et al., 2015; Li, 2017), which is applicable
to complex environments and has obtained state-of-the-art
performance on several challenging problems. In reinforcement learning an agent interacts with the environment, seeking to learn an optimal policy that yields the maximum
expected reward during the interaction. Generally speaking, a policy defines a distribution over actions conditioned
on the states. Learning an optimal policy corresponds to
searching for an element (a conditional action distribution)
on the space of distributions that yields the best expected
feedback (reward) to the agent as it interacts sequentially
1
Duke University 2 SUNY at Buffalo. Correspondence to:
Changyou Chen <cchangyou@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

with the environment.
A standard technique for policy learning is the policygradient (PG) method (Sutton et al., 2000). In PG, a policy
is represented in terms of parameters, typically optimized
by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to maximize the expected total reward. A similar idea has been applied for
learning deterministic policies, termed deterministic policy
gradient (DPG) (Silver et al., 2014). Significant progress
has been made on advancing policy learning since introduction of deep learning techniques. As examples, the deep
deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) method combines
DPG and Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992) to jointly
learn a policy and a Q-function for continuous control problems (Lillicrap et al., 2016). Trust region policy optimization (TRPO) improves PG by preserving the monotonicpolicy-improvement property (Schulman et al., 2015), implemented by imposing a trust-region constraint, defined as
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between consecutive
policies. Later, (Schulman et al., 2017b) proposed proximal
policy optimization (PPO) to improve TRPO by optimizing a “surrogate” objective with an adaptive KL penalty and
reward-clipping mechanism. Though obtaining encouraging
empirical success, many of the aforementioned algorithms
optimize parameters directly, and appear to lack a rigorous
interpretation in terms of distribution optimization, e.g., it is
not mathematically clear how sequentially optimizing policy parameters based on an expected-total-reward objective
corresponds to optimizing the distribution of policy itself.
In this paper we introduce gradient flows in the space of
probability distributions, called Wasserstein gradient flows
(WGF), and formulate policy optimization in RL as a WGF
problem. Essentially, WGF induces a geometry structure
(manifold) in the distribution space characterized by an
energy functional. The length between elements on the manifold is defined by the second-order Wasserstein distance.
Thus, searching for an optimal distribution corresponds to
traveling along a gradient flow on the space until convergence. In the context of deep RL, the energy functional is
characterized by the expected reward. Gradient flow corresponds to a sequence of policy distributions converging
to an optimal policy during an iterative optimization procedure. From this perspective, convergence behavior of the
optimization can be better understood.

