Comparison-Based Random Forests

Siavash Haghiri 1 Damien Garreau 2 Ulrike von Luxburg 1 2

Abstract
Assume we are given a set of items from a general metric space, but we neither have access to
the representation of the data nor to the distances
between data points. Instead, suppose that we
can actively choose a triplet of items (A, B, C)
and ask an oracle whether item A is closer to
item B or to item C. In this paper, we propose
a novel random forest algorithm for regression
and classification that relies only on such triplet
comparisons. In the theory part of this paper, we
establish sufficient conditions for the consistency
of such a forest. In a set of comprehensive experiments, we then demonstrate that the proposed
random forest is efficient both for classification
and regression. In particular, it is even competitive with other methods that have direct access to
the metric representation of the data.

1. Introduction
Assume we are given a set of items from a general metric
space (X , δ), but we neither have access to the representation of the data nor to the distances between data points.
Instead, we have access to an oracle that we can actively ask
a triplet comparison: given any triplet of items (xi , xj , xk )
in the metric space X , is it true that
δ(xi , xj ) < δ(xi , xk ) ?
Such a comparison-based framework has become popular in
recent years, for example in the context of crowd-sourcing
applications (Tamuz et al., 2011; Heikinheimo and Ukkonen,
2013; Ukkonen et al., 2015), and more generally, whenever
humans are supposed to give feedback or when constructing
an explicit distance or similarity function is difficult (Wilber
et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015; Wah et al., 2015; Balcan
et al., 2016; Kleindessner and von Luxburg, 2017).
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Germany 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems,
Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Siavash Haghiri
<haghiri@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

In the present work, we consider classification and regression problems in a comparison-based setting where we are
given the labels y1 , . . . , yn of unknown objects x1 , . . . , xn ,
and we can actively query triplet comparisons between objects. An indirect way to solve such problems is to first
construct an “ordinal embedding” of the data points in a
(typically low-dimensional) Euclidean space that satisfies
the set of triplet comparisons, and then to apply standard machine learning methods to the Euclidean data representation.
However, this approach is often not satisfactory because this
new representation necessarily introduces distortions in the
data. Furthermore, all existing ordinal embedding methods
are painfully slow, even on moderate-sized datasets (Agarwal et al., 2007; van der Maaten and Weinberger, 2012;
Terada and von Luxburg, 2014). In addition, one has to
estimate the embedding dimension, which is a challenging
task by itself (Kleindessner and Luxburg, 2015).
As an alternative, we solve the classification/regression problems by a new random forest algorithm that requires only
triplet comparisons. Standard random forests (Biau and
Scornet, 2016) are one of the most popular and successful classification/regression algorithms in Euclidean spaces
(Fernández-Delgado et al., 2014). However, they heavily rely on the underlying vector space structure. In our
comparison-based setting we need a completely different
tree building strategy. We use the recently described comparison tree (Haghiri et al., 2017) for this purpose (which
in Euclidean cases would be distantly related to linear decision trees (Kane et al., 2017b; Ezra and Sharir, 2017; Kane
et al., 2017a)). A comparison-based random forest (CompRF) consists of a collection of comparison trees built on
the training set.
We study the proposed CompRF both from a theoretical and
a practical point of view. In Section 3, we give sufficient
conditions under which a slightly simplified variant of the
comparison-based forest is statistically consistent. In Section 4, we apply the CompRF to various datasets. In the
first set of experiments we compare our random forests to
traditional CART forests on Euclidean data. In the second
set of experiments, the distances between objects are known
while their representation is missing. Finally, we consider a
case in which only triplet comparisons are available.

