CRVI: Convex Relaxation for Variational Inference
Ghazal Fazelnia 1 John Paisley 1

Abstract
We present a new technique for solving nonconvex variational inference optimization problems. Variational inference is a widely used
method for posterior approximation in which the
inference problem is transformed into an optimization problem. For most models, this optimization
is highly non-convex and so hard to solve. In
this paper, we introduce a new approach to solving the variational inference optimization based
on convex relaxation and semidefinite programming. Our theoretical results guarantee very tight
relaxation bounds that get nearer to the global optimal solution than traditional coordinate ascent.
We evaluate the performance of our approach on
regression and sparse coding.

1. Introduction
A major challenge of Bayesian modeling is posterior inference. For many models this requires calculating normalizing
integrals that neither have a closed form, nor are solvable
numerically in polynomial time. There are two fundamental
approaches to addressing the posterior inference problem.
One uses Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling
techniques that are asymptotically exact. However, these
methods tend to be slow compared with point-estimates and
not scalable to large datasets (Hastings, 1970; Gelfand and
Smith, 1990). Mean-field variational inference is another
approach that approximates the posterior distribution by first
defining a simpler family of distributions and then finding a
member that is closest to the desired posterior (Jordan et al.,
1999) according to the KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence.
This turns the inference problem into an optimization problem. However, this introduces new challenges due to the
resulting non-convex optimization.
In this paper, we present a method to deal with the non1

Department of Electrical Engineering & Data Science Institute,
Columbia University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Ghazal
Fazelnia <ghazal@ee.columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

convexities in variational inference (VI) optimization for
conjugate models that achieve near globally optimal solutions. Our method is based on convex relaxation and
semidefinite programming (SDP). In our approach, an SDP
relaxation converts a non-convex polynomial optimization
of vector parameters to a convex optimization with matrix
parameters via a lifting technique. We call this approach
convex relaxation for variational inference (CRVI). The
exactness of the relaxation can then be interpreted as the
existence of a low-rank solution to this SDP. Our main contribution is to solve this variational optimization problem in
an accurate way and provide theoretical guarantees for the
exactness of our solution using graph theoretic tools. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first time that a relaxation
for variational inference could guarantee and produce optimal solutions that are either globally optimal solution or
very close to it. Our experimental results demonstrate the
effectiveness of CRVI compared with coordinate ascent for
sparse regression and sparse coding models.
Convex optimization problems are one of the most important
areas of optimization theory. They are guaranteed to have
global optimal solutions that can be found with a numerical
algorithm. On the other hand, there is no such theory for
solving generic non-convex problems. Recent advances in
the area of convex optimization provide a variety of methods
for approaching and solving non-convex optimization problems exactly or approximately (Boyd and Vandenberghe,
2004; Yedidia et al., 2005; Wainwright and Jordan, 2008).
For instance, several works have studied the existence of
a low-rank solution to matrix optimizations with linear or
nonlinear constraints (Pataki, 1998; Sturm and Zhang, 2003;
Parrilo, 2003; Fazelnia et al., 2017; Madani et al., 2017).
We build on the method in Madani et al. (2017) to obtain
theoretical bounds for the exactness of CRVI.
There are a number of works that have addressed problems
with probabilistic inference using convex optimization methods. These works have mostly focused on convex relaxation
for maximum entropy and message passing algorithms (Guo
and Schuurmans, 2008; Nickisch and Seeger, 2009; Seeger
and Nickisch, 2011). In general, they lack control over the
exactness of their approximations in that there is no estimate
of the closeness of the solution of the relaxed problem to
the optimal solution of the original problem.
In this work, we apply convex relaxation techniques to the

