GradNorm: Gradient Normalization for Adaptive
Loss Balancing in Deep Multitask Networks

Zhao Chen 1 Vijay Badrinarayanan 1 Chen-Yu Lee 1 Andrew Rabinovich 1

Abstract
Deep multitask networks, in which one neural network produces multiple predictive outputs, can
offer better speed and performance than their
single-task counterparts but are challenging to
train properly. We present a gradient normalization (GradNorm) algorithm that automatically balances training in deep multitask models by dynamically tuning gradient magnitudes. We show that
for various network architectures, for both regression and classification tasks, and on both synthetic
and real datasets, GradNorm improves accuracy
and reduces overfitting across multiple tasks when
compared to single-task networks, static baselines,
and other adaptive multitask loss balancing techniques. GradNorm also matches or surpasses the
performance of exhaustive grid search methods,
despite only involving a single asymmetry hyperparameter α. Thus, what was once a tedious
search process that incurred exponentially more
compute for each task added can now be accomplished within a few training runs, irrespective of
the number of tasks. Ultimately, we will demonstrate that gradient manipulation affords us great
control over the training dynamics of multitask
networks and may be one of the keys to unlocking
the potential of multitask learning.

1. Introduction
Single-task learning in computer vision has enjoyed much
success in deep learning, with many single-task models now
performing at or beyond human accuracies for a wide array
of tasks. However, an ultimate visual system for full scene
understanding must be able to perform many diverse perceptual tasks simultaneously and efficiently, especially within
the limited compute environments of embedded systems
1
Magic Leap, Inc.
Correspondence to:
<zchen@magicleap.com>.

Zhao Chen

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

such as smartphones, wearable devices, and robots/drones.
Such a system can be enabled by multitask learning, where
one model shares weights across multiple tasks and makes
multiple inferences in one forward pass. Such networks
are not only scalable, but the shared features within these
networks can induce more robust regularization and boost
performance as a result. In the ideal limit, we can thus
have the best of both worlds with multitask networks: more
efficiency and higher performance.
In general, multitask networks are difficult to train; different
tasks need to be properly balanced so network parameters
converge to robust shared features that are useful across all
tasks. Methods in multitask learning thus far have largely
tried to find this balance by manipulating the forward pass
of the network (e.g. through constructing explicit statistical relationships between features (Long & Wang, 2015)
or optimizing multitask network architectures (Misra et al.,
2016), etc.), but such methods ignore a key insight: task
imbalances impede proper training because they manifest
as imbalances between backpropagated gradients. A task
that is too dominant during training, for example, will necessarily express that dominance by inducing gradients which
have relatively large magnitudes. We aim to mitigate such issues at their root by directly modifying gradient magnitudes
through tuning of the multitask loss function.
In practice, the multitask loss function is often
P assumed to
be linear in the single task losses Li , L = i wi Li , where
the sum runs over all T tasks. In our case, we propose an
adaptive method, and so wi can vary at each training step
t: wi = wi (t). This linear form of the loss function is
convenient for implementing gradient balancing, as wi very
directly and linearly couples to the backpropagated gradient
magnitudes from each task. The challenge is then to find the
best value for each wi at each training step t that balances
the contribution of each task for optimal model training.
To optimize the weights wi (t) for gradient balancing, we
propose a simple algorithm that penalizes the network when
backpropagated gradients from any task are too large or too
small. The correct balance is struck when tasks are training at similar rates; if task i is training relatively quickly,
then its weight wi (t) should decrease relative to other task
weights wj (t)|j6=i to allow other tasks more influence on

