Hierarchical Clustering with Structural Constraints

Vaggos Chatziafratis * 1 Rad Niazadeh * 1 Moses Charikar 1

Abstract
Hierarchical clustering is a popular unsupervised
data analysis method. For many real-world applications, we would like to exploit prior information about the data that imposes constraints
on the clustering hierarchy, and is not captured
by the set of features available to the algorithm.
This gives rise to the problem of hierarchical
clustering with structural constraints. Structural
constraints pose major challenges for bottom-up
approaches like average/single linkage and even
though they can be naturally incorporated into
top-down divisive algorithms, no formal guarantees exist on the quality of their output. In this
paper, we provide provable approximation guarantees for two simple top-down algorithms, using a recently introduced optimization viewpoint
of hierarchical clustering with pairwise similarity information (Dasgupta, 2016). We show how
to find good solutions even in the presence of
conflicting prior information, by formulating a
constraint-based regularization of the objective.
Furthermore, we explore a variation of this objective for dissimilarity information (Cohen-Addad
et al., 2018) and improve upon current techniques.
Finally, we demonstrate our approach on a real
dataset for the taxonomy application.

1. Introduction
Hierarchical clustering (HC) is a widely used data analysis
tool, ubiquitous in information retrieval, data mining, and
machine learning (see a survey by (Berkhin, 2006)). This
clustering technique represents a given dataset as a binary
tree; each leaf represents an individual data point and each
internal node represents a cluster on the leaves of its descendants. HC has become the most popular method for
1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Moses
Charikar <moses@cs.stanford.edu >, Vaggos Chatziafratis <vaggos@stanford.edu >, Rad Niazadeh <rad@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

gene expression data analysis (Eisen et al., 1998), and also
has been used in the analysis of social networks (Leskovec
et al., 2014; Mann et al., 2008), bioinformatics (Diez et al.,
2015), image and text classification (Steinbach et al., 2000),
and even in analysis of financial markets (Tumminello et al.,
2010). It is attractive because it provides richer information
at all levels of granularity simultaneously, compared to more
traditional flat clustering approaches like k-means.
Recently, (Dasgupta, 2016) formulated HC as a combinatorial optimization problem, giving a principled way to compare the performance of different HC algorithms. This optimization viewpoint has since received a lot of attention (Roy
& Pokutta, 2016; Charikar & Chatziafratis, 2017; CohenAddad et al., 2017; Moseley & Wang, 2017; Cohen-Addad
et al., 2018) that has led not only to the development of new
algorithms but also to theoretical justifications for the observed success of popular algorithms (e.g. average-linkage).
However, in real applications of clustering, the user often has background knowledge about the data that may
not be captured by the input to the clustering algorithm.
There is a rich body of work on constrained (flat) clustering formulations that take into account such user input in the form of “cannot link” and “must link” constraints (Wagstaff & Cardie, 2000; Wagstaff et al., 2001;
Bilenko et al., 2004; Rangapuram & Hein, 2012). Very recently, “semi-supervised” versions of HC that incorporate
additional constraints have been studied (Vikram & Dasgupta, 2016), where the natural form of such constraints
is triplet (or “must link before”) constraints ab|c1 : these
require that valid solutions contain a sub-cluster with a, b
together and c previously separated from them.2 Such triplet
constraints, as we show later, can encode more general structural constraints in the form of rooted subtrees. Surprisingly,
such simple triplet constraints already pose significant challenges for bottom-up linkage methods. (Figure 1).
Our work is motivated by applying the optimization lens to
study the interaction of hierarchical clustering algorithms
with structural constraints. Constraints can be fairly natu1
Hierarchies on data imply that all datapoints are linked at the
highest level and all are separated at the lowest level, hence “cannot
link” and “must link” constraints are not directly meaningful.
2
For a concrete example from taxonomy of species, a triplet
constraint may look like (T UNA, S ALMON|L ION).

