IMPALA: Scalable Distributed Deep-RL with Importance Weighted
Actor-Learner Architectures
Lasse Espeholt * 1 Hubert Soyer * 1 Remi Munos * 1 Karen Simonyan 1 Volodymyr Mnih 1 Tom Ward 1
Yotam Doron 1 Vlad Firoiu 1 Tim Harley 1 Iain Dunning 1 Shane Legg 1 Koray Kavukcuoglu 1

Abstract
In this work we aim to solve a large collection of
tasks using a single reinforcement learning agent
with a single set of parameters. A key challenge
is to handle the increased amount of data and extended training time. We have developed a new
distributed agent IMPALA (Importance Weighted
Actor-Learner Architecture) that not only uses
resources more efficiently in single-machine training but also scales to thousands of machines without sacrificing data efficiency or resource utilisation. We achieve stable learning at high throughput by combining decoupled acting and learning
with a novel off-policy correction method called
V-trace. We demonstrate the effectiveness of IMPALA for multi-task reinforcement learning on
DMLab-30 (a set of 30 tasks from the DeepMind
Lab environment (Beattie et al., 2016)) and Atari57 (all available Atari games in Arcade Learning
Environment (Bellemare et al., 2013a)). Our results show that IMPALA is able to achieve better
performance than previous agents with less data,
and crucially exhibits positive transfer between
tasks as a result of its multi-task approach.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning methods have recently mastered a wide variety of domains through trial and error
learning (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017; 2016; Zoph
et al., 2017; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Barth-Maron et al., 2018).
While the improvements on tasks like the game of Go (Silver et al., 2017) and Atari games (Horgan et al., 2018) have
been dramatic, the progress has been primarily in single
task performance, where an agent is trained on each task
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind Technologies, London,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Lasse Espeholt <lespeholt@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

separately. We are interested in developing new methods
capable of mastering a diverse set of tasks simultaneously as
well as environments suitable for evaluating such methods.
One of the main challenges in training a single agent on
many tasks at once is scalability. Since the current state-ofthe-art methods like A3C (Mnih et al., 2016) or UNREAL
(Jaderberg et al., 2017b) can require as much as a billion
frames and multiple days to master a single domain, training
them on tens of domains at once is too slow to be practical.
We propose the Importance Weighted Actor-Learner
Architecture (IMPALA) shown in Figure 1. IMPALA is
capable of scaling to thousands of machines without sacrificing training stability or data efficiency. Unlike the popular
A3C-based agents, in which workers communicate gradients with respect to the parameters of the policy to a central
parameter server, IMPALA actors communicate trajectories
of experience (sequences of states, actions, and rewards) to a
centralised learner. Since the learner in IMPALA has access
to full trajectories of experience we use a GPU to perform
updates on mini-batches of trajectories while aggressively
parallelising all time independent operations. This type of
decoupled architecture can achieve very high throughput.
However, because the policy used to generate a trajectory
can lag behind the policy on the learner by several updates at
the time of gradient calculation, learning becomes off-policy.
Therefore, we introduce the V-trace off-policy actor-critic
algorithm to correct for this harmful discrepancy.
With the scalable architecture and V-trace combined, IMPALA achieves exceptionally high data throughput rates of
250,000 frames per second, making it over 30 times faster
than single-machine A3C. Crucially, IMPALA is also more
data efficient than A3C based agents and more robust to
hyperparameter values and network architectures, allowing it to make better use of deeper neural networks. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of IMPALA by training a single agent on multi-task problems using DMLab-30, a new
challenge set which consists of 30 diverse cognitive tasks
in the 3D DeepMind Lab (Beattie et al., 2016) environment
and by training a single agent on all games in the Atari-57
set of tasks.

