The Weighted Kendall and High-order Kernels for Permutations

Yunlong Jiao 1 Jean-Philippe Vert 2

Abstract
We propose new positive definite kernels for permutations. First we introduce a weighted version
of the Kendall kernel, which allows to weight unequally the contributions of different item pairs in
the permutations depending on their ranks. Like
the Kendall kernel, we show that the weighted
version is invariant to relabeling of items and can
be computed efficiently in O(n ln(n)) operations,
where n is the number of items in the permutation. Second, we propose a supervised approach
to learn the weights by jointly optimizing them
with the function estimated by a kernel machine.
Third, while the Kendall kernel considers pairwise
comparison between items, we extend it by considering higher-order comparisons among tuples
of items and show that the supervised approach
of learning the weights can be systematically generalized to higher-order permutation kernels.

1. Introduction
A permutation is a 1-to-1 mapping from a finite set into itself,
and allows to represent mathematically a complete ordering
or n items. We consider the problem of machine learning
when data are permutations, which has many applications
such as analyzing preferences or votes (Diaconis, 1988;
Marden, 1996), tracking objects (Huang et al., 2009), or
learning robustly from high-dimensional biological data
(Geman et al., 2004; Lin et al., 2009; Jiao & Vert, 2018).
A promising direction to learn over permutations is to first
embed them to a vector space, i.e., to first represent each
permutation π by a vector Φ(π) ∈ Rd , and then to learn a
parametric linear or nonlinear model over Φ(π) using standard machine learning approaches. For example, Kondor &
Barbosa (2010) proposed an embedding to Rd with d = n!,
1
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 2 MINES ParisTech & Institut Curie & Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Jean-Philippe Vert <jeanphilippe.vert@mines-paristech.fr>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

where n is the number of items; however, in spite of computational tricks, this leads to algorithms with O(nn ) complexity which become impractical as soon as we consider
more than a few items. Recently, Jiao & Vert (2018) showed
that the well-known Kendall τ correlation defines implicitly
an embedding in d = O(n2 ) dimensions, in which linear
models can be learned with O(n ln(n)) complexity thanks
to the so-called kernel trick (Schölkopf & Smola, 2002;
Shawe-Taylor & Cristianini, 2004); they showed promising
results on gene expression classification where n is a few
thousands. In this paper, we propose to extend this work by
tackling several limitations of the Kendall kernel.
First, the Kendall kernel compares two permutations by
computing the number of pairs of items which are in the
same order in both permutations. When n is large, it may
be more interesting to weight differently the contributions
of different pairs, e.g., to focus more on the top-ranked
items. Many weighted versions of Kendall’s τ correlation
have been proposed in the literature, as reviewed below
in Section 3; however, to our knowledge, none of them
is associated to a valid embedding of permutations in a
vector space, like the original Kendall correlation. Here
we propose such an extension, and show that it inherits
the computational benefits from the Kendall kernel while
allowing to weight differently the importance of items based
on their rank.
Second, we discuss how to choose the position-dependent
weights that define this embedding. We propose to see them
as parameters of the model, and to optimize them jointly
with other parameters during training. This is similar in
spirit to the way different kernels are weighted and combined in multiple kernel learning (Lanckriet et al., 2004;
Bach et al., 2004), or more generally to the notion of representation learning which became central in recent years in
conjunction with neural networks or linear models (Mikolov
et al., 2013; Le Morvan & Vert, 2017). We show in particular that efficient alternative optimization schemes are
possible in the resulting optimization problem.
Third, observing that the features defining the embedding associated to the Kendall kernel are based on pairwise comparisons only, we consider extensions to higher-order comparisons, e.g., the relative ranking among triplets or quadruplets
of items. Such features are naturally captured by higher-

