Progress & Compress: A scalable framework for continual learning

Jonathan Schwarz 1 Jelena Luketina 2 Wojciech M. Czarnecki 1 Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska 1
Yee Whye Teh 1 Razvan Pascanu * 1 Raia Hadsell * 1

Abstract
We introduce a conceptually simple and scalable
framework for continual learning domains where
tasks are learned sequentially. Our method is constant in the number of parameters and is designed
to preserve performance on previously encountered tasks while accelerating learning progress
on subsequent problems. This is achieved by training a network with two components: A knowledge
base, capable of solving previously encountered
problems, which is connected to an active column
that is employed to efficiently learn the current
task. After learning a new task, the active column
is distilled into the knowledge base, taking care
to protect any previously acquired skills. This
cycle of active learning (progression) followed by
consolidation (compression) requires no architecture growth, no access to or storing of previous
data or tasks, and no task-specific parameters. We
demonstrate the progress & compress approach on
sequential classification of handwritten alphabets
as well as two reinforcement learning domains:
Atari games and 3D maze navigation.

1. Introduction
The standard learning process of neural networks is underpinned by the assumption that training examples are drawn
i.i.d. from some fixed distribution. In many scenarios such a
restriction is not of major concern. However, it can prove to
be an important limitation particularly when a system needs
to continuously adapt to a changing environment, as often
happens in reinforcement learning and other interactive domains such as robotics or dialogue systems. This ability to
learn consecutive tasks without forgetting how to perform
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, United Kingdom 2 Department of Computer Science, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to:
Jonathan Schwarz <schwarzjn@google.com>, Razvan Pascanu
<razp@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

previously trained problems is known as continual learning
(e.g. Ring, 1995).
A large body of literature recognises the importance of the
continual learning problem, and there has been some increased interest in the topic recently (e.g. Rusu et al., 2016a;
Shin et al., 2017; Lopez-Paz et al., 2017; Nguyen et al.,
2017; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2018). Part
of the challenge stems from the fact that there are multiple,
often competing, desiderata for continual learning:
(i) A continual learning method should not suffer from catastrophic forgetting. That is, it should be able to perform reasonably well on previously learnt tasks. (ii) It should be able
to learn new tasks while taking advantage of knowledge extracted from previous tasks, thus exhibiting positive forward
transfer to achieve faster learning and/or better final performance. (iii) It should be scalable, that is, the method should
be trainable on a large number of tasks. (iv) It should enable
positive backwards transfer as well, which means gaining
immediate improved performance on previous tasks after
learning a new task which is similar or relevant. (v) Finally,
it should be able to learn without requiring task labels, and
ideally it should even be applicable in the absence of clear
task boundaries.
Many approaches address some of these to the detriment of
others. For example: Naive finetuning often leads to successful positive transfer, but suffers from catastrophic forgetting; elastic weight consolidation (EWC) (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017) focuses on overcoming catastrophic forgetting but
the accumulation of Fisher regularisers can over-constrain
the network parameters leading to impaired learning of new
tasks; Progressive Networks (Rusu et al., 2016a) avoid catastrophic forgetting altogether by construction, however it
suffers from lack of scalability as the network size scales
quadratically in the number of tasks.
This paper presents a step towards unifying these techniques
in a framework that satisfies multiple desiderata, by taking
advantage of their complementary strengths while minimising their weaknesses. The proposed method implements two
neural networks, a knowledge base and an active column,
which are trained in two distinct, alternating phases. During
the progress phase, the network is presented with a new
learning problem, and only parameters in the active column

