Decoupled Parallel Backpropagation with Convergence Guarantee

Zhouyuan Huo 1 Bin Gu 1 Qian Yang 1 Heng Huang 1

Abstract
Backpropagation algorithm is indispensable for
the training of feedforward neural networks. It
requires propagating error gradients sequentially
from the output layer all the way back to the input
layer. The backward locking in backpropagation
algorithm constrains us from updating network
layers in parallel and fully leveraging the computing resources. Recently, several algorithms have
been proposed for breaking the backward locking.
However, their performances degrade seriously
when networks are deep. In this paper, we propose
decoupled parallel backpropagation algorithm for
deep learning optimization with convergence guarantee. Firstly, we decouple the backpropagation
algorithm using delayed gradients, and show that
the backward locking is removed when we split
the networks into multiple modules. Then, we
utilize decoupled parallel backpropagation in two
stochastic methods and prove that our method
guarantees convergence to critical points for the
non-convex problem. Finally, we perform experiments for training deep convolutional neural networks on benchmark datasets. The experimental
results not only confirm our theoretical analysis,
but also demonstrate that the proposed method
can achieve significant speedup without loss of
accuracy.

1. Introduction
We have witnessed a series of breakthroughs in computer vision using deep convolutional neural networks (LeCun et al.,
2015). Most neural networks are trained using stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) or its variants in which the gradients of the networks are computed by backpropagation
algorithm (Rumelhart et al., 1988). As shown in Figure 1,
the backpropagation algorithm consists of two processes, the
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States. Correspondence
to: Heng Huang <henghuanghh@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Figure 1. We split a multilayer feedforward neural network into
three modules. Each module is a stack of layers. Backpropagation
algorithm requires running forward pass (from 1 to 3) and backward pass (from 4 to 6) in sequential order. For example, module
t
A cannot perform step 6 before receiving δA
which is an output of
step 5 in module B.

forward pass to compute prediction and the backward pass
to compute gradient and update the model. After computing
prediction in the forward pass, backpropagation algorithm
requires propagating error gradients from the top (output
layer) all the way back to the bottom (input layer). Therefore, in the backward pass, all layers, or more generally,
modules, of the network are locked until their dependencies
have executed.
The backward locking constrains us from updating models
in parallel and fully leveraging the computing resources.
It has been shown in practice (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; Szegedy et al., 2015; He et al.,
2016; Huang et al., 2016) and in theory (Eldan & Shamir,
2016; Telgarsky, 2016; Bengio et al., 2009) that depth is
one of the most critical factors contributing to the success
of deep learning. From AlexNet with 8 layers (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012) to ResNet-101 with more than one hundred
layers (He et al., 2016), the forward and backward time
grow from (4.31ms and 9.58ms) to (53.38ms and 103.06ms)
when we train the networks on Titan X with the input size of
16×3×224×224 (Johnson, 2017). Therefore, parallelizing
the backward pass can greatly reduce the training time when
the backward time is about twice of the forward time. We

