Characterizing Implicit Bias in Terms of Optimization Geometry

Suriya Gunasekar 1 Jason Lee 2 Daniel Soudry 3 Nathan Srebro 1

Abstract
We study the implicit bias of generic optimization methods—mirror descent, natural gradient
descent, and steepest descent with respect to
different potentials and norms—when optimizing underdetermined linear regression or separable linear classification problems. We explore
the question of whether the specific global minimum (among the many possible global minima)
reached by an algorithm can be characterized in
terms of the potential or norm of the optimization
geometry, and independently of hyperparameter
choices such as step–size and momentum.

1. Introduction
Implicit bias from the optimization algorithm plays a crucial
role in learning deep neural networks as it introduces effective capacity control not directly specified in the objective
(Neyshabur et al., 2015b;a; Zhang et al., 2017; Keskar et al.,
2016; Wilson et al., 2017; Neyshabur et al., 2017). In overparameterized models where the training objective has many
global minima, optimizing using a specific algorithm, such
as gradient descent, implicitly biases the solutions to some
special global minima. The properties of the learned model,
including its generalization performance, are thus crucially
influenced by the choice of optimization algorithm used.
In neural networks especially, characterizing these special
global minima for common algorithms such as stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) is essential for understanding what
the inductive bias of the learned model is and why such large
capacity networks often show remarkably good generalization even in the absence of explicit regularization (Zhang
et al., 2017) or early stopping (Hoffer et al., 2017).
Implicit bias from optimization depends on the choice of
algorithm, and changing the algorithm, or even changing
1
TTI Chicago, USA 2 USC Los Angeles, USA 3 Technion, Israel. Correspondence to: Suriya Gunasekar <suriya@ttic.edu>,
Jason Lee <jasonlee@marshall.usc.edu>, Daniel Soudry
<daniel.soudry@gmail.com>, Nathan Srebro <nati@ttic.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

associated hyperparameter can change the implicit bias. For
example, Wilson et al. (2017) showed that for some standard deep learning architectures, variants of SGD algorithm
with different choices of momentum and adaptive gradient
updates (AdaGrad and Adam) exhibit different biases and
thus have different generalization performance; Keskar et al.
(2016), Hoffer et al. (2017) and Smith (2018) study how the
size of the mini-batches used in SGD influences generalization; and Neyshabur et al. (2015a) compare the bias of
path-SGD (steepest descent with respect to a scale invariant
path-norm) to standard SGD.
It is therefore important to explicitly relate different optimization algorithms to their implicit biases. Can we
precisely characterize which global minima different algorithms converge to? How does this depend on the loss
function? What other choices including initialization, step–
size, momentum, stochasticity, and adaptivity, does the implicit bias depend on? In this paper, we provide answers to
some of these questions for simple linear models for regression and classification. While neural networks are certainly
more complicated than these simple linear models, the results here provide a segue into understanding such biases
for more complex models.
For linear models, we already have an understanding of
the implicit bias of gradient descent. For underdetermined
least squares objective, gradient descent can be shown to
converge to the minimum Euclidean norm solution. Recently, Soudry et al. (2017) studied gradient descent for
linear logistic regression. The logistic loss is fundamentally
different from the squared loss in that the loss function has
no attainable global minima. Gradient descent iterates therefore diverge (the norm goes to infinity), but Soudry et al.
showed that they diverge in the direction of the hard margin
support vector machine solution, and therefore the decision
boundary converges to this max margin solution.
Can we extend such characterization to other optimization
methods that work under different (non-Euclidean) geometries, such as mirror descent with respect to some potential,
natural gradient descent with respect to a Riemannian metric, and steepest descent with respect to a generic norm?
Can we relate the implicit bias to these geometries?
As we shall see, the answer depends on whether the loss
function is similar to a squared loss or to a logistic loss.

