Loss Decomposition for Fast Learning in Large Output Spaces

Ian E.H. Yen 1 Satyen Kale 2 Felix X. Yu 2 Dan Holtmann-Rice 2 Sanjiv Kumar 2 Pradeep Ravikumar 1

Abstract
For problems with large output spaces, evaluation of the loss function and its gradient are expensive, typically taking linear time in the size of
the output space. Recently, methods have been
developed to speed up learning via efficient data
structures for Nearest-Neighbor Search (NNS) or
Maximum Inner-Product Search (MIPS). However, the performance of such data structures
typically degrades in high dimensions. In this
work, we propose a novel technique to reduce the
intractable high dimensional search problem to
several much more tractable lower dimensional
ones via dual decomposition of the loss function. At the same time, we demonstrate guaranteed convergence to the original loss via a greedy
message passing procedure. In our experiments
on multiclass and multilabel classification with
hundreds of thousands of classes, as well as training skip-gram word embeddings with a vocabulary size of half a million, our technique consistently improves the accuracy of search-based gradient approximation methods and outperforms
sampling-based gradient approximation methods
by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Large output spaces are ubiquitous in several machine
learning problems today: for example, extreme multiclass
or multilabel classification problems with many classes,
language modeling with big vocabularies, or metric learning with a large number of pairwise distance constraints.
In all such problems, a key bottleneck in training models
is evaluation of the loss function and its gradient. The loss
functions used for such problems typically require an enumeration of all the possible outputs, and thus, naı̈vely, necessitate a linear running time in the number of outputs for
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 2 Google,
New York, USA. Correspondence to:
Ian E.H. Yen
<eyan@cs.cmu.edu>, Satyen Kale <satyenkale@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

evaluation. This can be a significant bottleneck in iterative
methods such as gradient descent used to train the model,
since each step now requires a huge number of operations.
Many approaches have been proposed to mitigate this
issue. One body of work imposes structure over the
output space, such as low-rank (Yu et al., 2014), treestructure (Prabhu & Varma, 2014), locally low-rank (Bhatia
et al., 2015), or hierarchical factorization (Morin & Bengio, 2005; Mnih & Hinton, 2009). However, structural assumptions can be violated in many situations. For example, while the low-rank structure is typically reasonable in
a recommendation problem, it is usually not true in multiclass classification as for each instance there is exactly
one correct answer (i.e. classes may not be correlated with
each other). Additionally, even for valid structural assumptions, constructing the correct structure from data is hard,
and in practice heuristics or human annotation are required
(Morin & Bengio, 2005; Mnih & Hinton, 2009).
Another approach is sampling approximation (Mikolov
et al., 2013; Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2012; Jean et al.,
2014), which computes an estimate of the gradient based
on the scores of only a small fraction of the negative output
classes and also a small set of classes labeled as positive.
The approximation, however, has large variance when the
loss has a skewed distribution over classes. For example, in
extreme multiclass or multilabel classification, the loss typically only concentrates on a few confusing classes, which
have small probabilities of being sampled. The variance
in gradient estimation often leads to slow progress of the
learning algorithm.
In this paper, we consider problems with large output
spaces, but with each example having only a relatively
small set of correct outputs. The learning objective for
such tasks typically has its gradient concentrated on a relatively small number of classes, and therefore an efficient
way to learn is to search for classes of significant gradient magnitude. For example, (Yen et al., 2016; 2017) proposed a method to search classes efficiently by maintaining a sparse model during training. However, this method
applies only in problems of high input dimension. Another
strategy that has received a lot of attention recently is to utilize data structures to find classes efficiently through Maximum Inner-Product Search (MIPS) or Nearest-Neighbor

