Stagewise Safe Bayesian Optimization with Gaussian Processes

Yanan Sui 1 Vincent Zhuang 1 Joel W. Burdick 1 Yisong Yue 1

Abstract
Enforcing safety is a key aspect of many problems pertaining to sequential decision making under uncertainty, which require the decisions made
at every step to be both informative of the optimal decision and also safe. For example, we
value both efficacy and comfort in medical therapy, and efficiency and safety in robotic control.
We consider this problem of optimizing an unknown utility function with absolute feedback or
preference feedback subject to unknown safety
constraints. We develop an efficient safe Bayesian
optimization algorithm, S TAGE O PT, that separates safe region expansion and utility function
maximization into two distinct stages. Compared
to existing approaches which interleave between
expansion and optimization, we show that S TA GE O PT is more efficient and naturally applicable
to a broader class of problems. We provide theoretical guarantees for both the satisfaction of
safety constraints as well as convergence to the
optimal utility value. We evaluate S TAGE O PT
on both a variety of synthetic experiments, as
well as in clinical practice. We demonstrate that
S TAGE O PT is more effective than existing safe
optimization approaches, and is able to safely and
effectively optimize spinal cord stimulation therapy in our clinical experiments.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization is a well-established approach for
sequentially optimizing unknown utility functions. By leveraging regularity assumptions such as smoothness and continuity, such techniques offer efficient solutions for a wide
range of high-dimensional problem settings such as experimental design and personalization in recommender systems.
1
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA.
Correspondence to: Yanan Sui <ysui@caltech.edu>, Vincent Zhuang <vzhuang@caltech.edu>, Joel W. Burdick
<jwb@robotics.caltech.edu>, Yisong Yue <yyue@caltech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Many of these applications are also subject to a variety of
safety constraints, so that actions cannot be freely chosen
from the entire input space. For instance, in safe Bayesian
optimization, any chosen action during optimization must
be known to be “safe”, regardless of the reward from the
utility function. Typically, one is initially given a small
region of the decision/action space that is known to be safe,
and must iteratively expand the safe action region during
optimization (Sui et al., 2015).
A motivating application of our work is a clinical setting,
where physicians need to sequentially choose among a large
set of therapies (Sui et al., 2017a). The effectiveness and
safety of different therapies are initially unknown, and can
only be determined through sequential tests starting from
some initial set of well-studied therapies. A natural way
to explore is to start from some therapies similar to these
initial ones, since their efficacy and safety would not differ
too greatly. By iteratively repeating this process, one can
gradually explore the utility and safety landscapes in a safe
fashion.
Our contributions. We propose a novel safe Bayesian optimization algorithm, S TAGE O PT, to address the challenge
of efficiently identifying the total safe region and optimizing the utility function within the safe region. In contrast
to previous safe Bayesian optimization work (Sui et al.,
2015; Berkenkamp et al., 2016a) which interleaves safe region expansion and optimization, S TAGE O PT is a stagewise
algorithm which first expands the safe region and then optimizes the utility function. S TAGE O PT is well suited for
settings in which the safety and utility functions are very
different (e.g., temperature vs gripping force), i.e. lie on
different scales or amplitudes. Furthermore, in settings in
which the utility and safety functions are measured in different ways, it is natural to have a separate first stage dedicated
to safe region expansion. For example, in clinical trials we
may wish to spend the first stage only querying the patient
about the comfort of the stimulus, as opposed to having to
measure the utility and comfort simultaneously.
Conceptually, S TAGE O PT models the safety function(s)
and utility function as sampled functions from different
Gaussian processes (GPs), and uses confidence bounds to
assess the safety of unexplored decisions. We provide theoretical results for S TAGE O PT under the assumptions that

