Kronecker Recurrent Units
Cijo Jose 1 2 Moustapha Cissé 3 François Fleuret 1 2

Abstract
Our work addresses two important issues with
recurrent neural networks: (1) they are overparametrized, and (2) the recurrent weight matrix
is ill-conditioned. The former increases the sample complexity of learning and the training time.
The latter causes the vanishing and exploding gradient problem. We present a flexible recurrent
neural network model called Kronecker Recurrent
Units (KRU). KRU achieves parameter efficiency
in RNNs through a Kronecker factored recurrent
matrix. It overcomes the ill-conditioning of the
recurrent matrix by enforcing soft unitary constraints on the factors. Thanks to the small dimensionality of the factors, maintaining these constraints is computationally efficient. Our experimental results on seven standard data-sets reveal
that KRU can reduce the number of parameters by
three orders of magnitude in the recurrent weight
matrix compared to the existing recurrent models,
without trading the statistical performance. These
results in particular show that while there are advantages in having a high dimensional recurrent
space, the capacity of the recurrent part of the
model can be dramatically reduced.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have defined the state-of-the-art in a
wide range of problems in computer vision, speech analysis,
and natural language processing (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Hinton et al., 2012; Mikolov, 2012). However, these models
suffer from two key issues. (1) They are over-parametrized;
thus it takes a very long time for training and inference.
(2) Learning deep models is difficult because of the poor
conditioning of the matrices that parameterize the model.
1

Idiap Research Institute 2 École Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne (EPFL) 3 Facebook AI Research.
Correspondence to: Cijo Jose <cijo.jose@idiap.ch>, Moustapha
Cissé <moustaphacisse@fb.com>, François Fleuret <francois.fleuret@idiap.ch>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

These difficulties are especially relevant to recurrent neural networks. Indeed, the number of distinct parameters in
RNNs grows as the square of the size of the hidden state
conversely to convolutional networks which enjoy weight
sharing. Moreover, poor conditioning of the recurrent matrices results in the gradients to explode or vanish exponentially fast along the time horizon. This problem prevents
RNN from capturing long-term dependencies (Hochreiter,
1991; Bengio et al., 1994).
There exists an extensive body of literature addressing overparametrization in neural networks. (LeCun et al., 1990)
first studied the problem and proposed to remove unimportant weights in neural networks by exploiting the second
order information. Several techniques which followed include low-rank decomposition (Denil et al., 2013), training a small network on the soft-targets predicted by a big
pre-trained network (Ba & Caruana, 2014), low bit precision training (Courbariaux et al., 2014), hashing (Chen
et al., 2015), etc. A notable exception is the deep fried convnets (Yang et al., 2015) which explicitly parameterizes the
fully connected layers in a convnet with a computationally
cheap and parameter-efficient structured linear operator, the
Fastfood transform (Le et al., 2013). These techniques are
primarily aimed at feed-forward fully connected networks
and very few studies have focused on the particular case of
recurrent networks (Arjovsky et al., 2016).
The problem of vanishing and exploding gradients has
also received significant attention. (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) proposed an effective gating mechanism in
their seminal work on LSTMs. Later, this technique was
adopted by other models such as the Gated Recurrent Units
(GRU) (Chung et al., 2015) and the Highway networks (Srivastava et al., 2015) for recurrent and feed-forward neural
networks respectively. Other popular strategies include gradient clipping (Pascanu et al., 2013), and orthogonal initialization of the recurrent weights (Saxe et al., 2013; Le et al.,
2015). More recently (Arjovsky et al., 2016) proposed to use
a unitary recurrent weight matrix. The use of norm preserving unitary maps prevent the gradients from exploding or
vanishing, and thus help to capture long-term dependencies.
The resulting model called unitary RNN (uRNN) is computationally efficient since it only explores a small subset of
general unitary matrices. Unfortunately, since uRNNs can
only span a reduced subset of unitary matrices their expres-

