Inference Suboptimality in Variational Autoencoders
Chris Cremer 1 Xuechen Li 1 David Duvenaud 1

Abstract
Amortized inference allows latent-variable models trained via variational learning to scale to large
datasets. The quality of approximate inference is
determined by two factors: a) the capacity of the
variational distribution to match the true posterior and b) the ability of the recognition network
to produce good variational parameters for each
datapoint. We examine approximate inference in
variational autoencoders in terms of these factors.
We find that divergence from the true posterior
is often due to imperfect recognition networks,
rather than the limited complexity of the approximating distribution. We show that this is due
partly to the generator learning to accommodate
the choice of approximation. Furthermore, we
show that the parameters used to increase the expressiveness of the approximation play a role in
generalizing inference rather than simply improving the complexity of the approximation.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we analyze inference suboptimality: the mismatch between the true and approximate posterior. More
specifically, we are interested in understanding what factors
cause the gap between the marginal log-likelihood and the
evidence lower bound (ELBO) in variational autoencoders
(VAEs, Kingma & Welling (2014); Rezende et al. (2014)).
We refer to this as the inference gap. Moreover, we break
down the inference gap into two components: the approximation gap and the amortization gap. The approximation
gap comes from the inability of the variational distribution
family to exactly match the true posterior. The amortization gap refers to the difference caused by amortizing the
variational parameters over the entire training set, instead of
optimizing for each training example individually. We refer
the reader to Table 1 for the definitions of the gaps and to
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Chris Cremer <ccremer@cs.toronto.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Fig. 1 for a simple illustration of the gaps. In Fig. 1, L[q]
refers to the ELBO evaluated using an amortized distribution q, as is typical of VAE training. In contrast, L[q ⇤ ] is the
ELBO evaluated using the optimal approximation within its
variational family.
There has been significant work on improving variational
inference in VAEs through the development of expressive approximate posteriors (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Kingma
et al., 2016; Ranganath et al., 2016; Tomczak & Welling,
2016; 2017). These works have shown that with more expressive approximate posteriors, the model learns a better
distribution over the data. Our study aims to gain a better understanding of the relationship between expressive
approximations and improved generative models.
Our experiments investigate how the choice of encoder,
posterior approximation, decoder, and optimization affect
the approximation and amortization gaps. We train VAE
models in a number of settings on the MNIST (LeCun et al.,
1998), Fashion-MNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), and CIFAR-10
(Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009) datasets.
Our contributions are: a) we investigate inference suboptimality in terms of the approximation and amortization gaps,
providing insight to guide future improvements in VAE inference, b) we quantitatively demonstrate that the learned
generative model accommodates the choice of approximation, and c) we demonstrate that parameterized functions
that improve the expressiveness of the approximation play a
significant role in reducing amortization error.

log $(&)
,$$/.&1-301.4
63$
ℒ[* ∗ ]
,-./012301.4
63$
ℒ[*]
Figure 1. Gaps in Inference

