Bayesian Model Selection for Change Point Detection and Clustering

Othmane Mazhar 1 Cristian R. Rojas 1 Carlo Fischione 1 Mohammad Reza Hesamzadeh 1

Abstract
We address a generalization of change point detection with the purpose of detecting the change
locations and the levels of clusters of a piecewise constant signal. Our approach is to model it
as a nonparametric penalized least square model
selection on a family of models indexed over the
collection of partitions of the design points and
propose a computationally efficient algorithm to
approximately solve it. Statistically, minimizing such a penalized criterion yields an approximation to the maximum a-posteriori probability (MAP) estimator. The criterion is then analyzed and an oracle inequality is derived using
a Gaussian concentration inequality. The oracle
inequality is used to derive on one hand conditions for consistency and on the other hand an
adaptive upper bound on the expected square risk
of the estimator, which statistically motivates our
approximation. Finally, we apply our algorithm
to simulated data to experimentally validate the
statistical guarantees and illustrate its behavior.

1. Introduction
A classical estimation problem in many scientific inquiries
is the well-studied change point detection problem where
one tries to estimate when some properties of a sequence of
random variables changes. This local property is of prime
importance in many learning tasks such as signal segmentation (Abou-Elailah et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2009), change
point detection in comparative genomics for early cancer
diagnosis (Lai et al., 2005), and modeling and forecasting
of changes in financial data (Lavielle & TeyssiÃĺre, 2006;
Spokoiny, 2009).
For other applications, one needs more than this local answer and is interested in a more general overview of the
time series where for instance earlier data samples behave
like new ones creating a clustering effect. Examples of
this are found in: electricity market data, where prices
1

KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.
Correspondence to: Othmane Mazhar <othmane@kth.se>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

might have different behavior corresponding to different
price regimes that might reappear depending on some triggering events; signal partitioning with some parts of the
signal sharing similar properties; and speech segmentation
with different alternating sources. Generally speaking, it
is of interest in these situations to determine not only the
changes but also the clusters for a more precise description
of the inhomogeneous time series.
Parametric models for solving the change point detection problem have been proposed in Cleynen & Lebarbier
(2014) and Rigaill et al. (2012). However, in dealing with
the change point and clustering problem we would naturally require that our solution does not assume any knowledge of the number of changes nor the actual number of
clusters, as these numbers would evolve over time, so we
expect new changes in the process to happen and new clusters to form as N , the number of samples, grows. Thus,
any practical procedure should be able to estimate these
numbers and also have adaptive guarantees with respect to
how fast these numbers grow. Similar setups for change
point detection have been the subject of study by Harchaoui & Cappé (2007), Arlot et al. (2016) and Garreau
& Arlot (2017) who use characteristic kernels for detecting changes in the distribution, while from a computational
standpoint a more effective implementation has been proposed by Celisse et al. (2017). In this study, we will restrict ourselves to an iid (independent and identically distributed) Gaussian sequence model of the data with known
variance, noting that the same study can be done using kernels and that the algorithm we develop can be effectively
implemented using the same procedure as in (Celisse et al.,
2017), as explained later in the paper.
Two other related lines of research, but which we do not
explore here, are on-line algorithms for segmentation and
L1 -regularized segmentation. We refer the reader to (Tartakovsky et al., 2014) for an extensive review of on-line algorithms. Data segmentation using the L1 -penalty was introduced by Rudin et al. (1992). The one-dimensional case,
corresponding to the Fussed LASSO, has been studied in
(Tibshirani et al., 2005) and (Rennie & Dobson, 1969)
and an efficient algorithm has been proposed by Arnold
& Tibshirani (2016). More recent results can be found in
(Dalalyan et al., 2017) for the one-dimensional case and
(Hütter & Rigollet, 2016) for two-dimensional case.
Main contribution: The generalized setting of change
point detection while clustering the segments for sequences

