A Fast and Scalable Joint Estimator for Integrating Additional Knowledge in
Learning Multiple Related Sparse Gaussian Graphical Models

Beilun Wang 1 Arshdeep Sekhon 1 Yanjun Qi 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of including additional
knowledge in estimating sparse Gaussian graphical models (sGGMs) from aggregated samples,
arising often in bioinformatics and neuroimaging applications. Previous joint sGGM estimators
either fail to use existing knowledge or cannot
scale-up to many tasks (large K) under a highdimensional (large p) situation. In this paper, we
propose a novel Joint Elementary Estimator incorporating additional Knowledge (JEEK) to infer
multiple related sparse Gaussian Graphical models from large-scale heterogeneous data. Using
domain knowledge as weights, we design a novel
hybrid norm as the minimization objective to enforce the superposition of two weighted sparsity
constraints, one on the shared interactions and
the other on the task-specific structural patterns.
This enables JEEK to elegantly consider various
forms of existing knowledge based on the domain
at hand and avoid the need to design knowledgespecific optimization. JEEK is solved through
a fast and entry-wise parallelizable solution that
largely improves the computational efficiency of
the state-of-the-art O(p5 K 4 ) to O(p2 K 4 ). We
conduct a rigorous statistical analysis showing
that JEEK achieves the same convergence rate
O(log(Kp)/ntot ) as the state-of-the-art estimators that are much harder to compute. Empirically,
on multiple synthetic datasets and two real-world
data, JEEK outperforms the speed of the state-ofarts significantly while achieving the same level
of prediction accuracy.

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia,
http://www.jointnets.org/ . Correspondence to: Beilun Wang
<bw4mw@virginia.edu>, Yanjun Qi <yanjun@virginia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1

Introduction

Technology revolutions in the past decade have collected
large-scale heterogeneous samples from many scientific domains. For instance, genomic technologies have delivered
petabytes of molecular measurements across more than hundreds of types of cells and tissues from national projects like
ENCODE (Consortium et al., 2012) and TCGA (Network
et al., 2011). Neuroimaging technologies have generated
petabytes of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
datasets across thousands of human subjects (shared publicly through projects like openfMRI (Poldrack et al., 2013).
Given such data, understanding and quantifying variable
graphs from heterogeneous samples about multiple contexts
is a fundamental analysis task.
Such variable graphs can significantly simplify networkdriven studies about diseases (Ideker & Krogan, 2012), can
help understand the neural characteristics underlying clinical disorders (Uddin et al., 2013) and can allow for understanding genetic or neural pathways and systems. The
number of contexts (denoted as K) that those applications
need to consider grows extremely fast, ranging from tens
(e.g., cancer types in TCGA (Network et al., 2011)) to thousands (e.g., number of subjects in openfMRI (Poldrack et al.,
2013)). The number of variables (denoted as p) ranges from
hundreds (e.g., number of brain regions) to tens of thousands
(e.g., number of human genes).
The above data analysis problem can be formulated
as jointly estimating K conditional dependency graphs
G(1) , G(2) , . . . , G(K) on a single set of p variables based
on heterogeneous samples accumulated from K distinct
contexts. For homogeneous data samples from a given i-th
context, one typical approach is the sparse Gaussian Graphical Model (sGGM) (Lauritzen, 1996; Yuan & Lin, 2007).
sGGM assumes samples are independently and identically
drawn from Np (µ(i) , Σ(i) ), a multivariate Gaussian distribution with mean vector µ(i) and covariance matrix Σ(i) .
The graph structure G(i) is encoded by the sparsity pattern
of the inverse covariance matrix, also named precision ma(i)
trix, Ω(i) . Ω(i) := (Σ(i) )−1 . Ωjk = 0 if and only if in
G(i) an edge does not connect j-th node and k-th node (i.e.,
conditional independent). sGGM imposes an `1 penalty
on the parameter Ω(i) to achieve a consistent estimation

