Error Compensated Quantized SGD and its Applications to Large-scale
Distributed Optimization

Jiaxiang Wu 1 Weidong Huang 1 Junzhou Huang 1 Tong Zhang 1

Abstract
Large-scale distributed optimization is of great
importance in various applications. For dataparallel based distributed learning, the inter-node
gradient communication often becomes the performance bottleneck. In this paper, we propose
the error compensated quantized stochastic gradient descent algorithm to improve the training
efficiency. Local gradients are quantized to reduce the communication overhead, and accumulated quantization error is utilized to speed up the
convergence. Furthermore, we present theoretical analysis on the convergence behaviour, and
demonstrate its advantage over competitors. Extensive experiments indicate that our algorithm
can compress gradients by a factor of up to two
magnitudes without performance degradation.

1. Introduction
Due to the explosive growth of data in recent years, largescale machine learning has attracted increasing attention
in various domains, such as computer vision and speech
recognition. Distributed optimization is one of the core
building blocks in these applications, where the training
data is often too massive to be efficiently handled by a single computation node.
A commonly used distributed learning framework is data
parallelism, in which the whole data set is split and stored
on multiple nodes within a cluster. Each node computes
its local gradients and communicates gradients with other
nodes to update model parameters. For such learning systems, the time consumption can be roughly categorized as
either computation or communication. The communication
often becomes the performance bottleneck, especially for
large clusters and/or models with tons of parameters.
1
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Jiaxiang Wu <jonathanwu@tencent.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

There have been several works attempting to improve the
efficiency of distributed learning by reducing the communication cost. Some methods focused on quantizing
gradients into the fixed-point numbers (Zhou et al., 2016;
Alistarh et al., 2017), so that much fewer bits are needed
to be transimitted. More aggressive quantization, such as
the binary or ternary representation, has also been investigated in (Seide et al., 2014; Strom, 2015; Wen et al., 2017).
Other methods imposed sparsity onto gradients during communication, where only a small fraction of gradients get
exchanged across nodes in each iteration (Wangni et al.,
2017; Lin et al., 2018).
The underlying ideas of these methods are basically to compress gradients into some special form, in which each entry
can be represented by much fewer bits than the original
32-bit floating-point number. Such compression introduces
extra stochastic noises, i.e. quantization error, into the optimization process, and will slow down the convergence or
even leads to divergence. 1Bit-SGD (Seide et al., 2014)
adopted the error feedback scheme, which was to compensate the current local gradients with quantization error from
the last iteration, before feeding it into the quantization
function. Although authors stated that this improved the
convergence behaviour, no theoretical analysis was given
to evidence its effectiveness.
In this paper, we propose the error compensated quantized
stochastic gradient descent method, namely ECQ-SGD.
Our algorithm also utilizes the error feedback scheme, but
here we accumulate all the previous quantization errors,
rather than only from the last iteration as in 1Bit-SGD. Although empirical evaluation shows that this modification
leads to faster and more stable convergence than many baseline methods, it is non-trivial to establish the theoretical
guarantee for this phenomenon.
In (Alistarh et al., 2017), authors proved that for their proposed QSGD algorithm, the number of iterations required
to reach a certain sub-optimality gap is proportional to the
variance bound of stochastic quantized gradients. However,
this cannot explain our method’s convergence behaviour,
since our quantized gradients are biased estimations, unlike
in QSGD. Actually, the variance bound of quantized gradients is even larger than that in QSGD, due to the accumu-

