Soft Actor-Critic:
Off-Policy Maximum Entropy Deep Reinforcement
Learning with a Stochastic Actor

Tuomas Haarnoja 1 Aurick Zhou 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
Model-free deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have been demonstrated on a range of
challenging decision making and control tasks.
However, these methods typically suffer from two
major challenges: very high sample complexity
and brittle convergence properties, which necessitate meticulous hyperparameter tuning. Both of
these challenges severely limit the applicability
of such methods to complex, real-world domains.
In this paper, we propose soft actor-critic, an offpolicy actor-critic deep RL algorithm based on the
maximum entropy reinforcement learning framework. In this framework, the actor aims to maximize expected reward while also maximizing entropy. That is, to succeed at the task while acting
as randomly as possible. Prior deep RL methods
based on this framework have been formulated
as Q-learning methods. By combining off-policy
updates with a stable stochastic actor-critic formulation, our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on a range of continuous control benchmark tasks, outperforming prior on-policy and
off-policy methods. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that, in contrast to other off-policy algorithms, our
approach is very stable, achieving very similar
performance across different random seeds.

1. Introduction
Model-free deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
have been applied in a range of challenging domains, from
games (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2016) to robotic
control (Schulman et al., 2015). The combination of RL
and high-capacity function approximators such as neural
1

Berkeley Artificial Intelligence Research, University of California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: Tuomas Haarnoja
<haarnoja@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

networks holds the promise of automating a wide range of
decision making and control tasks, but widespread adoption
of these methods in real-world domains has been hampered
by two major challenges. First, model-free deep RL methods are notoriously expensive in terms of their sample complexity. Even relatively simple tasks can require millions of
steps of data collection, and complex behaviors with highdimensional observations might need substantially more.
Second, these methods are often brittle with respect to their
hyperparameters: learning rates, exploration constants, and
other settings must be set carefully for different problem
settings to achieve good results. Both of these challenges
severely limit the applicability of model-free deep RL to
real-world tasks.
One cause for the poor sample efficiency of deep RL methods is on-policy learning: some of the most commonly used
deep RL algorithms, such as TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015),
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017b) or A3C (Mnih et al., 2016),
require new samples to be collected for each gradient step.
This quickly becomes extravagantly expensive, as the number of gradient steps and samples per step needed to learn
an effective policy increases with task complexity. Offpolicy algorithms aim to reuse past experience. This is not
directly feasible with conventional policy gradient formulations, but is relatively straightforward for Q-learning based
methods (Mnih et al., 2015). Unfortunately, the combination of off-policy learning and high-dimensional, nonlinear
function approximation with neural networks presents a major challenge for stability and convergence (Bhatnagar et al.,
2009). This challenge is further exacerbated in continuous
state and action spaces, where a separate actor network is
often used to perform the maximization in Q-learning. A
commonly used algorithm in such settings, deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al., 2015), provides
for sample-efficient learning but is notoriously challenging
to use due to its extreme brittleness and hyperparameter
sensitivity (Duan et al., 2016; Henderson et al., 2017).
We explore how to design an efficient and stable modelfree deep RL algorithm for continuous state and action
spaces. To that end, we draw on the maximum entropy
framework, which augments the standard maximum reward

