Hierarchical Imitation and Reinforcement Learning

Hoang M. Le 1 Nan Jiang 2 Alekh Agarwal 2 Miroslav Dudı́k 2 Yisong Yue 1 Hal Daumé III 3 2

Abstract
We study how to effectively leverage expert feedback to learn sequential decision-making policies. We focus on problems with sparse rewards
and long time horizons, which typically pose
significant challenges in reinforcement learning.
We propose an algorithmic framework, called hierarchical guidance, that leverages the hierarchical structure of the underlying problem to integrate different modes of expert interaction. Our
framework can incorporate different combinations of imitation learning (IL) and reinforcement
learning (RL) at different levels, leading to dramatic reductions in both expert effort and cost of
exploration. Using long-horizon benchmarks, including Montezuma’s Revenge, we demonstrate
that our approach can learn significantly faster
than hierarchical RL, and be significantly more
label-efficient than standard IL. We also theoretically analyze labeling cost for certain instantiations of our framework.

1. Introduction
Learning good agent behavior from reward signals alone—
the goal of reinforcement learning (RL)—is particularly
difficult when the planning horizon is long and rewards are
sparse. One successful method for dealing with such long
horizons is imitation learning (IL) (Abbeel & Ng, 2004;
Daumé et al., 2009; Ross et al., 2011; Ho & Ermon, 2016),
in which the agent learns by watching and possibly querying an expert. One limitation of existing imitation learning approaches is that they may require a large amount of
demonstration data in long-horizon problems.
The central question we address in this paper is: when experts are available, how can we most effectively leverage
their feedback? A common strategy to improve sample ef1

2

California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA Microsoft
Research, New York, NY 3 University of Maryland, College Park,
MD. Correspondence to: Hoang M. Le <hmle@caltech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

ficiency in RL over long time horizons is to exploit hierarchical structure of the problem (Sutton et al., 1998; 1999;
Kulkarni et al., 2016; Dayan & Hinton, 1993; Vezhnevets
et al., 2017; Dietterich, 2000). Our approach leverages hierarchical structure in imitation learning. We study the case
where the underlying problem is hierarchical, and subtasks
can be easily elicited from an expert. Our key design principle is an algorithmic framework called hierarchical guidance, in which feedback (labels) from the high-level expert is used to focus (guide) the low-level learner. The
high-level expert ensures that low-level learning only occurs when necessary (when subtasks have not been mastered) and only over relevant parts of the state space. This
differs from a naı̈ve hierarchical approach which merely
gives a subtask decomposition. Focusing on relevant parts
of the state space speeds up learning (improves sample efficiency), while omitting feedback on the already mastered
subtasks reduces expert effort (improves label efficiency).
We begin by formalizing the problem of hierarchical imitation learning (Section 3) and carefully separate out cost
structures that naturally arise when the expert provides
feedback at multiple levels of abstraction. We first apply hierarchical guidance to IL, derive hierarchically guided variants of behavior cloning and DAgger (Ross et al., 2011),
and theoretically analyze the benefits (Section 4). We next
apply hierarchical guidance to the hybrid setting with highlevel IL and low-level RL (Section 5). This architecture
is particularly suitable in settings where we have access to
high-level semantic knowledge, the subtask horizon is sufficiently short, but the low-level expert is too costly or unavailable. We demonstrate the efficacy of our approaches
on a simple but extremely challenging maze domain, and
on Montezuma’s Revenge (Section 6). Our experiments
show that incorporating a modest amount of expert feedback can lead to dramatic improvements in performance
compared to pure hierarchical RL.1

2. Related Work
For brevity, we provide here a short overview of related
work, and defer to Appendix C for additional discussion.
1
Code and experimental setups are available at https://
sites.google.com/view/hierarchical-il-rl

