Characterizing and Learning Equivalence Classes of Causal DAGs
under Interventions
Karren D. Yang 1 Abigail Katcoff 1 Caroline Uhler 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning causal DAGs
in the setting where both observational and interventional data is available. This setting is common in biology, where gene regulatory networks
can be intervened on using chemical reagents or
gene deletions. Hauser & Bühlmann (2012) previously characterized the identifiability of causal
DAGs under perfect interventions, which eliminate dependencies between targeted variables
and their direct causes. In this paper, we extend
these identifiability results to general interventions, which may modify the dependencies between targeted variables and their causes without
eliminating them. We define and characterize the
interventional Markov equivalence class that can
be identified from general (not necessarily perfect) intervention experiments. We also propose
the first provably consistent algorithm for learning
DAGs in this setting and evaluate our algorithm
on simulated and biological datasets.

1. Introduction
The problem of learning a causal directed acyclic graph
(DAG) from observational data over its nodes is important
across disciplines such as computational biology, sociology,
and economics (Friedman et al., 2000; Pearl, 2003; Robins
et al., 2000; Spirtes et al., 2000). A causal DAG imposes
conditional independence (CI) relations on its node variables
that can be used to infer its structure. Since multiple DAGs
can encode the same CI relations, a causal DAG is generally
only identifiable up to its Markov equivalence class (MEC)
(Verma & Pearl, 1991; Andersson et al., 1997).
The identifiability of causal DAGs can be improved by performing interventions on the variables. Interventions that
eliminate the dependency between targeted variables and
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA. Correspondence to: Caroline Uhler <cuhler@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

their causes are known as perfect (or hard) interventions
(Eberhardt et al., 2005). Under perfect interventions, the
identifiability of causal DAGs improves to a smaller equivalence class called the perfect-I-MEC1 (Hauser & Bühlmann,
2012). Recently, Wang et al. (2017) proposed the first provably consistent algorithm for recovering the perfect-I-MEC
and successfully applied it towards learning regulatory networks from interventional data.
However, only considering perfect interventions is restrictive: in practice, many interventions are non-perfect (or
soft) and modify the causal relations between targeted variables and their direct causes without eliminating them (Eberhardt et al., 2005). In genomics, for example, interventions
such as RNA interference or CRISPR-mediated gene activation often have only modest effects on gene suppression
and activation respectively (Dominguez et al., 2016). Even
interventions meant to be perfect, such as CRISPR/Cas9mediated gene deletions, may not be uniformly successful
across a cell population (Dixit et al., 2016). Although nonperfect interventions may be considered inefficient from
an engineering perspective, they may still provide valuable
information about regulatory networks. The identifiability
of causal DAGs in this setting needs to be formally analyzed
to develop maximally effective algorithms for learning from
these types of interventions.
In this paper, we define and characterize I-Markov equivalence classes (I-MECs) of causal DAGs that can be identified from general interventions that are not assumed to be
perfect, thus extending the results of Hauser & Bühlmann
(2012) (Section 3). We show that under reasonable assumptions on the experiments, general interventions provide the
same causal information as perfect interventions. These
insights allow us to develop the first provably consistent
algorithm for learning the I-MEC from data from general
interventions (Section 4), which we evaluate on synthetic
and biological datasets (Section 5).
1
In Hauser & Bühlmann (2012), they call this the interventional
MEC (I-MEC). We call it the perfect-I-MEC to avoid confusion
with the equivalence class for DAGs under general interventions
that we characterize in this paper, which we call the I-MEC.

