Graphical Nonconvex Optimization via an Adaptive Convex Relaxation

Qiang Sun 1 Kean Ming Tan 2 Han Liu 3 Tong Zhang 3

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning highdimensional Gaussian graphical models. The
graphical lasso is one of the most popular methods
for estimating Gaussian graphical models. However, it does not achieve the oracle rate of convergence. In this paper, we propose the graphical
nonconvex optimization for optimal estimation
in Gaussian graphical models, which is then approximated by a sequence of adaptive convex programs. Our proposal is computationally tractable
and produces an estimator that achieves the oracle
rate of convergence. The statistical error introduced by the sequential approximation is clearly
demonstrated via a contraction property. The proposed methodology is then extended to modeling
semiparametric graphical models. We show via
numerical studies that the proposed estimator outperforms other popular methods for estimating
Gaussian graphical models.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of learning an undirected graph
G = (V, E), where V = {1, . . . , d} is a set of nodes that
represents d random variables, and E is an edge set that
describes the pairwise conditional dependence relationships
among the d random variables. Gaussian graphical models
have been widely used to represent pairwise conditional
dependencies among a set of random variables. Let X be
a d-dimensional random variables. Under the Gaussian assumption X ∼ N (0, Σ∗ ), the graph G is encoded by the
sparse concentration matrix Θ∗ = (Σ∗ )−1 , or the sparse
inverse correlation matrix Ψ∗ = (C∗ )−1 . Here, C∗ is the
correlation matrix such that Σ∗ = WC∗ W and W2 is a
1

Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 2 School of Statistics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA 3 Tencent AI Lab, Tencent
Technology, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Qiang Sun
<qsun@utstat.toronto.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

diagonal matrix with diagonal elements of Σ∗ . It is well
known that the jth and kth variables are conditionally independent given all of the other variables if and only if the
(j, k)-th element of Θ∗ (or Ψ∗ ) is equal to zero. Thus, inferring the conditional dependencies structure of a Gaussian
graphical model boils down to estimating a sparse inverse
covariance (or correlation) matrix.
A number of methods have been proposed to estimate the
sparse concentration matrix under the Gaussian assumption.
For example, Meinshausen & Bühlmann (2006) proposed a
neighborhood selection approach for estimating Gaussian
graphical models by solving a collection of sparse linear regression problems using the lasso penalty. In addition, Yuan
(2010) and Cai et al. (2011) proposed the graphical Dantzig
and CLIME, both of which can be solved efficiently. From
a different perspective, Yuan & Lin (2007) and Friedman
et al. (2008) proposed the graphical lasso, a penalized likelihood based approach, to estimate the concentration matrix
Θ∗ directly. Various extensions of the graphical lasso were
proposed and the theoretical properties were also studied
(among others, Banerjee et al., 2008; Rothman et al., 2008;
Ravikumar et al., 2011). The Gaussian graphical models
literature is vast and we refer the reader to Cai et al. (2016a)
and Drton & Maathuis (2016) for a comprehensive review.
Despite the popularity of the graphical lasso on modeling
sparse Gaussian graphical models, it does not achieve the
oracle rate of convergence. More specifically, it is believed
that the optimal rate of convergence
p in spectral norm for the
graphical lasso is at the order of s log d/n (Rothman et al.,
2008). Here, n is the sample size, d is the number of nodes,
and s is the number of edges in the true graph. In fact, the
graphical lasso and all of the aforementioned methods are
based on the lasso penalty and it is generally believed that
convex penalties usually introduce non-negligible estimation bias. For example, in the linear regression setting, Fan
& Li (2001); Zhang (2010a;b); Fan et al. (2018) have shown
that the nonconvex penalized regression is able to eliminate
the estimation bias and attain a more refined statistical rate
of convergence.
Based on these insights, we propose the following penalized
maximum likelihood estimation with a general nonconvex

