PixelSNAIL: An Improved Autoregressive Generative Model

Xi Chen 1 2 Nikhil Mishra 1 2 Mostafa Rohaninejad 1 2 Pieter Abbeel 1 2

Abstract
Autoregressive generative models achieve the best
results in density estimation tasks involving high
dimensional data, such as images or audio. They
pose density estimation as a sequence modeling
task, where a recurrent neural network (RNN)
models the conditional distribution over the next
element conditioned on all previous elements.
In this paradigm, the bottleneck is the extent to
which the RNN can model long-range dependencies, and the most successful approaches rely on
causal convolutions. Taking inspiration from recent work in meta reinforcement learning, where
dealing with long-range dependencies is also essential, we introduce a new generative model
architecture that combines causal convolutions
with self attention. In this paper, we describe
the resulting model and present state-of-the-art
log-likelihood results on heavily benchmarked
datasets: CIFAR-10 (2.85 bits per dim), 32 × 32
ImageNet (3.80 bits per dim) and 64 × 64 ImageNet (3.52 bits per dim). Our implementation
will be made available at anonymized.

1. Introduction
Autoregressive generative models over high-dimensional
data x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) factor the joint distribution as a
product of conditionals:
p(x) = p(x1 , . . . , xn ) =

n
Y

p(xi |x1 , . . . , xi−1 )

i=1

A recurrent neural network (RNN) is then trained to model
p(xi |x1:i−1 ). Optionally, the model can be conditioned
on additional global information h (such as a class label, when applied to images), in which case it in models
p(xi |x1:i−1 , h). Such methods are highly expressive and
1
covariant.ai 2 UC Berkeley, EECS Dept.. Correspondence to:
Xi Chen <peter@covariant.ai>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

allow modeling complex dependencies. Compared to GANs
(Goodfellow et al., 2014), neural autoregressive models offer tractable likelihood computation and ease of training,
and have been shown to outperform latent variable models
(van den Oord et al., 2016c;b; Salimans et al., 2017).
The main design consideration is the neural network architecture used to implement the RNN, as it must be able to
easily refer to earlier parts of the sequence. A number of
possibilities exist:
• Traditional RNNs, such as GRUs or LSTMs: these
propagate information by keeping it in their hidden
state from one timestep to the next. This temporallylinear dependency significantly inhibits the extent to
which they can model long-range relationships in the
data.
• Causal convolutions (van den Oord et al., 2016b; Salimans et al., 2017): these apply convolutions over the
sequence (masked or shifted so that the current prediction is only influenced by previous element). They
offer high-bandwidth access to the earlier parts of the
sequence. However, their receptive field has a finite
size, and still experience noticeable attenuation with
regards to elements far away in the sequence.
• Self-attention (Vaswani et al., 2017): these models
turn the sequence into an unordered key-value store
that can be queried based on content. They feature
an unbounded receptive field and allow undeteriorated
access to information far away in the sequence. However, they only offer pinpoint access to small amounts
of information, and require additional mechanism to
incorporate positional information.
Causal convolutions and self-attention demonstrate complementary strengths and weaknesses: the former allow high
bandwidth access over a finite context size, and the latter
allow access over an infinitely large context. Interleaving
the two thus offers the best of both worlds, where the model
can have high-bandwidth access without constraints on the
amount of information it can effectively use. The convolutions can be seen as aggregating information to build the
context over which to perform an attentive lookup. Using this approach (dubbed SNAIL), Mishra et al. (2017)
demonstrated significant performance improvements on a

