Improved Training of Generative Adversarial Networks
using Representative Features

Duhyeon Bang 1 Hyunjung Shim 1

Abstract
Despite the success of generative adversarial networks (GANs) for image generation, the trade-off
between visual quality and image diversity remains a significant issue. This paper achieves
both aims simultaneously by improving the stability of training GANs. The key idea of the proposed approach is to implicitly regularize the discriminator using representative features. Focusing
on the fact that standard GAN minimizes reverse
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, we transfer the
representative feature, which is extracted from the
data distribution using a pre-trained autoencoder
(AE), to the discriminator of standard GANs. Because the AE learns to minimize forward KL divergence, our GAN training with representative
features is influenced by both reverse and forward
KL divergence. Consequently, the proposed approach is verified to improve visual quality and
diversity of state of the art GANs using extensive
evaluations.

1. Introduction
Generative models aim to solve the problem of density estimation by learning the model distribution Pmodel , which
approximates the true but unknown data distribution of Pdata
using a set of training examples drawn from Pdata (Goodfellow, 2016). The generative adversarial networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al., 2014) family of generative models implicitly estimate a data distribution without requiring an
analytic expression or variational bounds of Pmodel . GANs
have been mainly used for image generation, with impressive results, producing sharp and realistic images of natural
scenes. The flexibility of the model definition and high quality outcomes has seen GANs applied to many real-world
1
School of Integrated Technology, Yonsei University, South Korea.
Correspondence to: Hyunjung Shim
<kateshim@yonsei.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

applications, including super-resolution, colorization, face
generation, image completion, etc. (Bao et al., 2017; Ledig
et al., 2016; Yeh et al., 2017; Cao et al., 2017).
Training a GAN requires two separate networks with competitive goals: a discriminator, D, to distinguish between
the real and fake data; and a generator, G, to create as real
as possible data to fool the discriminator. Consequently,
the generator implicitly models Pmodel , which approximates
Pdata . This problem may be formulated as a minimax game
(Goodfellow et al., 2014),




min max E log(D(x)) + E log(1 − D (G (z)) ,
G

D

x∼Pdata

z∼Pz

where E denotes expectation, x and z are samples drawn
from Pdata and Pmodel respectively.
When the generator produces perfect samples (i.e., Pmodel ≡
Pdata ), the discriminator cannot distinguish between real and
fake data, and the game ends because it reaches a Nash
equilibrium.
Although GANs have been successful in the image generation field, training process instabilities, such as extreme
sensitivity of network structure and parameter tuning, are
well-known disadvantages. Training instability produces
two major problems: gradient vanishing and mode collapse.
Gradient vanishing becomes a serious problem when any
subset of Pdata and Pmodel are disjointed such that the discriminator separates real and fake data perfectly; i.e., the
generator no longer improves the data because the discriminator has reached its optimum (Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017).
This produces poor results, because training stops even
though Pmodel has not learned Pdata properly. Mode collapse is where the generator repeatedly produces the same
or similar output because Pmodel only encapsulates the major
or single modes of Pdata to easily fool the discriminator.
The trade-off between image quality and mode collapse
has been theoretically and empirically investigated in previous studies (Berthelot et al., 2017; Fedus et al., 2017), and
generally either visual quality or image diversity has been
achieved, but not both simultaneously. Visual quality can
be achieved by minimizing reverse Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence, which is suggested in standard GANs including
(Goodfellow et al., 2014). Meanwhile, image diversity is
strongly correlated with minimizing forward KL divergence

