The Power of Interpolation: Understanding the Effectiveness of SGD in
Modern Over-parametrized Learning†

Siyuan Ma 1 Raef Bassily 1 Mikhail Belkin 1

Abstract
In this paper we aim to formally explain the phenomenon of fast convergence of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) observed in modern machine
learning. The key observation is that most modern learning architectures are over-parametrized
and are trained to interpolate the data by driving
the empirical loss (classification and regression)
close to zero. While it is still unclear why these
interpolated solutions perform well on test data,
we show that these regimes allow for fast convergence of SGD, comparable in number of iterations to full gradient descent. For convex loss
functions we obtain an exponential convergence
bound for mini-batch SGD parallel to that for full
gradient descent. We show that there is a critical batch size m∗ such that: (a) SGD iteration
with mini-batch size m ≤ m∗ is nearly equivalent
to m iterations of mini-batch size 1 (linear scaling regime). (b) SGD iteration with mini-batch
m > m∗ is nearly equivalent to a full gradient
descent iteration (saturation regime). Moreover,
for the quadratic loss, we derive explicit expressions for the optimal mini-batch and step size
and explicitly characterize the two regimes above.
The critical mini-batch size can be viewed as the
limit for effective mini-batch parallelization. It is
also nearly independent of the data size, implying
O(n) acceleration over GD per unit of computation. We give experimental evidence on real data
which closely follows our theoretical analyses. Finally, we show how our results fit in the recent
developments in training deep neural networks
and discuss connections to adaptive rates for SGD
and variance reduction.
† See full version of this paper at arxiv.org/abs/1712.06559.
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. Correspondence to:
Siyuan Ma <masi@cse.ohio-state.edu>, Raef Bassily <bassily.1@osu.edu>, Mikhail Belkin <mbelkin@cse.ohio-state.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1

Introduction

Most machine learning techniques for supervised learning are based on Empirical Loss Minimization
(ERM),
Pn
i.e., minimizing the loss L(w ) , n1 i=1 `i (w ) over
some parametrized space of functions fw . Here `i (w ) =
L(fw (x i ), yi ), where (x i , yi ) are the data and L could, for
example, be the square loss L(fw (x ), y) = (fw (x ) − y)2 .
In recent years, Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) with a
small mini-batch size has become the backbone of machine
learning, used in nearly all large-scale applications of machine learning methods, notably in conjunction with deep
neural networks. Mini-batch SGD is a first order method
which, instead of computing the full gradient of L(w ), computes the gradient with respect to a certain subset of the data
points, often chosen sequentially. In practice small minibatch SGD consistently outperforms full gradient descent
(GD) by a large factor in terms of the computations required
to achieve certain accuracy. However, the theoretical evidence has been mixed. While SGD needs less computations
per iteration, most analyses suggest that it requires adaptive step sizes and has the rate of convergence that is far
slower than that of GD, making computational efficiency
comparisons difficult.
In this paper, we explain the reasons for the effectiveness of
SGD by taking a different perspective. We note that most of
modern machine learning, especially deep learning, relies
on classifiers which are trained to achieve near zero classification and regression losses on the training data. Indeed,
the goal of achieving near-perfect fit on the training set is
stated explicitly by the practitioners as a best practice in
supervised learning1 , see, e.g., the tutorial (Salakhutdinov,
2017). The ability to achieve near-zero loss is provided by
over-parametrization. The number of parameters for most
deep architectures is very large and often exceeds by far the
size of the datasets used for training (see, e.g., (Canziani
et al., 2016) for a summary of different architectures). There
is significant theoretical and empirical evidence that in such
over-parametrized systems most or all local minima are also
global and hence correspond to the regime where the output
of the learning algorithm matches the training labels exactly,
1

Potentially using regularization at a later stage.

