Neural Networks Should Be Wide Enough to Learn Disconnected Decision
Regions

Quynh Nguyen 1 Mahesh Chandra Mukkamala 1 Matthias Hein 2

Abstract
In the recent literature the important role of depth
in deep learning has been emphasized. In this
paper we argue that sufficient width of a feedforward network is equally important by answering the simple question under which conditions
the decision regions of a neural network are connected. It turns out that for a class of activation
functions including leaky ReLU, neural networks
having a pyramidal structure, that is no layer has
more hidden units than the input dimension, produce necessarily connected decision regions. This
implies that a sufficiently wide hidden layer is
necessary to guarantee that the network can produce disconnected decision regions. We discuss
the implications of this result for the construction
of neural networks, in particular the relation to the
problem of adversarial manipulation of classifiers.

1. Introduction
While deep learning has become state of the art in many
application domains such as computer vision and natural
language processing and speech recognition, the theoretical
understanding of this success is steadily growing but there
are still plenty of questions where there is little or no understanding. In particular, for the question how one should
construct the network e.g. choice of activation function,
number of layers, number of hidden units per layer etc.,
there is little guidance and only limited understanding on
the implications of the choice e.g. “The design of hidden
units is an extremely active area of research and does not
yet have many definitive guiding theoretical principles.” is
a quote from the recent book on deep learning (Goodfellow
et al., 2016, p. 191). Nevertheless there is recently progress
in the understanding of these choices.
1

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Saarland
University, Germany 2 University of Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Quynh Nguyen <quynh@cs.uni-saarland.de>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

The first important results are the universal approximation
theorems (Cybenko, 1989; Hornik et al., 1989) which show
that even a single hidden layer network with standard nonpolynomial activation function (Leshno et al., 1993), like
the sigmoid, can approximate arbitrarily well every continuous function over a compact domain of Rd . In order to
explain the success of deep learning, much of the recent
effort has been spent on analyzing the representation power
of neural networks from the perspective of depth (Delalleau
& Bengio, 2011; Telgarsky, 2016; 2015; Eldan & Shamir,
2016; Safran & Shamir, 2017; Yarotsky, 2016; Poggio et al.,
2016; Liang & Srikant, 2017; Mhaskar & Poggio, 2016).
Basically, they show that there exist functions that can be
computed efficiently by deep networks of linear or polynomial size but require exponential size for shallow networks.
To further highlight the power of depth, (Montufar et al.,
2014; Pascanu et al., 2014) show that the number of linear
regions that a ReLU network can form in the input space
grows exponentially with depth. Tighter bounds on the
number of linear regions are later on developed by (Arora
et al., 2018; Serra et al., 2018; Charisopoulos & Maragos,
2018). Another measure of expressivity so-called trajectory length is proposed by (Raghu et al., 2017). They show
that the complexity of functions computed by the network
along a one-dimensional curve in the input space also grows
exponentially with depth.
While most of previous work can only show the existence
of depth efficiency (i.e. there exist certain functions that
can be efficiently represented by deep networks but not
effectively represented or even approximated by shallow
networks) but cannot show how often this holds for all
functions of interest, (Cohen et al., 2016) have taken the
first step to address this problem. In particular, by studying
a special type of networks called convolutional arithmetic
circuits – also known as Sum-Product networks (Poon &
Domingos, 2011), the authors show that besides a set of
measure zero, all functions that can be realized by a deep
network of polynomial size require exponential size in order
to be realized, or even approximated by a shallow network.
Later, (Cohen & Shashua, 2016) show that this property
however no longer holds for convolutional rectifier networks,
which represents so far the empirically most successful deep
learning architecture in practice.

