The Multilinear Structure of ReLU Networks
Thomas Laurent * 1 James H. von Brecht * 2

Abstract
We study the loss surface of neural networks
equipped with a hinge loss criterion and ReLU
or leaky ReLU nonlinearities. Any such network
defines a piecewise multilinear form in parameter space. By appealing to harmonic analysis we
show that all local minima of such network are
non-differentiable, except for those minima that
occur in a region of parameter space where the
loss surface is perfectly flat. Non-differentiable
minima are therefore not technicalities or pathologies; they are heart of the problem when investigating the loss of ReLU networks. As a consequence, we must employ techniques from nonsmooth analysis to study these loss surfaces. We
show how to apply these techniques in some illustrative cases.

Ω2

Ω1

Ω3

Ω4
(b) Loss Surface L(ω)

(a) Parameter Space Ω

Figure 1. (a): Parameter space Ω = R2 decomposes into a partition
of four open cells Ωu and a closed boundary set N (solid red
lines). (b): The loss surface is smooth inside each Ωu and nondifferentiable on N . It has two types of local minima, flat minima
(cell Ω1 ) and sharp minima (boundary between cells Ω3 and Ω4 ).
The sharp minima must have non-zero loss.

major open problems in deep learning.

1. Introduction
Empirical practice tends to show that modern neural networks have relatively benign loss surfaces, in the sense that
training a deep network proves less challenging than the nonconvex and non-smooth nature of the optimization would
naı̈vely suggest. Many theoretical efforts, especially in recent years, have attempted to explain this phenomenon and,
more broadly, the successful optimization of deep networks
in general (Gori & Tesi, 1992; Choromanska et al., 2015;
Kawaguchi, 2016; Safran & Shamir, 2016; Mei et al., 2016;
Soltanolkotabi, 2017; Soudry & Hoffer, 2017; Du et al.,
2017; Zhong et al., 2017; Tian, 2017; Li & Yuan, 2017;
Zhou & Feng, 2017; Brutzkus et al., 2017). The properties
of the loss surface of neural networks remain poorly understood despite these many efforts. Developing of a coherent
mathematical understanding of them is therefore one of the
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, Loyola Marymount University, Los Angeles, CA 90045, USA 2 Department
of Mathematics and Statistics, California State University, Long
Beach, Long Beach, CA 90840, USA. Correspondence to:
Thomas Laurent <tlaurent@lmu.edu>, James H. von Brecht
<james.vonbrecht@csulb.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 35 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

We focus on investigating the loss surfaces that arise
from feed-forward neural networks where rectified linear units (ReLUs) σ(x) := max(x, 0) or leaky ReLUs
σα (x) := α min(x, 0) + max(x, 0) account for all nonlinearities present in the network. We allow the transformations
defining the hidden-layers of the network to take the form
of fully connected affine transformations or convolutional
transformations. By employing a ReLU-based criterion we
then obtain a loss with a consistent, homogeneous structure
for the nonlinearities in the network. We elect to use the
binary hinge loss

`(ŷ, y) := σ 1 − y ŷ
(1)
for binary classification, where ŷ denote the scalar output of
the network and y ∈ {−1, 1} denotes the target. Similarly,
for multiclass classification we use the multiclass hinge loss,
`(ŷ, r0 ) =

P

r6=r0 σ

1 + ŷr − ŷr0



(2)

where ŷ = (ŷ1 , . . . , ŷR ) ∈ RR denotes the vectorial output
of the network and r0 ∈ {1, . . . , R} denotes the target class.
To see the type of structure that emerges in these networks,
let Ω denote the space of network parameters and let L(ω)
denote the loss. Due to the choices (1,2) of network criteria, all nonlinearities involved in L(ω) are piecewise linear.

