An Estimation and Analysis Framework for the Rasch Model

Andrew S. Lan 1 Mung Chiang 2 Christoph Studer 3

Abstract
The Rasch model is widely used for item response analysis in applications ranging from
recommender systems to psychology, education,
and finance. While a number of estimators have
been proposed for the Rasch model over the
last decades, the available analytical performance
guarantees are mostly asymptotic. This paper provides a framework that relies on a novel linear
minimum mean-squared error (L-MMSE) estimator which enables an exact, nonasymptotic, and
closed-form analysis of the parameter estimation
error under the Rasch model. The proposed framework provides guidelines on the number of items
and responses required to attain low estimation
errors in tests or surveys. We furthermore demonstrate its efficacy on a number of real-world collaborative filtering datasets, which reveals that
the proposed L-MMSE estimator performs on par
with state-of-the-art nonlinear estimators in terms
of predictive performance.

1. Introduction
This paper presents a novel framework that enables an exact, nonasymptotic, and closed-form analysis of the parameter estimation error under the Rasch model. The Rasch
model was proposed in 1960 for modeling the responses
of students/users to test/survey items (Rasch, 1960), and
has enjoyed great success in applications including (but
not limited to) psychometrics (van der Linden & Hambleton, 2013), educational tests (Lan et al., 2016), crowdsourcing (Whitehill et al., 2009), public health (Cappelleri et al.,
2014), and even market and financial research (Schellhorn
& Sharma, 2013; Brzezińska, 2016). Mathematically, the
(dichotomous) Rasch model, also known as the 1PL item
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University
Purdue University 3 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University. Correspondence to: Andrew S. Lan <andrew.lan@princeton.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

response theory (IRT) model (Lord, 1980), is given by
p(Yu,i = 1) = Φ(au − di ),

(1)

where Yu,i ∈ {−1, +1} denotes the response of user u to
item i, where +1 stands for a correct response and −1 stands
for an incorrect response. The parameters au ∈ R model the
scalar abilities of users u = 1, . . . , U and the parameters
di ∈ R model the scalar
R xdifficulties of items i = 1, . . . , Q.
The function Φ(x) = −∞ N (t; 0, 1)dt, often referred to
as the inverse probit link function1 , is the cumulative distribution function of a standard normal random variable,
where N (t; 0, 1) denotes the probability density function of
a standard normal random variable evaluated at t.
The literature describes a range of parameter estimation
methods under the Rasch model and related IRT models;
see (Baker & Kim, 2004) for an overview. However, existing
analytical results for the associated parameter estimation
error are limited; see (Tsutakawa & Johnson, 1990) for an
example. The majority of existing results have been proposed in the psychometrics and educational measurement
literature; see, e.g., (Carroll et al., 2006) for a survey. The
proposed analysis tools rely, for example, on multiple imputation (Yang et al., 2012) or Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) techniques (Patz & Junker, 1999), and are thus
not analytical. Hence, their accuracy strongly depends on
the available data.
Other analysis tools use the Fisher information matrix
(Zhang et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2012) to obtain lower
bounds on the estimation error. Such methods are of asymptotic nature, i.e., they yield accurate results only when the
number of users and items tend to infinity. For real-world
settings with limited data, these bounds are typically loose;
As an example, in computerized adaptive testing (CAT)
(Chang & Ying, 2009), a user enters the system and starts
responding to items. The system maintains an estimate of
their ability parameter, and adaptively selects the next-best
item to assign to the user that is most informative of the
ability estimate. Calculating the informativeness of each
item requires an analysis of the uncertainty in the ability
1
While some publications assume the inverse logit link function, i.e., the sigmoid Φ(x) = 1+e1−x , in most real-world applications the choice of the link function has no significant performance
impact. In what follows, we will focus on the inverse probit link
function for reasons that will be discussed in Section 3.

