Decomposition of Uncertainty in Bayesian Deep Learning
for Efficient and Risk-sensitive Learning

Stefan Depeweg 1 2 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 3 Finale Doshi-Velez 4 Steffen Udluft 1

Abstract
Bayesian neural networks with latent variables are
scalable and flexible probabilistic models: they
account for uncertainty in the estimation of the
network weights and, by making use of latent variables, can capture complex noise patterns in the
data. Using these models we show how to perform and utilize a decomposition of uncertainty in
aleatoric and epistemic components for decision
making purposes. This allows us to successfully
identify informative points for active learning of
functions with heteroscedastic and bimodal noise.
Using the decomposition we further define a novel
risk-sensitive criterion for reinforcement learning
to identify policies that balance expected cost,
model-bias and noise aversion.

1. Introduction
Many important problems in machine learning require learning functions in the presence of noise. For example, in
reinforcement learning (RL), the transition dynamics of a
system is often stochastic. Ideally, a model for these systems should be able to both express such randomness but
also to account for the uncertainty in its parameters.
Bayesian neural networks (BNN) are probabilistic models
that place the flexibility of neural networks in a Bayesian
framework (Blundell et al., 2015; Gal, 2016). In particular,
recent work has extended BNNs with latent input variables
(BNN+LV) to estimate functions with complex stochasticity
such as bimodality or heteroscedasticity (Depeweg et al.,
2016). This model class can describe complex stochastic
patterns via a distribution over the latent input variables
(aleatoric uncertainty), while, at the same time, account for
model uncertainty via a distribution over weights (epistemic
uncertainty).
1

Siemens AG 2 TU Munich 3 University of Cambridge
Harvard University. Correspondence to: Stefan Depeweg <stdepewe@gmail.com>.

4

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

In this work we show how to perform and utilize a decomposition of uncertainty in aleatoric and epistemic components
for decision making purposes. Our contributions are:
• We derive two decompositions that extract epistemic
and aleatoric uncertainties from the predictive distribution of BNN+LV (Section 3).
• We demonstrate that with this uncertainty decomposition, the BNN+LV identifies informative regions even
in bimodal and heteroscedastic cases, enabling efficient active learning in the presence of complex noise
(Section 4).
• We derive a novel risk-sensitive criterion for modelbased RL based on the uncertainty decomposition, enabling a domain expert to trade-off the risks of reliability, which originates from model bias and the risk
induced by stochasticity (Section 5).
While using uncertainties over transition probabilities to
avoid worst-case behavior has been well-studied in discrete
MDPs (e.g. (Shapiro & Kleywegt, 2002; Nilim & El Ghaoui,
2005; Bagnell et al., 2001), to our knowledge, our work is
the first to consider continuous non-linear functions with
complex noise.

2. Background: BNN+LV
We review a recent family of probabilistic models for multioutput regression. These models were previously introduced
by Depeweg et al. (2016), we refer to them as Bayesian
Neural Networks with latent variables (BNN+LV).
Given a dataset D = {xn , yn }N
n=1 , formed by feature
vectors xn ∈ RD and targets yn ∈ RK , we assume
that yn = f (xn , zn ; W) + n , where f (·, ·; W) is the output of a neural network with weights W and K output
units. The network receives as input the feature vector
xn and the latent variable zn ∼ N (0, γ). We choose rectifiers, ϕ(x) = max(x, 0), as activation functions for the
hidden layers and the identity function, ϕ(x) = x, for the
output layer. The network output is corrupted by the additive noise variable n ∼ N (0, Σ) with diagonal covariance matrix Σ. The role of the latent variable zn is to
capture unobserved stochastic features that can affect the
network’s output in complex ways. Without zn , randomness

