Topological Mixture Estimation

Steve Huntsman 1

Abstract
We introduce topological mixture estimation, a
completely nonparametric and computationally
efficient solution to the problem of estimating a
one-dimensional mixture with generic unimodal
components. We repeatedly perturb the unimodal
decomposition of Baryshnikov and Ghrist to produce a topologically and information-theoretically
optimal unimodal mixture. We also detail a
smoothing process that optimally exploits topological persistence of the unimodal category in
a natural way when working directly with sample data. Finally, we illustrate these techniques
through examples.

1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Density functions that represent sample data are often multimodal, i.e. they exhibit more than one maximum. Typically
this behavior indicates that the underlying data deserves a
more detailed representation as a mixture of densities with
individually simpler structure. The usual specification of a
component density is quite restrictive, with log-concave the
most general case considered in the literature, and Gaussian
the overwhelmingly typical case. It is also necessary to
determine the number of mixture components a priori, and
much art is devoted to this.
In this paper we detail how to efficiently determine a topologically and information-theoretically optimal mixture of
generic unimodal component densities directly from a onedimensional input density and without any auxiliary information whatsoever. The topological criterion is a natural
qualitative alternative to more traditional quantitative model
selection criteria (e.g., information criteria) and is computed
at the outset of computation, then subsequently preserved,
while the information-theoretical criterion optimally sepa1
BAE Systems FAST Labs, Arlington, VA, USA. Correspondence to: Steve Huntsman <steve.huntsman@baesystems.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

rates component densities. We further show how to optimally smooth the mixture when the input density itself is being estimated. Topological persistence (which operationally
amounts to the assignment of significance to topological
features that persist as a function of scale) is the essential
ingredient in both the “model selection” and smoothing.
1.2. Formal Motivation
To give some formal motivation, let D(Rd ) denote a suitable
space of continuous probability densities (henceforth merely
called densities) on Rd . A mixture on Rd with M components is a pair P
(π, p) ∈ ∆◦M × D(Rd )M , where ∆◦M :=
M
{π ∈ (0, 1] : m πm = 1}; we write |(π, p)| := M , and
note that π cannot have any components equal
zero. The
Pto
M
corresponding mixture density is hπ, pi := m=1 πm pm .
The Jensen-Shannon divergence of (π, p) is (Briët & Harremoës, 2009)
J(π, p) := H (hπ, pi) − hπ, H(p)i
(1)
R
where H(p)m := H(pm ) and H(f ) := − f log f dx is
the entropy of f .
Now J(π, p) is the mutual information between the random
variables Ξ ∼ π and X ∼ hπ, pi. Since mutual information
is always nonnegative, the same is true of J. The concavity
of H gives the same result, i.e. H (hπ, pi) ≥ hπ, H(p)i.
If M := |(π,
πM −1 + πM ),
 p)| > 1, π̂ := (π1 , . . . , πM −2 , 
pM −1 +πM pM
and p̂ := p1 , . . . , pM −2 , πM −1πM
, then is easy
−1 +πM

to show that J(π̂, p̂) ≤ J(π, p).
We say that a density f ∈ D(Rd ) is unimodal if
f −1 ([y, ∞)) is either empty or contractible (i.e., topologically equivalent to a point in the sense of homotopy) for
all y. For d = 1, this simply means that any nonempty
sets f −1 ([y, ∞)) are intervals and agrees with intuition. We
call a mixture (π, p) unimodal iff each of the component
densities pm is unimodal. The unimodal category ucat(f )
is the smallest number of components of any unimodal mixture (π, p) that satisfies hπ, pi = f . Figure 1 shows that
the unimodal category can be much less than the number of
maxima. In the event that hπ, pi = f and |(π, p)| = ucat(f ),
we write (π, p) |= f : the symbol |= is called “models.” The
unimodal category is a topological invariant that generalizes and relates to other classical invariants (Baryshnikov &
Ghrist, 2011; Ghrist, 2014).

