Black-box Adversarial Attacks with Limited Queries and Information

Andrew Ilyas * 1 2 Logan Engstrom * 1 2 Anish Athalye * 1 2 Jessy Lin * 1 2

Abstract
Current neural network-based classifiers are susceptible to adversarial examples even in the
black-box setting, where the attacker only has
query access to the model. In practice, the threat
model for real-world systems is often more restrictive than the typical black-box model where
the adversary can observe the full output of the
network on arbitrarily many chosen inputs. We
define three realistic threat models that more
accurately characterize many real-world classifiers: the query-limited setting, the partialinformation setting, and the label-only setting.
We develop new attacks that fool classifiers under these more restrictive threat models, where
previous methods would be impractical or ineffective. We demonstrate that our methods are effective against an ImageNet classifier under our
proposed threat models. We also demonstrate a
targeted black-box attack against a commercial
classifier, overcoming the challenges of limited
query access, partial information, and other practical issues to break the Google Cloud Vision
API.

1. Introduction

a substitute network to emulate the original network and
then attacks the substitute with first-order white-box methods (Papernot et al., 2016a; 2017). Recent works note
that adversarial examples for substitute networks do not
always transfer to the target model, especially when conducting targeted attacks (Chen et al., 2017; Narodytska &
Kasiviswanathan, 2017). These works instead construct adversarial examples by estimating the gradient through the
classifier with coordinate-wise finite difference methods.
We consider additional access and resource restrictions on
the black-box model that characterize restrictions in realworld systems. These restrictions render targeted attacks
with prior methods impractical or infeasible. We present
new algorithms for generating adversarial examples that
render attacks in the proposed settings tractable.
1.1. Definitions
At a high level, an adversarial example for a classifier is an
input that is slightly perturbed to cause misclassification.
Prior work considers various threat models (Papernot et al.,
2016b; Carlini & Wagner, 2017). In this work, we consider
`∞ -bounded perturbation that causes targeted misclassification (i.e. misclassification as a given target class). Thus,
the task of the adversary is: given an input x, target class
yadv , and perturbation bound , find an input xadv such that
||xadv − x||∞ <  and xadv is classified as yadv .

Neural network-based image classifiers are susceptible to
adversarial examples, minutely perturbed inputs that fool
classifiers (Szegedy et al., 2013; Biggio et al., 2013). These
adversarial examples can potentially be exploited in the real
world (Kurakin et al., 2016; Athalye et al., 2017; Sharif
et al., 2017; Evtimov et al., 2017). For many commercial
or proprietary systems, adversarial examples must be considered under a limited threat model. This has motivated
black-box attacks that do not require access to the gradient
of the classifier.

All of the threat models considered in this work are additional restrictions on the black-box setting:

One approach to attacking a classifier in this setting trains
Equal contribution Massachusetts Institute of Technology
LabSix. Correspondence to: LabSix <team@labsix.org>.

We introduce the following threat models as more limited
variants of the black-box setting that reflect access and resource restrictions in real-world systems:

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1. Query-limited setting. In the query-limited setting,
the attacker has a limited number of queries to the

*

2

1

Black-box setting. In this paper, we use the definition of
black-box access as query access (Chen et al., 2017; Liu
et al., 2017; Hayes & Danezis, 2017). In this model, the
adversary can supply any input x and receive the predicted
class probabilities, P (y|x) for all classes y. This setting
does not allow the adversary to analytically compute the
gradient ∇P (y|x) as is doable in the white-box case.

