Curriculum Learning by Transfer Learning: Theory and Experiments with
Deep Networks

Daphna Weinshall 1 Gad Cohen 1 Dan Amir 1

Abstract
We provide theoretical investigation of curriculum learning in the context of stochastic gradient descent when optimizing the convex linear
regression loss. We prove that the rate of convergence of an ideal curriculum learning method
is monotonically increasing with the difficulty of
the examples. Moreover, among all equally difficult points, convergence is faster when using
points which incur higher loss with respect to the
current hypothesis. We then analyze curriculum
learning in the context of training a CNN. We describe a method which infers the curriculum by
way of transfer learning from another network,
pre-trained on a different task. While this approach can only approximate the ideal curriculum, we observe empirically similar behavior to
the one predicted by the theory, namely, a significant boost in convergence speed at the beginning
of training. When the task is made more difficult, improvement in generalization performance
is also observed. Finally, curriculum learning exhibits robustness against unfavorable conditions
such as excessive regularization.

1. Introduction
Biological organisms can learn to perform tasks (and often
do) by observing a sequence of labeled events, just like
supervised machine learning. But unlike machine learning,
in human learning supervision is often accompanied by a
curriculum. Thus the order of presented examples is rarely
random when a human teacher teaches another human. Likewise, the task may be divided by the teacher into smaller
sub-tasks, a process sometimes called shaping (Krueger &
Dayan, 2009) and typically studied in the context of rein1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel. Correspondence
to: Daphna Weinshall <daphna@mail.huji.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

forcement learning (e.g. Graves et al., 2017). Although it
remained for the most part in the fringes of machine learning
research, curriculum learning has been identified as a key
challenge for machine learning throughout (e.g., Mitchell,
1980; 2006; Wang & Cottrell, 2015).
We focus here on curriculum learning based on ranking (or
weighting as in (Bengio et al., 2009)) of the training examples, which is used to guide the order of presentation of
examples to the learner. Risking over simplification, the
idea is to first present the learner primarily with examples
of higher weight or rank, later to be followed by examples
with lower weight or rank. Ranking may be based on the difficulty of each training example as evaluated by the teacher,
from easiest to the most difficult.
In Section 2 we investigate this strict definition of curriculum learning theoretically, in the context of stochastic gradient descent used to optimize the convex linear regression
loss function. We first define the (ideal) difficulty of a training point as its loss with respect to the optimal classifier.
We then prove that curriculum learning, when given the
ranking of training points by their difficulty thus defined, is
expected (probabilistically) to significantly speed up learning especially at the beginning of training. This theoretical
result is supported by empirical evidence obtained in the
deep learning scenario of curriculum learning described in
Section 3, where similar behavior is observed. We also
show that when the difficulty of the sampled training points
is fixed, convergence is faster when sampling points that
incur higher loss with respect to the current hypothesis as
suggested in (Shrivastava et al., 2016). This result is not always true when the difficulty of the sampled training points
is not fixed.
But such ideal ranking is rarely available. In fact, the need
for such supervision has rendered curriculum learning less
useful in machine learning, since ranking by difficulty is
hard to obtain. Moreover, even when it is provided by a
human teacher, it may not reflect the true difficulty as it
affects the machine learner. For example, in visual object
recognition it has been demonstrated that what makes an
image difficult to a neural network classifier may not always
match whatever makes it difficult to a human observer, an
observation that has been taken advantage of in the recent

