Fast Stochastic AUC Maximization with O(1/n)-Convergence Rate

Mingrui Liu 1 Xiaoxuan Zhang 1 Zaiyi Chen 2 Xiaoyu Wang 3 Tianbao Yang 1

Abstract
In this paper, we consider statistical learning with
AUC (area under ROC curve) maximization in
the classical stochastic setting where one random
data drawn from an unknown distribution is revealed at each iteration for updating the model.
Although consistent convex surrogate losses for
AUC maximization have been proposed to make
the problem tractable, it remains an challenging
problem to design fast optimization algorithms in
the classical stochastic setting since the convex
surrogate loss depends on random pairs of examples from positive and negative classes. Building on a saddle point formulation for a consistent
square loss, this paper proposes a novel stochas√
tic algorithm to improve the standard O(1/ n)
e
convergence rate to O(1/n)
convergence rate
without strong convexity assumption or any favorable statistical assumptions (e.g., low noise),
where n is the number of random samples. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first stochastic algorithm for AUC maximization with a statistical convergence rate as fast as O(1/n) up
to a logarithmic factor. Extensive experiments
on eight large-scale benchmark data sets demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed
algorithm comparing with existing stochastic or
online algorithms for AUC maximization.

1. Introduction
Area under ROC curve (AUC) (Metz, 1978; Hanley & McNeil, 1982; 1983) is a commonly used metric for evaluating
the performance of a classifier. ROC (receiver operating
characteristic) curve is the "true positive rate false positive rate" curve, and AUC represents
the probability that examples in positive class are scored
higher than those in negative class (Hanley & McNeil,
1
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa,
IA 52242, USA 2 University of Science and Technology of China
3
Intellifusion. Correspondence to: Mingrui Liu <mingruiliu@uiowa.edu>, Tianbao Yang <tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1982). Compared with misclassification rate, AUC is more
favorable in the applications with imbalanced datasets and
in which the real-valued classifier is used for ranking.
However, the algorithms designed to minimize the misclassification error rate may not lead to maximization of
AUC (Cortes & Mohri, 2004).
In a batch learning setting where all training data is given
beforehand, one may formulate AUC maximization as a
convex empirical optimization problem based on the training data using a convex surrogate loss. The resulting optimization problem can be solved by employing existing
algorithms (Herschtal & Raskutti, 2004; Cortes & Mohri,
2004; Ferri et al., 2011). However, such an approach has
two limitations: (i) it is not applicable to many applications
in which a random data is received in a sequential manner
(e.g., online advertisement); (ii) little is known about the
statistical convergence rate of the empirical maximizer to
the true maximizer due to the i.i.d assumption of pairwise
data does not hold. Therefore, a stochastic algorithm with
a provable convergence rate in the classical stochastic setting for minimizing an expected convex surrogate loss for
AUC maximization is desirable for addressing these two
limitations. It is also useful for tackling large-scale data by
one pass of training data.
Nevertheless, the pairwise nature in the definition of AUC
makes it challenging to design algorithms suitable for the
classical stochastic setting. To address this challenge, several online and stochastic algorithms have been developed
based on convex surrogate loss (Zhao et al., 2011; Gao
et al., 2013; Ying et al., 2016). An interesting observation
in (Ying et al., 2016) is that the AUC maximization using
a consistent square loss is equivalent to a stochastic minmax saddle point problem, for which a primal-dual style
of stochastic
gradient algorithm can be employed to yield
e √n) convergence rate for minimizing an expected
an O(1/
square loss, where n is the number of samples. How to
improve the convergence rate of stochastic optimization of
AUC remains an open problem though.
Fast rate such as O(1/n) of stochastic algorithms has been
established for expected convex risk minimization in literature (Hazan & Kale, 2011a; Srebro et al., 2010; Bach
& Moulines, 2013). However, these studies either impose
strong assumptions about the problem (e.g., strong convex-

