χ2 Generative Adversarial Network

Chenyang Tao 1 Liqun Chen 1 Ricardo Henao 1 Jianfeng Feng 2 Lawrence Carin 1

Abstract
To assess the difference between real and synthetic data, Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) are trained using a distribution discrepancy measure. Three widely employed measures
are information-theoretic divergences, integral
probability metrics, and Hilbert space discrepancy metrics. We elucidate the theoretical connections between these three popular GAN training
criteria and propose a novel procedure, called χ2 GAN, that is conceptually simple, stable at training and resistant to mode collapse. Our procedure
naturally generalizes to address the problem of
simultaneous matching of multiple distributions.
Further, we propose a resampling strategy that significantly improves sample quality, by repurposing the trained critic function via an importance
weighting mechanism. Experiments show that the
proposed procedure improves stability and convergence, and yields state-of-art results on a wide
range of generative modeling tasks.

1. Introduction
Learning to sample from complicated distributions has attracted considerable recent interest, with many important
applications (Zhu et al., 2017; Ledig et al., 2017; Yu et al.,
2017; Hu et al., 2017). Likelihood-free models avoid the
need to explicitly assume a particular parametrization of
the data-generating distribution pG (x). Such models implicitly define a distribution via generator G(z; θ) : Z → X ,
and a latent random variable Z with pre-specified distribution q(z). Samples from the generator are produced by first
drawing Z ∼ q(z) and then feeding it through the generator.
To match pG (x) to the true data distribution pd (x), one estimates a discrepancy measure, d(pd , pG ). In the GAN
framework, the discrepancy is first estimated by maximizing an auxiliary variational functional V (pd , pG ; D) :
1

Electrical & Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham,
NC 27708, USA 2 ISTBI, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Chenyang Tao <chenyang.tao@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

P × P → R between distributions pd (x) and pG (x) satisfying d(pd , pG ) = maxD V (pd , pG ; D), where P is the
space of probability distributions and V (pd , pG ; D) is estimated using samples from the two distributions. Function
D(x; ω), parameterized by ω and known as the critic function, is intended to maximally discriminate between samples
of the two distributions. One seeks to match the generator
distribution pG (x) to the unknown true distribution pd (x)
by solving a minimax game between the critic and the generator: minG maxD V (pd , pG ; D).
Following ideas from the original GAN (Goodfellow et al.,
2014), which optimizes the Jensen-Shannon divergence,
much recent work has focused on information-theoretic
divergences, such as the KL-divergence (Sønderby et al.,
2017). Many other studies have investigated the generalized
f -divergence (Csiszár, 1963), Divf (pd k pG ) ,
R  pd (x) 
f pG (x) pG (x) dx, where f (·) : R → R is a convex
function satisfying f (1) = 0, that summarizes the local discrepancy between pd (x) and pG (x). Nowozin et al. (2016)
proposed an algorithm based on the variational formulation of Divf (pd k pG ), Uehara et al. (2016) explored in
depth its density-ratio formulation, and Nock et al. (2017)
further generalized it from an information-geometric perspective. Interestingly, Mao et al. (2017) showed that a
specific type of f -divergence, namely the χ2 -divergence,
can be directly optimized for GAN learning, by recasting it
as a least-squares regression problem.
However, Arjovsky & Bottou (2017) showed that when using divergence-based objectives, the parameter updates for
the generator can be either uninformative or numerically
unstable, and divergence-based objectives may not be continuous wrt the generator parameters. These issues motivated
development of GAN formulations based on Integral Probability Metrics (IPMs) (Müller, 1997). IPM models seek
to optimize an objective of the form VIPM (pd , pG ; D) =
EX∼pd [D(X; ω)] − EX 0 ∼pG [D(X 0 ; ω)], where EX∼pd [·]
denotes the expectation wrt to distributions pd (x). When
the critic D(x; ω) is chosen from a unit ball of Lipschitz-1
functions (kDkLip ≤ 1), the IPM reduces to the Wasserstein1 or earth mover’s distance (Rubner et al., 2000). In this
case, the challenge with dIPM (pd , pG ) lies in constraining
the critic function Lipschitz constant (Arjovsky et al., 2017;
Gulrajani et al., 2017; Miyato et al., 2017).

