Dissipativity Theory for Accelerating Stochastic Variance Reduction:
A Unified Analysis of SVRG and Katyusha Using Semidefinite Programs

Bin Hu 1 Stephen Wright 1 Laurent Lessard 1

Abstract

Monro, 1951; Bottou & LeCun, 2003). Recently, a large
family of variance-reduction methods have been developed
to improve the convergence guarantees of SG. Such methods
are typically classified into the following two categories:

Techniques for reducing the variance of gradient
estimates used in stochastic programming algorithms for convex finite-sum problems have received a great deal of attention in recent years.
By leveraging dissipativity theory from control,
we provide a new perspective on two important
variance-reduction algorithms: SVRG and its direct accelerated variant Katyusha. Our perspective provides a physically intuitive understanding
of the behavior of SVRG-like methods via a principle of energy conservation. The tools discussed
here allow us to automate the convergence analysis of SVRG-like methods by capturing their essential properties in small semidefinite programs
amenable to standard analysis and computational
techniques. Our approach recovers existing convergence results for SVRG and Katyusha and
generalizes the theory to alternative parameter
choices. We also discuss how our approach complements the linear coupling technique. Our combination of perspectives leads to a better understanding of accelerated variance-reduced stochastic methods for finite-sum problems.

1. SVRG-like methods are epoch-based, requiring evaluation of a complete gradient ∇g(x̃) at the beginning
of each epoch. The epoch length is typically set to
be 2n but can be adaptive. Methods of this type include SVRG (Johnson & Zhang, 2013) and its direct
accelerated variant Katyusha (Allen-Zhu, 2016).
2. SAGA-like methods do not involve epoch length tuning, and include SAG (Roux et al., 2012; Schmidt
et al., 2013), SAGA (Defazio et al., 2014a), Finito (Defazio et al., 2014b), SDCA (Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang,
2013; Shalev-Shwartz, 2016), APCG (Lin et al., 2014),
SPDC (Zhang & Xiao, 2017), and point-SAGA (Defazio, 2016). Due to storage issues, it may be difficult
to apply SAGA-like methods to general learning problems other than linear prediction/classification, since
their required storage for general learning tasks scales
with the training set size.

1. Introduction
Empirical risk minimization (ERM) is a key paradigm in
machine learning (Bubeck, 2015; Bottou et al., 2016). Many
learning problems, including ridge regression, logistic regression, and support vector machines, can be naturally
formulated as the following finite-sum ERM
n

minp g(x) :=

x∈R

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(1)

where g is strongly convex. A standard approach for solving (1) is the stochastic gradient (SG) method (Robbins &
1
University of Wisconsin–Madison, United States. Correspondence to: Bin Hu <bhu38@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

This paper is motivated by the following two concerns. First,
there has been recent interest in developing a unified, coherent set of tools for analyzing stochastic finite-sum methods.
Traditionally, convergence proofs for variance-reduction
methods have been developed in a case-by-case manner.
More coherent techniques may facilitate the design of new
finite-sum methods in more complicated setups. Recently,
control theory has been used to derive linear matrix inequality (LMI) conditions that can be used to automate
the analysis of a large family of first-order optimization
methods (Lessard et al., 2016; Hu et al., 2017a;b; Hu &
Lessard, 2017; Fazlyab et al., 2017). Specifically, Hu et al.
(2017b) has tailored jump system theory to provide a unified analysis for SAGA, Finito, and SDCA. The analysis
in Hu et al. (2017b) can potentially be extended to cover
other SAGA-like methods, such as SAG, APCG, SPDC, and
point-SAGA. However, as pointed out in Hu et al. (2017b),
jump system theory may not be the most suitable tool for
epoch-based methods. This paper aims in part to bridge
the gap between control-oriented analysis and SVRG-like

