Stochastic Variance-Reduced Cubic Regularized Newton Methods
Dongruo Zhou 1 Pan Xu 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract
We propose a stochastic variance-reduced cubic regularized Newton method (SVRC) for nonconvex optimization. At the core of our algorithm is a novel semi-stochastic gradient along
with a semi-stochastic Hessian, which are specifically designed for cubic regularization method.
We show that our
p algorithm is guaranteed to converge to an (✏, ✏)-approximate local minimum
e 4/5 /✏3/2 ) second-order oracle calls,
within O(n
which outperforms the state-of-the-art cubic regularization algorithms including subsampled cubic regularization. Our work also sheds light on
the application of variance reduction technique
to high-order non-convex optimization methods.
Thorough experiments on various non-convex optimization problems support our theory.

1 Introduction
We study the following finite-sum optimization problem:

krF (x)k2 < ✏g ,

2
min (r F (x))

✏h ,

(1.2)

for some given constant ✏g , ✏h > 0. In fact, in some machine learning problems like matrix completion (Ge et al.,
2016), one finds that every local minimum is a global minimum, suggesting that finding an approximate local minimum is a better choice than a stationary point, and is
good enough in many applications. One of the most popular method to achieve this goal is perhaps cubic regularized Newton method, which was introduced by Nesterov &
Polyak (2006), and solves the following kind of subproblems in each iteration:
h(x) = argmin m(h, x),
h2Rd

n

1X
min F (x) =
fi (x),
d
n i=1
x2R

their extensions (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013; Reddi et al., 2016a;
Allen-Zhu & Hazan, 2016; Ghadimi & Lan, 2016). Nevertheless, first-order stationary points can be non-degenerate
saddle points or even local maximum in non-convex optimization, which are undesirable. Therefore, a more reasonable objective is to find an approximate second-order
stationary point (Nesterov & Polyak, 2006), which is also
known as an (✏g , ✏h )-approximate local minimum of F (x):

(1.1)

where F (x) and each fi (x) can be non-convex. Such problems are common in machine learning, where each fi (x) is
a loss function on a training example (LeCun et al., 2015).
Since F (x) is non-convex, finding its global minimum is
generally NP-Hard (Hillar & Lim, 2013). As a result, one
possible goal is to find an approximate first-order stationary
point (✏ stationary point):
krF (x)k2  ✏,
for some given ✏ > 0. A lot of studies have been devoted
to this problem including gradient descent (GD), stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins & Monro, 1951), and
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

m(h, x) = hrF (x), hi +

↵ ✓
1⌦ 2
r F (x)h, h + khk32 ,
2
6
(1.3)

where ✓ > 0 is a regularization parameter. Nesterov &
Polyak (2006) proved that fixing a starting point x0 , and
performing the updating rule xt = xt 1 + h(xt 1 ), the
algorithm can output a sequence xi that converges to a local
minimum provided that the function is Hessian Lipschitz.
However, it can be seen that to solve the subproblem (1.3),
one needs to calculate the full gradient rF (x) and Hessian
r2 F (x), which is a big overhead in large scale machine
learning problem because n is often very large.
Some recent studies presented various algorithms to avoid
the calculation of full gradient and Hessian in cubic regularization. Kohler & Lucchi (2017) used subsampling technique to get approximate gradient and Hessian instead of
exact ones, and Xu et al. (2017c) also used subsampled Hessian. Both of them can reduce the computational complexity
in some circumstance. However, just like other samplingbased algorithm such as subsampled Newton method Erdogdu & Montanari (2015); Xu et al. (2016); Roostakho-

