Learning by Playing – Solving Sparse Reward Tasks from Scratch

Martin Riedmiller * 1 Roland Hafner * 1 Thomas Lampe 1 Michael Neunert 1 Jonas Degrave 1
Tom Van de Wiele 1 Volodymyr Mnih 1 Nicolas Heess 1 Tobias Springenberg 1

Abstract
We propose Scheduled Auxiliary Control (SACX), a new learning paradigm in the context of
Reinforcement Learning (RL). SAC-X enables
learning of complex behaviors – from scratch – in
the presence of multiple sparse reward signals. To
this end, the agent is equipped with a set of general auxiliary tasks, that it attempts to learn simultaneously via off-policy RL. The key idea behind
our method is that active (learned) scheduling and
execution of auxiliary policies allows the agent to
efficiently explore its environment – enabling it
to excel at sparse reward RL. Our experiments in
several challenging robotic manipulation settings
demonstrate the power of our approach. A video
of the rich set of learned behaviours can be found
at https://youtu.be/mPKyvocNe M.

1. Introduction
Consider the following scenario: a learning agent has to
control a robot arm to open a box and place a block inside.
While defining the reward for this task is simple and straightforward (e.g. using a simple mechanism inside the box such
as a force sensor to detect a placed block), the underlying
learning problem is hard. The agent has to discover a long
sequence of “correct” actions in order to find a configuration
of the environment that yields the sparse reward – the block
contained inside the box. Discovering this sparse reward
signal is a hard exploration problem for which success via
random exploration is highly unlikely.
Over the last decades, a multitude of methods have been
developed to help with the above mentioned exploration
problem. These include for example: shaping rewards (Ng
et al., 1999; Randløv & Alstrøm, 1998; Gu et al., 2017),
curriculum learning (Heess et al., 2017; Ghosh et al., 2018;
Forestier et al., 2017), transfer of learned policies from
*

1

Equal contribution Google DeepMind, London, GB. Correspondence to: Martin Riedmiller <riedmiller@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

simulation to reality (see Duan et al. (2017); Sadeghi et al.
(2017); Tobin et al. (2017); Rusu et al. (2017); Hanna &
Stone (2017) for recent examples), learning from demonstrations (Ross et al., 2011; Vecerik et al., 2017; Kober & Peters,
2011; Sermanet et al., 2017; Nair et al., 2017), learning with
model guidance, see e.g. Montgomery & Levine (2016), or
inverse RL (Ng & Russell, 2000; Ziebart et al., 2008). All
of these approaches rely on the availability of prior knowledge that is specific to a task. Moreover, they often bias
the control policy in a certain – potentially suboptimal –
direction. For example, using a shaped reward designed by
the experimenter, inevitably, biases the solutions that the
agent can find. In contrast to this, when a sparse task formulation is used, the agent can discover novel and potentially
preferable solutions. We would thus, arguably, prefer to
develop methods that support the agent during learning but
preserve the ability of the agent to learn from sparse rewards.
Ideally, our new methods should reduce the specific prior
task knowledge that is required to cope with sparse rewards.
In this paper, we introduce a new method dubbed Scheduled
Auxiliary Control (SAC-X, with X denoting the scheduler
type), as a first step towards such an approach. It is based
on four main principles:
1. Every state-action pair is paired with a vector of rewards, consisting of (typically sparse) externally provided rewards and (typically sparse) internal auxiliary
rewards.
2. Each reward entry has an assigned policy, called intention in the following, which is trained to maximize its
corresponding cumulative reward.
3. There is a high-level scheduler which selects and executes the individual intentions with the goal of improving performance of the agent on the external tasks.
4. Learning is performed off-policy (and asynchronously
from policy execution) and the experience between
intentions is shared – to use information effectively.
Although the approach proposed in this paper is generally
applicable to a wider range of problems, we discuss our
method in the light of a typical robotics manipulation application with sparse rewards: stacking various objects and
cleaning a table.
Auxiliary rewards in these tasks are defined based on the

