S ADAG RAD: Strongly Adaptive Stochastic Gradient Methods

Zaiyi Chen * 1 2 Yi Xu * 2 Enhong Chen 1 Tianbao Yang 2

Abstract
Although the convergence rates of existing variants of A DAG RAD have a better dependence on
the number of iterations under the strong convexity condition, their iteration complexities have a
explicitly linear dependence on the dimensionality
of the problem. To alleviate this bad dependence,
we propose a simple yet novel variant of A DA G RAD for stochastic (weakly) strongly convex
optimization. Different from existing variants,
the proposed variant (referred to as S ADAG RAD)
uses an adaptive restarting scheme in which (i)
A DAG RAD serves as a sub-routine and is restarted periodically; (ii) the number of iterations for
restarting A DAG RAD depends on the history of
learning that incorporates knowledge of the geometry of the data. In addition to the adaptive
proximal functions and adaptive number of iterations for restarting, we also develop a variant that
is adaptive to the (implicit) strong convexity from
the data, which together makes the proposed algorithm strongly adaptive. In the worst case S ADA G RAD has an O(1/) iteration complexity for
finding an -optimal solution similar to other variants. However, it could enjoy faster convergence
and much better dependence on the problem’s
dimensionality when stochastic gradients are sparse. Extensive experiments on large-scale data
sets demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed
algorithms in comparison with several variants of
A DAG RAD and stochastic gradient method.

1. Introduction
A DAG RAD is a well-known method for general online and
stochastic optimization that adopts a step size adaptive to
each feature based on the learning history observed in earlier
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Science and Technology of China, China 2 The University of Iowa, USA. Correspondence to: Zaiyi Chen <czy6516@mail.ustc.edu.cn>, Yi Xu <yixu@uiowa.edu>, Tianbao Yang <tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

iterations. It has received tremendous interests for solving
big data learning problems (e.g., see (Dean et al., 2012)).
A rigorous regret analysis of A DAG RAD for online convex
optimization was provided in the original paper (Duchi et al.,
2011), which can be easily translated into a convergence
result in expectation for stochastic convex optimization.
In spite of the claimed/observed advantage of A DAG RAD
over stochastic gradient descent (SGD) method for general stochastic convex optimization (SCO), its benefit for
stochastic strongly convex optimization (SSCO) over SGD
diminishes due to its linear dependence on the problem’s
dimensionality and marginal benefit from sparse stochastic
gradients. In particular, SGD and its variants can enjoy a
convergence rate of O(G2 /(λT )) for SSCO (Hazan & Kale,
2011; Rakhlin et al., 2012; Shamir & Zhang, 2013; LacosteJulien et al., 2012), where T is the number of iterations,
G is a variance bound of stochastic gradient and O(·) only
hides a constant factor independent of the problem’s dimensionality. In contrast, the convergence result of A DAG RAD
for strongly convex function (Duchi et al., 2010) implies an
Pd
iteration complexity of O(G2∞ i=1 log(kg1:T,i k22 )/(λT )),
where g1:T,i is a vector of historical stochastic gradients of
the i-th dimension, and G∞ is the upper bound of stochastic
gradient’s infinity norm. It is notable that kg1:T,i k2 enters
into the logarithmic function, which gives marginal adaptive
benefit from sparse stochastic gradients and also a linear
dependence on the dimensionality d even in the presence of
sparse stochastic gradients. Such dependence also exists in
other variants such as SC-A DAG RAD (Mukkamala & Hein,
2017) and MetaGrad (van Erven & Koolen, 2016) for SSCO,
which are two recent variants of A DAG RAD with rigorous
regret analysis.
It remains an open problem how to develop a variant of
A DAG RAD that can enjoy greater benefit from sparse stochastic gradients and better dependence on the problem’s
dimensionality while still enjoying O(1/T ) convergence
rate for SSCO. This paper provides an affirmative solution
to address the problem. In particular, we consider the following SCO problem:
min F (w)

w∈Ω

(1)

where Ω ⊆ Rd is a closed convex set and F (w) is a proper
lower semi-continuous convex function that satisfies (2).

