Stability and Generalization of Learning Algorithms
that Converge to Global Optima
Zachary Charles 1 Dimitris Papailiopoulos 1

Abstract
We establish novel generalization bounds for
learning algorithms that converge to global minima. We derive black-box stability results that
only depend on the convergence of a learning algorithm and the geometry around the minimizers
of the empirical risk function. The results are
shown for non-convex loss functions satisfying
the Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL) and the quadratic
growth (QG) conditions, which we show arise for
1-layer neural networks with leaky ReLU activations and deep neural networks with linear activations. We use our results to establish the stability
of first-order methods such as stochastic gradient
descent (SGD), gradient descent (GD), randomized coordinate descent (RCD), and the stochastic variance reduced gradient method (SVRG), in
both the PL and the strongly convex setting. Our
results match or improve state-of-the-art generalization bounds and can easily extend to similar
optimization algorithms. Finally, although our results imply comparable stability for SGD and GD
in the PL setting, we show that there exist simple quadratic models with multiple local minima
where SGD is stable but GD is not.

1. Introduction
The recent success of training complex models at state-ofthe-art accuracy in many common machine learning tasks
has sparked significant interest and research in algorithmic
machine learning. In practice, not only can these complex deep neural models yield zero training loss, they can
also generalize surprisingly well (Zhang et al., 2016; Lin
& Tegmark, 2016). Although there has been significant
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Wisconsin, USA. Correspondence to:
Zachary Charles <zcharles@wisc.edu>, Dimitris Papailiopoulos
<dimitris@ece.wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

recent work in analyzing the generalization capacity of various learning algorithms, our theoretical understanding of
their generalization properties falls far below what has been
observed empirically.
A useful proxy for analyzing the generalization performance
of learning algorithms is that of stability. A training algorithm is stable if small changes in the training set result in
small differences in the output predictions of the trained
model. In their foundational work, Bousquet & Elisseeff
(2002) establish that stability begets generalization.
While there has been stability analysis for empirical risk
minimizers (Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2002; Mukherjee et al.,
2006), there are far fewer results for commonly used iterative learning algorithms. In a recent novel work, Hardt
et al. (2016) establish stability bounds for SGD, and discuss
algorithmic heuristics that provably increase the stability of
SGD models. Unfortunately, showing non-trivial stability
for more involved algorithms like SVRG (Johnson & Zhang,
2013) (even in the convex case), or SGD in more nuanced
non-convex setups is not straightforward. While Hardt et al.
(2016) provide an elegant analysis that shows stability of
SGD for non-convex loss functions, the result requires very
small step-sizes. The step-size is small enough that under
standard smoothness assumptions (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013),
approximate convergence may require an exponential number of steps (see Appendix section B.3). Generally, there
seems to be a trade-off between convergence and stability of
algorithms. In this work we show that under certain geometric assumptions on the loss function around global minima,
we can actually leverage the convergence properties of an
algorithm to prove that it is stable.
The goal of this work is to provide black-box and easy-touse stability results for a variety of learning algorithms in
non-convex settings. We show that this is in some cases
possible by decoupling the stability of global minima and
their proximity to models trained by learning algorithms.
Our Contributions: We establish that models trained by
algorithms that converge to global minima are stable under the Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL) and the quadratic growth
(QG) conditions (Karimi et al., 2016). Informally, these
conditions assert that the suboptimality of a model is upper

