Implicit Quantile Networks for Distributional Reinforcement Learning

Will Dabney * 1 Georg Ostrovski * 1 David Silver 1 Rémi Munos 1

Abstract
In this work, we build on recent advances in distributional reinforcement learning to give a generally applicable, flexible, and state-of-the-art distributional variant of DQN. We achieve this by
using quantile regression to approximate the full
quantile function for the state-action return distribution. By reparameterizing a distribution over
the sample space, this yields an implicitly defined
return distribution and gives rise to a large class of
risk-sensitive policies. We demonstrate improved
performance on the 57 Atari 2600 games in the
ALE, and use our algorithm’s implicitly defined
distributions to study the effects of risk-sensitive
policies in Atari games.

1. Introduction
Distributional reinforcement learning (Jaquette, 1973; Sobel,
1982; White, 1988; Morimura et al., 2010b; Bellemare et al.,
2017) focuses on the intrinsic randomness of returns within
the reinforcement learning (RL) framework. As the agent interacts with the environment, irreducible randomness seeps
in through the stochasticity of these interactions, the approximations in the agent’s representation, and even the
inherently chaotic nature of physical interaction (Yu et al.,
2016). Distributional RL aims to model the distribution over
returns, whose mean is the traditional value function, and to
use these distributions to evaluate and optimize a policy.
Any distributional RL algorithm is characterized by two
aspects: the parameterization of the return distribution, and
the distance metric or loss function being optimized. Together, these choices control assumptions about the random
returns and how approximations will be traded off. Categorical DQN (Bellemare et al., 2017, C51) combines a
categorical distribution and the cross-entropy loss with the
Cramér-minimizing projection (Rowland et al., 2018). For
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence
to: Will Dabney <wdabney@google.com>, Georg Ostrovski <ostrovski@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

this, it assumes returns are bounded in a known range and
trades off mean-preservation at the cost of overestimating
variance.
C51 outperformed all previous improvements to DQN on
a set of 57 Atari 2600 games in the Arcade Learning Environment (Bellemare et al., 2013), which we refer to as
the Atari-57 benchmark. Subsequently, several papers have
built upon this successful combination to achieve significant improvements to the state-of-the-art in Atari-57 (Hessel
et al., 2018; Gruslys et al., 2018), and challenging continuous control tasks (Barth-Maron et al., 2018).
These algorithms are restricted to assigning probabilities to
an a priori fixed, discrete set of possible returns. Dabney
et al. (2018) propose an alternate pair of choices, parameterizing the distribution by a uniform mixture of Diracs whose
locations are adjusted using quantile regression. Their algorithm, QR-DQN, while restricted to a discrete set of quantiles, automatically adapts return quantiles to minimize the
Wasserstein distance between the Bellman updated and current return distributions. This flexibility allows QR-DQN to
significantly improve on C51’s Atari-57 performance.
In this paper, we extend the approach of Dabney et al.
(2018), from learning a discrete set of quantiles to learning
the full quantile function, a continuous map from probabilities to returns. When combined with a base distribution,
such as U ([0, 1]), this forms an implicit distribution capable
of approximating any distribution over returns given sufficient network capacity. Our approach, implicit quantile
networks (IQN), is best viewed as a simple distributional
generalization of the DQN algorithm (Mnih et al., 2015),
and provides several benefits over QR-DQN.
First, the approximation error for the distribution is no
longer controlled by the number of quantiles output by
the network, but by the size of the network itself, and the
amount of training. Second, IQN can be used with as few, or
as many, samples per update as desired, providing improved
data efficiency with increasing number of samples per training update. Third, the implicit representation of the return
distribution allows us to expand the class of policies to more
fully take advantage of the learned distribution. Specifically,
by taking the base distribution to be non-uniform, we expand the class of policies to -greedy policies on arbitrary
distortion risk measures (Yaari, 1987; Wang, 1996).

