Partial Optimality and Fast Lower Bounds for Weighted Correlation Clustering

Jan-Hendrik Lange 1 2 Andreas Karrenbauer 1 Bjoern Andres 1 3 4

Abstract
Weighted correlation clustering is hard to solve
and hard to approximate for general graphs. Its
applications in network analysis and computer vision call for efficient algorithms. To this end, we
make three contributions: We establish partial optimality conditions that can be checked efficiently,
and doing so recursively solves the problem for
series-parallel graphs to optimality, in linear time.
We exploit the packing dual of the problem to
compute a heuristic, but non-trivial lower bound
faster than that of a canonical linear program relaxation. We introduce a re-weighting with the
dual solution by which efficient local search algorithms converge to better feasible solutions. The
effectiveness of our methods is demonstrated empirically on a number of benchmark instances.

1. Introduction
This paper is about weighted correlation clustering (Bansal
et al., 2004), a combinatorial optimization problem whose
feasible solutions are all clusterings of a graph, and whose
objective function is a sum of weights w0 , w1 : E → R+
0
defined on the edges E of the graph. The weight we0 is added
to the sum if the nodes {u, v} = e ∈ E are in the same
cluster, and the weight we1 is added to the sum if these nodes
are in distinct clusters. The problem consists in finding a
clustering of minimum weight.
Weighted correlation clustering has found applications in
the fields of network analysis (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2012)
and, more recently, computer vision (Kappes et al., 2011;
Keuper et al., 2015; Insafutdinov et al., 2016; Beier et al.,
2017; Tang et al., 2017), partly due to its key property that
the number of clusters is not fixed, constrained or penalized
in the problem statement but is instead defined by the (any)
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany 3 Bosch Center for
AI, Renningen, Germany 4 University of Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Jan-Hendrik Lange <jlange@mpi-inf.mpg.de>.

solution. Weighted correlation clustering in general graphs
is hard to solve exactly and hard to approximate (Demaine
et al., 2006). Remarkable progress has been made toward
algorithms that find feasible solutions by approximations
or heuristics (cf. Section 2). Yet, the computation of lower
bounds remains challenging for large instances (Swoboda
& Andres, 2017).
We make the following contributions: Firstly, in order to
reduce instances in size, we establish partial optimality conditions on the graph and weights that can be checked combinatorially in polynomial time and determine the values of
some variables in an optimal solution. By applying these
conditions recursively, we reduce an instance in size without restricting the quality of solutions. For series-parallel
graphs, our algorithm solves weighted correlation clustering
exactly and in linear time, as we show. For general graphs,
we demonstrate its effectiveness empirically.
Secondly, in order to compute lower bounds to the optimal objective value efficiently, we define an algorithm that
outputs a heuristic solution to a packing problem that is
the dual of a reformulation of weighted correlation clustering. Empirically, this algorithm is shown to exhibit a
run-time/tightness trade-off that is different from both the
cutting plane algorithm of Kappes et al. (2015) and the
message passing algorithm of Swoboda & Andres (2017),
both of which solve a canonical linear program relaxation
of weighted correlation clustering.
Thirdly, toward the goal of obtaining primal feasible solutions, we define a transformation of the weights w.r.t. our
heuristic solution to the dual problem. This transformation is again a heuristic and is motivated by complementary
slackness. Empirically, local search algorithms are shown
to find feasible solutions of lower original weight when
applied to instances with transformed weights.
In the supplementary material, we provide additional results
that were omitted from the main paper for the sake of space.
Implementations of our algorithms are provided on GitHub.

2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

2. Related Work
Weighted correlation clustering has a long history in the field
of combinatorial optimization. Grötschel & Wakabayashi
(1989) state an equivalent problem for complete graphs and

