The Mechanics of n-Player Differentiable Games
David Balduzzi 1 Sébastien Racanière 1 James Martens 1 Jakob Foerster 2 Karl Tuyls 1 Thore Graepel 1

Abstract
The cornerstone underpinning deep learning is the
guarantee that gradient descent on an objective
converges to local minima. Unfortunately, this
guarantee fails in settings, such as generative adversarial nets, where there are multiple interacting
losses. The behavior of gradient-based methods
in games is not well understood – and is becoming
increasingly important as adversarial and multiobjective architectures proliferate. In this paper,
we develop new techniques to understand and control the dynamics in general games. The key result
is to decompose the second-order dynamics into
two components. The first is related to potential
games, which reduce to gradient descent on an implicit function; the second relates to Hamiltonian
games, a new class of games that obey a conservation law, akin to conservation laws in classical
mechanical systems. The decomposition motivates Symplectic Gradient Adjustment (SGA), a
new algorithm for finding stable fixed points in
general games. Basic experiments show SGA is
competitive with recently proposed algorithms for
finding stable fixed points in GANs – whilst at
the same time being applicable to – and having
guarantees in – much more general games.

1. Introduction
Recent progress in machine learning is heavily dependent on
using gradient descent, applied to optimize the parameters
of models with respect to a (single) objectives. A basic
result is that gradient descent converges to a local minimum
of the objective under a broad range of conditions (Lee et al.,
2017). However, there is a rapidly growing set of powerful
models that do not optimize a single objective, including:
generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014),
proximal gradient TD learning (Liu et al., 2016), multi-level
1
DeepMind 2 University of Oxford. Correspondence to: David
Balduzzi <dbalduzzi@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

optimization (Pfau & Vinyals, 2016), synthetic gradients
(Jaderberg et al., 2017), hierarchical reinforcement learning
(Wayne & Abbott, 2014; Vezhnevets et al., 2017), curiosity
(Pathak et al., 2017), and imaginative agents (Racanière
et al., 2017). In effect, the models are trained via games
played by cooperating and competing modules.
No-regret algorithms such as gradient descent are guaranteed to converge to coarse correlated equilibria in games
(Stoltz & Lugosi, 2007). However, the dynamics do not
converge to Nash equilibria – and do not even stabilize –
in general (Mertikopoulos et al., 2018). Concretely, cyclic
behaviors emerge even in simple cases, see example 1.
This paper presents an analysis of the second-order structure
of game dynamics that allows to identify two classes of
games, potential and Hamiltonian, that are easy to solve
separately. We then derive symplectic gradient adjustment
(SGA), a method for finding stable fixed points in games.
SGA’s performance is evaluated in basic experiments.
Background and problem description. Procedures that
converge to Nash equilibria have been found for restricted
game classes: potential games, 2-player zero-sum games
and a few others (Hu & Wellman, 2003; Hart & Mas-Colell,
2013). Finding equilibria can be reformulated as a nonlinear
complementarity problem, but these are ‘hopelessly impractical to solve’ in general (Shoham & Leyton-Brown, 2008)
because the problem is PPAD hard (Daskalakis et al., 2009).
Players are primarily neural nets in our setting. We therefore restrict to gradient-based methods (game-theorists have
considered a much broader range of techniques). Losses are
not necessarily convex in any of their parameters, so Nash
equilibria do not necessarily exist. Leaving existence aside,
finding Nash equilibria is analogous to, but much harder
than, finding global minima in neural nets – which is not
realistic with gradient-based methods.
There are (at least) three problems with gradient descent in
games. Firstly, the potential existence of cycles (recurrent
dynamics) implies there are no convergence guarantees,
see example 1 and Mertikopoulos et al. (2018). Secondly,
even when gradient descent converges, the rate may be
too slow in practice because ‘rotational forces’ necessitate
extremely small learning rates (see figure 3). Finally, since
there is no single objective, there is no way to measure

