Learn from Your Neighbor:
Learning Multi-modal Mappings from Sparse Annotations

Ashwin Kalyan 1 Stefan Lee 1 Anitha Kannan 2 Dhruv Batra 1 3

Abstract
Many structured prediction problems (particularly
in vision and language domains) are ambiguous,
with multiple outputs being ‘correct’ for an input – e.g. there are many ways of describing an
image, multiple ways of translating a sentence;
however, exhaustively annotating the applicability of all possible outputs is intractable due to
exponentially large output spaces (e.g. all English
sentences). In practice, these problems are cast
as multi-class prediction, with the likelihood of
only a sparse set of annotations being maximized
– unfortunately penalizing for placing beliefs on
plausible but unannotated outputs. We make and
test the following hypothesis – for a given input,
the annotations of its neighbors may serve as an
additional supervisory signal. Specifically, we
propose an objective that transfers supervision
from neighboring examples. We first study the
properties of our developed method in a controlled
toy setup before reporting results on multi-label
classification and two image-grounded sequence
modeling tasks – captioning and question generation. We evaluate using standard task-specific
metrics and measures of output diversity, finding
consistent improvements over standard maximum
likelihood training and other baselines.

1. Introduction
In many real-world tasks, a single input is associated with
multiple correct outputs. For instance, as shown in Fig. 1,
multiple captions can accurately describe an image. For
tasks with small output spaces, it may be practical to treat
the problem under a multi-label formulation – learning to
predict the correctness of each possible output based on
exhaustive human annotations. However, for structured
1
Georgia Tech 2 Curai 3 Facebook AI Research. Correspondence
to: Ashwin Kalyan <ashwinkv@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

A home kitchen with wooden cabinets and a dinning table.
A family is eating dinner together at a kitchen table.
Freshly cut bread on a wooden table in a rustic kitchen.
People laughing and talking with each other at a table.

A home kitchen with wooden cabinets and a dinning table.

Figure 1. Many tasks exhibit many-to-many relationships between
inputs and outputs. Taking image captioning as an example, a
single image can be described with multiple captions (top) and
likewise a single caption can accurately describe multiple images
(bottom). In this work, we leverage these relationships in the data
to learn multi-modal output mappings from sparse annotations.

prediction tasks, the output space is exponentially large
(e.g. the space of all English sentences) such that collecting
exhuastive annotations is intractable even for a single input.
Instead, sparse annotations are obtained by collecting
human responses – leaving the correctness of a vast majority
of possible outputs uncertain.
This problem of multi-label classification with missing labels has been addressed in prior work by either
imposing structure on the label space such as known
label taxonomies (Verma & Jawahar, 2013; Deng et al.,
2014), or by imposing constraints on the model parameters
(Yu et al., 2014) or the posterior distributions (Lin et al.,
2014b) to effectively compress the label space. However,
these approaches do not scale to the exponentially large
label spaces often seen in structured prediction tasks like
sequence-modeling (e.g. |V|T length–T sentences in captioning where V is the vocabulary). As a consequence, such
tasks are often cast as multi-class problems with parameters
learned to maximize the likelihood of a sparse set of human
annotations (i.e. Maximum Likelihood training) – implicitly
enforcing the unreasonable assumption that all outputs that
are not annotated must be incorrect.
Much contemporary research has been invested in the more
expensive yet viable option of curating massive datasets that

