Differentially Private Matrix Completion Revisited

Prateek Jain 1 Om Thakkar 2 Abhradeep Thakurta 3

Abstract
We provide the first provably joint differentially
private algorithm with formal utility guarantees
for the problem of user-level privacy-preserving
collaborative filtering. Our algorithm is based on
the Frank-Wolfe method, and it consistently estimates the underlying preference matrix as long
as the number of users m is ω(n5/4 ), where n
is the number of items, and
√ each user provides
her preference for at least n randomly selected
items. Along the way, we provide an optimal
differentially private algorithm for singular vector computation, based on the celebrated Oja’s
method, that provides significant savings in terms
of space and time while operating on sparse matrices. We also empirically evaluate our algorithm on a suite of datasets, and show that it consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art private
algorithms.

1. Introduction
Collaborative filtering (or matrix completion) is a popular
approach for modeling the recommendation system problem, where the goal is to provide personalized recommendations about certain items to a user (Koren & Bell, 2015).
In other words, the objective of a personalized recommendation system is to learn the entire users-items preference
matrix Y ∗ ∈ <m×n using a small number of user-item
preferences Yij∗ , (i, j) ∈ [m] × [n], where m is the number of users and n is the number of items. Naturally, in
absence of any structure in Y ∗ , the problem is ill-defined
as the unknown entries of Y ∗ can be arbitrary. Hence, a
popular modeling hypothesis is that the underlying preference matrix Y ∗ is low-rank, and thus, the collaborative
filtering problem reduces to that of low-rank matrix com1

Microsoft Research. Email: prajain@microsoft.com
Department of Computer Science, Boston University. Email:
omthkkr@bu.edu 3 Computer Science Department, University
of California Santa Cruz. Email: aguhatha@ucsc.edu. Correspondence to: Om Thakkar <omthkkr@bu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

pletion (Recht, 2011; Candes & Recht, 2012). One can also
enhance this formulation using side-information like userfeatures or item-features (Yu et al., 2014).
Naturally, personalization problems require collecting and
analyzing sensitive customer data like their preferences for
various items, which can lead to serious privacy breaches
(Korolova, 2010; Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2010; Calandrino et al., 2011). In this work, we attempt to address this
problem of privacy-preserving recommendations using collaborative filtering (McSherry & Mironov, 2009; Liu et al.,
2015). We answer the following question in the affirmative: Can we design a matrix completion algorithm which
keeps all the ratings of a user private, i.e., guarantees userlevel privacy while still providing accurate recommendations? In particular, we provide the first differentially private (Dwork et al., 2006b) matrix completion algorithms
with provable accuracy guarantees. Differential privacy
(DP) is a rigorous privacy notion which formally protects
the privacy of any user participating in a statistical computation by controlling her influence to the final output.
Most of the prior works on DP matrix completion (and lowrank approximation) (Blum et al., 2005; Chan et al., 2011;
Hardt & Roth, 2012; 2013; Kapralov & Talwar, 2013;
Dwork et al., 2014b) have provided guarantees which are
non-trivial only in the entry-level privacy setting, i.e., they
preserve privacy of only a single rating of a user. Hence,
they are not suitable for preserving a user’s privacy in practical recommendation systems. In fact, their trivial extension to user-level privacy leads to vacuous bounds (see Table 1). Some works (McSherry & Mironov, 2009; Liu et al.,
2015) do serve as an exception, and directly address the
user-level privacy problem. However, they only show empirical evidences of their effectiveness; they do not provide
formal error bounds.1 In contrast, we provide an efficient
algorithm based on the classic Frank-Wolfe (FW) procedure (Frank & Wolfe, 1956), and show that it gives strong
utility guarantees while preserving user-level privacy. Furthermore, we empirically demonstrate its effectiveness on
various benchmark datasets.
Our private FW procedure needs to compute the top right
singular vector of a sparse user preference matrix, while
1
In case of (Liu et al., 2015), the DP guarantee itself might
require an exponential amount of computation.

