A Probabilistic Theory of Supervised Similarity Learning
for Pointwise ROC Curve Optimization

Robin Vogel 1 2 Aurélien Bellet 3 Stéphan Clémençon 1

Abstract
The performance of many machine learning techniques depends on the choice of an appropriate
similarity or distance measure on the input space.
Similarity learning (or metric learning) aims at
building such a measure from training data so that
observations with the same (resp. different) label are as close (resp. far) as possible. In this
paper, similarity learning is investigated from the
perspective of pairwise bipartite ranking, where
the goal is to rank the elements of a database by
decreasing order of the probability that they share
the same label with some query data point, based
on the similarity scores. A natural performance
criterion in this setting is pointwise ROC optimization: maximize the true positive rate under a
fixed false positive rate. We study this novel perspective on similarity learning through a rigorous
probabilistic framework. The empirical version of
the problem gives rise to a constrained optimization formulation involving U -statistics, for which
we derive universal learning rates as well as faster
rates under a noise assumption on the data distribution. We also address the large-scale setting by
analyzing the effect of sampling-based approximations. Our theoretical results are supported by
illustrative numerical experiments.

1. Introduction
Similarity (or distance) functions play a key role in many
machine learning algorithms for problems ranging from
classification (e.g., k-nearest neighbors) and clustering (e.g.,
k-means) to dimensionality reduction (van der Maaten &
Hinton, 2008) and ranking (Chechik et al., 2010). The success of such methods are heavily dependent on the relevance
1

Télécom ParisTech, Paris, France 2 IDEMIA, Colombes,
France 3 INRIA, France. Correspondence to: Robin Vogel
<robin.vogel@telecom-paristech.fr>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

of the similarity function to the task and dataset of interest.
This has motivated the research in similarity and distance
metric learning (Bellet et al., 2015), a line of work which
consists in automatically learning a similarity function from
data. This training data often comes in the form of pairwise
similarity judgments derived from labels, such as positive
(resp. negative) pairs composed of two instances with same
(resp. different) label. Most existing algorithms can then be
framed as unconstrained optimization problems where the
objective is to minimize some average loss function over
the set of similarity judgments (see for instance Goldberger
et al., 2004; Weinberger & Saul, 2009; Bellet et al., 2012,
for methods tailored to classification). Some generalization bounds for this class of methods have been derived,
accounting for the specific dependence structure found in
the training similarity judgments (Jin et al., 2009; Bellet &
Habrard, 2015; Cao et al., 2016; Jain et al., 2017; Verma
& Branson, 2015). We refer to Kulis (2012) and Bellet
et al. (2015) for detailed surveys on similarity and metric
learning.
In this paper, we study similarity learning from the perspective of pairwise bipartite ranking, where the goal is to
rank the elements of a database by decreasing order of the
probability that they share the same label with some query
data point. This problem is motivated by many concrete
applications: for instance, biometric identification aims to
check the claimed identity of an individual by matching
her biometric information (e.g., a photo taken at an airport)
with a large reference database of authorized people (e.g.,
of passport photos) (Jain et al., 2011). Given a similarity
function and a threshold, the database elements are ranked
in decreasing order of similarity score with the query, and
the matching elements are those whose score is above the
threshold. In this context, performance criteria are related
to the ROC curve associated with the similarity function,
i.e., the relation between the false positive rate and the true
positive rate. Previous approaches have empirically tried
to optimize the Area under the ROC curve (AUC) of the
similarity function (McFee & Lanckriet, 2010; Huo et al.,
2018), without establishing any generalization guarantees.
The AUC is a global summary of the ROC curve which
penalizes pairwise ranking errors regardless of the positions
in the list. More local versions of the AUC (e.g., focusing

