Accelerated Spectral Ranking

Arpit Agarwal 1 Prathamesh Patil 1 Shivani Agarwal 1

Abstract
The problem of rank aggregation from pairwise
and multiway comparisons has a wide range of implications, ranging from recommendation systems
to sports rankings to social choice. Some of the
most popular algorithms for this problem come
from the class of spectral ranking algorithms;
these include the rank centrality algorithm for pairwise comparisons, which returns consistent estimates under the Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model
for pairwise comparisons (Negahban et al., 2017),
and its generalization, the Luce spectral ranking
algorithm, which returns consistent estimates under the more general multinomial logit (MNL)
model for multiway comparisons (Maystre &
Grossglauser, 2015). In this paper, we design a
provably faster spectral ranking algorithm, which
we call accelerated spectral ranking (ASR), that
is also consistent under the MNL/BTL models.
Our accelerated algorithm is achieved by designing a random walk that has a faster mixing time
than the random walks associated with previous
algorithms. In addition to a faster algorithm, our
results yield improved sample complexity bounds
for recovery of the MNL/BTL parameters: to the
best of our knowledge, we give the first general
sample complexity bounds for recovering the parameters of the MNL model from multiway comparisons under any (connected) comparison graph
(and improve significantly over previous bounds
for the BTL model for pairwise comparisons).
We also give a message-passing interpretation of
our algorithm, which suggests a decentralized distributed implementation. Our experiments on several real world and synthetic datasets confirm that
our new ASR algorithm is indeed orders of magnitude faster than existing algorithms.
1
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. Correspondence to:
Arpit Agarwal <aarpit@seas.upenn.edu>, Shivani Agarwal <ashivani@seas.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The problem of rank aggregation from pairwise or multiway comparisons is a fundamental one in machine learning
with applications in recommendation systems, sports, social
choice etc. In this problem, given pairwise or multiway comparisons among n items, the goal is to learn a score for each
item. These scores can further be used to produce a ranking
over these items. For example, in recommendation systems,
the goal might be to learn a ranking over items by observing
the choices that users make when presented with different
subsets of these items; in sports, the goal might be to rank
teams/individuals at the end of a tournament based on pairwise or multiway games between these individuals/teams; in
social choice, the goal might be to aggregate the choices of
individuals when presented with different alternatives such
as candidates in an election.
In the case of pairwise comparisons, a popular model is
the Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model (Bradley & Terry,
1952; Luce, 1959) which posits that given a set of n items,
there is a positive weight wi associated with each item i,
and the probability that i is preferred over j in a pairwise
i
comparison between i and j is wiw+w
. The BTL model is a
j
special case of the multinomial logit (MNL)/Plackett-Luce
model (Plackett, 1975; McFadden, 1974) which is defined
for more general multiway comparisons. Under the MNL
model, the probability that an item i is preferred amongst
all items in a set S is P wi wj .
j∈S

Rank aggregation under pairwise comparisons has been an
active area of research, and several algorithms have been
proposed that are consistent under the BTL model (Negahban et al., 2017; Rajkumar & Agarwal, 2014; Hunter, 2004;
Chen & Suh, 2015; Jang et al., 2016; Guiver & Snelson,
2009; Soufiani et al., 2013). The case of multiway comparisons has also received some attention recently (Maystre &
Grossglauser, 2015; Jang et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017).
Two popular algorithms are the rank centrality (RC) algorithm (Negahban et al., 2017) for the case of pairwise
comparisons, and its generalization to the case of multiway
comparisons, called the Luce spectral ranking (LSR) algorithm (Maystre & Grossglauser, 2015). The key idea behind
these algorithms is to construct a random walk (equivalently
a Markov chain) over the comparison graph on n items,
where there is an edge between two items if they are com-

