Invariance of Weight Distributions in Rectified MLPs

Russell Tsuchida 1 Farbod Roosta-Khorasani 2 3 Marcus Gallagher 1

Abstract
An interesting approach to analyzing neural networks that has received renewed attention is to
examine the equivalent kernel of the neural network. This is based on the fact that a fully
connected feedforward network with one hidden layer, a certain weight distribution, an activation function, and an infinite number of neurons can be viewed as a mapping into a Hilbert
space. We derive the equivalent kernels of MLPs
with ReLU or Leaky ReLU activations for all
rotationally-invariant weight distributions, generalizing a previous result that required Gaussian weight distributions. Additionally, the Central Limit Theorem is used to show that for certain activation functions, kernels corresponding
to layers with weight distributions having 0 mean
and finite absolute third moment are asymptotically universal, and are well approximated by
the kernel corresponding to layers with spherical
Gaussian weights. In deep networks, as depth increases the equivalent kernel approaches a pathological fixed point, which can be used to argue
why training randomly initialized networks can
be difficult. Our results also have implications
for weight initialization.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have recently been applied to a number
of diverse problems with impressive results (van den Oord
et al., 2016; Silver et al., 2017; Berthelot et al., 2017).
These breakthroughs largely appear to be driven by ap1
School of ITEE, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia 2 School of Mathematics and
Physics, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia 3 International Computer Science Institute,
Berkeley, California, USA. Correspondence to:
Russell Tsuchida <s.tsuchida@uq.edu.au>, Farbod RoostaKhorasani <fred.roosta@uq.edu.au>,
Marcus Gallagher
<marcusg@uq.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

plication rather than an understanding of the capabilities
and training of neural networks. Recently, significant work
has been done to increase understanding of neural networks (Choromanska et al., 2015; Haeffele & Vidal, 2015;
Poole et al., 2016; Schoenholz et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2016; Martin & Mahoney, 2017; Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby,
2017; Balduzzi et al., 2017; Raghu et al., 2017). However,
there is still work to be done to bring theoretical understanding in line with the results seen in practice.
The connection between neural networks and kernel machines has long been studied (Neal, 1994). Much past
work has been done to investigate the equivalent kernel
of certain neural networks, either experimentally (Burgess,
1997), through sampling (Sinha & Duchi, 2016; Livni
et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2017), or analytically by assuming some random distribution over the weight parameters
in the network (Williams, 1997; Cho & Saul, 2009; Pandey
& Dukkipati, 2014a;b; Daniely et al., 2016; Bach, 2017a).
Surprisingly, in the latter approach, rarely have distributions other than the Gaussian distribution been analyzed.
This is perhaps due to early influential work on Bayesian
Networks (MacKay, 1992), which laid a strong mathematical foundation for a Bayesian approach to training networks. Another reason may be that some researchers may
hold the intuitive (but not necessarily principled) view that
the Central Limit Theorem (CLT) should somehow apply.
In this work, we investigate the equivalent kernels for networks with Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU), Leaky ReLU
(LReLU) or other activation functions, one-hidden layer,
and more general weight distributions. Our analysis carries
over to deep networks. We investigate the consequences
that weight initialization has on the equivalent kernel at
the beginning of training. While initialization schemes that
mitigate exploding/vanishing gradient problems (Hochreiter, 1991; Bengio et al., 1994; Hochreiter et al., 2001)
for other activation functions and weight distribution combinations have been explored in earlier works (Glorot &
Bengio, 2010; He et al., 2015), we discuss an initialization
scheme for Muli-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) with LReLUs
and weights coming from distributions with 0 mean and finite absolute third moment. The derived kernels also allow
us to analyze the loss of information as an input is propagated through the network, offering a complementary view
to the shattered gradient problem (Balduzzi et al., 2017).

