Bounds on the Approximation Power of Feedforward Neural Networks

Mohammad Mehrabi 1 Aslan Tchamkerten 2 Mansoor I. Yousefi 2

Abstract
The approximation power of general feedforward
neural networks with piecewise linear activation
functions is investigated. First, lower bounds on
the size of a network are established in terms
of the approximation error and network depth
and width. These bounds improve upon stateof-the-art bounds for certain classes of functions,
such as strongly convex functions. Second, an
upper bound is established on the difference of
two neural networks with identical weights but
different activation functions.

1. Introduction
It is well-known that sufficiently large multi-layer feedforward networks can approximate any function with desired
accuracy (Hornik et al., 1989). An important problem then
is to determine the smallest neural network for a given task
and accuracy. The standard guideline is the approximation
power (variously known as expressiveness) of the network
which quantifies the size of the neural network, typically in
terms of depth and width, in order to approximate a class of
functions within a given error. In particular, several works
provided evidence that deeper networks perform better than
shallow ones, given a fixed number of hidden units (Bianchini & Scarselli, 2014; Delalleau & Bengio, 2011; Liang
& Srikant, 2017; Mhaskar et al., 2016; Pascanu et al., 2014;
Telgarsky, 2015; 2016; Yarotsky, 2017).1
A popular activation function is the rectified linear unit
(ReLU), partly because of its low complexity when coupled
with backpropagation training (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). It
has, therefore, become of interest to determine the power
of neural networks with ReLU’s and, more generally, with
piecewise linear activation functions.
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Sharif University of
Technology, Iran 2 Department of Communications and Electronics, Telecom ParisTech, France. Correspondence to: Mohammad
Mehrabi <mohamadmehrabi4@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).
1
For a nice counterexample see (Lu et al., 2017).

Determining the capacity of a neural networks with a piecewise linear activation function typically involves two steps.
First, evaluate the number of linear pieces (or break points)
that the network can produce and, second, tie this number
to the approximation error. The works (Montufar et al.,
2014; Pascanu et al., 2014) recently showed that a linear
increase in depth results in an exponential growth in the
number of linear pieces as opposed to width which results
only in a polynomial growth. Accordingly, the approximation capacity exhibits a similar tradeoff between depth and
width. For related works with respect to classification error
see (Telgarsky, 2015; 2016) and with respect to function
approximation error see (Liang & Srikant, 2017; Mhaskar
et al., 2016; Yarotsky, 2017).
In this paper we consider general feedforward neural networks with piecewise linear activation functions and establish bounds on the size of the network in terms of the
approximation error, the depth d, the width, and the dimension of the input space to approximate a given function.
We first establish an improved upper bound on the number
of break points that such a network can produce which is
a multiplicative factor dd smaller than the currently best
known from (Yarotsky, 2017). This upper bound is obtained
by investigating neuron state transitions as introduced in
(Raghu et al., 2017). Combining this upper bound with
lower bounds in terms of error and dimension, we obtain
necessary conditions on the depth, width, error, and dimension for a neural network to approximate a given function.
These bounds significantly improve on the corresponding
state-of-the-art bounds for certain classes of functions (Theorems 1,2 and Corollaries 1,2,3).
The second contribution of the paper (Theorem 3) is an
upper bound on the difference of two neural networks with
identical weights but different activation functions. This
problem is related to “activation function simulation” investigated in (DasGupta & Schnitger, 1993) which leverages
network topology to compensate a change in activation function.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we briefly
introduce the setup. In Section 3 we present the main results
which are then compared with the corresponding ones in the
recent literature in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 contains the
proofs.

