Noise2Noise: Learning Image Restoration without Clean Data

Jaakko Lehtinen1 2 Jacob Munkberg1 Jon Hasselgren1 Samuli Laine1 Tero Karras1 Miika Aittala3 Timo Aila1

Abstract
We apply basic statistical reasoning to signal reconstruction by machine learning – learning to
map corrupted observations to clean signals – with
a simple and powerful conclusion: it is possible to learn to restore images by only looking at
corrupted examples, at performance at and sometimes exceeding training using clean data, without
explicit image priors or likelihood models of the
corruption. In practice, we show that a single
model learns photographic noise removal, denoising synthetic Monte Carlo images, and reconstruction of undersampled MRI scans – all corrupted
by different processes – based on noisy data only.

1. Introduction
Signal reconstruction from corrupted or incomplete measurements is an important subfield of statistical data analysis.
Recent advances in deep neural networks have sparked significant interest in avoiding the traditional, explicit a priori
statistical modeling of signal corruptions, and instead learning to map corrupted observations to the unobserved clean
versions. This happens by training a regression model, e.g.,
a convolutional neural network (CNN), with a large number
of pairs (x̂i , yi ) of corrupted inputs x̂i and clean targets yi
and minimizing the empirical risk
X
argmin
L (fθ (x̂i ), yi ) ,
(1)
θ

i

where fθ is a parametric family of mappings (e.g., CNNs),
under the loss function L. We use the notation x̂ to underline the fact that the corrupted input x̂ ∼ p(x̂|yi ) is a
random variable distributed according to the clean target.
Training data may include, for example, pairs of short and
long exposure photographs of the same scene, incomplete
and complete k-space samplings of magnetic resonance
images, fast-but-noisy and slow-but-converged ray-traced
1
NVIDIA 2 Aalto University 3 MIT CSAIL. Correspondence to:
Jaakko Lehtinen <jlehtinen@nvidia.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

renderings of a synthetic scene, etc. Significant advances
have been reported in several applications, including Gaussian denoising, de-JPEG, text removal (Mao et al., 2016),
super-resolution (Ledig et al., 2017), colorization (Zhang
et al., 2016), and image inpainting (Iizuka et al., 2017). Yet,
obtaining clean training targets is often difficult or tedious:
a noise-free photograph requires a long exposure; full MRI
sampling precludes dynamic subjects; etc.
In this work, we observe that we can often learn to turn
bad images into good images by only looking at bad images,
and do this just as well – sometimes even better – as if we
were using clean examples. Further, we require neither an
explicit statistical likelihood model of the corruption nor
an image prior, and instead learn these indirectly from the
training data. (Indeed, in one of our examples, synthetic
Monte Carlo renderings, the non-stationary noise cannot
be characterized analytically.) In addition to denoising, our
observation is directly applicable to inverse problems such
as MRI reconstruction from undersampled data. While our
conclusion is almost trivial from a statistical perspective, it
significantly eases practical learned signal reconstruction by
lifting requirements on availability of training data.

2. Theoretical Background
Assume that we have a set of unreliable measurements
(y1 , y2 , ...) of the room temperature. A common strategy
for estimating the true unknown temperature is to find a
number z that has the smallest average deviation from the
measurements according to some loss function L:
argmin Ey {L(z, y)}.

(2)

z

For the L2 loss L(z, y) = (z − y)2 , this minimum is found
at the arithmetic mean of the observations:
z = Ey {y}.

(3)

The L1 loss, the sum of absolute deviations L(z, y) = |z −
y|, in turn, has its optimum at the median of the observations.
The general class of deviation-minimizing estimators are
known as M-estimators (Huber, 1964). From a statistical
viewpoint, summary estimation using these common loss
functions can be seen as ML estimation by interpreting the
loss function as the negative log likelihood.

