Minibatch Gibbs Sampling on Large Graphical Models

Christopher De Sa 1 Vincent Chen 1 Wing Wong 2

Abstract
Gibbs sampling is the de facto Markov chain
Monte Carlo method used for inference and learning on large scale graphical models. For complicated factor graphs with lots of factors, the
performance of Gibbs sampling can be limited
by the computational cost of executing a single
update step of the Markov chain. This cost is proportional to the degree of the graph, the number
of factors adjacent to each variable. In this paper,
we show how this cost can be reduced by using
minibatching: subsampling the factors to form
an estimate of their sum. We introduce several
minibatched variants of Gibbs, show that they can
be made unbiased, prove bounds on their convergence rates, and show that under some conditions
they can result in asymptotic single-update-runtime speedups over plain Gibbs sampling.

1. Introduction
Gibbs sampling is a Markov chain Monte Carlo method that
is one of the most widespread techniques used with graphical models (Koller & Friedman, 2009). Gibbs sampling is
an iterative method that repeatedly resamples a variable in
the model from its conditional distribution, a process that is
guaranteed to converge asymptotically to the desired distribution. Since these updates are typically simple and fast to
run, Gibbs sampling can be applied to a variety of problems,
and has been used for inference on large-scale graphical
models in many systems (Newman et al., 2007; Lunn et al.,
2009; McCallum et al., 2009; Smola & Narayanamurthy,
2010; Theis et al., 2012; Zhang & Ré, 2014).

is a graph-local algorithm, in the sense that each update only
needs to reference data associated with a local neighborhood
of the factor graph, as graphs become large and highly connected, even these local neighborhoods can become huge.
To make matters worse, complicated models tend to have
categorical variables with large domains: for example, the
variables can represent US States or ZIP codes, where there
are dozens to thousands of possible choices. The cost of
computing a single iteration of Gibbs sampling is proportional to the product of the size of the local neighborhood
and the size of the domain of the categorical random variables. More explicitly, if the maximum degree of a variable
in the factor graph is ∆, and each variable can take on D
possible values, then a single Gibbs sampling update takes
O(D∆) time to compute in the worst case.
This effect limits the scalability of Gibbs sampling. What
started as a fast, efficient system can become dramatically
slower over the course of development as models become
more complicated, new factors are added, and new values are included in the variables’ domains. To address
this, practitioners have developed techniques such as pruning (Rekatsinas et al., 2017) which improve scalability by
making the factor graphs simpler. While this does make
Gibbs sampling faster, it comes at the cost of introducing
bias which reduces fidelity to the original model.

Unfortunately, for large graphical models with many factors,
the computational cost of running an iteration of Gibbs sampling can become prohibitive. Even though Gibbs sampling

In this paper, we explore a more principled approach to
making Gibbs sampling scalable. Our approach is inspired
by minibatching in stochastic gradient descent, which has
been used with great success to scale up machine learning
training. The main idea is that, when a Gibbs sampling
update depends on a large local graph neighborhood, we
can instead randomly subsample the neighborhood. Supposing the random sample is representative of the rest of the
neighborhood, we can proceed to perform the update using
just the random sample, rather than the (much larger) entire
neighborhood. In this paper, we study minibatching for
Gibbs Sampling, and we make the following contributions:

1
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY, USA 2 Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Christopher De
Sa <cdesa@cs.cornell.edu>.

• We introduce techniques for minibatching which can
dramatically reduce the cost of running Gibbs sampling, while provably adding no bias to the samples.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

• We prove bounds on the convergence rates of our minibatch Gibbs algorithms, as measured by the spectral
gap of the Markov chain. We give a recipe for how to

