Bandits with Delayed, Aggregated Anonymous Feedback

Ciara Pike-Burke 1 Shipra Agrawal 2 Csaba Szepesvári 3 4 Steffen Grünewälder 1

Abstract
We study a variant of the stochastic K-armed
bandit problem, which we call “bandits with delayed, aggregated anonymous feedback”. In this
problem, when the player pulls an arm, a reward
is generated, however it is not immediately observed. Instead, at the end of each round the
player observes only the sum of a number of previously generated rewards which happen to arrive in the given round. The rewards are stochastically delayed and due to the aggregated nature
of the observations, the information of which arm
led to a particular reward is lost. The question is
what is the cost of the information loss due to this
delayed, aggregated anonymous feedback? Previous works have studied bandits with stochastic,
non-anonymous delays and found that the regret
increases only by an additive factor relating to the
expected delay. In this paper, we show that this
additive regret increase can be maintained in the
harder delayed, aggregated anonymous feedback
setting when the expected delay (or a bound on it)
is known. We provide an algorithm that matches
the worst case regret of the non-anonymous problem exactly when the delays are bounded, and
up to logarithmic factors or an additive variance
term for unbounded delays.

1. Introduction
The stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is
a prominent framework for capturing the explorationexploitation tradeoff in online decision making and experiment design. The MAB problem proceeds in discrete sequential rounds, where in each round, the player pulls one
1
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK 2 Department of Industrial Engineering and
Operations Research, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
3
DeepMind, London, UK 4 Department of Computing Science,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. Correspondence
to: Ciara Pike-Burke <ciara.pikeburke@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

of the K possible arms. In the classic stochastic MAB setting, the player immediately observes stochastic feedback
from the pulled arm in the form of a ‘reward’ which can be
used to improve the decisions in subsequent rounds. One
of the main application areas of MABs is in online advertising. Here, the arms correspond to adverts, and the feedback would correspond to conversions, that is users buying a product after seeing an advert. However, in practice,
these conversions may not necessarily happen immediately
after the advert is shown, and it may not always be possible to assign the credit of a sale to a particular showing
of an advert. A similar challenge is encountered in many
other applications, e.g., in personalized treatment planning,
where the effect of a treatment on a patient’s health may be
delayed, and it may be difficult to determine which out of
several past treatments caused the change in the patient’s
health; or, in content design applications, where the effects
of multiple changes in the website design on website traffic
and footfall may be delayed and difficult to distinguish.
In this paper, we propose a new bandit model to handle online problems with such ‘delayed, aggregated and anonymous’ feedback. In our model, a player interacts with an
environment of K actions (or arms) in a sequential fashion.
At each time step the player selects an action which leads
to a reward generated at random from the underlying reward distribution. At the same time, a nonnegative random
integer-valued delay is also generated i.i.d. from an underlying delay distribution. Denoting this delay by τ ≥ 0 and
the index of the current round by t, the reward generated
in round t will arrive at the end of the (t + τ )th round. At
the end of each round, the player observes only the sum
of all the rewards that arrive in that round. Crucially, the
player does not know which of the past plays have contributed to this aggregated reward. We call this problem
multi-armed bandits with delayed, aggregated anonymous
feedback (MABDAAF). As in the standard MAB problem,
in MABDAAF, the goal is to maximize the cumulative reward from T plays of the bandit, or equivalently to minimize the regret. The regret is the total difference between
the reward of the optimal action and the actions taken.
If the delays are all zero, the MABDAAF problem reduces
to the standard (stochastic) MAB problem, which has been
studied considerably (e.g., Thompson, 1933; Lai & Robbins, 1985; Auer et al., 2002; Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi,

