Scalable Gaussian Processes with Grid-Structured Eigenfunctions (GP-GRIEF)

Trefor W. Evans 1 Prasanth B. Nair 1

Abstract
We introduce a kernel approximation strategy that
enables computation of the Gaussian process log
marginal likelihood and all hyperparameter derivatives in Oppq time. Our GRIEF kernel consists
of p eigenfunctions found using a Nyström approximation from a dense Cartesian product grid
of inducing points. By exploiting algebraic properties of Kronecker and Khatri-Rao tensor products, computational complexity of the training
procedure can be practically independent of the
number of inducing points. This allows us to
use arbitrarily many inducing points to achieve a
globally accurate kernel approximation, even in
high-dimensional problems. The fast likelihood
evaluation enables type-I or II Bayesian inference
on large-scale datasets. We benchmark our algorithms on real-world problems with up to twomillion training points and 1033 inducing points.

1. Introduction
Gaussian process (GP) modelling is a powerful Bayesian
approach for classification and regression, however, it is
restricted to modestly sized datasets since training and inference require Opn3 q time and Opn2 q storage, where n
is the number of training points (Rasmussen & Williams,
2006). This has motivated the development of approximate
GP methods that use a set of m (! nq inducing points to
reduce time and memory requirements to Opm2 n ` m3 q
and Opmnq, respectively (Smola & Bartlett, 2000; Snelson & Ghahramani, 2006; Titsias, 2009; Peng & Qi, 2015).
However, such techniques perform poorly if too few inducing points are used, and computational savings are lost on
complex datasets that require m to be large.
Wilson & Nickisch (2015) exploited the structure of inducing points placed on a Cartesian product grid, allowing for
1

University of Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Trefor W. Evans <trefor.evans@mail.utoronto.ca>, Prasanth B. Nair
<pbn@utias.utoronto.ca>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

m ą n while dramatically reducing computational demands
over an exact GP. This inducing point structure enables
significant performance gains in low-dimensions, however,
time and storage complexities scale exponentially with the
dataset dimensionality, rendering the technique intractable
for general learning problems unless a dimensionality reduction procedure is applied. In the present work, a Cartesian
product grid of inducing points is also considered, however,
we show that these computational bottlenecks can be eliminated by identifying and exploiting further structure of the
resulting matrices. The proposed approach leads to a highly
scalable algorithm which we call GP-GRIEF (Gaussian Processes with Grid-Structured Eigenfunctions). After an initial
setup cost of Opnp2 ` dnp ` dm3{d q, GP-GRIEF requires
only Oppq time and Oppq memory per log marginal likelihood evaluation, where d denotes the dataset dimensionality,
and p is the number of eigenfunctions that we will describe
next. We emphasize that our complexity is practically independent of m, which can generally be set arbitrarily high.
GP-GRIEF approximates an exact kernel as a finite sum
of eigenfunctions which we accurately compute using the
Nyström approximation conditioned on a huge number of
inducing points. In other words, our model is sparse in the
kernel eigenfunctions rather than the number of inducing
points, which can greatly exceed the size of the training set
due to the structure we introduce. This is attractive since it is
well-known that eigenfunctions produce the most compact
representation among orthogonal basis functions. Although
the eigenfunctions used are approximate, we demonstrate
convergence in the limit of large m. Additionally, our ability to fill out the input space with inducing points enables
accurate global approximations of the eigenfunctions, even
at test locations far from the training data. These basis functions also live in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space, unlike
some other sparse GPs whose bases have a pre-specified
form (e.g. Lázaro-Gredilla et al. (2010)). We summarize
our main contributions below

• We break the curse of dimensionality incurred by placing
inducing points on a full Cartesian product grid. Typically, a grid of inducing points results in a computational
complexity that scales exponentially in d, however, we reduce this complexity to linear in d by exploiting algebraic
properties of Kronecker and Khatri-Rao products.

