Fast Parametric Learning with Activation Memorization
Jack W Rae 1 2 Chris Dyer 1 Peter Dayan 3 Timothy P Lillicrap 1 2

Abstract
Neural networks trained with backpropagation
often struggle to identify classes that have been
observed a small number of times. In applications
where most class labels are rare, such as language
modelling, this can become a performance bottleneck. One potential remedy is to augment the network with a fast-learning non-parametric model
which stores recent activations and class labels
into an external memory. We explore a simplified architecture where we treat a subset of the
model parameters as fast memory stores. This can
help retain information over longer time intervals
than a traditional memory, and does not require
additional space or compute. In the case of image
classification, we display faster binding of novel
classes on an Omniglot image curriculum task.
We also show improved performance for wordbased language models on news reports (GigaWord), books (Project Gutenberg) and Wikipedia
articles (WikiText-103) — the latter achieving a
state-of-the-art perplexity of 29.2.

1. Introduction
Neural networks can be trained to classify discrete outputs
by appending a softmax output layer. This is a linear map
projecting the d-dimensional hidden output of the network
to m outputs, where m is the number of distinct classes. A
softmax operator (Bridle, 1990) is then applied to produce a
probability distribution over classes. The parameters in this
softmax layer are typically optimized with the network’s
parameters by gradient descent.
We can think of the weights in the softmax layer ✓ 2 Rm⇥d
as a set of m vectors ✓[i]; i = 1, . . . , m that each corre1

DeepMind, London, UK 2 CoMPLEX, Computer Science,
University College London, London, UK 3 Gatsby Computational
Neuroscience Unit, University College London, UK. Correspondence to: Jack W Rae <jwrae@google.com>, Timothy P Lillicrap
<countzero@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

spond to a given class. When trained with a supervised loss,
such as cross-entropy, each step of gradient descent pulls the
parameter ✓[y], corresponding to the class label y, towards
having a greater inner product with the network output h,
and pushes all other parameters ✓[j] , j 6= y towards having
a smaller inner product with h.
One shortcoming of neural network classifiers trained with
backpropagation is that they require many input examples
for a given class in order to predict it with reasonable accuracy. That is, many positive class examples and optimization
steps are required to pull ✓[i] towards a point in space where
class i can then be recognized. While the learner will have
many opportunities to organize ✓[i] parameters associated
with frequent classes, infrequent class parameters will be
poorly estimated. In domains where new classes are frequently introduced, or large-scale classification problems
where some classes are very infrequently observed, this
estimation problem is potentially quite serious.
One approach to speed up learning, which has received revived interest, is meta-learning. Here, meta-learning refers
to algorithms which learn to produce or manipulate learning
algorithms (Thrun, 1998; Hochreiter et al., 2001), and it
operates by learning over a distribution of tasks or datasets.
A meta-learner applies knowledge from the global distribution of tasks to produce or optimize algorithms which
specialize to a given task instance. Meta-learning of neural
networks has seen promising results for applications such
as parameter optimization (Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Ravi
& Larochelle, 2016; Finn et al., 2017) and classification
(Santoro et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2018).
For classification, the networks are augmented with a differentiable external memory, and are trained with many rounds
of data — with class labels permuted between episodes.
Meta-learning can be very powerful for few-shot learning
in cases where there is a set of similar prior data to metalearn over, however it may not be practical for standalone
datasets. For example, if one wants to model the grammar
of computer code, it is unclear that a meta-learning system
trained over natural language will be useful. Also memorybased meta-learning requires backpropagating from the read
time to the original write time, which is not well suited to
applications where writes and reads are separated by many
time steps. In the case of modelling language, for example,

