Orthogonality-Promoting Distance Metric Learning: Convex Relaxation and
Theoretical Analysis

Pengtao Xie 1 2 Wei Wu 2 Yichen Zhu 3 Eric P. Xing 1

Abstract
Distance metric learning (DML), which learns
a distance metric from labeled “similar” and
“dissimilar” data pairs, is widely utilized. Recently, several works investigate orthogonalitypromoting regularization (OPR), which encourages the projection vectors in DML to be close
to being orthogonal, to achieve three effects:
(1) high balancedness – achieving comparable performance on both frequent and infrequent classes; (2) high compactness – using a
small number of projection vectors to achieve a
“good” metric; (3) good generalizability – alleviating overfitting to training data. While showing promising results, these approaches suffer
three problems. First, they involve solving nonconvex optimization problems where achieving
the global optimal is NP-hard. Second, it lacks
a theoretical understanding why OPR can lead
to balancedness. Third, the current generalization error analysis of OPR is not directly on the
regularizer. In this paper, we address these three
issues by (1) seeking convex relaxations of the
original nonconvex problems so that the global
optimal is guaranteed to be achievable; (2) providing a formal analysis on OPR’s capability of
promoting balancedness; (3) providing a theoretical analysis that directly reveals the relationship
between OPR and generalization performance.
Experiments on various datasets demonstrate that
our convex methods are more effective in promoting balancedness, compactness, and generalization, and are computationally more efficient,
compared with the nonconvex methods.
1
Petuum Inc 2 School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon
University 3 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University.
Correspondence to: Pengtao Xie <pengtao.xie@petuum.com>,
Eric P. Xing <eric.xing@petuum.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Given data pairs labeled as either “similar” or “dissimilar”,
distance metric learning (Xing et al., 2002; Weinberger
et al., 2005; Davis et al., 2007) learns a distance measure in such a way that similar examples are placed close
to each other while dissimilar ones are separated apart.
The learned distance metrics are important to many downstream tasks, such as retrieval (Chen et al., 2017), classification (Weinberger et al., 2005) and clustering (Xing et al.,
2002). One commonly used distance metric between two
examples x, y ∈ RD is: kAx − Ayk2 (Weinberger et al.,
2005; Xie, 2015; Chen et al., 2017), which is parameterized
by R projection vectors (in A ∈ RR×D ).
Many works (Wang et al., 2012; Xie, 2015; Wang et al.,
2015; Raziperchikolaei & Carreira-Perpinán, 2016; Chen
et al., 2017) have proposed orthogonality-promoting DML
to learn distance metrics that are (1) balanced: performing
equally well on data instances belonging to frequent and infrequent classes; (2) compact: using a small number of projection vectors to achieve a “good” metric, (i.e., capturing
well the relative distances of the data pairs); (3) generalizable: reducing the overfitting to training data. Regarding
balancedness, under many circumstances, the frequency
of classes, defined as the number of examples belonging
to each class, can be highly imbalanced. Classic DML
methods are sensitive to the skewness of the frequency
of the classes: they perform favorably on frequent classes
whereas less well on infrequent classes — a phenomenon
also confirmed in our experiments in Section 7. However,
infrequent classes are of crucial importance in many applications, and should not be ignored. For example, in a
clinical setting, many diseases occur infrequently, but are
life-threatening. Regarding compactness, the number of
the projection vectors R entails a tradeoff between performance and computational complexity (Ge et al., 2014b;
Xie, 2015; Raziperchikolaei & Carreira-Perpinán, 2016).
On one hand, more projection vectors bring in more expressiveness in measuring distance. On the other hand, a
larger R incurs a higher computational overhead since the
number of weight parameters in A grows linearly with R.
It is therefore desirable to keep R small without hurting
much ML performance. Regarding generalization perfor-

