Essentially No Barriers in Neural Network Energy Landscape

Felix Draxler 1 2 Kambis Veschgini 2 Manfred Salmhofer 2 Fred A. Hamprecht 1

Abstract
Training neural networks involves finding minima of a high-dimensional non-convex loss function. Relaxing from linear interpolations, we construct continuous paths between minima of recent neural network architectures on CIFAR10
and CIFAR100. Surprisingly, the paths are essentially flat in both the training and test landscapes.
This implies that minima are perhaps best seen as
points on a single connected manifold of low loss,
rather than as the bottoms of distinct valleys.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have achieved remarkable success in practical applications such as object recognition (He et al., 2016;
Huang et al., 2017), machine translation (Bahdanau et al.,
2015; Vinyals & Le, 2015), speech recognition (Hinton
et al., 2012; Graves et al., 2013; Xiong et al., 2017) etc.
Theoretical insights on why neural networks can be trained
successfully despite their high-dimensional and non-convex
loss functions are few or based on strong assumptions such
as the eigenvalues of the Hessian at critical points being
random (Dauphin et al., 2014), linear activations (Choromanska et al., 2014; Kawaguchi, 2016) or wide hidden layers (Soudry & Carmon, 2016; Nguyen & Hein, 2017).
In the current literature, minima of the loss function are
typically depicted as points at the bottom of a strictly convex
valley of a certain width that reflects the generalisation of
the network, with network parameters given by the location
of the minimum (Keskar et al., 2016). This is also the
picture obtained when the loss function of neural networks
is visualised in low dimension (Li et al., 2017).
In this work, we conjecture that neural network loss minima
are not isolated points in parameter space, but essentially
1

Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing (HCI), IWR,
Heidelberg University, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany 2 Institut
für Theoretische Physik, Heidelberg University, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. Correspondence to: Fred A. Hamprecht
<fred.hamprecht@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

form a connected manifold. More precisely, we argue that
the part of the parameter space where the loss remains below a certain low threshold forms one single connected
component.
We support the above claim by studying the energy landscape of several ResNets and DenseNets on CIFAR10 and
CIFAR100: For random pairs of minima, we construct continuous paths through parameter space for which the loss
remains very close to the value found directly at the minima.
An example for such a path is shown in Figure 1.

θ1

Linear interpolation

θ2

Our path

Figure 1. Left: A slice through the one million-dimensional training loss function of DenseNet-40-12 on CIFAR10 and the minimum energy path found by our method. The plane is spanned
by the two minima and the mean of the nodes of the path. Right:
Loss along the linear line segment between minima, and along our
high-dimensional path. Surprisingly, the energy along this path is
essentially flat.

Our main contribution is the finding of paths
1. that connect minima trained from different initialisations which are not related to each other via known
loss-conserving operations like rescaling,
2. along which the training loss remains essentially at the
same value as at the minima,
3. along which the test loss remains essentially constant
while the test error rate slightly increases.
The existence of such paths suggests that modern neural networks have enough parameters such that they can achieve

