Implicit Regularization in Nonconvex Statistical Estimation: Gradient Descent
Converges Linearly for Phase Retrieval and Matrix Completion

Cong Ma 1 Kaizheng Wang 1 Yuejie Chi 2 Yuxin Chen 3

Abstract

Recent years have seen a flurry of activities in designing provably efficient nonconvex optimization
procedures for solving statistical estimation problems. For various problems like phase retrieval or
low-rank matrix completion, state-of-the-art nonconvex procedures require proper regularization
(e.g. trimming, regularized cost, projection) in order to guarantee fast convergence. When it comes
to vanilla procedures such as gradient descent,
however, prior theory either recommends highly
conservative learning rates to avoid overshooting,
or completely lacks performance guarantees. This
paper uncovers a striking phenomenon in several
nonconvex problems: even in the absence of explicit regularization, gradient descent follows a
trajectory staying within a basin that enjoys nice
geometry, consisting of points incoherent with the
sampling mechanism. This “implicit regularization” feature allows gradient descent to proceed in
a far more aggressive fashion without overshooting, which in turn results in substantial computational savings. Focusing on two statistical estimation problems, i.e. solving random quadratic
systems of equations and low-rank matrix completion, we establish that gradient descent achieves
near-optimal statistical and computational guarantees without explicit regularization. As a byproduct, for noisy matrix completion, we demonstrate
that gradient descent enables optimal control of
both entrywise and spectral-norm errors.

1. Introduction
A wide spectrum of science and engineering applications
calls for solutions to a nonlinear system of equations. Imagine we have collected a set of data points y = {yj }1≤j≤m ,
generated by a nonlinear sensing system,

yj ≈ Aj x\ , 1 ≤ j ≤ m,
where x\ is the unknown object of interest, and the Aj ’s
are certain nonlinear maps known a priori. Can we hope to
reconstruct the underlying object x\ in a faithful yet efficient
manner? Problems of this kind abound in information and
statistical science, prominent examples including low-rank
matrix recovery (Keshavan et al., 2010; Candès & Recht,
2009), phase retrieval (Candès et al., 2013; Jaganathan et al.,
2015), and learning neural networks (Soltanolkotabi et al.,
2017; Zhong et al., 2017), to name just a few.
In principle, one can attempt reconstruction by seeking a
solution that minimizes the empirical loss, namely,
minimizex f (x) =

j=1

(1)

• Solving random quadratic systems of equations
(a.k.a. phase retrieval): where one wishes to solve for x\

\ 2
in m quadratic equations yj = a>
, 1 ≤ j ≤ m,
j x
with {aj }1≤j≤m denoting the known design vectors. In
this case, the empirical risk minimization is given by

1

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

2

yj − Aj (x) .

Unfortunately, this empirical loss minimization problem is,
in many cases, highly nonconvex, making it NP-hard in
general. For example, this non-convexity issue comes up in:

minimizex∈Rn f (x) =
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering,
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA 2 Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 3 Department of Electrical Engineering,
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. Correspondence
to: Cong Ma <congm@princeton.edu>.

m
X

m
2 i 2
1 Xh
yj − a>
. (2)
j x
4m j=1

• Low-rank matrix completion: which aims to predict all
entries of a low-rank matrix M \ = X \ X \> from partial
entries (those from an index subset Ω), where X \ ∈
Rn×r (r  n). Here, the nonconvex problem to solve is
minimize f (X) =
X∈Rn×r

2
n2 X  \
>
Mj,k − e>
.
j XX ek
4m
(j,k)∈Ω

