Noisy Natural Gradient as Variational Inference

Guodong Zhang * 1 2 Shengyang Sun * 1 2 David Duvenaud 1 2 Roger Grosse 1 2

Abstract
Variational Bayesian neural nets combine the flexibility of deep learning with Bayesian uncertainty
estimation. Unfortunately, there is a tradeoff
between cheap but simple variational families
(e.g. fully factorized) or expensive and complicated inference procedures. We show that natural
gradient ascent with adaptive weight noise implicitly fits a variational posterior to maximize the
evidence lower bound (ELBO). This insight allows us to train full-covariance, fully factorized,
or matrix-variate Gaussian variational posteriors
using noisy versions of natural gradient, Adam,
and K-FAC, respectively, making it possible to
scale up to modern-size conv nets. On standard regression benchmarks, our noisy K-FAC algorithm
makes better predictions and matches Hamiltonian Monte Carlo’s predictive variances better
than existing methods. Its improved uncertainty
estimates lead to more efficient exploration in
active learning, and intrinsic motivation for reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
Combining deep learning with Bayesian uncertainty estimation has the potential to fit flexible and scalable models that
are resistant to overfitting (MacKay, 1992b; Neal, 1995; Hinton & Van Camp, 1993). Stochastic variational inference is
especially appealing because it closely resembles ordinary
backprop (Graves, 2011; Blundell et al., 2015), but such
methods typically impose restrictive factorization assumptions on the approximate posterior, such as fully independent
weights. There have been attempts to fit more expressive
approximating distributions which capture correlations such
as matrix-variate Gaussians (Louizos & Welling, 2016; Sun
et al., 2017) or multiplicative normalizing flows (Louizos
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Canada 2 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada.
Correspondence to: Guodong Zhang <gdzhang@cs.toronto.edu>,
Shengyang Sun <ssy@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

& Welling, 2017), but fitting such models can be expensive
without further approximations.
In this work, we introduce and exploit a surprising connection between natural gradient descent (Amari, 1998) and
variational inference. In particular, several approximate
natural gradient optimizers have been proposed which fit
tractable approximations to the Fisher matrix to gradients
sampled during training (Kingma & Ba, 2014; Martens &
Grosse, 2015). While these procedures were described as
natural gradient descent on the weights using an approximate Fisher matrix, we reinterpret these algorithms as natural gradient on a variational posterior using the exact Fisher
matrix. Both the weight updates and the Fisher matrix estimation can be seen as natural gradient ascent on a unified
evidence lower bound (ELBO), analogously to how Neal
and Hinton (Neal & Hinton, 1998) interpreted the E and
M steps of Expectation-Maximization (E-M) as coordinate
ascent on a single objective.
Using this insight, we give an alternative training method for
variational Bayesian neural networks. For a factorial Gaussian posterior, it corresponds to a diagonal natural gradient
method with weight noise, and matches the performance of
Bayes By Backprop (Blundell et al., 2015), but converges
faster. We also present noisy K-FAC, an efficient and GPUfriendly method for fitting a full matrix-variate Gaussian
posterior, using a variant of Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature (K-FAC) (Martens & Grosse, 2015) with
correlated weight noise.

2. Background
2.1. Variational Inference for Bayesian Neural Nets
Given a dataset D = {(xi , yi )ni=1 }, a Bayesian neural net
(BNN) is defined in terms of a prior p(w) on the weights, as
well as the likelihood p(D | w). Variational Bayesian methods (Hinton & Van Camp, 1993; Graves, 2011; Blundell
et al., 2015) attempt to fit an approximate posterior q(w) to
maximize the evidence lower bound (ELBO):
L[q] = Eq [log p(D | w)] − λDKL (q(w) k p(w))

(1)

where λ is a regularization parameter. Proper Bayesian
inference corresponds to λ = 1, but other values may work
better in practice on some problems.

