Fast Gradient-Based Methods with Exponential Rate:
A Hybrid Control Framework

Arman Sharifi Kolarijani 1 Peyman Mohajerin Esfahani 1 Tamás Keciczky 1

Abstract
Ordinary differential equations, and in general a
dynamical system viewpoint, have seen a resurgence of interest in developing fast optimization
methods, mainly thanks to the availability of wellestablished analysis tools. In this study, we pursue
a similar objective and propose a class of hybrid
control systems that adopts a 2nd-order differential equation as its continuous flow. A distinctive
feature of the proposed differential equation in
comparison with the existing literature is a statedependent, time-invariant damping term that acts
as a feedback control input. Given a user-defined
scalar α, it is shown that the proposed control
input steers the state trajectories to the global optimizer of a desired objective function with a guaranteed rate of convergence O(e−αt ). Our framework requires that the objective function satisfies
the so called Polyak–Łojasiewicz inequality. Furthermore, a discretization method is introduced
such that the resulting discrete dynamical system
possesses an exponential rate of convergence.

1. Introduction
The low computational and memory complexities of
gradient-based optimization algorithms have made them
an attractive alternative in many applications such as support vector machines (Allen-Zhu, 2016), signal and image
processing (Becker et al., 2011), and networked-constrained
optimization (Ghadimi et al., 2013) among others. Hence,
extensive efforts have been made recently in order to bring
more insight into these algorithms’ properties.
One research direction that has been recently revitalized is
the application of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) to
1

Delft Center for Systems and Control, Delft University of
Technology, The Netherlands. Correspondence to: Arman Sharifi
Kolarijani <a.sharifikolarijani@tudelft.nl>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

the analysis and design of optimization algorithms. Consider an iterative algorithm that can be viewed as a discrete
dynamical system, with the scalar s as its step size. As s decreases, one can observe that the iterative algorithm in fact
recovers a differential equation, e.g., in the case of gradient
descent method applied to an unconstrained optimization
problem minX∈Rn f (X), one can inspect that

X k+1 = X k − s∇f (X k )
Ẋ(t) = −∇f X(t)
where f : Rn → R is a smooth function, X is the decision
variable, k ∈ Z≥0 is the iteration index, and t ∈ R≥0 is
the time. The main motivation behind this line of research
has to do with well-established analysis tools in dynamical
systems described by differential equations.
The slow rate of convergence of the gradient descent algorithm (O( 1t ) in continuous and O( k1 ) in discrete time),
limits its application in large-scale problems. In order to
address this shortcoming, many researchers resort to the
following class of 2nd-order ODEs, which is also the focus
of this study:

Ẍ(t) + γ(t)Ẋ(t) + ∇f X(t) = 0.
(1)
Increasing the order of the system dynamics interestingly
helps improve the convergence rate of the corresponding algorithms to O( k12 ) in the discrete-time domain or to O( t12 )
in the continuous-time domain. Such methods are called
momentum, accelerated, or fast gradient-based iterative algorithms in the literature. The time-dependent function
γ : R≥0 → R>0 is a damping or a viscosity term, which
has been also referred to as the asymptotically vanishing
viscosity since limt→∞ γ(t) = 0 (Cabot, 2004).
Chronological developments of fast algorithms: It is believed that the application of (1) to speed-up optimization algorithms is originated from (Polyak, 1964) in which Polyak
was inspired by a physical point of view (i.e., a heavy-ball
moving in a potential field). Later on, Nesterov introduced
his celebrated accelerated gradient method in (Nesterov,
1983) using the notion of “estimate sequences” and guaranteeing convergence rate of O( k12 ). Despite several extensions of Nesterov’s method (Nesterov, 2004; 2005; 2013),
the approach has not yet been fully understood. In this regard, many have tried to study the intrinsic properties of

