Fair and Diverse DPP-Based Data Summarization
L. Elisa Celis 1 Vijay Keswani 1 Damian Straszak 1 Amit Deshpande 2 Tarun Kathuria 3 Nisheeth K. Vishnoi 1

Abstract
Sampling methods that choose a subset of the
data proportional to its diversity in the feature
space are popular for data summarization. However, recent studies have noted the occurrence
of bias – e.g., under or over representation of a
particular gender or ethnicity – in such data summarization methods. In this paper we initiate a
study of the problem of outputting a diverse and
fair summary of a given dataset. We work with
a well-studied determinantal measure of diversity and corresponding distributions (DPPs) and
present a framework that allows us to incorporate a general class of fairness constraints into
such distributions. Designing efficient algorithms
to sample from these constrained determinantal
distributions, however, suffers from a complexity
barrier; we present a fast sampler that is provably
good when the input vectors satisfy a natural property. Our empirical results on both real-world and
synthetic datasets show that the diversity of the
samples produced by adding fairness constraints
is not too far from the unconstrained case.

1. Introduction
A problem facing many services – from search engines and
news feeds to machine learning – is data summarization:
how can one select a small but representative, i.e., diverse,
subset from a large dataset. For instance, Google Images
outputs a small subset of images from its enormous dataset
given a user query. Similarly, in training a learning algorithm one may be required to choose a subset of data points
to train on as training on the entire dataset may be costly.
However, data summarization algorithms prevalent in the
online world have been recently shown to be biased with respect to sensitive attributes such as gender, race or ethnicity.
For instance, a recent study found evidence of systematic
1
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland 2 Microsoft Research, India 3 UC Berkeley. Correspondence
to: L. Elisa Celis <elisa.celis@epfl.ch>, Nisheeth K. Vishnoi
<nisheeth.vishnoi@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

under-representation of women in search results (Kay et al.,
2015). Concretely, the above work studied the output of
Google Images for various search terms involving occupations and found, e.g., that for the search term “CEO”, the
percentage of women in top 100 results was 11%, significantly lower than the ground truth of 27%. Through studies
on human subjects, they also found that such misrepresentations have the power to influence people’s perception about
reality. Beyond humans, since data summaries are used to
train algorithms, there is a danger that these biases in the
data might be passed on to the algorithms that use them;
a phenomena that is being revealed more and more in automated data-driven processes in education, recruitment,
banking, and judiciary systems, see (O’Neil, 2016).
A robust and widely deployed method for data summarization is to associate a diversity score to each subset and
select a subset with probability proportional to this score;
see (Hesabi et al., 2015). This paper focuses on a concrete
geometric measure of diversity of a subset S of a dataset
{vx }x∈X of vectors – the determinantal measure denoted
by G(S) (Kulesza & Taskar, 2012); and the resulting probability distribution is called a determinantal point process
(DPP). G(S) generalizes the correlation measure for two
vectors to multiple vectors and, intuitively, the larger G(S),
the more diverse is S in the feature space. Among benefits
of G(·) are its overall simplicity, wide applicability – not
depending on combinatorial properties of the data, and efficient computability. A potential downside might be the
additional effort required in modeling, i.e., to represent the
data in a suitable vector form so that the geometry of the
dataset indeed corresponds to diversity.
Despite the well-acknowledged ability of DPPs to produce
diverse subsets, unfortunately, there seems to be no obvious way to ensure that this also guarantees fairness in the
DPP samples in the form of appropriate representation of
sensitive attributes in the subset selected. Partially, this is
due to the fact that fairness could mean different things in
different contexts. For instance, consider a dataset in which
each data point has a gender. One notion of fairness, useful
in ensuring that the ground truth does not get distorted, is
proportional representation: i.e., the distribution of sensitive characteristics in the output set should be identical to
that of the input dataset (Kay et al., 2015). Another notion
of fairness, argued to be necesseary to reverse the effect of

