Gradient Descent Learns One-hidden-layer CNN:
Don’t be Afraid of Spurious Local Minima
Simon S. Du 1 Jason D. Lee 2 Yuandong Tian 3 Barnabás Póczos 1 Aarti Singh 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning a one-hiddenlayer neural network with non-overlapping convolutional layer
P and ReLU activation, i.e.,
f (Z, w, a) = j aj (wT Zj ), in which both the
convolutional weights w and the output weights a
are parameters to be learned. When the labels are
the outputs from a teacher network of the same architecture with fixed weights (w⇤ , a⇤ ), we prove
that with Gaussian input Z, there is a spurious local minimizer. Surprisingly, in the presence of the
spurious local minimizer, gradient descent with
weight normalization from randomly initialized
weights can still be proven to recover the true parameters with constant probability, which can be
boosted to probability 1 with multiple restarts. We
also show that with constant probability, the same
procedure could also converge to the spurious local minimum, showing that the local minimum
plays a non-trivial role in the dynamics of gradient descent. Furthermore, a quantitative analysis
shows that the gradient descent dynamics has two
phases: it starts off slow, but converges much
faster after several iterations.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNN) have achieved
the state-of-the-art performance in many applications such
as computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), natural language processing (Dauphin et al., 2016) and reinforcement
learning applied in classic games like Go (Silver et al., 2016).
Despite the highly non-convex nature of the objective function, simple first-order algorithms like stochastic gradient
descent and its variants often train such networks success1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Department of Data Sciences and Operations, University of Southern California 3 Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research. Correspondence to: Simon S. Du <ssdu@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

fully. Why such simple methods in learning DCNN is successful remains elusive from the optimization perspective.
Recently, a line of research (Tian, 2017; Brutzkus & Globerson, 2017; Li & Yuan, 2017; Soltanolkotabi, 2017; ShalevShwartz et al., 2017b) assumed the input distribution is
Gaussian and showed that stochastic gradient descent with
random or 0 initialization
is able to train a neural netP
work f (Z, {wj }) = j aj (wjT Z) with ReLU activation
(x) = max(x, 0) in polynomial time. However, these
results all assume there is only one unknown layer {wj },
while a is a fixed vector. A natural question thus arises:
Does randomly initialized (stochastic) gradient descent
learn neural networks with multiple layers?
In this paper, we take an important step by showing that
randomly initialized gradient descent learns a non-linear
convolutional neural network with two unknown layers w
and a. To our knowledge, our work is the first of its kind.
Formally, we consider the convolutional case in which a
filter w is shared among different hidden nodes. Let x 2 Rd
be an input sample, e.g., an image. We generate k patches
from x, each with size p: Z 2 Rp⇥k where the i-th column
is the i-th patch generated by selecting some coordinates
of x: Zi = Zi (x). We further assume there is no overlap
between patches. Thus, the neural network function has the
following form:
f (Z, w, a) =

k
X

ai

w > Zi .

i=1

We focus on the realizable case, i.e., the label is generated
according to y = f (Z, w⇤ , a⇤ ) for some true parameters
w⇤ and a⇤ and use `2 loss to learn the parameters:
min `(Z, w, a) :=
w,a

1
(f (Z, w, a)
2

2

f (Z, w⇤ , a⇤ )) .

We assume x is sampled from a Gaussian distribution and
there is no overlap between patches. This assumption is
equivalent to that each entry of Z is sampled from a Gaussian distribution (Brutzkus & Globerson, 2017; Zhong et al.,
2017b). Following (Zhong et al., 2017a;b; Li & Yuan, 2017;

