Continuous-Time Flows for Efficient Inference and Density Estimation
Changyou Chen 1 Chunyuan Li 2 Liqun Chen 2 Wenlin Wang 2 Yunchen Pu 2 Lawrence Carin 2

Abstract
Two fundamental problems in unsupervised learning are efficient inference for latent-variable models and robust density estimation based on large
amounts of unlabeled data. Algorithms for the
two tasks, such as normalizing flows and generative adversarial networks (GANs), are often
developed independently. In this paper, we propose the concept of continuous-time flows (CTFs),
a family of diffusion-based methods that are able
to asymptotically approach a target distribution.
Distinct from normalizing flows and GANs, CTFs
can be adopted to achieve the above two goals in
one framework, with theoretical guarantees. Our
framework includes distilling knowledge from
a CTF for efficient inference, and learning an
explicit energy-based distribution with CTFs for
density estimation. Both tasks rely on a new technique for distribution matching within amortized
learning. Experiments on various tasks demonstrate promising performance of the proposed
CTF framework, compared to related techniques.

1. Introduction
Efficient inference and robust density estimation are two
important goals in unsupervised learning. In fact, they can
be unified from the perspective of learning desired target
distributions. In inference problems, one targets to learn a
tractable distribution for a latent variable that is close to
a given unnormalized distribution (e.g., a posterior distribution in a Bayesian model). In density estimation, one
tries to learn an unknown data distribution only based on
the samples from it. It is also helpful to make a distinction
between two types of representations for learning distributions: explicit and implicit methods (Mohamed & Lakshminarayanan, 2017). Explicit methods provide a prescribed
parametric form for the distribution, while implicit methods
1
SUNY at Buffalo 2 Duke University. Correspondence to:
Changyou Chen <cchangyou@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

learn a stochastic procedure to directly generate samples
from the unknown distribution.
Existing deep generative models can easily be identified
from this taxonomy. For example, the standard variational
autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende
et al., 2014) is an important example of an explicit inference method. Within the inference arm (encoder) of a VAE,
recent research has focused on improving the accuracy of
the approximation to the posterior distribution on latent
variables (codes) using normalizing flow (NF) (Rezende &
Mohamed, 2015). NF is particularly interesting due to its
ability to approximate the posterior distribution arbitrarily
well, while maintaining explicit parametric forms. On the
other hand, Stein VAE (Feng et al., 2017; Pu et al., 2017)
is an implicit inference method, as it only learns to draw
samples to approximate posteriors, without assuming an
explicit form for the distribution.. For density estimation on
observed data, the generative adversarial network (GAN)
can be regarded as an implicit density estimation method
(Ranganath et al., 2016; Huszár, 2017; Mohamed & Lakshminarayanan, 2017), in the sense that one may sample
from the distribution (regarded as a representation of the
unknown distribution), but an explicit form for the distribution is not estimated. GAN has recently been augmented by
Flow-GAN (Grover et al., 2017) to incorporate a likelihood
term for explicit density estimation. Further, the real-valued
non-volume preserving (real NVP) transformations algorithm (Dinh et al., 2017) was proposed to perform inference
within the implicit density estimation framework.
Some aforementioned methods rely on the concept of flows.
A flow defines a series of transformations for a random
variable (RV), such that the distribution of the RV evolves
from a simple distribution to a more complex distribution.
When the sequence of transformations are indexed on a
discrete-time domain (e.g., indexed with integers) with a
finite number of transformations, this method is referred to
as a normalizing flow (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015). Various efficient implementations of NFs have been proposed,
such as the planar, radial (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015),
Householder (Tomczak & Welling, 2016), and inverse autoregressive flows (Kingma et al., 2016). One theoretical
limitation of existing normalizing flows is that there is no
guarantee on the approximation accuracy due to the finite
number of transformations.

