Learning and Memorization

Satrajit Chatterjee 1

Abstract
In the machine learning research community, it
is generally believed that there is a tension between memorization and generalization. In this
work, we examine to what extent this tension exists, by exploring if it is possible to generalize
by memorizing alone. Although direct memorization with a lookup table obviously does not
generalize, we find that introducing depth in the
form of a network of support-limited lookup tables leads to generalization that is significantly
above chance and closer to those obtained by standard learning algorithms on several tasks derived
from MNIST and CIFAR-10. Furthermore, we
demonstrate through a series of empirical results
that our approach allows for a smooth tradeoff
between memorization and generalization and exhibits some of the most salient characteristics of
neural networks: depth improves performance;
random data can be memorized and yet there is
generalization on real data; and memorizing random data is harder in a certain sense than memorizing real data. The extreme simplicity of the
algorithm and potential connections with generalization theory point to several interesting directions for future research.

1. Introduction
Neural networks trained through stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) can memorize their training data. Although practitioners have long been aware of this phenomenon, Zhang
et al. (2017) recently brought attention to it by showing
that standard SGD-based training on AlexNet gets close
to zero training error on a modification of the ImageNet
dataset even when the labels are randomly permuted. This
leads to an interesting question: If neural nets have sufficient capacity to memorize random training sets why do
1

Two Sigma, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Satrajit
Chatterjee <satrajit.chatterjee@twosigma.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

they generalize on real data? A natural hypothesis is that
nets behave differently on real data than on random data.
Arpit et al. (2017) study this question experimentally and
show that there are apparent differences in behavior. They
conclude that generalization and memorization depend not
just on the network architecture and optimization procedure
but on the dataset itself.
But what if networks fundamentally do not behave differently on real data than on random data, and, in both cases,
are simply memorizing? This is a difficult question to explore for two reasons. First, it is hard to provide a direct
answer. Whereas it is easy to tell when a net is memorizing random data (the training error goes to zero!), there
is no easy way to tell when a network is memorizing real
data as opposed to “learning”. Second, and perhaps more
importantly, it contradicts the intuitive notion—inherent in
the preceding discussion—that memorization and generalization are at odds. This work attempts to shed light on
this second difficulty by investigating the following: How
much can you learn if memorization is all you can do? Is
generalization even possible in this setting?
At first, generalization in such a setting of pure memorization may seem hopeless: the simplest way to memorize
would be to build a lookup table from the training data.
Although this approach works for special cases where the
input population is finite and small, it fails in general since
the examples seen during training are unlikely to match test
examples. One way to get around this limitation is to use
k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN) or any of its variants at test
time. While k-NNs work well on many problems, they fail
on problems where it is not easy to construct a semantically
meaningful distance function on the input space. In such
cases, the obvious syntactic distance functions (e.g., say Euclidean distance between images viewed as vectors in Rd )
do not work well. Indeed some of the most interesting results from deep learning have been the discovery—through
learning—of semantically meaningful distance functions
(via embeddings).
Therefore, in this work we do not allow ourselves a distance
function. Instead, we get around the problem by applying
the notion of depth, which has been wildly successful in
improving the performance of neural networks, to direct
memorization. We build a network of lookup tables (also

