Open Category Detection with PAC Guarantees

Si Liu * 1 Risheek Garrepalli * 2 Thomas G. Dietterich 2 Alan Fern 2 Dan Hendrycks 3

Abstract
Open category detection is the problem of detecting “alien” test instances that belong to categories
or classes that were not present in the training
data. In many applications, reliably detecting
such aliens is central to ensuring the safety and
accuracy of test set predictions. Unfortunately,
there are no algorithms that provide theoretical
guarantees on their ability to detect aliens under
general assumptions. Further, while there are algorithms for open category detection, there are
few empirical results that directly report alien detection rates. Thus, there are significant theoretical and empirical gaps in our understanding of
open category detection. In this paper, we take
a step toward addressing this gap by studying a
simple, but practically-relevant variant of open
category detection. In our setting, we are provided with a “clean” training set that contains
only the target categories of interest and an unlabeled “contaminated” training set that contains
a fraction α of alien examples. Under the assumption that we know an upper bound on α, we
develop an algorithm with PAC-style guarantees
on the alien detection rate, while aiming to minimize false alarms. Empirical results on synthetic
and standard benchmark datasets demonstrate the
regimes in which the algorithm can be effective
and provide a baseline for further advancements.

1. Introduction
Most machine learning systems implicitly or explicitly assume that their training experience is representative of their
test experience. This assumption is rarely true in real-world
deployments of machine learning, where “unknown unknowns”, or “alien” data, can arise without warning. Ig*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, Oregon State
University, Oregon, USA 2 School of EECS, Oregon State University, Oregon, USA 3 University of California, Berkeley, California,
USA. Correspondence to: Si Liu <lius2@oregonstate.edu>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

noring the potential for such aliens can lead to serious safety
concerns in many applications and significantly degrade
the accuracy of test set predictions in others. For example, consider a scientific application where a classifier is
trained to recognize specific categories of insects in freshwater samples in order to detect important environmental
changes (Lytle et al., 2010). Test samples will typically
contain some fraction of specimens belonging to species
not represented in the training data. A classifier that is unaware of these new species will misclassify the specimens
as belonging to existing species. This will produce incorrect
scientific conclusions.
The problem of open category detection is to detect such
alien examples at test time. An ideal algorithm for this problem would guarantee a user-specified alien-detection rate
(e.g., 95%), while attempting to minimize the false alarm
rate. Unfortunately, no existing algorithm provides such
guarantees under general conditions. In addition, empirical evaluations of existing algorithms for open category
detection typically do not directly evaluate alien detection
rates, which are perhaps the most relevant for safety-critical
applications. Overall, our current theoretical and practical
understanding of open category detection is lacking from a
safety and accuracy perspective.
Is it possible to achieve open category detection with guarantees? In this paper, we take a step toward answering
this question by studying a simplified, but practically relevant, problem setting. To motivate our setting, consider
the above insect identification problem. At training time it
is reasonable to expect that a clean training set is available
that contains only the insect categories of interest. At test
time, a new sample will include insects from the training
categories along with some percentage of insects from new
alien categories. Further, scientists may have reasonable
estimates for this percentage based on their scientific knowledge and practical experience. We would like to guarantee
that the system is able to raise an alarm for, say, 95% of the
insects from alien classes, with each alarm being examined
by a scientist. At the same time, we would like to avoid as
many “false alarms” as possible, since each alarm requires
scientist effort.
To formalize the example, our setting assumes two training
sets: a clean training dataset involving a finite set of cate-

