A Spectral Approach to Gradient Estimation for Implicit Distributions

Jiaxin Shi 1 Shengyang Sun 2 Jun Zhu 1

Abstract
Recently there have been increasing interests in
learning and inference with implicit distributions
(i.e., distributions without tractable densities). To
this end, we develop a gradient estimator for
implicit distributions based on Stein’s identity
and a spectral decomposition of kernel operators,
where the eigenfunctions are approximated by the
Nyström method. Unlike the previous works that
only provide estimates at the sample points, our
approach directly estimates the gradient function,
thus allows for a simple and principled out-ofsample extension. We provide theoretical results
on the error bound of the estimator and discuss
the bias-variance tradeoff in practice. The effectiveness of our method is demonstrated by applications to gradient-free Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
and variational inference with implicit distributions. Finally, we discuss the intuition behind
the estimator by drawing connections between the
Nyström method and kernel PCA, which indicates
that the estimator can automatically adapt to the
geometry of the underlying distribution.

1. Introduction
Recently there have been increasing interests in learning
and inference with implicit distributions, i.e., distributions
defined by a sampling process but without tractable densities. Popular examples include Generative adversarial
networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Mohamed &
Lakshminarayanan, 2016). Compared to the explicit likelihoods (e.g., Gaussian) in other deep generative models
such as variational autoencoders (VAE) (Kingma & Welling,
2013), implicit distributions are shown able to capture the
complex data manifold that lies in a high dimensional space,
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, State Key
Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys., THBI Lab, Tsinghua University
2
Dept. of Comp. Sci., University of Toronto. Correspondence
to: Jiaxin Shi <shijx15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Jun Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

leading to more realistic samples generated by GAN than
other models. Besides, as the constraint of requiring an
explicit density is removed, implicit distributions are treated
as more flexible variants of variational families for approximate inference (Ranganath et al., 2016; Liu & Feng, 2016;
Mescheder et al., 2017; Tran et al., 2017; Huszár, 2017; Li
& Turner, 2018; Shi et al., 2018).
Despite that it is appealing to use flexible implicit distributions, which capture complex correlations and manifold
structures, deploying them in practical scenes is still challenging. This is because most learning and inference algorithms require optimizing some divergences between two
distributions, which often rely on evaluating the densities
of them. However, the density of an implicit distribution is
intractable and we only have access to its samples. Previous
works have explored two directions to solve the problem.
One is to first approximate the optimization objective with
the samples and then use the approximation to guide the
learning procedure. Many works in this direction are based
on the fact that the density ratio between two distributions
can be estimated from their samples, by a probabilistic
classifier (also known as the discriminator) trained in an adversarial game (Donahue et al., 2016; Dumoulin et al., 2016;
Mescheder et al., 2017; Tran et al., 2017; Huszár, 2017),
or by kernel-based estimators (Shi et al., 2018). The other
direction is to estimate the gradients instead of the objective.
Li & Turner (2018) propose the Stein gradient estimator
for the log density of an implicit distribution. It is based
on a ridge regression that inverts a generalized version of
Stein’s identity (Gorham & Mackey, 2015; Liu et al., 2016).
As argued in their work, this approach is more direct and
avoids probable arbitrarily diverse gradients provided by the
approximate objective. In this paper, we focus on the latter
direction.
Though the Stein gradient estimator has been shown to be a
fast and easy way to obtain gradient estimates for implicit
models. It is still limited by its simple formulation, i.e., the
unjustified choice of both the test function (the kernel feature
mapping) and the regularization scheme (the Frobeniusnorm regularization used in ridge regression). The problem
has deeper implications. For instance, no theoretical results
have been established for the estimator. Moreover, there is
no principled way to obtain gradient estimates at positions
out of the sample points.

