StrassenNets: Deep Learning with a Multiplication Budget

Michael Tschannen 1 Aran Khanna 2 Anima Anandkumar 2 3

Abstract
A large fraction of the arithmetic operations required to evaluate deep neural networks (DNNs)
consists of matrix multiplications, in both convolution and fully connected layers. We perform
end-to-end learning of low-cost approximations of
matrix multiplications in DNN layers by casting
matrix multiplications as 2-layer sum-product networks (SPNs) (arithmetic circuits) and learning
their (ternary) edge weights from data. The SPNs
disentangle multiplication and addition operations
and enable us to impose a budget on the number of
multiplication operations. Combining our method
with knowledge distillation and applying it to image classification DNNs (trained on ImageNet)
and language modeling DNNs (using LSTMs),
we obtain a first-of-a-kind reduction in number of
multiplications (over 99.5%) while maintaining
the predictive performance of the full-precision
models. Finally, we demonstrate that the proposed framework is able to rediscover Strassen’s
matrix multiplication algorithm, learning to multiply 2 × 2 matrices using only 7 multiplications
instead of 8.

1. Introduction
The outstanding predictive performance of deep neural networks (DNNs) often comes at the cost of large model size,
and corresponding computational inefficiency. This can
make the deployment of DNNs on mobile and embedded
hardware challenging. For example, a full-precision ResNet152 (He et al., 2016a) contains 60.2 million parameters and
one forward pass requires 11.3 billion floating point operations. A variety of methods to address this issue were
proposed recently, including optimizing the network architecture, factorizing the weight tensors, pruning the weights,
1
ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland (most of this work was
done while MT was at Amazon AI) 2 Amazon AI, Palo Alto, CA,
USA 3 Caltech, Pasadena, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Michael
Tschannen <michaelt@nari.ee.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

and reducing the numerical precision of weights and activations (see Section 1.1 for a detailed overview).
These prior works mainly focused on decreasing the number
of multiply-accumulate operations used by DNNs. In contrast, in this paper, the objective that guides our algorithm
design is a reduction of the number of multiplications. This
algorithm design principle has led to many fast algorithms
in linear algebra, most notably Strassen’s matrix multiplication algorithm (Strassen, 1969). Strassen’s algorithm uses 7
instead 8 multiplications to compute the product of two 2×2
matrices (and requires O(n2.807 ) operations for multiplying
n × n matrices). In the context of DNNs, the same design
principle led to the Winograd filter-based convolution algorithm proposed by Lavin & Gray (2016). This algorithm
only requires 16 instead of 36 multiplications to compute
2 × 2 outputs of 2D convolutions with 3 × 3 kernels and
achieves a 2–3× speedup on GPU in practice.
From a hardware perspective, multipliers occupy considerably more area on chip than adders (for fixed-point data
types). Field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) and
application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) can therefore potentially accommodate considerably more adders
than multipliers, and trading off multiplications against additions is desirable. In fact, it was demonstrated recently
that DNN architectures which rely on a large number of
additions and a small number of multiplications (such as (Li
et al., 2016)) achieve a 60% higher throughput on FPGA
than on GPU, while being 2.3× better in performance per
watt (Nurvitadhi et al., 2017). In the context of ASICs,
reducing the number of multiplications is beneficial as multiplication operations consume significantly more energy
than addition operations (3–30× depending on the data type
(Horowitz, 2014; Andri et al., 2018)). More generally, replacing multiplications in DNNs by additions leads to a
reduction in models size as addition/subtraction can be encoded as a binary weight. This is beneficial in terms of
throughput for most deep learning applications, which are
typically memory-bound.
Motivated by these observations, we propose a novel framework to drastically reduce the number of multiplications
used by DNNs for inference. Specifically, for every DNN
layer, we cast the (matrix) multiplication of the weight matrix with the activations as a 2-layer sum-product network

