Learning to Act in Decentralized Partially Observable MDPs

Jilles S. Dibangoye 1 Olivier Buffet 2

Abstract
We address a long-standing open problem of reinforcement learning in decentralized partially observable Markov decision processes. Previous
attempts focussed on different forms of generalized policy iteration, which at best led to local optima. In this paper, we restrict attention
to plans, which are simpler to store and update
than policies. We derive, under certain conditions,
the first near-optimal cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithm. To achieve significant scalability gains, we replace the greedy
maximization by mixed-integer linear programming. Experiments show our approach can learn
to act near-optimally in many finite domains from
the literature.

1. Introduction
Decentralized partially observable Markov decision processes (Dec-POMDPs) emerged as the standard framework
for sequential decision making by a team of collaborative
agents (Bernstein et al., 2000). A key assumption of DecPOMDPs is that agents can neither see the actual state of the
system nor explicitly communicate their noisy observations
with each other due to communication cost, latency or noise,
hence providing a partial explanation of the double exponential growth at every control interval of the required memory
in optimal algorithms (Hansen et al., 2004; Szer et al., 2005;
Oliehoek et al., 2008; Amato et al., 2009; Oliehoek et al.,
2013; Dibangoye et al., 2015; 2016). While planning methods for finite Dec-POMDPs made substantial progress in
recent years, the formal treatment of the corresponding reinforcement learning problems received little attention so
far. The literature of multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) can be divided into two main categories: concurrent and team approaches (Tan, 1998; Panait & Luke, 2005).
1

Univ Lyon, INSA Lyon, INRIA, CITI, F-69621 Villeurbanne,
France 2 INRIA / Université de Lorraine, Nancy, France. Correspondence to: Jilles S. Dibangoye <jilles.dibangoye@inria.fr>,
Olivier Buffet <olivier.buffet@loria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

Perhaps the dominant paradigm in MARL is the concurrent
approach, which involves multiple simultaneous learners:
typically, each agent has its learning process. Self-interested
learners, for example, determine their best-response behaviors considering their opponents are part of the environment, often resulting in local optima (Brown, 1951; Hu &
Wellman, 1998; Littman, 1994). While concurrent learning can apply in Dec-POMDPs, a local optimum may lead
to severely suboptimal performances (Peshkin et al., 2000;
Zhang & Lesser, 2011; Kraemer & Banerjee, 2016; Nguyen
et al., 2017). Also, methods of this family face two conceptual issues that limit their applicability. The primary
concern is that of the co-adaptation dilemma, which arises
when each attempt to modify an agent behavior can ruin
learned behaviors of its teammates. Another major problem
is that of the multi-agent credit assignment, that is, how to
split the collective reward among independent learners.
Alternatively, the team approach involves a single learner
acting on behalf of all agents to discover a collective solution (Salustowicz et al., 1998; Miconi, 2003). Interestingly, this approach circumvents the difficulties arising from
both the co-adaptation and the multi-agent credit assignment. Coordinated agents, for example, simultaneously
learn their control choices and the other agent strategies
assuming instantaneous and free explicit communications
(Guestrin et al., 2002; Kok & Vlassis, 2004). While methods
of this family inherit from standard single-agent techniques,
they need to circumvent two significant drawbacks: the explosion in the state space size; and the centralization of all
learning resources in a single place. Recently, team algorithms ranging from Q-learning to policy-search have been
introduced for finite Dec-POMDPs, but with no guaranteed
global optimality (Wu et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2015; 2016;
Kraemer & Banerjee, 2016). So, it seems one can either
compute local optima with arbitrary bad performances or
calculate optimal solutions but assuming noise-free, instantaneous and explicit communications.
A recent approach to optimally solving Dec-POMDPs suggests recasting them into occupancy-state MDPs (oMDPs)
and then applying (PO)MDP solution methods (Dibangoye
et al., 2013; 2014a;b; 2016). In these oMDPs, the states
called occupancy states are distributions over hidden states
and joint histories of the original problem, and actions called
decision rules are mappings from joint histories to con-

