A Distributed Second-Order Algorithm You Can Trust

Celestine Dünner 1 Aurelien Lucchi 2 Matilde Gargiani 3 An Bian 2 Thomas Hofmann 2 Martin Jaggi 4

Abstract
Due to the rapid growth of data and computational
resources, distributed optimization has become an
active research area in recent years. While firstorder methods seem to dominate the field, secondorder methods are nevertheless attractive as they
potentially require fewer communication rounds
to converge. However, there are significant drawbacks that impede their wide adoption, such as
the computation and the communication of a large
Hessian matrix. In this paper we present a new algorithm for distributed training of generalized linear models that only requires the computation of
diagonal blocks of the Hessian matrix on the individual workers. To deal with this approximate information we propose an adaptive approach that akin to trust-region methods - dynamically adapts
the auxiliary model to compensate for modeling
errors. We provide theoretical rates of convergence for a wide class of problems including L1 regularized objectives. We also demonstrate that
our approach achieves state-of-the-art results on
multiple large benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
The last decade has witnessed a growing number of successful machine learning applications in various fields, along
with the availability of larger training datasets. However,
the speed at which training datasets grow in size is strongly
outpacing the evolution of the computational power of single devices, as well as their memory capacity. Therefore,
distributed approaches for training machine learning models have become tremendously important while also being increasingly more accessible to users with the rise of
cloud-computing. Scaling up optimization algorithms for
training machine learning models in such a setting poses
1
IBM Research – Zürich, Switzerland 2 ETH, Zürich, Switzerland 3 Albert-Ludwigs-Universität, Freiburg, Germany 4 EPFL,
Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Celestine Dünner
<cdu@zurich.ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

many challenges. One key aspect is communication efficiency; because communication is often more expensive
than local computation, the overall speed of distributed
algorithms strongly depends on how frequently information is exchanged between workers. In order to develop
communication-efficient distributed algorithms, we advocate the use of second-order methods which benefit from
faster rates of convergence compared to their first-order
(gradient-based) counterparts, and hence require less communication rounds to achieve the same accuracy. However,
second-order methods have the significant drawback of requiring the computation and storage – and potentially the
communication – of a Hessian matrix. Exact methods are
therefore elusive for large datasets and one has to resort to
approximate methods. In this paper, we propose a method
where every worker uses local Hessian information only
(i.e., with respect to the local parameters on that worker),
hence it does not require any second-order information to
be communicated. Conceptually, this approach relies on approximating the full Hessian matrix with a block-diagonal
version. At the same time, to automatically adapt to the
model misfit, we use an adaptive approach similar in spirit
to trust-region methods (Conn et al., 2000).
Problem Setup & Distributed Setting. We address the
problem of training generalized linear models which are
ubiquitous in machine learning, including e.g. logistic regression, support vector machines as well as sparse linear
models such as lasso and elastic net. Formally, we address
convex optimization problems with an objective of the form
F (α) := f (Aα) +

X
i

gi (αi ),

(1)

where we assume f to be smooth and convex, and gi to be
convex functions. A ∈ Rd×n is a given data matrix and
α ∈ Rn the parameter vector to be learned from data.
We assume that every worker k ∈ {1 . . . K} only has access to its own local part of the data, which corresponds to a
subset of the columns of the matrix A. In machine learning,
these columns typically correspond to a subset of the features or data examples, depending on the application. For
example, in the case where (1) corresponds to the objective
of a regularized generalized linear P
model – i.e., where f
is a data dependent loss and g =
i gi a regularization
term – the columns of A correspond to features. In another

