Fast Decoding in Sequence Models Using Discrete Latent Variables

Łukasz Kaiser 1 Aurko Roy 1 Ashish Vaswani 1 Niki Parmar 1 Samy Bengio 1 Jakob Uszkoreit 1
Noam Shazeer 1

Abstract
Autoregressive sequence models based on deep
neural networks, such as RNNs, Wavenet and the
Transformer attain state-of-the-art results on many
tasks. However, they are difficult to parallelize
and are thus slow at processing long sequences.
RNNs lack parallelism both during training and
decoding, while architectures like WaveNet and
Transformer are much more parallelizable during
training, yet still operate sequentially during decoding. We present a method to extend sequence
models using discrete latent variables that makes
decoding much more parallelizable. We first autoencode the target sequence into a shorter sequence
of discrete latent variables, which at inference
time is generated autoregressively, and finally decode the output sequence from this shorter latent
sequence in parallel. To this end, we introduce
a novel method for constructing a sequence of
discrete latent variables and compare it with previously introduced methods. Finally, we evaluate our model end-to-end on the task of neural machine translation, where it is an order of
magnitude faster at decoding than comparable
autoregressive models. While lower in BLEU
than purely autoregressive models, our model
achieves higher scores than previously proposed
non-autoregressive translation models.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have been applied successfully to a variety
of tasks involving natural language. In particular, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with long short-term memory (LSTM) cells (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) in a
sequence-to-sequence configuration (Sutskever et al., 2014)
have proven successful at tasks including machine trans1

Google Brain, Mountain View, California, USA. Correspondence to: Łukasz Kaiser <lukaszkaiser@google.com>, Aurko
Roy <aurkor@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

lation (Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2014; Cho
et al., 2014), parsing (Vinyals et al., 2015), and many others.
RNNs are inherently sequential, however, and thus tend to
be slow to execute on modern hardware optimized for parallel execution. Recently, a number of more parallelizable
sequence models were proposed and architectures such as
WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2016), ByteNet (Kalchbrenner et al., 2016) and the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)
can indeed be trained faster due to improved parallelism.
When actually generating sequential output, however, their
autoregressive nature still fundamentally prevents these
models from taking full advantage of parallel computation.
When generating a sequence y1 . . . yn in a canonical order,
say from left to right, predicting the symbol yt first requires
generating all symbols y1 . . . yt−1 as the model predicts
P (yt |yt−1 yt−2 . . . y1 ).
During training, the ground truth is known so the conditioning on previous symbols can be parallelized. But during
decoding, this is a fundamental limitation as at least n sequential steps need to be made to generate y1 . . . yn .
To overcome this limitation, we propose to introduce a sequence of discrete latent variables l1 . . . lm , with m < n,
that summarizes the relevant information from the sequence
y1 . . . yn . We will still generate l1 . . . lm autoregressively,
but it will be much faster as m < n (in our experiments we
mostly use m = n8 ). Then, we reconstruct each position in
the sequence y1 . . . yn from l1 . . . lm in parallel.
For the above strategy to work, we need to autoencode the
target sequence y1 . . . yn into a shorter sequence l1 . . . lm .
Autoencoders have a long history in deep learning (Hinton
& Salakhutdinov, 2006; Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009a;
Vincent et al., 2010; Kingma & Welling, 2013). Autoencoders mostly operate on continuous representations, either
by imposing a bottleneck (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006),
requiring them to remove added noise (Vincent et al., 2010),
or adding a variational component (Kingma & Welling,
2013). In our case though, we prefer the sequence l1 . . . lm
to be discrete, as we use standard autoregressive models to
predict it. Despite some success (Bowman et al., 2016; Yang
et al., 2017), predicting continuous latent representations
does not work as well as the discrete case in our setting.

