prDeep: Robust Phase Retrieval with a Flexible Deep Network

Christopher A. Metzler 1 Philip Schniter 2 Ashok Veeraraghavan 1 Richard G. Baraniuk 1

Abstract

PR algorithms were first developed in the early 1970s and
have been continuously studied by the optics community
since then (Gerchberg, 1972; Fienup, 1978; 1982; Griffin
& Lim, 1984; Pfeifer et al., 2006; Rodriguez et al., 2013).
More recently, PR has been taken up by the optimization
community. This has produced a number of algorithms
with theoretical, if not always practical, benefits (Candes
et al., 2013; 2015a; Goldstein & Studer, 2016; Bahmani
& Romberg, 2017). For a benchmark study of over a
dozen popular PR algorithms, see PhasePack (Chandra et al.,
2017).

Phase retrieval algorithms have become an important component in many modern computational
imaging systems. For instance, in the context
of ptychography and speckle correlation imaging, they enable imaging past the diffraction limit
and through scattering media, respectively. Unfortunately, traditional phase retrieval algorithms
struggle in the presence of noise. Progress has
been made recently on developing more robust
algorithms using signal priors, but at the expense
of limiting the range of supported measurement
models (e.g., to Gaussian or coded diffraction patterns). In this work we leverage the regularizationby-denoising framework and a convolutional neural network denoiser to create prDeep, a new
phase retrieval algorithm that is both robust and
broadly applicable. We test and validate prDeep
in simulation to demonstrate that it is robust to
noise and can handle a variety of system models.

Following the popularity of compressive sensing, numerous
algorithms were developed that use prior information, oftentimes sparsity, to improve PR reconstructions and potentially
enable compressive PR (Moravec et al., 2007; Schniter &
Rangan, 2015). In general, these methods do not improve
reconstructions when the signal of interest is dense.

1. Introduction
The PR problem manifests when one wants to recover the
input from only the amplitude, or intensity, of the output
of a linear system. Mathematically, PR refers to the problem of recovering a vectorized signal x ∈ Rn or Cn from
measurements y of the form
y = |Ax| + w,

(1)

where the measurement matrix A represents the forward
operator of the system and w represents noise.
PR shows up in many imaging applications including microscopy (Zheng & Yang, 2013), crystallography (Millane,
1990), astronomical imaging (Dainty & Fienup, 1987), and
inverse scattering (Katz et al., 2014; Metzler et al., 2017b),
to name just a few.
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University, Houston, TX 2 The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
Correspondence to: Chris Metzler <chris.metzler@rice.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

In the last few years, three methods, SPAR (Katkovnik &
Astola, 2012; Katkovnik, 2017), BM3D-prGAMP (Metzler
et al., 2016b), and Plug-and-Play ADMM (Venkatakrishnan
et al., 2013; Heide et al., 2016), have been developed to
solve the PR problem using natural-image priors, which
make their reconstructions more robust to noise. These
methods all apply a natural-image prior via the BM3D
image-denoising algorithm (Dabov et al., 2007).
Unfortunately, two of these three methods, SPAR and
BM3D-prGAMP, are restricted to i.i.d Gaussian or coded
diffraction measurements (Candes et al., 2015b), which prevents their use in many practical applications. All three
methods are computationally demanding.
In this work, we make two technical contributions. First, we
show how the Regularization by Denoising (RED) (Romano
et al., 2017) framework can be adapted to solve the PR
problem. We call this adaption prRED. Because it sets up a
general optimization problem, rather than using a specific algorithm, prRED is flexible and can handle a wide variety of
measurements including, critically, Fourier measurements.
Second, we show how prRED can utilize convolutional neural networks by incorporating the DnCNN neural network
(Zhang et al., 2017). We call this combination of RED and
DnCNN applied to PR prDeep.
prDeep offers excellent performance with reasonable run

