Towards More Efficient Stochastic Decentralized Learning:
Faster Convergence and Sparse Communication

Zebang Shen 1 2 Aryan Mokhtari 3 Tengfei Zhou 1 Peilin Zhao 4 Hui Qian 1

Abstract
Recently, the decentralized optimization problem
is attracting growing attention. Most existing
methods are deterministic with high per-iteration
cost and have a convergence rate quadratically
depending on the problem condition number. Besides, the dense communication is necessary to ensure the convergence even if the dataset is sparse.
In this paper, we generalize the decentralized
optimization problem to a monotone operator
root finding problem, and propose a stochastic
algorithm named DSBA that (i) converges geometrically with a rate linearly depending on the
problem condition number, and (ii) can be implemented using sparse communication only. Additionally, DSBA handles learning problems like
AUC-maximization which cannot be tackled efficiently in the decentralized setting. Experiments
on convex minimization and AUC-maximization
validate the efficiency of our method.

1. Introduction
Over the last decades, decentralized learning has received
a lot of attention in the machine learning community due
to the rise of distributed high-dimensional datasets. This
paper focuses on finding a global solution to learning problems in the setting where each node merely has access to
a subset of data and are allowed to exchange information
with their neighboring nodes only. Specifically, consider
a connected network with N nodes where each node n
has access to a local function fn : Rd → R which is the
average of q component
functions fn,i : Rd → R, i.e.
Pq
fn (x) = (1/q) i=1 fn,i (x). Considering xn as the local
1

Zhejiang University 2 Tencent AI Lab 3 Massachusetts Institute
of Technology 4 South China University of Technology. Correspondence to: Hui Qian <qianhui@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

variable of node n, the problem of interest is
(
)
q
N
X
1X
fn (xn ) ,
fn,i (xn ) .
min
q i=1
{xn }N
n=1
n=1

(1)

s.t. x1 =...=xN

The formulation (1) captures problems in sensor network,
mobile computation, and multi-agent control, where either
efficiently centralizing data or globally aggregate intermediate results is unfeasible (Johansson, 2008; Bullo et al., 2009;
Forero et al., 2010; Ribeiro, 2010).
Developing efficient methods for such problem has been
one of the major efforts in the machine learning community. While early work dates back to 1980’s (Tsitsiklis et al.,
1986; Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1989), consensus based gradient descent and dual averaging methods with sublinear convergence have made their debut (Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009;
Duchi et al., 2012), which consist of two steps: all nodes
(i) gather the (usually dense) iterates from theirs neighbors
via communication to compute a weighted average, and
(ii) update the average by the full gradient of the local fn
to obtain new iterates. Following such protocol, successors
with linear convergence have been proposed recently (Shi
et al., 2015a; Mokhtari et al., 2016; Scaman et al., 2017).
Despite the progress, two entangled challenges, realized by
the above interlacing steps, still remain. The first challenge
is the high computation complexity of existing methods.
Real world tasks commonly suffer from the ill-conditionness
of the underlying problem, which deteriorates the performance of existing methods due to their heavy dependence on
the problem condition number (Shi et al., 2015a; Mokhtari
et al., 2016). Besides, even a single node could contain a
plethora of data points, which impedes the full local gradient
evaluation required by most existing methods. The second
challenge is the high communication overhead. The existing
linear convergent methods overlooked such practical issue
and simply adopt the dense communication strategy, which
restrains their applications.
Furthermore, important problems like AUC maximization
involves pairwise component functions which take input
outside the local nodes. Multiple rounds of communications
are necessary to estimate the gradient, which precludes the
direct application of existing linear convergent algorithms.

