On the Spectrum of Random Features Maps of High Dimensional Data
Zhenyu Liao 1 Romain Couillet 1 2

Abstract
Random feature maps are ubiquitous in modern
statistical machine learning, where they generalize random projections by means of powerful, yet
often difficult to analyze nonlinear operators. In
this paper, we leverage the “concentration” phenomenon induced by random matrix theory to
perform a spectral analysis on the Gram matrix
of these random feature maps, here for Gaussian
mixture models of simultaneously large dimension and size. Our results are instrumental to
a deeper understanding on the interplay of the
nonlinearity and the statistics of the data, thereby
allowing for a better tuning of random featurebased techniques.

1. Introduction
Finding relevant features is one of the key steps for solving a
machine learning problem. To this end, the backpropagation
algorithm is probably the best-known method, with which
superhuman performances are commonly achieved for specific tasks in applications of computer vision (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012) and many others (Schmidhuber, 2015). But
data-driven approaches such as the backpropagation method,
in addition to being computationally demanding, fail to cope
with limited amounts of available training data.
One successful alternative in this regard is the use of “random features”, exploited both in feed-forward neural networks (Huang et al., 2012; Scardapane & Wang, 2017),
in large-scale kernel estimation (Rahimi & Recht, 2008;
Vedaldi & Zisserman, 2012) and more recently in random
sketching schemes (Keriven et al., 2016). Random feature
maps consist in projections randomly exploring the set of
nonlinear representations of the data, hopefully extracting
1

Laboratoire des Signaux et Systèmes (L2S), CentraleSupélec,
Université Paris-Saclay, France; 2 G-STATS Data Science Chair,
GIPSA-lab, University Grenobles-Alpes, France. Correspondence
to: Zhenyu Liao <zhenyu.liao@l2s.centralesupelec.fr>, Romain
Couillet <romain.couillet@centralesupelec.fr>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

features relevant to some given task. The nonlinearities
make these representations more mighty but meanwhile
theoretically more difficult to analyze and optimize.
Infinitely large random features maps are nonetheless well
understood as they result in (asymptotically) equivalent kernels, the most popular example being random Fourier features and their limiting radial basis kernels (Rahimi & Recht,
2008). Beyond those asymptotic results, recent advances
in random matrix theory give rise to unexpected simplification on the understanding of the finite-dimensional version
of these kernels, i.e., when the data number and size are
large but of similar order as the random feature vector size
(El Karoui et al., 2010; Couillet et al., 2016). Following the
same approach, in this work, we perform a spectral analysis
on the Gram matrix of the random feature matrices. This
matrix is of key relevance in many associated machine learning methods (e.g., spectral clustering (Ng et al., 2002) and
kernel SVM (Schölkopf & Smola, 2002)) and understanding
its spectrum casts an indispensable light on their asymptotic
performances. In the remainder of the article, we shall constantly consider spectral clustering as a concrete example of
application; however, similar analyses can be performed for
other types of random feature-based algorithms.
Our contribution is twofold. From a random matrix theory
perspective, it is a natural extension of the sample covariance matrix analysis (Silverstein & Bai, 1995) to a nonlinear
setting and can also be seen as the generalization of the
recent work of (Pennington & Worah, 2017) to a more practical data model. From a machine learning point of view,
we describe quantitatively the mutual influence of different
nonlinearities and data statistics on the resulting random
feature maps. More concretely, based on the ratio of two
coefficients from our analysis, commonly used activation
functions are divided into three classes: means-oriented,
covariance-oriented and balanced, which eventually allows
one to choose the activation function with respect to the
statistical properties of the data (or task) at hand, with a
solid theoretical basis.
We show by experiments that our results, applicable theoretically only to Gaussian mixture data, show an almost
perfect match when applied to some real-world datasets. We
are thus optimistic that our findings, although restricted to
Gaussian assumptions on the data model, can be applied to

