Approximation Guarantees for Adaptive Sampling
Eric Balkanski 1 Yaron Singer 1

Abstract
In this paper we analyze an adaptive sampling
approach for submodular maximization. Adaptive sampling is a technique that has recently been
shown to achieve a constant factor approximation
guarantee for submodular maximization under a
cardinality constraint with exponentially fewer
adaptive rounds than any previously studied constant factor approximation algorithm for this problem. Adaptivity quantifies the number of sequential rounds that an algorithm makes when function
evaluations can be executed in parallel and is the
parallel running time of an algorithm, up to low
order terms. Adaptive sampling achieves its exponential speedup at the expense of approximation.
In theory, it is guaranteed to produce a solution
that is a 1/3 approximation to the optimum. Nevertheless, experiments show that adaptive sampling techniques achieve far better values in practice. In this paper we provide theoretical justification for this phenomenon. In particular, we show
that under very mild conditions of curvature of
a function, adaptive sampling techniques achieve
an approximation arbitrarily close to 1/2 while
maintaining their low adaptivity. Furthermore, we
show that the approximation ratio approaches 1
in direct relationship to a homogeneity property
of the submodular function. In addition, we conduct experiments on real data sets in which the
curvature and homogeneity properties can be easily manipulated and demonstrate the relationship
between approximation and curvature, as well as
the effectiveness of adaptive sampling in practice.

1. Introduction
In machine learning, many fundamental quantities we care
to optimize such as entropy, diversity, coverage, diffusion,
1

Harvard University. Correspondence to: Eric Balkanski
<ericbalkanski@g.harvard.edu>,
Yaron
Singer
<yaron@seas.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

and clustering are submodular functions. For the canonical
problem of maximizing a non-decreasing submodular function under a cardinality constraint k, the celebrated greedy
algorithm which iteratively adds elements whose marginal
contribution is largest is known to achieve a 1 1/e approximation (Nemhauser et al., 1978) which is tight unless the
algorithm uses exponentially-many queries in the size of the
ground set n (Nemhauser & Wolsey, 1978).
Although the simple greedy algorithm achieves an optimal
approximation guarantee, it is highly adaptive. Informally,
the adaptivity of an algorithm is the number of sequential
rounds it requires when polynomially-many function evaluations can be executed in parallel in each round. The
adaptivity of the greedy algorithm is k since it sequentially
adds elements in k rounds, making linearly many function
evaluations in each round to evaluate the marginal contribution of every element to the set of elements selected in the
previous rounds. In general, k 2 ⌦(n) and the adaptivity,
as well as the parallel runtime, of the greedy algorithm is
hence linear in the size of the data.
The concept of adaptivity is generally well-studied in multiple areas of computer science as algorithms with low adaptivity lead to algorithms that can be parallelized efficiently
(see Section 6 for further discussion). These areas include
sorting and selection (Valiant, 1975; Cole, 1988; Braverman
et al., 2016), communication complexity (Papadimitriou &
Sipser, 1984; Duris et al., 1984; Nisan & Widgerson, 1991),
multi-armed bandits (Agarwal et al., 2017), sparse recovery
(Haupt et al., 2009a; Indyk et al., 2011; Haupt et al., 2009b),
and property testing (Canonne & Gur, 2017; Buhrman et al.,
2012; Chen et al., 2017).
Since the greedy algorithm has linear adaptivity and the
size of the ground set n can be large, a natural question is
whether constant factor approximations with lower adaptivity are achievable. Somewhat surprisingly, until very
recently ⌦(n) was the best known adaptivity required for a
constant factor approximation to maximizing a monotone
submodular maximization under a cardinality constraint.
In recent work (Balkanski & Singer, 2018) introduce an
adaptive sampling technique for maximizing monotone submodular functions under a cardinality constraint. This technique produces an algorithm that is O(log n)-adaptive and
achieves an approximation arbitrarily close to 1/3. Further-

