A Practical Algorithm for Distributed Clustering and
Outlier Detection∗
Erfan Sadeqi Azer
Indiana University Bloomington
Bloomington, IN
esadeqia@indiana.edu

Jiecao Chen
Indiana University Bloomington
Bloomington, IN
jiecchen@indiana.edu

Qin Zhang
Indiana University Bloomington
Bloomington, IN
qzhangcs@indiana.edu

Abstract
We study the classic k-means/median clustering, which are fundamental problems
in unsupervised learning, in the setting where data are partitioned across multiple
sites, and where we are allowed to discard a small portion of the data by labeling
them as outliers. We propose a simple approach based on constructing small
summary for the original dataset. The proposed method is time and communication
efficient, has good approximation guarantees, and can identify the global outliers
effectively. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first practical algorithm with
theoretical guarantees for distributed clustering with outliers. Our experiments
on both real and synthetic data have demonstrated the clear superiority of our
algorithm against all the baseline algorithms in almost all metrics.

1

Introduction

The rise of big data has brought the design of distributed learning algorithm to the forefront. For
example, in many practical settings the large quantities of data are collected and stored at different
locations, while we want to learn properties of the union of the data. For many machine learning
tasks, in order to speed up the computation we need to partition the data into a number of machines
for a joint computation. In a different dimension, since real-world data often contain background
noise or extreme values, it is desirable for us to perform the computation on the “clean data” by
discarding a small portion of the data from the input. Sometimes these outliers are interesting by
themselves; for example, in the study of statistical data of a population, outliers may represent those
people who deserve special attention. In this paper we study clustering with outliers, a fundamental
problem in unsupervised learning, in the distributed model where data are partitioned across multiple
sites, who need to communicate to arrive at a consensus on the cluster centers and labeling of outliers.
For many clustering applications it is common to model data objects as points in Rd , and the similarity
between two objects is represented as the Euclidean distance of the two corresponding points. In
this paper we assume for simplicity that each point can be sent by one unit of communication.
Note that when d is large, we can apply standard dimension reduction tools (for example, the
Johnson-Lindenstrauss lemma) before running our algorithms.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

∗

A full version of this paper is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.09495

