Learning to Reconstruct Shapes from Unseen Classes

Xiuming Zhang∗
MIT CSAIL

Zhoutong Zhang∗
MIT CSAIL

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT CSAIL

William T. Freeman
MIT CSAIL, Google Research

Chengkai Zhang
MIT CSAIL
Jiajun Wu
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
From a single image, humans are able to perceive the full 3D shape of an object by
exploiting learned shape priors from everyday life. Contemporary single-image
3D reconstruction algorithms aim to solve this task in a similar fashion, but often
end up with priors that are highly biased by training classes. Here we present
an algorithm, Generalizable Reconstruction (GenRe), designed to capture more
generic, class-agnostic shape priors. We achieve this with an inference network and
training procedure that combine 2.5D representations of visible surfaces (depth and
silhouette), spherical shape representations of both visible and non-visible surfaces,
and 3D voxel-based representations, in a principled manner that exploits the causal
structure of how 3D shapes give rise to 2D images. Experiments demonstrate
that GenRe performs well on single-view shape reconstruction, and generalizes to
diverse novel objects from categories not seen during training.

1

Introduction

Humans can imagine an object’s full 3D shape from just a single image, showing only a fraction of
the object’s surface. This applies to common objects such as chairs, but also to novel objects that
we have never seen before. Vision researchers have long argued that the key to this ability may be a
sophisticated hierarchy of representations, extending from images through surfaces to volumetric
shape, which process different aspects of shape in different representational formats [Marr, 1982].
Here we explore how these ideas can be integrated into state-of-the-art computer vision systems for
3D shape reconstruction.
Recently, computer vision and machine learning researchers have made impressive progress on
single-image 3D reconstruction by learning a parametric function f2D→3D , implemented as deep
neural networks, that maps a 2D image to its corresponding 3D shape. Essentially, f2D→3D encodes
shape priors (“what realistic shapes look like”), often learned from large shape repositories such as
ShapeNet [Chang et al., 2015]. Because the problem is well-known to be ill-posed—there exist many
3D explanations for any 2D visual observation—modern systems have explored looping in various
structures into this learning process. For example, MarrNet [Wu et al., 2017] uses intrinsic images or
2.5D sketches [Marr, 1982] as an intermediate representation, and concatenates two learned mappings
for shape reconstruction: f2D→3D = f2.5D→3D ◦ f2D→2.5D .
Many existing methods, however, ignore the fact that mapping a 2D image or a 2.5D sketch to a 3D
shape involves complex, but deterministic geometric projections. Simply using a neural network to
approximate this projection, instead of modeling this mapping explicitly, leads to inference models
that are overparametrized (and hence subject to overfitting training classes). It also misses valuable
inductive biases that can be wired in through such projections. Both of these factors contribute to
poor generalization to unseen classes.
∗

indicates equal contribution. Project page: http://genre.csail.mit.edu

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

