A Bayes–Sard Cubature Method

Toni Karvonen
Aalto University, Finland
toni.karvonen@aalto.fi

Chris. J. Oates
Newcastle University, UK
Alan Turing Institute, UK
chris.oates@ncl.ac.uk

Simo Särkkä
Aalto University, Finland
simo.sarkka@aalto.fi

Abstract
This paper focusses on the formulation of numerical integration as an inferential
task. To date, research effort has largely focussed on the development of Bayesian
cubature, whose distributional output provides uncertainty quantification for the
integral. However, the point estimators associated to Bayesian cubature can be
inaccurate and acutely sensitive to the prior when the domain is high-dimensional.
To address these drawbacks we introduce Bayes–Sard cubature, a probabilistic
framework that combines the flexibility of Bayesian cubature with the robustness
of classical cubatures which are well-established. This is achieved by considering
a Gaussian process model for the integrand whose mean is a parametric regression
model, with an improper prior on each regression coefficient. The features in
the regression model consist of test functions which are guaranteed to be exactly
integrated, with remaining degrees of freedom afforded to the non-parametric part.
The asymptotic convergence of the Bayes–Sard cubature method is established and
the theoretical results are numerically verified. In particular, we report two orders
of magnitude reduction in error compared to Bayesian cubature in the context of a
high-dimensional financial integral.

1

Introduction

R
This paper considers the numerical approximation of an integral I(f † ) := D f † dν of a continuous
integrand f † : D → R against a Borel distribution ν defined on a domain D ⊆ Rd . The approximation of such integrals is a fundamental task in applied mathematics, statistics and machine learning,
and is usually achieved using an n-point cubature rule
†

In (f ) :=

n
X

wi f † (xi ) ≈ I(f † )

i=1

with some weights w = (w1 , . . . , wn ) ∈ R and points (or nodes) X = {x1 , . . . , xn } ⊂ Rd . The
scope and ambition of modern scientific and industrial computer codes is such that the integrand f †
can often represent the output of a complex computational model. In such cases the evaluation of the
integrand is associated with a substantial resource cost and, as a consequence, the total number of
evaluations will be limited. The research challenge, in these circumstances, manifests not merely in
the design of a cubature method but also in the assessment of the associated error.
n

The (generalised) Bayesian cubature (BC) method [27, 35, 29] provides a statistical approach to error
assessment. In brief, let Ω be a probability space and consider a hypothetical Bayesian agent who
represents their epistemic uncertainties in the form of a stochastic process f : D × Ω → R. This
stochastic process must arise from a Bayesian regression model and be consistent with obtained
evaluations of the true integrand, typically provided on a discrete point set {xi }ni=1 ⊂ D; that is
f (xi , ω) = f † (xi ) for almost all ω ∈ Ω. The stochastic process acts as a stochastic model for the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

