Online Learning of Quantum States
Scott Aaronson
UT Austin ⇤
aaronson@cs.utexas.edu
Elad Hazan
Princeton University and Google AI Princeton
ehazan@cs.princeton.edu

Xinyi Chen
Google AI Princeton †
xinyic@google.com
Satyen Kale
Google AI, New York
satyenkale@google.com

Ashwin Nayak
University of Waterloo ‡
ashwin.nayak@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Suppose we have many copies of an unknown n-qubit state ⇢. We measure some
copies of ⇢ using a known two-outcome measurement E1 , then other copies using
a measurement E2 , and so on. At each stage t, we generate a current hypothesis !t
about the state ⇢, using the outcomes of the previous measurements. We show that
it is possible to do this in a way that guarantees that |Tr(Ei !t ) Tr(Ei ⇢)|, the error in our prediction for the next measurement, is at least " at most O n/"2 times.
Even in the “non-realizable” setting—where there could be arbitrary noise in the
measurement
outcomes—we show how to output hypothesis states that incur at
p
most O( T n ) excess loss over the best possible state on the first T measurements.
These results generalize a 2007 theorem by Aaronson on the PAC-learnability of
quantum states, to the online and regret-minimization settings. We give three
different ways to prove our results—using convex optimization, quantum postselection, and sequential fat-shattering dimension—which have different advantages
in terms of parameters and portability.

1

Introduction

State tomography is a fundamental task in quantum computing of great practical and theoretical
importance. In a typical scenario, we have access to an apparatus that is capable of producing many
copies of a quantum state, and we wish to obtain a description of the state via suitable measurements.
Such a description would allow us, for example, to check the accuracy with which the apparatus
constructs a specific target state.
How many single-copy measurements are needed to “learn” an unknown n-qubit quantum state ⇢?
Suppose we wish to reconstruct the full 2n ⇥ 2n density matrix, even approximately, to within "
in trace distance. If we make no assumptions about ⇢, then it is straightforward to show that the
number of measurements needed grows exponentially with n. In fact, even when we allow joint
measurement of multiple copies of the state, an exponential number of copies of ⇢ are required (see,
⇤

Supported by a Vannevar Bush Faculty Fellowship from the US Department of Defense. Part of this work
was done while the author was supported by an NSF Alan T. Waterman Award.
†
Part of this work was done when the author was a research assistant at Princeton University.
‡
Research supported in part by NSERC Canada.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

