Meta-Learning MCMC Proposals

Tongzhou Wang∗
Facebook AI Research
tongzhou.wang.1994@gmail.com

Yi Wu
University of California, Berkeley
jxwuyi@gmail.com

David A. Moore†
Google
davmre@gmail.com

Stuart J. Russell
University of California, Berkeley
russell@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Effective implementations of sampling-based probabilistic inference often require
manually constructed, model-specific proposals. Inspired by recent progresses in
meta-learning for training learning agents that can generalize to unseen environments, we propose a meta-learning approach to building effective and generalizable
MCMC proposals. We parametrize the proposal as a neural network to provide
fast approximations to block Gibbs conditionals. The learned neural proposals
generalize to occurrences of common structural motifs across different models,
allowing for the construction of a library of learned inference primitives that can
accelerate inference on unseen models with no model-specific training required.
We explore several applications including open-universe Gaussian mixture models,
in which our learned proposals outperform a hand-tuned sampler, and a real-world
named entity recognition task, in which our sampler yields higher final F1 scores
than classical single-site Gibbs sampling.

1

Introduction

Model-based probabilistic inference is a highly successful paradigm for machine learning, with
applications to tasks as diverse as movie recommendation [31], visual scene perception [17], music
transcription [3], etc. People learn and plan using mental models, and indeed the entire enterprise
of modern science can be viewed as constructing a sophisticated hierarchy of models of physical,
mental, and social phenomena. Probabilistic programming provides a formal representation of
models as sample-generating programs, promising the ability to explore a even richer range of models.
Probabilistic programming language based approaches have been successfully applied to complex
real-world tasks such as seismic monitoring [23], concept learning [18] and design generation [26].
However, most of these applications require manually designed proposal distributions for efficient
MCMC inference. Commonly used “black-box” MCMC algorithms are often far from satisfactory
when handling complex models. Hamiltonian Monte Carlo [24] takes global steps but is only
applicable to continuous latent variables with differentiable likelihoods. Single-site Gibbs sampling
[30, 1] can be applied to many model but suffers from slow mixing when variables are coupled in the
posterior. Effective real-world inference often requires block proposals that update multiple variables
together to overcome near-deterministic and long-range dependence structures. However, computing
exact Gibbs proposals for large blocks quickly becomes intractable (approaching the difficulty of
posterior inference), and in practice it is common to invest significant effort in hand-engineering
computational tricks for a particular model.
∗
†

Work done while the author was at the University of California, Berkeley
Work done while the author was at the University of California, Berkeley

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

