Fast Similarity Search via Optimal Sparse Lifting

Wenye Li1,2,∗, Jingwei Mao1 , Yin Zhang1 , Shuguang Cui1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
{wyli,yinzhang,shuguangcui}@cuhk.edu.cn, 216019005@link.cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Similarity search is a fundamental problem in computing science with various
applications and has attracted significant research attention, especially in largescale search with high dimensions. Motivated by the evidence in biological science,
our work develops a novel approach for similarity search. Fundamentally different
from existing methods that typically reduce the dimension of the data to lessen
the computational complexity and speed up the search, our approach projects the
data into an even higher-dimensional space while ensuring the sparsity of the data
in the output space, with the objective of further improving precision and speed.
Specifically, our approach has two key steps. Firstly, it computes the optimal
sparse lifting for given input samples and increases the dimension of the data
while approximately preserving their pairwise similarity. Secondly, it seeks the
optimal lifting operator that best maps input samples to the optimal sparse lifting.
Computationally, both steps are modeled as optimization problems that can be
efficiently and effectively solved by the Frank-Wolfe algorithm. Simple as it is, our
approach has reported significantly improved results in empirical evaluations, and
exhibited its high potentials in solving practical problems.

1

Introduction

Similarity search refers to the problem of finding a subset of objects which are similar to a given query
from a specific dataset. As a fundamental problem in computing science, it has various applications in
information retrieval, pattern classification, data clustering, etc., and has attracted significant research
attention in the literature [21, 9].
More specifically and of particular research interest, recent work in similarity search focuses on the
large-scale high-dimensional problems. To lessen the computational complexity, a popular approach
is to firstly reduce the dimension of the data, and then apply the nearest neighbor search or the space
partitioning methods effectively on the reduced data. To efficiently reduce the dimension of large
volume datasets, the locality sensitive hashing method is widely used [11, 3, 7], with quite successful
results.
Very recently, with biological evidence from the fruit fly’s olfactory circuit, people have shown the
possibility of increasing the data dimension instead of reducing it as a general hashing scheme. For
example, the fly algorithm projects each input data sample to a higher-dimensional output space with
a random sparse binary matrix. Then after competitive learning, the algorithm returns a sparse binary
vector in the output space. Comparing with the locality sensitive hashing method, similarity search
based on the sparse binary vectors has reported improved precision and speed in a series of empirical
studies [8].
Motivated by the biological evidence and the idea of dimension expansion, our work proposes a
unified framework for dimension expansion and applies it in similarity search. The framework has
∗

Corresponding author.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

