Nonparametric Density Estimation
with Adversarial Losses
Shashank Singh1,2,∗
Ananya Uppal3
Boyue Li4
1
1
Chun-Liang Li
Manzil Zaheer
Barnabás Póczos1
1
2
Machine Learning Department
Department of Statistics & Data Science
3
Department of Mathematical Sciences 4 Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
∗
Corresponding Author: sss1@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We study minimax convergence rates of nonparametric density estimation under a
large class of loss functions called “adversarial losses”, which, besides classical Lp
losses, includes maximum mean discrepancy (MMD), Wasserstein distance, and
total variation distance. These losses are closely related to the losses encoded by
discriminator networks in generative adversarial networks (GANs). In a general
framework, we study how the choice of loss and the assumed smoothness of
the underlying density together determine the minimax rate. We also discuss
implications for training GANs based on deep ReLU networks, and more general
connections to learning implicit generative models in a minimax statistical sense.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling, that is, modeling the distribution from which data are drawn, is a central task in
machine learning and statistics. Often, prior information is insufficient to guess the form of the data
distribution. In statistics, generative modeling in these settings is usually studied from the perspective
of nonparametric density estimation, in which histogram, kernel, orthogonal series, and nearestneighbor methods are popular approaches with well-understood statistical properties [49, 47, 14, 7].
Recently, machine learning has made significant empirical progress in generative modeling, using
such tools as generative adversarial networks (GANs) and variational autoencoders (VAEs). Computationally, these methods are quite distinct from classical density estimators; they usually rely on deep
neural networks, fit by black-box optimization, rather than a mathematically prescribed smoothing
operator, such as convolution with a kernel or projection onto a finite-dimensional subspace.
Ignoring the implementation of these models, from the perspective of statistical analysis, these
recent methods have at least two main differences from classical density estimators. First, they
are implicit, rather than explicit (or prescriptive) generative models [12, 29]; that is, rather than an
estimate of the probability of a set or the density at a point, they return novel samples from the
data distribution. Second, in many recent models, loss is measured not with Lp distances (as is
conventional in nonparametric statistics [49, 47]), but rather with weaker losses, such as
dFD (P, Q) = sup

E [f (X)] − E [f (X)] ,

f ∈FD X∼P

(1)

X∼Q

where FD is a discriminator class of bounded, Borel-measurable functions, and P and Q lie in a
generator class FG of Borel probability measures on a sample space X . Specifically, GANs often
use losses of this form because (1) can be approximated by a discriminator neural network.
This paper attempts to help bridge the gap between traditional nonparametric statistics and these
recent advances by studying these two differences from a statistical minimax perspective. Specifically,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

