Algorithmic Linearly Constrained Gaussian Processes

Markus Lange-Hegermann
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Ostwestfalen-Lippe University of Applied Sciences
Lemgo
markus.lange-hegermann@hs-owl.de

Abstract
We algorithmically construct multi-output Gaussian process priors which satisfy
linear differential equations. Our approach attempts to parametrize all solutions of
the equations using Gröbner bases. If successful, a push forward Gaussian process
along the paramerization is the desired prior. We consider several examples from
physics, geomathematics and control, among them the full inhomogeneous system
of Maxwell’s equations. By bringing together stochastic learning and computer
algebra in a novel way, we combine noisy observations with precise algebraic
computations.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Gaussian process regression has become a prime regression technique [37]. Roughly,
a Gaussian process can be viewed as a suitable1 probability distribution on a set of functions, which we
can condition on observations using Bayes’ rule. The resulting mean function is used for regression.
The strength of Gaussian process regression lies in avoiding overfitting while still finding functions
complex enough to describe any behavior present in given observations, even in noisy or unstructured
data. Gaussian processes are usually applied when observations are rare or expensive to produce.
Applications range, among many others, from robotics [9], biology [19], global optimization [33],
astrophysics [13] to engineering [47].
Incorporating justified assumptions into the prior helps these applications: the full information content
of the scarce observations can be utilized to create a more precise regression model. Examples of
such assumptions are smooth or rough behavior, trends, homogeneous or heterogeneous noise, local
or global behavior, and periodicity (cf. §4 in [37],[11]). Such assumptions are usually incorporated in
the covariance structure of the Gaussian process.
Even certain physical laws, given by certain linear differential equations, could be incorporated
into the covariance structures of Gaussian process priors. Thereby, despite their random nature,
all realizations and the mean function of the posterior strictly adhere to these physical laws2 . For
example, [29, 41] constructed covariance structures for divergence-free and curl-free vector fields,
which [50, 45] used to model electromagnetic phenomena.
A first step towards systematizing this construction was achieved in [24]. In certain cases, a map
into the solution set for physical laws could be found by a computation that does not necessarily
terminate. Having found such a map, one could assume a Gaussian process prior in its domain and
push it forward. This results in a Gaussian process prior for the solutions of the physical laws.
1

They are the maximum entropy prior for finite mean and variance in the unknown behavior [22, 23].
For notational simplicity, we refrain from using the phrases “almost surely” and “up to equivalence” in this
paper, e.g. by assuming separability.
2

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

