See and Think: Disentangling Semantic Scene
Completion

Shice Liu1, 2

Yu Hu1, 2 Yiming Zeng1, 2 Qiankun Tang1, 2 Beibei Jin1, 2
Yinhe Han1, 2 Xiaowei Li1, 2
1
State Key Laboratory of Computer Architecture
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{liushice,huyu,zengyiming,tangqiankun,jinbeibei,yinhes,lxw}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Semantic scene completion predicts volumetric occupancy and object category
of a 3D scene, which helps intelligent agents to understand and interact with the
surroundings. In this work, we propose a disentangled framework, sequentially
carrying out 2D semantic segmentation, 2D-3D reprojection and 3D semantic scene
completion. This three-stage framework has three advantages: (1) explicit semantic
segmentation significantly boosts performance; (2) flexible fusion ways of sensor
data bring good extensibility; (3) progress in any subtask will promote the holistic
performance. Experimental results show that regardless of inputing a single depth
or RGB-D, our framework can generate high-quality semantic scene completion,
and outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on both synthetic and real datasets.

1

Introduction

Humans can understand unfamiliar circumstances quickly. For the scene shown in Figure 1, one
can recover the shape of the sofa though some parts of it are occluded by clothes. To endow agents
with this basic but important capability, semantic scene completion [1] is put forward, which predicts
volumetric occupancy and object category of a 3D scene.
Early works on semantic scene completion is limited in visible surface partition [2, 3] and shape
recovery without considering object category or environment context [4, 5]. Recently, [1, 6] agree
scene completion and semantic labeling are tightly intertwined and simultaneously generate shapes
and their categories. However, they not only exploit few semantic features, but are highly customized
for a specific sensor. For a more effective and general framework, we present a novel modeling by
borrowing ideas from human perception. The Gestalt psychologists proposed that segmentation,
shape assignment and recognition were ordered serially and hierarchically and lower-level cues form
the substrate for higher-level cues [7, 8]. Inspired by that, we treat 2D semantic segmentation as
lower-level cues and leverage it to assist higher-level 3D semantic scene completion.
We propose a CNN-based framework to disentangle semantic scene completion. It sequentially
accomplishes two subtasks, i.e., 2D semantic segmentation and 3D semantic scene completion. These
two subtasks are connected by a 2D-3D reprojection layer. Considering that semantic segmentation
is to acquire lower-level information as seeing and semantic scene completion is a higher-level task
as thinking, we name it See And Think Network (SATNet). Figure 1 shows its three modules.
Based on the framework, we provide various implementations. Note that all these implementations
need a depth image, for it is required by the 2D-3D reprojection layer. For a single depth or
RGB-D input, SATNet can finish semantic scene completion efficiently in a single-branch manner.
Moreover, for the RGB-D input, two more effective double-branch implementations will be introduced.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

