Communication Compression for Decentralized
Training
Hanlin Tang1 , Shaoduo Gan2 , Ce Zhang2 , Tong Zhang3 , and Ji Liu3,1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
3
Tencent AI Lab

htang14@ur.rochester.edu, sgan@inf.ethz.ch, ce.zhang@inf.ethz.ch,
tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org, ji.liu.uwisc@gmail.com

Abstract

Optimizing distributed learning systems is an art of balancing between computation and
communication. There have been two lines of research that try to deal with slower networks:
communication compression for low bandwidth networks, and decentralization for high
latency networks. In this paper, We explore a natural question: can the combination of both
techniques lead to a system that is robust to both bandwidth and latency?
Although the system implication of such combination is trivial, the underlying theoretical principle and algorithm design is challenging: unlike centralized algorithms, simply
compressing exchanged information, even in an unbiased stochastic way, within the decentralized network would accumulate the error and fail to converge. In this paper, we develop a
framework of compressed, decentralized training and propose two different strategies, which
we call extrapolation compression and difference
√ compression. We analyze both algorithms
and prove both converge at the rate of O(1/ nT ) where n is the number of workers and
T is the number of iterations, matching the convergence rate for full precision, centralized
training. We validate our algorithms and find that our proposed algorithm outperforms the
best of merely decentralized and merely quantized algorithm significantly for networks with
both high latency and low bandwidth.

1

Introduction

When training machine learning models in a distributed fashion, the underlying constraints of how
workers (or nodes) communication have a significant impact on the training algorithm. When workers
cannot form a fully connected communication topology or the communication latency is high (e.g., in
sensor networks or mobile networks), decentralizing the communication comes to the rescue. On the
other hand, when the amount of data sent through the network is an optimization objective (maybe
to lower the cost or energy consumption), or the network bandwidth is low, compressing the traffic,
either via sparsification [Wangni et al., 2017, Konečnỳ and Richtárik, 2016] or quantization [Zhang
et al., 2017a, Suresh et al., 2017] is a popular strategy. In this paper, our goal is to develop a novel
framework that works robustly in an environment that both decentralization and communication
compression could be beneficial. In this paper, we focus on quantization, the process of lowering
the precision of data representation, often in a stochastically unbiased way. But the same techniques
would apply to other unbiased compression schemes such as sparsification.
Both decentralized training and quantized (or compressed more generally) training have attracted
intensive interests recently [Yuan et al., 2016, Zhao and Song, 2016, Lian et al., 2017a, Konečnỳ and
Richtárik, 2016, Alistarh et al., 2017]. Decentralized algorithms usually exchange local models among
nodes, which consumes the main communication budget; on the other hand, quantized algorithms
usually exchange quantized gradient, and update an un-quantized model. A straightforward idea to
combine these two is to directly quantize the models sent through the network during decentralized
training. However, this simple strategy does not converge to the right solution as the quantization
error would accumulate during training. The technical contribution of this paper is to develop novel
algorithms that combine both decentralized training and quantized training together.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

