Joint Active Feature Acquisition and Classification
with Variable-Size Set Encoding
Hajin Shim1 , Sung Ju Hwang1,2 , Eunho Yang1,2
KAIST1 , AItrics2 , South Korea
{shimazing, sjhwang82, eunhoy} @kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We consider the problem of active feature acquisition where the goal is to sequentially select the subset of features in order to achieve the maximum prediction
performance in the most cost-effective way at test time. In this work, we formulate this active feature acquisition as a joint learning problem of training both the
classifier (environment) and the reinforcement learning (RL) agent that decides
either to ‘stop and predict’ or ‘collect a new feature’ at test time, in a cost-sensitive
manner. We also introduce a novel encoding scheme to represent acquired subsets
of features by proposing an order-invariant set encoding at the feature level, which
also significantly reduces the search space for our agent. We evaluate our model
on a carefully designed synthetic dataset for the active feature acquisition as well
as several medical datasets. Our framework shows meaningful feature acquisition
process for diagnosis that complies with human knowledge, and outperforms all
baselines in terms of prediction performance as well as feature acquisition cost.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has shown remarkable growth in recent years mainly due to easier access to vast
amount of data from the internet, and demonstrated significant improvements over classical and
standard algorithms on diverse tasks such as visual recognition [1, 2] and machine translation [3],
to name a few. The fundamental assumption for training accurate deep networks is that data is
readily available at little or even no cost, such that the model can make predictions after observing
all available features (in other words, feature acquisition is considered as an independent process
against predictions). However, in some applications, information acquisition is not only affected by
the model (and vice versa) but it also incurs a cost. Consider, for instance, the task of diagnosing a
patient with diseases. A human doctor, in this case, will start the diagnosis by starting with only a
few symptoms that the patient initially reported. From there, the doctor will either ask about more
symptoms or conduct some medical examinations to narrow down the set of potential diseases the
patient might have until he or she has enough confidence to make the final diagnosis. Acquiring all
features (via all medical tests) in this problem may cause a financial burden to patients and more
seriously it may increase the risk of not receiving proper treatment at the right time. Furthermore,
collecting irrelevant features might add only noise and make the prediction unstable.
In this paper, we first formulate the feature acquisition problem that minimizes the prediction error as
well as the feature acquisition cost as an optimization problem.We then provide the sequential feature
acquisition framework with the classifier for predictions and the RL agent for feature acquisitions, in
order to systematically solve the proposed optimization problem. We can understand the sequential
feature acquisition with the following example. As a human doctor diagnoses a patient in the
previous healthcare example, we need to decide which unknown features should be discovered in
order to be sufficient confident about our prediction. Given a new data point with missing entries,
our RL agent sequentially chooses features to acquire based on the set of features acquired so far.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

