Cooperative neural networks (CoNN): Exploiting
prior independence structure for improved
classification
Harsh Shrivastava ∗
Georgia Tech

Eugene Bart †
PARC

hshrivastava3@gatech.edu

bart@parc.com

Hanjun Dai ∗
Georgia Tech
hanjundai@gatech.edu

Bo Dai ∗
Georgia Tech
bodai@gatech.edu

Bob Price †
PARC
bprice@parc.com
Srinivas Aluru ∗
Georgia Tech
aluru@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
We propose a new approach, called cooperative neural networks (CoNN), which
uses a set of cooperatively trained neural networks to capture latent representations that exploit prior given independence structure. The model is more flexible
than traditional graphical models based on exponential family distributions, but
incorporates more domain specific prior structure than traditional deep networks
or variational autoencoders. The framework is very general and can be used to
exploit the independence structure of any graphical model. We illustrate the technique by showing that we can transfer the independence structure of the popular
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model to a cooperative neural network, CoNNsLDA. Empirical evaluation of CoNN-sLDA on supervised text classification tasks
demonstrates that the theoretical advantages of prior independence structure can be
realized in practice - we demonstrate a 23% reduction in error on the challenging
MultiSent data set compared to state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Neural networks offer a low-bias solution for learning complex concepts such as the linguistic
knowledge required to separate documents into thematically related classes. However, neural networks
typically start with a fairly generic structure, with each level comprising a number of functionally
equivalent neurons connected to other layers by identical, repetitive connections. Any structure
present in the problem domain must be learned from training examples and encoded as weights.
In practice, some domain structure is often known ahead of time; in such cases, it is desirable to
pre-design a network with this domain structure in mind. In this paper, we present an approach
that allows incorporating certain kinds of independence structure into a new kind of neural learning
machine.
The proposed approach is called “Cooperative Neural Networks” (CoNN). This approach works
by constructing a set of neural networks, each trained to output an embedding of a probability
distribution. The networks are iteratively updated so that each embedding is consistent with the
embeddings of the other networks and with the training data. Like probabilistic graphical models,
the representation is factored into components that are independent. Unlike probabilistic graphical
∗
†

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Eng. Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta, GA 30332
3333 Coyote Hill Rd, Palo Alto, CA,

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

