Deep Defense: Training DNNs with Improved
Adversarial Robustness
Ziang Yan1* Yiwen Guo2,1* Changshui Zhang1
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI),
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
Department of Automation,Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Intel Labs China
1

yza18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

yiwen.guo@intel.com

zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the efficacy on a variety of computer vision tasks, deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, limiting their applications
in security-critical systems. Recent works have shown the possibility of generating imperceptibly perturbed image inputs (a.k.a., adversarial examples) to
fool well-trained DNN classifiers into making arbitrary predictions. To address
this problem, we propose a training recipe named “deep defense”. Our core
idea is to integrate an adversarial perturbation-based regularizer into the classification objective, such that the obtained models learn to resist potential attacks, directly and precisely. The whole optimization problem is solved just like
training a recursive network. Experimental results demonstrate that our method
outperforms training with adversarial/Parseval regularizations by large margins
on various datasets (including MNIST, CIFAR-10 and ImageNet) and different
DNN architectures. Code and models for reproducing our results are available at
https://github.com/ZiangYan/deepdefense.pytorch.

1

Introduction

Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have advanced the state-of-the-art of many challenging
computer vision tasks, they are vulnerable to adversarial examples [34] (i.e., generated images which
seem perceptually similar to the real ones but are intentionally formed to fool learning models).
A general way of synthesizing the adversarial examples is to apply worst-case perturbations to real
images [34, 8, 26, 3]. With proper strategies, the required perturbations for fooling a DNN model can
be 1000× smaller in magnitude when compared with the real images, making them imperceptible to
human beings. It has been reported that even the state-of-the-art DNN solutions have been fooled to
misclassify such examples with high confidence [18]. Worse, the adversarial perturbation can transfer
across different images and network architectures [25]. Such transferability also allows black-box
attacks, which means the adversary may succeed without having any knowledge about the model
architecture or parameters [28].
Though intriguing, such property of DNNs can lead to potential issues in real-world applications
like self-driving cars and paying with your face systems. Unlike certain instability against random
noise, which is theoretically and practically guaranteed to be less critical [7, 34], the vulnerability
to adversarial perturbations is still severe in deep learning. Multiple attempts have been made to
analyze and explain it so far [34, 8, 5, 14]. For example, Goodfellow et al. [8] argue that the main
*The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

