Bayesian Distributed Stochastic Gradient Descent

Michael Teng
Department of Engineering Sciences
University of Oxford
mteng@robots.ox.ac.uk

Frank Wood
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
fwood@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
We introduce Bayesian distributed stochastic gradient descent (BDSGD), a highthroughput algorithm for training deep neural networks on parallel computing
clusters. This algorithm uses amortized inference in a deep generative model to
perform joint posterior predictive inference of mini-batch gradient computation
times in a compute cluster specific manner. Specifically, our algorithm mitigates
the straggler effect in synchronous, gradient-based optimization by choosing an
optimal cutoff beyond which mini-batch gradient messages from slow workers are
ignored. The principle novel contribution and finding of this work goes beyond
this by demonstrating that using the predicted run-times from a generative model
of cluster worker performance improves over the static-cutoff prior art, leading
to higher gradient computation throughput on large compute clusters. In our experiments we show that eagerly discarding the mini-batch gradient computations
of stragglers not only increases throughput but sometimes also increases the overall rate of convergence as a function of wall-clock time by virtue of eliminating
idleness.

1

Introduction

Deep learning success stories are predicated on large neural network models being trained using
ever larger amounts of data. While the computational speed and memory available on individual
computers and GPUs continually grows, there will always be some problems and settings in which
the amount of training data available will not fit entirely into the memory of one computer. What is
more, and even for a fixed amount of data, as the number of parameters in a neural network or the
complexity of the computation it performs increases, so too do the incurred economic and time costs
to train. Both large training datasets and complex networks inspire parallel training algorithms.
In this work we focus on parallel stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Like the substantial and growing
body of work on this topic (Recht et al. (2011); Dean et al. (2012); McMahan and Streeter (2014);
Zhang et al. (2015)) we too focus on gradient computations computed in parallel on “mini-batches”
drawn from the training data. However, unlike most of these methods which are asynchronous in
nature, we focus instead on improving the performance of synchronous distributed SGD, very much
like Chen et al. (2016), upon whose work we directly build.
A problem in fully synchronous distributed SGD is the straggler effect. This real-world effect is
caused by the small and constantly varying subset of worker nodes that, for factors outside our control, perform their mini-batch gradient computation slower than the rest of the concurrent workers,
causing long idle times in workers which already have finished. Chen et al. (2016) introduce a
method of mitigating the straggler effect on wall-clock convergence rate by picking a fixed cut-off
for the number of workers on which to wait before synchronously updating the parameter on a centralized parameter server. They found, as we demonstrate in this work as well, that the increased
gradient computation throughput that comes from reducing idle time more than offsets the loss of a
small fraction of mini-batch gradient contributions per gradient descent step.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

