Orthogonally Decoupled Variational
Gaussian Processes
Hugh Salimbeni∗
Imperial College London
hrs13@ic.ac.uk

Ching-An Cheng∗
Georgia Institute of Technology
cacheng@gatech.edu

Byron Boots
Georgia Institute of Technology
bboots@gatech.edu

Marc Deisenroth
Imperial College London
mpd37@ic.ac.uk

Abstract
Gaussian processes (GPs) provide a powerful non-parametric framework for reasoning over functions. Despite appealing theory, its superlinear computational and
memory complexities have presented a long-standing challenge. State-of-the-art
sparse variational inference methods trade modeling accuracy against complexity.
However, the complexities of these methods still scale superlinearly in the number
of basis functions, implying that that sparse GP methods are able to learn from
large datasets only when a small model is used. Recently, a decoupled approach
was proposed that removes the unnecessary coupling between the complexities
of modeling the mean and the covariance functions of a GP. It achieves a linear
complexity in the number of mean parameters, so an expressive posterior mean
function can be modeled. While promising, this approach suffers from optimization
difﬁculties due to ill-conditioning and non-convexity. In this work, we propose an
alternative decoupled parametrization. It adopts an orthogonal basis in the mean
function to model the residues that cannot be learned by the standard coupled approach. Therefore, our method extends, rather than replaces, the coupled approach
to achieve strictly better performance. This construction admits a straightforward
natural gradient update rule, so the structure of the information manifold that is
lost during decoupling can be leveraged to speed up learning. Empirically, our
algorithm demonstrates signiﬁcantly faster convergence in multiple experiments.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) are ﬂexible Bayesian non-parametric models that have achieved stateof-the-art performance in a range of applications [8, 31]. A key advantage of GP models is that
they have large representational capacity, while being robust to overﬁtting [27]. This property is
especially important for robotic applications, where there may be an abundance of data in some parts
of the space but a scarcity in others [7]. Unfortunately, exact inference in GPs scales cubically in
computation and quadratically in memory with the size of the training set, and is only available in
closed form for Gaussian likelihoods.
To learn from large datasets, variational inference provides a principled way to ﬁnd tractable approximations to the true posterior. A common approach to approximate GP inference is to form
a sparse variational posterior, which is designed by conditioning the prior process at a small set
of inducing points [32]. The sparse variational framework trades accuracy against computation,
∗

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

