Content preserving text generation
with attribute controls
Lajanugen Logeswaran˚
Honglak Lee:
Samy Bengio:
˚
:
University of Michigan, Google Brain
llajan@umich.edu,{honglak,bengio}@google.com

Abstract
In this work, we address the problem of modifying textual attributes of sentences.
Given an input sentence and a set of attribute labels, we attempt to generate sentences that are compatible with the conditioning information. To ensure that the
model generates content compatible sentences, we introduce a reconstruction loss
which interpolates between auto-encoding and back-translation loss components.
We propose an adversarial loss to enforce generated samples to be attribute compatible and realistic. Through quantitative, qualitative and human evaluations we
demonstrate that our model is capable of generating fluent sentences that better
reflect the conditioning information compared to prior methods. We further demonstrate that the model is capable of simultaneously controlling multiple attributes.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling of images and text has seen increasing progress over the last few years. Deep
generative models such as variational auto-encoders [1], adversarial networks [2] and Pixel Recurrent
Neural Nets [3] have driven most of this success in vision. Conditional generative models capable
of providing fine-grained control over the attributes of a generated image such as facial attributes
[4] and attributes of birds and flowers [5] have been extensively studied. The style transfer problem
which aims to change more abstract properties of an image has seen significant advances [6, 7].
The discrete and sequential nature of language makes it difficult to approach language problems in a
similar manner. Changing the value of a pixel by a small amount has negligible perceptual effect on
an image. However, distortions to text are not imperceptible in a similar way and this has largely
prevented the transfer of these methods to text.
In this work we consider a generative model for sentences that is capable of expressing a given
sentence in a form that is compatible with a given set of conditioning attributes. Applications of such
models include conversational systems [8], paraphrasing [9], machine translation [10], authorship
obfuscation [11] and many others. Sequence mapping problems have been addressed successfully
with the sequence-to-sequence paradigm [12]. However, this approach requires training pairs of
source and target sentences. The lack of parallel data with pairs of similar sentences that differ along
certain stylistic dimensions makes this an important and challenging problem.
We focus on categorical attributes of language. Examples of such attributes include sentiment,
language complexity, tense, voice, honorifics, mood, etc. Our approach draws inspiration from
style transfer methods in the vision and language literature. We enforce content preservation using
auto-encoding and back-translation losses. Attribute compatibility and realistic sequence generation
are encouraged by an adversarial discriminator. The proposed adversarial discriminator is more data
efficient and scales better to multiple attributes with several classes more easily than prior methods.
Evaluating models that address the transfer task is also quite challenging. Previous works have
mostly focused on assessing the attribute compatibility of generated sentences. These evaluations do
not penalize vacuous mappings that simply generate a sentence of the desired attribute value while
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

