Negotiable Reinforcement Learning for Pareto
Optimal Sequential Decision-Making

Nishant Desai
Center for Human-Compatible AI
University of California, Berkeley
nishantdesai@berkeley.edu

Andrew Critch
Department of EECS
University of California, Berkeley
critch@berkeley.edu

Stuart Russell
Computer Science Division
University of California, Berkeley
russell@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
It is commonly believed that an agent making decisions on behalf of two or more
principals who have different utility functions should adopt a Pareto optimal policy,
i.e. a policy that cannot be improved upon for one principal without making
sacrifices for another. Harsanyi’s theorem shows that when the principals have a
common prior on the outcome distributions of all policies, a Pareto optimal policy
for the agent is one that maximizes a fixed, weighted linear combination of the
principals’ utilities. In this paper, we derive a more precise generalization for the
sequential decision setting in the case of principals with different priors on the
dynamics of the environment. We refer to this generalization as the Negotiable
Reinforcement Learning (NRL) framework. In this more general case, the relative
weight given to each principal’s utility should evolve over time according to how
well the agent’s observations conform with that principal’s prior. To gain insight
into the dynamics of this new framework, we implement a simple NRL agent and
empirically examine its behavior in a simple environment.

1

Introduction

It has been argued that the first AI systems with generally super-human cognitive abilities will play a
pivotal decision-making role in directing the future of civilization [Bostrom, 2014]. If that is the case,
an important question will arise: Whose values will the first super-human AI systems serve? Since
safety is a crucial consideration in developing such systems, assuming the institutions building them
come to understand the risks and the time investments needed to address them [Baum, 2016], they
will have a large incentive to cooperate in their design rather than racing under time-pressure to build
competing systems [Armstrong et al., 2016].
Therefore, consider two nations—allies or adversaries—who must decide whether to cooperate in the
deployment of an extremely powerful AI system. Implicitly or explicitly, the resulting system would
have to strike compromises when conflicts arise between the wishes of those nations. How can they
specify the degree to which that system would be governed by the distinctly held principles of each
nation? More mundanely, suppose a couple purchases a domestic robot. How should the robot strike
compromises when conflicts arise between the commands of its owners?
It is already an interesting and difficult problem to robustly align an AI system’s values with those
of a single human (or a group of humans in close agreement). Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL)
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

