Minimax Estimation of Neural Net Distance
Kaiyi Ji
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
ji.367@osu.edu

Yingbin Liang
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
liang.889@osu.edu

Abstract
An important class of distance metrics proposed for training generative adversarial
networks (GANs) is the integral probability metric (IPM), in which the neural net
distance captures the practical GAN training via two neural networks. This paper
investigates the minimax estimation problem of the neural net distance based on
samples drawn from the distributions. We develop the first known minimax lower
bound on the estimation error of the neural net distance, and an upper bound tighter
than an existing bound on the estimator error for the empirical neural net distance.
Our lower and upper bounds match not only in the order of the sample size but also
in terms of the norm of the parameter matrices of neural networks, which justifies
the empirical neural net distance as a good approximation of the true neural net
distance for training GANs in practice.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs), first introduced by [9], have become an important technique
for learning generative models from complicated real-life data. Training GANs is performed via a minmax optimization with the maximum and minimum respectively taken over a class of discriminators
and a class of generators, where both discriminator and generators are modeled by neural networks.
Given that the discriminator class is sufficiently large, [9] interpreted the GAN training as finding a
generator such that the generated distribution ν is as close as possible to the target true distribution µ,
measured by the Jensen-Shannon distance dJS (µ, ν), as shown below:
min dJS (µ, ν).

ν∈DG

(1)

Inspired by such an idea, a large body of GAN models were then proposed based on various distance
metrics between a pair of distributions, in order to improve the training stability and performance,
e.g., [2, 3, 13, 15]. Among them, the integral probability metric (IPM) [19] arises as an important
class of distance metrics for training GANs, which takes the following form
dF (µ, ν) = sup |Ex∼µ f (x) − Ex∼ν f (x)| .

(2)

f ∈F

In particular, different choices of the function class F in (2) result in different distance metrics.
For example, if F represents a set of all 1-Lipschitz functions, then dF (µ, ν) corresponds to the
Wasserstein-1 distance, which is used in Wasserstein-GAN (WGAN) [2]. If F represents a unit ball
in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), then dF (µ, ν) corresponds to the maximum mean
discrepancy (MMD) distance, which is used in MMD-GAN [7, 13].
Practical GAN training naturally motivates to take F in (2) as a set Fnn of neural networks, which
results in the so-called neural net distance dFnn (µ, ν) introduced and studied in [3, 28]. For
computational feasibility, in practice dFnn (µ̂n , ν̂m ) is typically adopted as an approximation (i.e.,
an estimator) of the true neural net distance dFnn (µ, ν) for the practical GAN training, where µ̂n
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

