Fighting Boredom in Recommender Systems with
Linear Reinforcement Learning

Romain Warlop
fifty-five, Paris, France
SequeL Team, Inria Lille, France
romain@fifty-five.com

Alessandro Lazaric
Facebook AI Research
Paris, France
lazaric@fb.com

Jérémie Mary
Criteo AI Lab
Paris, France
j.mary@criteo.com

Abstract
A common assumption in recommender systems (RS) is the existence of a best
fixed recommendation strategy. Such strategy may be simple and work at the item
level (e.g., in multi-armed bandit it is assumed one best fixed arm/item exists) or
implement more sophisticated RS (e.g., the objective of A/B testing is to find the
best fixed RS and execute it thereafter). We argue that this assumption is rarely
verified in practice, as the recommendation process itself may impact the user’s
preferences. For instance, a user may get bored by a strategy, while she may gain
interest again, if enough time passed since the last time that strategy was used. In
this case, a better approach consists in alternating different solutions at the right
frequency to fully exploit their potential. In this paper, we first cast the problem as
a Markov decision process, where the rewards are a linear function of the recent
history of actions, and we show that a policy considering the long-term influence
of the recommendations may outperform both fixed-action and contextual greedy
policies. We then introduce an extension of the UCRL algorithm (L IN UCRL) to
effectively balance exploration and exploitation in an unknown environment, and
we derive a regret bound that is independent of the number of states. Finally,
we empirically validate the model assumptions and the algorithm in a number of
realistic scenarios.

1

Introduction

Consider a movie recommendation problem, where the recommender system (RS) selects the genre
to suggest to a user. A basic strategy is to estimate user’s preferences and then recommend movies of
the preferred genres. While this strategy is sensible in the short term, it overlooks the dynamics of the
user’s preferences caused by the recommendation process. For instance, the user may get bored of
the proposed genres and then reduce her ratings. This effect is due to the recommendation strategy
itself and not by an actual evolution of user’s preferences, as she would still like the same genres, if
only they were not proposed so often.1
The existence of an optimal fixed strategy is often assumed in RS using, e.g., matrix factorization to
estimate users’ ratings and the best (fixed) item/genre [16]. Similarly, multi-armed bandit (MAB)
algorithms [4] effectively trade off exploration and exploitation in unknown environments, but still
assume that rewards are independent from the sequence of arms selected over time and they try
to select the (fixed) optimal arm as often as possible. Even when comparing more sophisticated
recommendation strategies, as in A/B testing, we implicitly assume that once the better option
(either A or B) is found, it should be constantly executed, thus ignoring how its performance may
deteriorate if used too often. An alternative approach is to estimate the state of the user (e.g., her
1

In this paper, we do not study non-stationarity preferences, as it is a somehow orthogonal problem to the
issue that we consider.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

