Memory Replay GANs: learning to generate images
from new categories without forgetting

Chenshen Wu, Luis Herranz, Xialei Liu, Yaxing Wang,
Joost van de Weijer, Bogdan Raducanu
Computer Vision Center
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain
{chenshen, lherranz, xialei, yaxing, joost, bogdan}@cvc.uab.es

Abstract
Previous works on sequential learning address the problem of forgetting in discriminative models. In this paper we consider the case of generative models. In
particular, we investigate generative adversarial networks (GANs) in the task of
learning new categories in a sequential fashion. We first show that sequential
fine tuning renders the network unable to properly generate images from previous
categories (i.e. forgetting). Addressing this problem, we propose Memory Replay
GANs (MeRGANs), a conditional GAN framework that integrates a memory replay
generator. We study two methods to prevent forgetting by leveraging these replays,
namely joint training with replay and replay alignment. Qualitative and quantitative
experimental results in MNIST, SVHN and LSUN datasets show that our memory
replay approach can generate competitive images while significantly mitigating the
forgetting of previous categories. 1

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [6] are a popular framework for image generation due to
their capability to learn a mapping between a low-dimensional latent space and a complex distribution
of interest, such as natural images. The approach is based on an adversarial game between a generator
that tries to generate good images and a discriminator that tries to discriminate between real training
samples and generated. The original framework has been improved with new architectures [21, 9]
and more robust losses [2, 7, 16].
GANs can be used to sample images by mapping a randomly sampled latent vector. While providing
diversity, there is little control over the semantic properties of what is being generated. Conditional
GANs [18] enable the use of semantic conditions as inputs, so the semantic properties and the inherent
diversity can be decoupled. The simplest condition is just the category label, allowing to control the
category of the generated image [20].
As most machine learning problems, image generation models have been studied in the conventional
setting that assumes all training data is available at training time. This assumption can be unrealistic in
practice, and modern neural networks face scenarios where tasks and data are not known in advance,
requiring to continuously update their models upon the arrival of new data or new tasks. Unfortunately,
neural networks suffer from severe degradation when they are updated in a sequential manner without
revisiting data from previous tasks (known as catastrophic forgetting [17]). Most strategies to prevent
forgetting in neural networks rely on regularizing weights [4, 14] or activations [13], keeping a small
set of exemplars from previous categories [22, 15], or memory replay mechanisms[23, 25, 10].
1

The code is available at https://github.com/WuChenshen/MeRGAN

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

