Disconnected Manifold Learning for Generative
Adversarial Networks
Mahyar Khayatkhoei
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
m.khayatkhoei@cs.rutgers.edu

Ahmed Elgammal
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
elgammal@cs.rutgers.edu

Maneesh Singh
Verisk Analytics
maneesh.singh@verisk.com

Abstract
Natural images may lie on a union of disjoint manifolds rather than one globally
connected manifold, and this can cause several difficulties for the training of
common Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). In this work, we first show
that single generator GANs are unable to correctly model a distribution supported
on a disconnected manifold, and investigate how sample quality, mode dropping
and local convergence are affected by this. Next, we show how using a collection of
generators can address this problem, providing new insights into the success of such
multi-generator GANs. Finally, we explain the serious issues caused by considering
a fixed prior over the collection of generators and propose a novel approach for
learning the prior and inferring the necessary number of generators without any
supervision. Our proposed modifications can be applied on top of any other GAN
model to enable learning of distributions supported on disconnected manifolds. We
conduct several experiments to illustrate the aforementioned shortcoming of GANs,
its consequences in practice, and the effectiveness of our proposed modifications in
alleviating these issues.

1

Introduction

Consider two natural images, picture of a bird and picture of a cat for example, can we continuously
transform the bird into the cat without ever generating a picture that is not neither bird nor cat? In
other words, is there a continuous transformation between the two that never leaves the manifold of
"real looking" images? It is often the case that real world data falls on a union of several disjoint
manifolds and such a transformation does not exist, i.e. the real data distribution is supported on a
disconnected manifold, and an effective generative model needs to be able to learn such manifolds.
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [10], model the problem of finding the unknown distribution of real data as a two player game where one player, called the discriminator, tries to perfectly
separate real data from the data generated by a second player, called the generator, while the second
player tries to generate data that can perfectly fool the first player. Under certain conditions, Goodfellow et al. [10] proved that this process will result in a generator that generates data from the real
data distribution, hence finding the unknown distribution implicitly. However, later works uncovered
several shortcomings of the original formulation, mostly due to violation of one or several of its
assumptions in practice [1, 2, 20, 24]. Most notably, the proof only works for when optimizing in
the function space of generator and discriminator (and not in the parameter space) [10], the Jensen
Shannon Divergence is maxed out when the generated and real data distributions have disjoint support
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

