Stimulus domain transfer in recurrent models for
large scale cortical population prediction on video

Fabian H. Sinz,1-2,5,7,* Alexander S. Ecker,2,4-6 Paul G. Fahey,1-2 Edgar Y. Walker,1-2
Erick Cobos, 1-2 Emmanouil Froudarakis,1-2 Dimitri Yatsenko,1-2
Xaq Pitkow,1-3 Jacob Reimer,1-2 Andreas S. Tolias1-3,5
1

2

Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
Center for Neuroscience and Artificial Intelligence, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University, Houston, TX, USA
4
Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Germany
5
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Germany
6
Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Tübingen, Germany
7
Institute for Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Germany
*

sinz@bcm.edu

Abstract
To better understand the representations in visual cortex, we need to generate better
predictions of neural activity in awake animals presented with their ecological
input: natural video. Despite recent advances in models for static images, models
for predicting responses to natural video are scarce and standard linear-nonlinear
models perform poorly. We developed a new deep recurrent network architecture
that predicts inferred spiking activity of thousands of mouse V1 neurons simultaneously recorded with two-photon microscopy, while accounting for confounding
factors such as the animal’s gaze position and brain state changes related to running
state and pupil dilation. Powerful system identification models provide an opportunity to gain insight into cortical functions through in silico experiments that can
subsequently be tested in the brain. However, in many cases this approach requires
that the model is able to generalize to stimulus statistics that it was not trained on,
such as band-limited noise and other parameterized stimuli. We investigated these
domain transfer properties in our model and find that our model trained on natural
images is able to correctly predict the orientation tuning of neurons in responses to
artificial noise stimuli. Finally, we show that we can fully generalize from movies
to noise and maintain high predictive performance on both stimulus domains by
fine-tuning only the final layer’s weights on a network otherwise trained on natural
movies. The converse, however, is not true.

1

Introduction

The visual cortex represents natural stimuli in a complex and highly nonlinear way [1, 2]. In order to
understand these representations, we need predictive models that can account for neural responses to
natural movies. This task is particularly challenging because a substantial portion of the response
variability in cortical neurons is not driven by the stimulus, but by other factors such as eye movements
under free-viewing conditions and brain state changes [3–9]. While deep convolutional networks have
recently been shown to improve prediction performance over linear-nonlinear type models [10–13]
and are currently considered state-of-the-art, in V1 they have only been used to predict responses to
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

