Distributed Weight Consolidation:
A Brain Segmentation Case Study

Patrick McClure
National Institute of Mental Health
patrick.mcclure@nih.gov

Charles Y. Zheng
National Institute of Mental Health
charles.zheng@nih.gov

Jakub R. Kaczmarzyk
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
jakubk@mit.edu

John A. Lee
National Institute of Mental Health
john.rodgers-lee@nih.gov

Satrajit S. Ghosh
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
satra@mit.edu

Dylan Nielson
National Institute of Mental Health
dylann.nielson@nih.gov

Peter Bandettini
National Institute of Mental Health
bandettini@nih.gov

Francisco Pereira
National Institute of Mental Health
francisco.pereira@nih.gov

Abstract
Collecting the large datasets needed to train deep neural networks can be very
difficult, particularly for the many applications for which sharing and pooling data
is complicated by practical, ethical, or legal concerns. However, it may be the case
that derivative datasets or predictive models developed within individual sites can
be shared and combined with fewer restrictions. Training on distributed data and
combining the resulting networks is often viewed as continual learning, but these
methods require networks to be trained sequentially. In this paper, we introduce
distributed weight consolidation (DWC), a continual learning method to consolidate
the weights of separate neural networks, each trained on an independent dataset.
We evaluated DWC with a brain segmentation case study, where we consolidated
dilated convolutional neural networks trained on independent structural magnetic
resonance imaging (sMRI) datasets from different sites. We found that DWC led
to increased performance on test sets from the different sites, while maintaining
generalization performance for a very large and completely independent multi-site
dataset, compared to an ensemble baseline.

1

Introduction

Deep learning methods require large datasets to perform well. Collecting such datasets can be very
difficult, particularly for the many applications for which sharing and pooling data is complicated
by practical, ethical, or legal concerns. One prominent application is human subjects research, in
which researchers may be prevented from sharing data due to privacy concerns or other ethical
considerations. These concerns can significantly limit the purposes for which the collected data can
be used, even within a particular collection site. If the datasets are collected in a clinical setting,
they may be subject to many additional constraints. However, it may be the case that derivative
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

