Heterogeneous Bitwidth Binarization in
Convolutional Neural Networks
Josh Fromm
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
jwfromm@uw.edu

Shwetak Patel
Department of Computer Science
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
shwetak@cs.washington.edu

Matthai Philipose
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA 98052
matthaip@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent work has shown that fast, compact low-bitwidth neural networks can
be surprisingly accurate. These networks use homogeneous binarization: all
parameters in each layer or (more commonly) the whole model have the same low
bitwidth (e.g., 2 bits). However, modern hardware allows efficient designs where
each arithmetic instruction can have a custom bitwidth, motivating heterogeneous
binarization, where every parameter in the network may have a different bitwidth.
In this paper, we show that it is feasible and useful to select bitwidths at the
parameter granularity during training. For instance a heterogeneously quantized
version of modern networks such as AlexNet and MobileNet, with the right mix
of 1-, 2- and 3-bit parameters that average to just 1.4 bits can equal the accuracy
of homogeneous 2-bit versions of these networks. Further, we provide analyses
to show that the heterogeneously binarized systems yield FPGA- and ASIC-based
implementations that are correspondingly more efficient in both circuit area and
energy efficiency than their homogeneous counterparts.

1

Introduction

With Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) now outperforming humans in vision classification
tasks (Szegedy et al., 2015), it is clear that CNNs will be a mainstay of AI applications. However,
CNNs are known to be computationally demanding, and are most comfortably run on GPUs. For
execution in mobile and embedded settings, or when a given CNN is evaluated many times, using
a GPU may be too costly. The search for inexpensive variants of CNNs has yielded techniques
such as hashing (Chen et al., 2015), vector quantization (Gong et al., 2014), and pruning (Han et al.,
2015). One particularly promising track is binarization (Courbariaux et al., 2015), which replaces
32-bit floating point values with single bits, either +1 or -1, and (optionally) replaces floating point
multiplies with packed bitwise popcount-xnors Hubara et al. (2016). Binarization can reduce the size
of models by up to 32×, and reduce the number of operations executed by up to 64×.
It has not escaped hardware designers that the popcount-xnor operations used in a binary network
are especially well suited for FPGAs or ASICs. Taking the xnor of two bits requires a single logic
gate compared to the hundreds required for even the most efficient floating point multiplication
units (Ehliar, 2014). The drastically reduced area requirements allows binary networks to be implemented with fully parallel computations on even relatively inexpensive FPGAs (Umuroglu et al.,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

