Improving Online Algorithms via ML Predictions

Ravi Kumar
Google
Mountain View, CA
ravi.k53@gmail.com

Manish Purohit
Google
Mountain View, CA
mpurohit@google.com

Zoya Svitkina
Google
Mountain View, CA
zoya@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
In this work we study the problem of using machine-learned predictions to improve
the performance of online algorithms. We consider two classical problems, ski
rental and non-clairvoyant job scheduling, and obtain new online algorithms that
use predictions to make their decisions. These algorithms are oblivious to the
performance of the predictor, improve with better predictions, but do not degrade
much if the predictions are poor.

1

Introduction

Dealing with uncertainty is one of the most challenging issues that real-world computational tasks,
besides humans, face. Ranging from “will it snow next week?” to “should I rent an apartment or
buy a house?”, there are questions that cannot be answered reliably without some knowledge of the
future. Similarly, the question of “which job should I run next?” is hard for a CPU scheduler that
does not know how long this job will run and what other jobs might arrive in the future.
There are two interesting and well-studied computational paradigms aimed at tackling uncertainty.
The first is in the field of machine learning where uncertainty is addressed by making predictions
about the future. This is typically achieved by examining the past and building robust models based
on the data. These models are then used to make predictions about the future. Humans and real-world
applications can use these predictions to adapt their behavior: knowing that it is likely to snow next
week can be used to plan a ski trip. The second is in the field of algorithm design. Here, the effort
has to been to develop a notion of competitive ratio1 for the goodness of an algorithm in the presence
of an unknown future and develop online algorithms that make decisions heedless of the future but
are provably good in the worst-case, i.e., even in the most pessimistic future scenario. Such online
algorithms are popular and successful in real-world systems and have been used to model problems
including paging, caching, job scheduling, and more (see the book by Borodin and El-Yaniv [5]).
Recently, there has been some interest in using machine-learned predictions to improve the quality
of online algorithms [20, 18]. The main motivation for this line of research is two-fold. The first
is to design new online algorithms that can avoid assuming a worst-case scenario and hence have
better performance guarantees both in theory and practice. The second is to leverage the vast
amount of modeling work in machine learning, which precisely deals with how to make predictions.
Furthermore, as machine-learning models are often retrained on new data, these algorithms can
naturally adapt to evolving data characteristics. When using the predictions, it is important that
the online algorithm is unaware of the performance of the predictor and makes no assumptions on
the types of prediction errors. Additionally, we desire two key properties of the algorithm: (i) if
the predictor is good, then the online algorithm should perform close to the best offline algorithm
(consistency) and (ii) if the predictor is bad, then the online algorithm should gracefully degrade, i.e.,
its performance should be close to that of the online algorithm without predictions (robustness).
1
Informally, competitive ratio compares the worst-case performance of an online algorithm to the best offline
algorithm that knows the future.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

