Diffusion Maps for Textual Network Embedding
Xinyuan Zhang, Yitong Li, Dinghan Shen, Lawrence Carin
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University
Durham, NC 27707
{xy.zhang, yitong.li, dinghan.shen, lcarin}@duke.edu

Abstract
Textual network embedding leverages rich text information associated with the
network to learn low-dimensional vectorial representations of vertices. Rather
than using typical natural language processing (NLP) approaches, recent research
exploits the relationship of texts on the same edge to graphically embed text. However, these models neglect to measure the complete level of connectivity between
any two texts in the graph. We present diffusion maps for textual network embedding (DMTE), integrating global structural information of the graph to capture
the semantic relatedness between texts, with a diffusion-convolution operation
applied on the text inputs. In addition, a new objective function is designed to efficiently preserve the high-order proximity using the graph diffusion. Experimental
results show that the proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods on
the vertex-classification and link-prediction tasks.

1

Introduction

Learning effective vectorial embeddings to repCitation
Citation
resent text can lead to improvements in many
B
C
A
natural language processing (NLP) tasks. However, most text embedding models do not emEfficiently
Segment Indexes:
The K-D-B-Tree:
Processing
bed the semantic relatedness between different
Dynamic Indexing
A Search
Queries on
Techniques for
Structure
For
texts. Graphical text networks address this probInterval-andMultiLarge
Value
Tuples
in
lem by adding edges between correlated text
Dimensional
Multidimensional
Relational
Interval Data.
Dynamic Indexes.
vertices. For example, paper citation networks
Databases.
contain rich textual information and the citation
relationships provide structural information to Figure 1: Three sentences from the DBLP dataset. Verreflect the similarity between papers. Graphical tices A and C are second neighbors, i.e., two vertices that
text embedding naturally extends the problem are not on the same edge but share at lease one common
to network embedding (NE), mapping vertices neighbor (vertex B). The alignment words are colored.
of a graph into a low-dimensional space. The
learned representations containing structure and textual information can be used as features for
network tasks, such as vertex classification [22], link prediction [14], and tag recommendation [31].
Learning network embeddings is a challenging research problem, due to the sparsity, non-linearity
and high dimensionality of the graph data.
In order to exploit textual information associated with each vertex, some NE models [13, 33, 19, 26]
embed texts with a variety of NLP approaches, ranging from bag-of-words models to deep neural
models. However these text embedding methods fail to consider the semantic distance indicated
from the graph. In [30, 24] it was recently proposed to simultaneously embed two texts on the same
edge using a mutual-attention mechanism. But in real-world sparse networks, it is intuitive that two
connected vertices do not necessarily share more similarities than two unconnected vertices. Figure 1
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

