Contextual Combinatorial Multi-armed Bandits with
Volatile Arms and Submodular Reward
Lixing Chen, Jie Xu
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Miami
Coral Gables, FL 33146
{lx.chen, jiexu}@miami.edu

Zhuo Lu
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of South Florida
Tampa, FL 33620
zhuolu@usf.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the stochastic contextual combinatorial multi-armed bandit (CC-MAB) framework that is tailored for volatile arms and submodular reward
functions. CC-MAB inherits properties from both contextual bandit and combinatorial bandit: it aims to select a set of arms in each round based on the side information (a.k.a. context) associated with the arms. By “volatile arms”, we mean that
the available arms to select from in each round may change; and by “submodular
rewards”, we mean that the total reward achieved by selected arms is not a simple
sum of individual rewards but demonstrates a feature of diminishing returns determined by the relations between selected arms (e.g. relevance and redundancy).
Volatile arms and submodular rewards are often seen in many real-world applications, e.g. recommender systems and crowdsourcing, in which multi-armed bandit
(MAB) based strategies are extensively applied. Although there exist works that
investigate these issues separately based on standard MAB, jointly considering all
these issues in a single MAB problem requires very different algorithm design
and regret analysis. Our algorithm CC-MAB provides an online decision-making
policy in a contextual and combinatorial bandit setting and effectively addresses
the issues raised by volatile arms and submodular reward functions. The proposed
2α+D
algorithm is proved to achieve O(cT 3α+D log(T )) regret after a span of T rounds.
The performance of CC-MAB is evaluated by experiments conducted on a realworld crowdsourcing dataset, and the result shows that our algorithm outperforms
the prior art.

1 Introduction
Multi-armed bandit (MAB) problems are among the most fundamental sequential decision problems
with an exploration vs. exploitation trade-off. In such problems, a decision maker chooses one of
several “arms”, and observes a realization from an unknown reward distribution. Each decision
is made based on past decisions and observed rewards. The objective is to maximize expected
cumulative reward [4] over some time horizon by balancing exploration (to learn the average reward
of different arms) and exploiting (to select arms that have yielded high reward in the past). The
performance of a decision policy is measured by the expected regret, defined as the gap between the
expected reward achieved by the algorithm and that achieved by an oracle algorithm always selecting
the best arm. Contextual bandit [1] is an extension of the standard MAB framework where there is
some side information (also called context) associated with each arm that determines the reward
distribution. Contextual bandit also aims to maximize the cumulative reward by selecting one arm
in each round, but now the contexts can be leveraged to predict the expected reward of arms.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

