Efficient Gradient Computation for Structured
Output Learning with Rational and Tropical Losses

Corinna Cortes
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
corinna@google.com

Vitaly Kuznetsov
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
vitalyk@google.com

Mehryar Mohri
Courant Institute and Google Research
New York, NY 10012
mohri@cims.nyu.edu

Dmitry Storcheus
Courant Institute and Google Research
New York, NY 10012
dstorcheus@google.com

Scott Yang∗
D. E. Shaw and Co.
New York, NY 10036
yangs@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Many structured prediction problems admit a natural loss function for evaluation
such as the edit-distance or n-gram loss. However, existing learning algorithms
are typically designed to optimize alternative objectives such as the cross-entropy.
This is because a naïve implementation of the natural loss functions often results in
intractable gradient computations. In this paper, we design efficient gradient computation algorithms for two broad families of structured prediction loss functions:
rational and tropical losses. These families include as special cases the n-gram loss,
the edit-distance loss, and many other loss functions commonly used in natural
language processing and computational biology tasks that are based on sequence
similarity measures. Our algorithms make use of weighted automata and graph
operations over appropriate semirings to design efficient solutions. They facilitate
efficient gradient computation and hence enable one to train learning models such
as neural networks with complex structured losses.

1

Introduction

Many important machine learning tasks are instances of structured prediction problems. These are
learning problems where the output labels admit some structure that is important to take into account
both for statistical and computational reasons. Structured prediction problems include most natural
language processing tasks, such as pronunciation modeling, part-of-speech tagging, context-free
parsing, dependency parsing, machine translation, speech recognition, where the output labels are
sequences of phonemes, part-of-speech tags, words, parse trees, or acyclic graphs, as well as other
sequence modeling tasks in computational biology. They also include a variety of problems in
computer vision such as image segmentation, feature detection, object recognition, motion estimation,
computational photography and many others.
Several algorithms have been designed in the past for structured prediction tasks, including Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) (Lafferty et al., 2001; Gimpel and Smith, 2010), StructSVMs
(Tsochantaridis et al., 2005), Maximum-Margin Markov Networks (M3N) (Taskar et al., 2003),
kernel-regression-based algorithms (Cortes et al., 2007), and search-based methods (Daumé III et al.,
2009; Doppa et al., 2014; Lam et al., 2015; Chang et al., 2015; Ross et al., 2011). More recently, deep
learning techniques have been designed for many structured prediction tasks, including part-of-speech
∗

Work done at the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

