Stochastic Cubic Regularization for Fast Nonconvex
Optimization
Nilesh Tripuraneni⇤ Mitchell Stern⇤ Chi Jin Jeffrey Regier Michael I. Jordan
{nilesh_tripuraneni,mitchell,chijin,regier}@berkeley.edu
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
This paper proposes a stochastic variant of a classic algorithm—the cubicregularized Newton method [Nesterov and Polyak, 2006]. The proposed algorithm
efficiently escapes saddle points and finds approximate local minima for general
smooth, nonconvex functions in only Õ(✏ 3.5 ) stochastic gradient and stochastic
Hessian-vector product evaluations. The latter can be computed as efficiently as
stochastic gradients. This improves upon the Õ(✏ 4 ) rate of stochastic gradient
descent. Our rate matches the best-known result for finding local minima without
requiring any delicate acceleration or variance-reduction techniques.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of nonconvex optimization in the stochastic approximation framework
[Robbins and Monro, 1951]:
min f (x) := E⇠⇠D [f (x; ⇠)].

x2Rd

(1)

In this setting, we only have access to the stochastic function f (x; ⇠), where the random variable ⇠ is
sampled from an underlying distribution D. The task is to optimize the expected function f (x), which
in general may be nonconvex. This framework covers a wide range of problems, including the offline
setting where we minimize the empirical loss over a fixed amount of data, and the online setting
where data arrives sequentially. One of the most prominent applications of stochastic optimization
has been in large-scale statistics and machine learning problems, such as the optimization of deep
neural networks.
Classical analysis in nonconvex optimization only guarantees convergence to a first-order stationary
point (i.e., a point x satisfying krf (x)k = 0), which can be a local minimum, a local maximum,
or a saddle point. This paper goes further, proposing an algorithm that escapes saddle points and
converges to a local minimum. A local minimum is defined as a point x satisfying krf (x)k = 0
and r2 f (x) ⌫ 0. Finding such a point is of special interest for a large class of statistical learning
problems where local minima are global or near-global solutions (e.g. Choromanska et al. [2015],
Sun et al. [2016a,b], Ge et al. [2017]).
Among first-order stochastic optimization algorithms, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is perhaps
the simplest and most versatile. While SGD is computationally inexpensive, the best current guarantee
for finding an ✏-approximate local minimum (see Definition 1) requires O(✏ 4 poly(d)) iterations
[Ge et al., 2015], which is inefficient in the high-dimensional regime.
⇤

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

