Deep Structured Prediction with Nonlinear
Output Transformations

Colin Graber

cgraber2@illinois.edu

Ofer Meshi†

meshi@google.com

Alexander Schwing

aschwing@illinois.edu

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
†
Google

Abstract
Deep structured models are widely used for tasks like semantic segmentation,
where explicit correlations between variables provide important prior information
which generally helps to reduce the data needs of deep nets. However, current deep
structured models are restricted by oftentimes very local neighborhood structure,
which cannot be increased for computational complexity reasons, and by the fact
that the output configuration, or a representation thereof, cannot be transformed
further. Very recent approaches which address those issues include graphical
model inference inside deep nets so as to permit subsequent non-linear output
space transformations. However, optimization of those formulations is challenging
and not well understood. Here, we develop a novel model which generalizes
existing approaches, such as structured prediction energy networks, and discuss a
formulation which maintains applicability of existing inference techniques.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, machine learning models are used widely across disciplines from computer vision and
natural language processing to computational biology and physical sciences. This wide usage
is fueled, particularly in recent years, by easily accessible software packages and computational
resources, large datasets, a problem formulation which is general enough to capture many cases of
interest, and, importantly, trainable high-capacity models, i.e., deep nets.
While deep nets are a very convenient tool these days, enabling rapid progress in both industry and
academia, their training is known to require significant amounts of data. One possible reason is the
fact that prior information on the structural properties of output variables is not modeled explicitly.
For instance, in semantic segmentation, neighboring pixels are semantically similar, or in disparity
map estimation, neighboring pixels often have similar depth. The hope is that if such structural
assumptions hold true in the data, then learning becomes easier (e.g., smaller sample complexity)
[10]. To address a similar shortcoming of linear models, in the early 2000’s, structured models were
proposed to augment support vector machines (SVMs) and logistic regression. Those structured
models are commonly referred to as ‘Structured SVMs’ [52, 54] and ‘conditional random fields’ [27]
respectively.
More recently, structured models have also been combined with deep nets, first in a two-step training
setup where the deep net is trained before being combined with a structured model, e.g., [1, 8], and
then by considering a joint formulation [53, 59, 9, 42]. In these cases, structured prediction is used
on top of a deep net, using simple models for the interactions between output variables, such as plain
summation. This formulation may be limiting in the type of interactions it can capture. To address
this shortcoming, very recently, efforts have been conducted to include structured prediction inside,
i.e., not on top of, a deep net. For instance, structured prediction energy networks (SPENs) [3, 4]
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

