Evolved Policy Gradients

Rein Houthooft∗ , Richard Y. Chen∗ , Phillip Isola∗†× , Bradly C. Stadie∗† , Filip Wolski∗ ,
Jonathan Ho∗† , Pieter Abbeel†
OpenAI∗ , UC Berkeley† , MIT×

Abstract
We propose a metalearning approach for learning gradient-based reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithms. The idea is to evolve a differentiable loss function,
such that an agent, which optimizes its policy to minimize this loss, will achieve
high rewards. The loss is parametrized via temporal convolutions over the agent’s
experience. Because this loss is highly flexible in its ability to take into account
the agent’s history, it enables fast task learning. Empirical results show that
our evolved policy gradient algorithm (EPG) achieves faster learning on several
randomized environments compared to an off-the-shelf policy gradient method.
We also demonstrate that EPG’s learned loss can generalize to out-of-distribution
test time tasks, and exhibits qualitatively different behavior from other popular
metalearning algorithms.

1

Introduction

Most current reinforcement learning (RL) agents approach each new task de novo. Initially, they have
no notion of what actions to try out, nor which outcomes are desirable. Instead, they rely entirely
on external reward signals to guide their initial behavior. Coming from such a blank slate, it is no
surprise that RL agents take far longer than humans to learn simple skills [12].
Our aim in this paper is to devise agents that have a prior
notion of what constitutes making progress on a novel task.
Rather than encoding this knowledge explicitly through a
learned behavioral policy, we encode it implicitly through
a learned loss function. The end goal is agents that can use
this loss function to learn quickly on a novel task. This
approach can be seen as a form of metalearning, in which
we learn a learning algorithm. Rather than mining rules
that generalize across data points, as in traditional machine learning, metalearning concerns itself with devising
algorithms that generalize across tasks, by infusing prior Figure 1: High-level overview of our
approach.
knowledge of the task distribution [7].
Our method consists of two optimization loops. In the
inner loop, an agent learns to solve a task, sampled from a particular distribution over a family of
tasks. The agent learns to solve this task by minimizing a loss function provided by the outer loop. In
the outer loop, the parameters of the loss function are adjusted so as to maximize the final returns
achieved after inner loop learning. Figure 1 provides a high-level overview of this approach.
Although the inner loop can be optimized with stochastic gradient descent (SGD), optimizing the
outer loop presents substantial difficulty. Each evaluation of the outer objective requires training a
complete inner-loop agent, and this objective cannot be written as an explicit function of the loss
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

