Domain-Invariant Projection Learning
for Zero-Shot Recognition

An Zhao1,• Mingyu Ding1,• Jiechao Guan1,• Zhiwu Lu1,∗ Tao Xiang2,3 Ji-Rong Wen1
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China
2
School of EECS, Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS, U.K.
3
Samsung AI Centre, Cambridge, U.K.
zhiwu.lu@gmail.com
t.xiang@qmul.ac.uk
•
∗
Equal contribution
Corresponding author

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to recognize unseen object classes without any
training samples, which can be regarded as a form of transfer learning from seen
classes to unseen ones. This is made possible by learning a projection between
a feature space and a semantic space (e.g. attribute space). Key to ZSL is thus
to learn a projection function that is robust against the often large domain gap
between the seen and unseen classes. In this paper, we propose a novel ZSL model
termed domain-invariant projection learning (DIPL). Our model has two novel
components: (1) A domain-invariant feature self-reconstruction task is introduced
to the seen/unseen class data, resulting in a simple linear formulation that casts
ZSL into a min-min optimization problem. Solving the problem is non-trivial,
and a novel iterative algorithm is formulated as the solver, with rigorous theoretic
algorithm analysis provided. (2) To further align the two domains via the learned
projection, shared semantic structure among seen and unseen classes is explored
via forming superclasses in the semantic space. Extensive experiments show that
our model outperforms the state-of-the-art alternatives by significant margins.

1

Introduction

The recent focus on object recognition has been on large-scale recognition problems such as the
ImageNet ILSVRC challenge [47]. Since the latest deep neural network (DNN) based models
[49, 53, 12, 19] are reported to achieve super-human performance on the ILSVRC 1K recognition
task, a question arises: are we close to solving the large-scale recognition problem? The answer
clearly relies on how large the scale is: 1) There are approximately 8.7 million animal species on
earth; in that context, the ILSVRC 1K recognition task is nowhere near large-scale; 2) Most existing
object recognition models (particularly those DNN based ones) require hundreds of image samples to
be collected from each object class, but many of the object classes are rare and it is impossible to
collect sufficient training samples for some of the rare classes even with the help from social media
platforms (e.g., most of the beetle species have never been photoed by amateurs). Therefore, there is
still a long way to go before a computer vision model can recognize all object categories.
One approach to overcoming the above challenge is zero-shot learning (ZSL) [48, 25, 46, 50, 8, 69,
10, 1, 61]. ZSL aims to recognize a new/unseen class without any training samples from the class.
All existing ZSL models assume that each class name is embedded in a semantic space, such as
attribute space [22, 25] or word vector space [14, 54]. Given a set of seen class samples, the visual
features are first extracted, typically using a DNN pretrained on ImageNet. With the visual feature
representation of the images and the semantic representation of the class names, the next task is to
learn a joint embedding space using the seen class data. In such a space, both feature and semantic
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

