Variational Bayesian Monte Carlo

Luigi Acerbi∗
Department of Basic Neuroscience
University of Geneva
luigi.acerbi@unige.ch

Abstract
Many probabilistic models of interest in scientific computing and machine learning
have expensive, black-box likelihoods that prevent the application of standard
techniques for Bayesian inference, such as MCMC, which would require access
to the gradient or a large number of likelihood evaluations. We introduce here a
novel sample-efficient inference framework, Variational Bayesian Monte Carlo
(VBMC). VBMC combines variational inference with Gaussian-process based,
active-sampling Bayesian quadrature, using the latter to efficiently approximate
the intractable integral in the variational objective. Our method produces both
a nonparametric approximation of the posterior distribution and an approximate
lower bound of the model evidence, useful for model selection. We demonstrate
VBMC both on several synthetic likelihoods and on a neuronal model with data
from real neurons. Across all tested problems and dimensions (up to D = 10),
VBMC performs consistently well in reconstructing the posterior and the model
evidence with a limited budget of likelihood evaluations, unlike other methods that
work only in very low dimensions. Our framework shows great promise as a novel
tool for posterior and model inference with expensive, black-box likelihoods.

1

Introduction

In many scientific, engineering, and machine learning domains, such as in computational neuroscience and big data, complex black-box computational models are routinely used to estimate model
parameters and compare hypotheses instantiated by different models. Bayesian inference allows us
to do so in a principled way that accounts for parameter and model uncertainty by computing the
posterior distribution over parameters and the model evidence, also known as marginal likelihood or
Bayes factor. However, Bayesian inference is generally analytically intractable, and the statistical
tools of approximate inference, such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) or variational inference,
generally require knowledge about the model (e.g., access to the gradients) and/or a large number of
model evaluations. Both of these requirements cannot be met by black-box probabilistic models with
computationally expensive likelihoods, precluding the application of standard Bayesian techniques of
parameter and model uncertainty quantification to domains that would most need them.
Given a dataset D and model parameters x ∈ RD , here we consider the problem of computing both
the posterior p(x|D) and the marginal likelihood (or model evidence) p(D), defined as, respectively,
Z
p(D|x)p(x)
p(x|D) =
and
p(D) = p(D|x)p(x)dx,
(1)
p(D)
where p(D|x) is the likelihood of the model of interest and p(x) is the prior over parameters.
Crucially, we consider the case in which p(D|x) is a black-box, expensive function for which we
have a limited budget of function evaluations (of the order of few hundreds).
A promising approach to deal with such computational constraints consists of building a probabilistic
model-based approximation of the function of interest, for example via Gaussian processes (GP)
∗

Website: luigiacerbi.com. Alternative e-mail: luigi.acerbi@gmail.com.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

