Inexact trust-region algorithms on
Riemannian manifolds
Hiroyuki Kasai
The University of Electro-Communications
Japan
kasai@is.uec.ac.jp

Bamdev Mishra
Microsoft
India
bamdevm@microsoft.com

Abstract
We consider an inexact variant of the popular Riemannian trust-region algorithm
for structured big-data minimization problems. The proposed algorithm approximates the gradient and the Hessian in addition to the solution of a trust-region
sub-problem. Addressing large-scale finite-sum problems, we specifically propose
sub-sampled algorithms with a fixed bound on sub-sampled Hessian and gradient
sizes, where the gradient and Hessian are computed by a random sampling technique. Numerical evaluations demonstrate that the proposed algorithms outperform state-of-the-art Riemannian deterministic and stochastic gradient algorithms
across different applications.

1

Introduction

We consider the optimization problem
min f (x),

x∈M

(1)

where f : M → R is a smooth real-valued function on a Riemannian manifold M [1]. The focus
on the paper is when f has a finite-sum structure, which frequently arises as !
big-data problems in
n
1
machine learning applications. Specifically, we consider the form f (x) ! n i=1 fi (x), where n
is the total number of samples and fi (x) is the cost function for the i-th (i ∈ [n]) sample.

Riemannian optimization translates the constrained optimization problem (1) into an unconstrained
optimization problem over the manifold M. This viewpoint has shown benefits in many applications. The principal component analysis (PCA) and subspace tracking problems are defined on the
Grassmann manifold [2, 3]. The low-rank matrix completion (MC) and tensor completion problems
are examples on the manifold of fixed-rank matrices and tensors [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. The linear
regression problem is defined on the manifold of the fixed-rank matrices [11, 12]. The independent
component analysis (ICA) problem requires a whitening step that is posed as a joint diagonalization
problem on the Stiefel manifold [13, 14].
A popular choice for solving (1) is the Riemannian steepest descent (RSD) algorithm [1, Sec. 4],
which is traced back to [15]. RSD calculates the Riemannian full gradient gradf (x) every iteration,
which can be computationally heavy when the data size n is extremely large. As an alternative,
the Riemannian stochastic gradient descent (RSGD) algorithm becomes a computationally efficient
approach [16], which extends the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in the Euclidean space to the
general Riemannian manifolds [17, 18, 19]. The benefit of RSGD is that it calculates only Riemannian stochastic gradient gradfi (x) corresponding to a particular i-th sample every iteration.
Consequently, the complexity per iteration of RSGD is independent of the sample size n, which
leads to higher scalability for large-scale data. Although the iterates generated by RSGD do not
guarantee to decrease the objective value, −gradfi (x) is a decent direction in expectation. However, similar to SGD, RSGD suffers from slow convergence due to a decaying stepsize sequence. For
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

