Depth-Limited Solving for
Imperfect-Information Games

Noam Brown, Tuomas Sandholm, Brandon Amos
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
noamb@cs.cmu.edu, sandholm@cs.cmu.edu, bamos@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
A fundamental challenge in imperfect-information games is that states do not have
well-defined values. As a result, depth-limited search algorithms used in singleagent settings and perfect-information games do not apply. This paper introduces a
principled way to conduct depth-limited solving in imperfect-information games
by allowing the opponent to choose among a number of strategies for the remainder
of the game at the depth limit. Each one of these strategies results in a different set
of values for leaf nodes. This forces an agent to be robust to the different strategies
an opponent may employ. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach by
building a master-level heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em poker AI that defeats two
prior top agents using only a 4-core CPU and 16 GB of memory. Developing such
a powerful agent would have previously required a supercomputer.

1

Introduction

Imperfect-information games model strategic interactions between agents with hidden information.
The primary benchmark for this class of games is poker, specifically heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em
(HUNL), in which Libratus defeated top humans in 2017 [6]. The key breakthrough that led to
superhuman performance was nested solving, in which the agent repeatedly calculates a finer-grained
strategy in real time (for just a portion of the full game) as play proceeds down the game tree [5, 27, 6].
However, real-time subgame solving was too expensive for Libratus in the first half of the game
because the portion of the game tree Libratus solved in real time, known as the subgame, always
extended to the end of the game. Instead, for the first half of the game Libratus pre-computed a finegrained strategy that was used as a lookup table. While this pre-computed strategy was successful, it
required millions of core hours and terabytes of memory to calculate. Moreover, in deeper sequential
games the computational cost of this approach would be even more expensive because either longer
subgames or a larger pre-computed strategy would need to be solved. A more general approach
would be to solve depth-limited subgames, which may not extend to the end of the game. These could
be solved even in the early portions of a game.
The poker AI DeepStack does this using a technique similar to nested solving that was developed
independently [27]. However, while DeepStack defeated a set of non-elite human professionals in
HUNL, it never defeated prior top AIs despite using over one million core hours to train the agent,
suggesting its approach may not be sufficiently efficient in domains like poker. We discuss this in
more detail in Section 7. This paper introduces a different approach to depth-limited solving that
defeats prior top AIs and is computationally orders of magnitude less expensive.
When conducting depth-limited solving, a primary challenge is determining what values to substitute
at the leaf nodes of the depth-limited subgame. In perfect-information depth-limited subgames, the
value substituted at leaf nodes is simply an estimate of the state’s value when all players play an
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

