Bayesian Pose Graph Optimization via Bingham
Distributions and Tempered Geodesic MCMC

Tolga Birdal1,2
Umut Şimşekli3
M. Onur Eken1,2
Slobodan Ilic1,2
1
CAMP Chair, Technische Universität München, 85748, München, Germany
2
Siemens AG, 81739, München, Germany
3
LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, 75013, Paris, France

Abstract
We introduce Tempered Geodesic Markov Chain Monte Carlo (TG-MCMC) algorithm for initializing pose graph optimization problems, arising in various scenarios
such as SFM (structure from motion) or SLAM (simultaneous localization and
mapping). TG-MCMC is first of its kind as it unites global non-convex optimization on the spherical manifold of quaternions with posterior sampling, in order to
provide both reliable initial poses and uncertainty estimates that are informative
about the quality of solutions. We devise theoretical convergence guarantees and
extensively evaluate our method on synthetic and real benchmarks. Besides its
elegance in formulation and theory, we show that our method is robust to missing
data, noise and the estimated uncertainties capture intuitive properties of the data.

1

Introduction

The ability to navigate autonomously is now a key technology in self driving cars, unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAV), robot guidance, augmented reality, 3D digitization, sensory network localization and
more. This ubiquitous appliance is due to the fact that vision sensors can provide cues to directly
solve 6DoF pose estimation problem and do not necessitate external tracking input, such as imprecise
GPS, to ego-localize. Many of the problems in these domains can now be addressed by tailor-made
pipelines such as SLAM (Simultaneous Localization and Mapping), SfM (Structure From Motion)
or multi robot localization (MRL) [1, 2]. Nowadays, thanks to the resulting reliable estimates of
rotations and translations, many of these pipelines exploit some form of an optimization, such as
bundle adjustment (BA) [3] or 3D global registration [4, 5], that can globally consider the acquired
measurements [6]. Holistically, these methods belong to the family of pose graph optimization
(PGO) [7]. Unfortunately, many of PGO post-processing stages, which take in to account both camera
poses and 3D structure, are too costly for online or even soft-realtime operation. This bottleneck
demands good solutions for PGO initialization, that can relieve the burden of the joint optimization.
In this paper, we address the particular problem of initializing PGO, in which multiple local measurements are fused into a globally consistent estimate, without resorting to the costly bundle
adjustment or optimization that uses structure. In specifics, let us consider a finite simple directed
graph G = (V, E), where vertices correspond to reference frames and edges to the available relative measurements as shown in Figures 1(a), 1(b). Both vertices and edges are labeled with rigid
motions representing absolute and relative poses, respectively. Each absolute pose is described by
a homogeneous transformation matrix {Mi ∈ SE(3)}ni=1 . Similarly, each relative orientation is
expressed as the transformation between frames i and j, Mij , where (i, j) ∈ E ⊂ [n] × [n]. The
labeling of the edges is such that if (i, j) ∈ E, then (j, i) ∈ E and Mij = M−1
ji . Hence, we consider
G to be undirected. With a convention as shown in Figure 1(c), the link between absolute and relative
transformations is encoded by the compatibility constraint:
Mij ≈ Mj M−1
i , ∀i 6= j
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

(1)

