RenderNet: A deep convolutional network for
differentiable rendering from 3D shapes

Thu Nguyen-Phuoc
University of Bath
T.Nguyen.Phuoc@bath.ac.uk

Chuan Li
Lambda Labs
c@lambdalabs.com

Stephen Balaban
Lambda Labs
s@lambdalabs.com

Yong-Liang Yang
University of Bath
Y.Yang@cs.bath.ac.uk

Abstract
Traditional computer graphics rendering pipelines are designed for procedurally generating 2D images from 3D shapes with high performance. The nondifferentiability due to discrete operations (such as visibility computation) makes it
hard to explicitly correlate rendering parameters and the resulting image, posing
a significant challenge for inverse rendering tasks. Recent work on differentiable
rendering achieves differentiability either by designing surrogate gradients for
non-differentiable operations or via an approximate but differentiable renderer.
These methods, however, are still limited when it comes to handling occlusion, and
restricted to particular rendering effects. We present RenderNet, a differentiable
rendering convolutional network with a novel projection unit that can render 2D images from 3D shapes. Spatial occlusion and shading calculation are automatically
encoded in the network. Our experiments show that RenderNet can successfully
learn to implement different shaders, and can be used in inverse rendering tasks to
estimate shape, pose, lighting and texture from a single image.

1

Introduction

Rendering refers to the process of forming a realistic or stylized image from a description of the 3D
virtual object (e.g., shape, pose, material, texture), and the illumination condition of the surrounding
scene (e.g., light position, distribution, intensity). On the other hand, inverse rendering (graphics)
aims at estimating these properties from a single image. The two most popular rendering methods,
rasterization-based rendering and ray tracing, are designed to achieve fast performance and realism
respectively, but not for inverse graphics. These two methods rely on discrete operations, such
as z-buffering and ray-object intersection, to identify point visibility in a rendering scene, which
makes these techniques non-differentiable. Although it is possible to treat them as non-differentiable
renderers in computer vision tasks [1], inferring parameters, such as shapes or poses, from the
rendered images using traditional graphics pipelines is still a challenging task. A differentiable
renderer that can correlate the change in a rendered image with the change in rendering parameters
therefore will facilitate a range of applications, such as vision-as-inverse-graphics tasks or imagebased 3D modelling and editing.
Recent work in differentiable rendering achieves differentiability in various ways. Loper and Black
[2] propose an approximate renderer which is differentiable. Kato et al. [3] achieve differentiability
by proposing an approximate gradient for the rasterization operation. Recent work on image-based
reconstruction uses differentiable projections of 3D objects onto silhouette masks as a surrogate for a
rendered image of the objects [4, 5]. Wu et al. [6] and Tulsiani et al. [7] derive differentiable projective
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

