Why so gloomy? A Bayesian explanation of human
pessimism bias in the multi-armed bandit task

Dalin Guo
Department of Cognitive Science
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
dag082@ucsd.edu

Angela J. Yu
Department of Cognitive Science
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
ajyu@ucsd.edu

Abstract
How humans make repeated choices among options with imperfectly known reward
outcomes is an important problem in psychology and neuroscience. This is often
studied using multi-armed bandits, which is also frequently studied in machine
learning. We present data from a human stationary bandit experiment, in which
we vary the average abundance and variability of reward availability (mean and
variance of the reward rate distribution). Surprisingly, we find subjects significantly
underestimate prior mean of reward rates – based on their self-report on their
reward expectation of non-chosen arms at the end of a game. Previously, human
learning in the bandit task was found to be well captured by a Bayesian ideal
learning model, the Dynamic Belief Model (DBM), albeit under an incorrect
generative assumption of the temporal structure – humans assume reward rates can
change over time even though they are truly fixed. We find that the “pessimism
bias” in the bandit task is well captured by the prior mean of DBM when fitted
to human choices; but it is poorly captured by the prior mean of the Fixed Belief
Model (FBM), an alternative Bayesian model that (correctly) assumes reward
rates to be constants. This pessimism bias is also incompletely captured by a
simple reinforcement learning model (RL) commonly used in neuroscience and
psychology, in terms of fitted initial Q-values. While it seems sub-optimal, and
thus mysterious, that humans have an underestimated prior reward expectation, our
simulations show that an underestimated prior mean helps to maximize long-term
gain, if the observer assumes volatility when reward rates are stable, and utilizes
a softmax decision policy instead of the optimal one (obtainable by dynamic
programming). This raises the intriguing possibility that the brain underestimates
reward rates to compensate for the incorrect non-stationarity assumption in the
generative model and a simplified decision policy.

1

Introduction

Humans and animals frequently have to make choices among options with imperfectly known
outcomes. This is often studied using the multi-armed bandit task [1, 2, 3], in which the agent
repeatedly chooses among bandit arms with fixed but unknown reward probabilities. In a bandit
setting, only the outcome of the chosen arm is observed in a given trial. The decision-maker learns
how rewarding an arm is by choosing it and observing whether it produces a reward, thus each choice
pits exploitation against exploration since it affects not only the immediate reward outcome but also
the longer-term information gain. Previously, it has been shown that human learning in the bandit
task is well captured by a Bayesian ideal learning model [4], the Dynamic Belief Model (DBM) [5],
which assumes the reward rate distribution to undergo occasional and abrupt changes. While DBM
assumes non-stationarity, an alternative Bayesian model, the Fixed Belief Model (FBM), assumes the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

