Learning to Multitask

Yu Zhang1 , Ying Wei2 , Qiang Yang1
1
2
HKUST
Tencent AI Lab
yu.zhang.ust@gmail.com judywei@tencent.com qyang@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Multitask learning has shown promising performance in many applications and
many multitask models have been proposed. In order to identify an effective multitask model for a given multitask problem, we propose a learning framework called
Learning to MultiTask (L2MT). To achieve the goal, L2MT exploits historical multitask experience which is organized as a training set consisting of several tuples,
each of which contains a multitask problem with multiple tasks, a multitask model,
and the relative test error. Based on such training set, L2MT first uses a proposed
layerwise graph neural network to learn task embeddings for all the tasks in a
multitask problem and then learns an estimation function to estimate the relative
test error based on task embeddings and the representation of the multitask model
based on a unified formulation. Given a new multitask problem, the estimation
function is used to identify a suitable multitask model. Experiments on benchmark
datasets show the effectiveness of the proposed L2MT framework.

1

Introduction

Multitask learning [9] aims to leverage useful information contained in multiple tasks to help improve
the generalization performance of those tasks. In the past decades, many multitask models have
been proposed. According to a recent survey [38], these models can be classified into two main
categories: feature-based approach and parameter-based approach. The feature-based approach
uses data features as the media to share knowledge among tasks and it usually learns a common
feature representation for all the tasks. This approach can be further divided into two categories:
shallow approach [9, 2, 43] and deep approach [25]. Different from the feature-based approach, the
parameter-based approach links different tasks by placing regularizers or Bayesian priors on model
parameters to achieve knowledge transfer among tasks. This approach can be further classified into
four categories: low-rank approach [1, 28, 17], task clustering approach [18, 20, 15], task relation
learning approach [39, 40, 36, 35, 41, 42, 21, 37], and decomposition approach [10, 19, 44, 16].
Given so many multitask models, one important issue is how to choose a good model among them
for a given multitask problem. One solution is to do model selection, that is, using cross validation or
its variants. One limitation of this solution is that it is computationally heavy considering that each of
the candidate models needs to be trained for multiple times.
In this paper, we propose a framework called Learning to MultiTask (L2MT) to solve this issue in a
learning-based approach. The main idea of L2MT is to exploit the historical multitask experience to
learn how to choose a suitable multitask model for a new multitask problem. To achieve that, the
historical multitask experience is represented as a training set consisting of tuples each of which has
three entries: a multitask problem, a multitask model, and the relative test error that equals the ratio
of the average test error of the multitask model on the multitask problem over that of the single-task
learning model. Based on this training set, we propose an end-to-end approach to learn the mapping
from both the multitask problem and the multitask model to the relative test error, where we need to
determine the representations of the multitask problem and the multitask model. First, a Layerwise
Graph Neural Network (LGNN) is proposed to learn the task embedding as the representation of each
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

