Neural Guided Constraint Logic Programming for
Program Synthesis

Lisa Zhang1,2 , Gregory Rosenblatt4 , Ethan Fetaya1,2 , Renjie Liao1,2,3 , William E. Byrd4 ,
Matthew Might4 , Raquel Urtasun1,2,3 , Richard Zemel1,2
1
University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 Uber ATG, 4 University of Alabama at Birmingham
1
{lczhang,ethanf,rjliao,urtasun,zemel}@cs.toronto.edu
4
{gregr,webyrd,might}@uab.edu

Abstract
Synthesizing programs using example input/outputs is a classic problem in artificial
intelligence. We present a method for solving Programming By Example (PBE)
problems by using a neural model to guide the search of a constraint logic programming system called miniKanren. Crucially, the neural model uses miniKanren’s
internal representation as input; miniKanren represents a PBE problem as recursive
constraints imposed by the provided examples. We explore Recurrent Neural Network and Graph Neural Network models. We contribute a modified miniKanren,
drivable by an external agent, available at https://github.com/xuexue/neuralkanren.
We show that our neural-guided approach using constraints can synthesize programs faster in many cases, and importantly, can generalize to larger problems.

1

Introduction

Program synthesis is a classic area of artificial intelligence that has captured the imagination of many
computer scientists. Programming by Example (PBE) is one way to formulate program synthesis
problems, where example input/output pairs specify a target program. In a sense, supervised learning
can be considered program synthesis, but supervised learning via successful models like deep neural
networks famously lacks interpretability. The clear interpretability of programs as code means that
synthesized results can be compared, optimized, translated, and proved correct. The manipulability
of code makes program synthesis continue to be relevant today.
Current state-of-the-art approaches use symbolic techniques developed by the programming languages
community. These methods use rule-based, exhaustive search, often manually optimized by human
experts. While these techniques excel for small problems, they tend not to scale. Recent works by the
machine learning community explore a variety of statistical methods to solve PBE problems more
quickly. Works generally fall under three categories: differentiable programming [1, 2, 3], direct
synthesis [4, 5], and neural guided search [6, 7].
examples
This work falls under neural guided search,
chooses candidate
where the machine learning model guides a syminput
bolic search. We take integrating with a symML Agent
miniKanren
bolic system further: we use its internal repoutput
resentation as input to the neural model. The
expands candidate
symbolic system we use is a constraint logic proprogram
1
gramming system called miniKanren [8], chosen for its ability to encode synthesis problems
Figure 1: Neural Guided Synthesis Approach
that are difficult to express in other systems.
1

The name “Kanren” comes from the Japanese word for “relation”.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

