Structured Local Minima in
Sparse Blind Deconvolution

Yuqian Zhang, Han-Wen Kuo, John Wright
Department of Electrical Engineer and Data Science Institute
Columbia University, New York, NY 10027
{yz2409, hk2673, jw2966}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Blind deconvolution is a ubiquitous problem of recovering two unknown
signals from their convolution. Unfortunately, this is an ill-posed problem
in general. This paper focuses on the short and sparse blind deconvolution problem, where the one unknown signal is short and the other one
is sparsely and randomly supported. This variant captures the structure
of the unknown signals in several important applications. We assume the
short signal to have unit `2 norm and cast the blind deconvolution problem
as a nonconvex optimization problem over the sphere. We demonstrate that
(i) in a certain region of the sphere, every local optimum is close to some
shift truncation of the ground truth, and (ii) for a generic short signal of
length k, when the sparsity of activation signal θ . k −2/3 and number of
measurements m & poly (k), a simple initialization method together with a
descent algorithm which escapes strict saddle points recovers a near shift
truncation of the ground truth kernel.

1

Introduction

Blind deconvolution is the problem of recovering two unknown signals a0 and x0 from their
convolution y = a0 ∗ x0 . This fundamental problem recurs across several fields, including
astronomy, microscopy data processing [1], neural spike sorting [2], computer vision [3], etc.
However, this problem is ill-posed without further priors on the unknown signals, as there
are infinitely many pairs of signals (a, x) whose convolution equals a given observation y.
Fortunately, in practice, the target signals (a, x) are often structured. In particular, a number
of practical applications exhibit a common short-and-sparse structure:
In Neural spike sorting: Neurons in the brain fire brief voltage spikes when stimulated. The
signatures of the spikes encode critical features of the neuron and the occurrence of such
spikes are usually sparse and random in time [2, 4].
In Microscopy data analysis: Some nanoscale materials are contaminated by randomly and
sparsely distributed “defects”, which change the electronic structure of the material [1].
In Image deblurring: Blurred images due to camera shake can be modeled as a convolution of
the latent sharp image and a kernel capturing the motion of the camera. Although natural
images are not sparse, they typically have (approximately) sparse gradients [5, 6].
In the above applications, the observation signal y ∈ Rm is generated via the convolution
of a short kernel a0 ∈ Rk (k  m) and a sparse activation coefficient x0 ∈ Rm (kx0 k0  m).
Without loss of generality, we let y denote the circular convolution of a0 and x0
f0 ~ x0 ,
y = a0 ~ x0 = a
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

(1)

