Stochastic Primal-Dual Method for Empirical Risk
Minimization with O(1) Per-Iteration Complexity

Conghui Tan∗
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
chtan@se.cuhk.edu.hk
Shiqian Ma
University of California, Davis
sqma@math.ucdavis.edu

Tong Zhang
Tencent AI Lab
tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org
Ji Liu
Tencent AI Lab, University of Rochester
ji.liu.uwisc@gmail.com

Abstract
Regularized empirical risk minimization problem with linear predictor appears
frequently in machine learning. In this paper, we propose a new stochastic primaldual method to solve this class of problems. Different from existing methods, our
proposed methods only require O(1) operations in each iteration. We also develop
a variance-reduction variant of the algorithm that converges linearly. Numerical
experiments suggest that our methods are faster than existing ones such as proximal
SGD, SVRG and SAGA on high-dimensional problems.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the convex regularized empirical risk minimization with linear predictors:
(
)
n
1X
>
min P (x) ,
φi (ai x) + g(x) ,
(1)
x∈X
n i=1
where X ⊂ Rd is a convex closed feasible set, ai ∈ Rd is the i-th data sample, φi is its corresponding
convex closed loss function, and g(x) : X → R is a convex closed regularizer for model parameter x.
Here we assume the feasible set X and the regularizer function g(x) are both separable, i.e.,
X = X1 × · · · × Xd

and g(x) =

d
X

gj (xj ).

(2)

j=1

Problem (1) with structure (2) generalizes many well-known classification and regression problems.
For example, support vector machine is with this form by choosing φi (u) = max{0, 1 − bi u} and
g(x) = λ2 kxk22 . Other examples include `1 logistic regression, `2 logistic regression, and LASSO.
One popular choice for solving (1) is the proximal stochastic gradient descent method (PSGD). In
each iteration of PSGD, an index i is randomly sampled from {1, 2, . . . , n}, and then the iterates are
updated using only the information of ai and φi . As a result, the per-iteration cost of PSGD is O(d)
and independent of n.
It is well known that PSGD converges at a sub-linear rate [9] even for strongly convex problems, due
to non-diminishing variance of the stochastic gradients. One line of research tried is dedicated to
improve the convergence rate of PSGD by utilizing the finite sum structure in (1). Some representative
∗

This work was done while Conghui Tan was a research intern at Tencent AI lab.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

