Adaptive Path-Integral Autoencoder: Representation
Learning and Planning for Dynamical Systems

Jung-Su Ha, Young-Jin Park, Hyeok-Joo Chae, Soon-Seo Park, and Han-Lim Choi
Department of Aerospace Engineering & KI for Robotics, KAIST
Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea
{{jsha, yjpark, hjchae, sspark}@lics., hanlimc@}kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a representation learning algorithm that learns a low-dimensional latent
dynamical system from high-dimensional sequential raw data, e.g., video. The
framework builds upon recent advances in amortized inference methods that use
both an inference network and a refinement procedure to output samples from
a variational distribution given an observation sequence, and takes advantage of
the duality between control and inference to approximately solve the intractable
inference problem using the path integral control approach. The learned dynamical
model can be used to predict and plan the future states; we also present the efficient planning method that exploits the learned low-dimensional latent dynamics.
Numerical experiments show that the proposed path-integral control based variational inference method leads to tighter lower bounds in statistical model learning
of sequential data. The supplementary video1 and the implementation code2 are
available online.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised learning of the underlying dynamics of sequential high-dimensional sensory inputs is
the essence of intelligence, because the agent should utilize the learned dynamical model to predict
and plan the future state. Such learning problems are formulated as latent or generative model
learning assuming that observations were emerged from the low-dimensional latent states, which
includes an intractable posterior inference of latent states for given input data. In the amortized
variational inference framework, an inference network is introduced to output variational parameters
of an approximate posterior distribution. This allows for a fast approximate inference procedure and
efficient end-to-end training of the generative and inference networks when the learning signals from
a loss function are back-propagated into the inference network with reparameterization trick [Kingma
and Welling, 2014, Rezende et al., 2014]. The learning procedure is based on optimization of a
surrogate loss, a lower-bound of data likelihood, which results in two source of sub-optimality:
an approximation gap and an amortization gap [Krishnan et al., 2018, Cremer et al., 2018]; the
former comes from the sub-optimality of variational approximation (the gap between true posterior
and optimal variational distribution) and the latter is caused by the amortized approximation (the
gap between the optimal variational distribution and the distribution from the inference network).
Recently, several works, e.g., [Hjelm et al., 2016, Krishnan et al., 2018, Kim et al., 2018], combined
iterative refinement procedures with the amortized inference, where the output distribution of the
inference network is used as a warm-start point of refinement. This technique is referred to as the
semi-amortized inference and, since refined variational distributions do not rely only on the inference
network, the sub-optimality from amortization gap can be mitigated.
1
2

https://youtu.be/xCp35crUoLQ
https://github.com/yjparkLiCS/18-NeurIPS-APIAE

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

