Geometry Based Data Generation

Ofir Lindenbaum∗
Applied Mathematics Program
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511
ofir.lindenbaum@yale.edu

Jay S. Stanley III∗
Computational Biology & Bioinformatics Program
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06510
jay.stanley@yale.edu

Guy Wolf†
Applied Mathematics Program
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511
guy.wolf@yale.edu

Smita Krishnaswamy†
Departments of Genetics & Computer Science
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06510
smita.krishnawamy@yale.edu

Abstract
We propose a new type of generative model for high-dimensional data that learns
a manifold geometry of the data, rather than density, and can generate points
evenly along this manifold. This is in contrast to existing generative models that
represent data density, and are strongly affected by noise and other artifacts of
data collection. We demonstrate how this approach corrects sampling biases and
artifacts, thus improves several downstream data analysis tasks, such as clustering
and classification. Finally, we demonstrate that this approach is especially useful in
biology where, despite the advent of single-cell technologies, rare subpopulations
and gene-interaction relationships are affected by biased sampling. We show that
SUGAR can generate hypothetical populations, and it is able to reveal intrinsic
patterns and mutual-information relationships between genes on a single-cell RNA
sequencing dataset of hematopoiesis.

1

Introduction

Manifold learning methods in general, and diffusion geometry ones in particular (Coifman & Lafon,
2006), are traditionally used to infer latent representations that capture intrinsic geometry in data, but
they do not relate them to original data features. Here, we propose a novel data synthesis method,
which we call SUGAR (Synthesis Using Geometrically Aligned Random-walks), for generating data
in its original feature space while following its intrinsic geometry. This geometry is inferred by a
diffusion kernel that captures a data-driven manifold and reveals underlying structure in the full range
of the data space – including undersampled regions that can be augmented by new synthesized data.
Geometry-based data generation with SUGAR is motivated by numerous uses in data exploration. For
instance, in biology, despite the advent of single-cell technologies such as single-cell RNA sequencing
and mass cytometry, sampling biases and artifacts often make it difficult to evenly sample the data
space. Rare populations of relevance to disease and development are often left out (Grün et al., 2015).
By learning the data geometry rather than density, SUGAR is able to generate hypothetical cell types
for exploration, and uncover patterns and interactions in the data.
Further, imbalanced data is problematic for many machine learning applications. In classification,
for example, class density can strongly bias some classifiers (He & Garcia, 2009; López et al.,
∗
†

These authors contributed equally
These authors contributed equally;

Corresponding author

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

