Experimental Design for Cost-Aware
Learning of Causal Graphs
Erik M. Lindgren
University of Texas at Austin
erikml@utexas.edu

Murat Kocaoglu
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
murat@ibm.com

Alexandros G. Dimakis
University of Texas at Austin
dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

Sriram Vishwanath
University of Texas at Austin
sriram@ece.utexas.edu

Abstract
We consider the minimum cost intervention design problem: Given the essential
graph of a causal graph and a cost to intervene on a variable, identify the set of
interventions with minimum total cost that can learn any causal graph with the
given essential graph. We first show that this problem is NP-hard. We then prove
that we can achieve a constant factor approximation to this problem with a greedy
algorithm. We then constrain the sparsity of each intervention. We develop an
algorithm that returns an intervention design that is nearly optimal in terms of size
for sparse graphs with sparse interventions and we discuss how to use it when there
are costs on the vertices.

1

Introduction

Causality is a fundamental concept in science and an essential tool for multiple disciplines such as
engineering, medical research, and economics [28, 27, 29]. Discovering causal relations has been
studied extensively under different frameworks and under various assumptions [25, 15]. To learn
the cause-effect relations between variables without any assumptions other than basic modeling
assumptions, it is essential to perform experiments. Experimental data combined with observational
data has been successfully used for recovering causal relationships in different domains [30].
There is significant cost and time required to set up experiments. Often there are many ways to design
experiments to discover cause-and-effect relationships. Considering cost when designing experiments
can critically change the total cost needed to learn the same causal system. King et al. [18] created a
robot scientist that would automatically perform experiments to learn how a yeast gene functions.
Different experiments required different materials with large variations with costs. By considering
material cost when defining interventions, their robot scientist was able to learn the same causal
structure significantly cheaper.
Since the work of King et al., there have been a number of papers on automated and cost-sensitive
experiment design for causal learning in biological systems. Sverchkov and Craven [33] discuss some
aspects on how to design costs. Ness et al. [24] develop an active learning strategy for cost-aware
experiments in protein networks.
We study the problem of cost-aware causal learning in Pearl’s framework of causality [25] under the
causal sufficiency assumption, i.e., when there are no latent confounders. In this framework, there is a
directed acyclic graph (DAG) called the causal graph that describes the causal relationships between
the variables in our system. Learning direct causal relations between the variables in the system is
equivalent to learning the directed edges of this graph. From observational data, we can learn of the
existence of a causal edge, as well as some of the edge directions, however in general we cannot learn
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

