Teaching Inverse Reinforcement Learners
via Features and Demonstrations
Sebastian Tschiatschek
Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK
setschia@microsoft.com

Luis Haug
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
lhaug@inf.ethz.ch

Adish Singla
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
Saarbrücken, Germany
adishs@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Learning near-optimal behaviour from an expert’s demonstrations typically relies
on the assumption that the learner knows the features that the true reward function
depends on. In this paper, we study the problem of learning from demonstrations
in the setting where this is not the case, i.e., where there is a mismatch between
the worldviews of the learner and the expert. We introduce a natural quantity, the
teaching risk, which measures the potential suboptimality of policies that look
optimal to the learner in this setting. We show that bounds on the teaching risk
guarantee that the learner is able to find a near-optimal policy using standard
algorithms based on inverse reinforcement learning. Based on these findings, we
suggest a teaching scheme in which the expert can decrease the teaching risk
by updating the learner’s worldview, and thus ultimately enable her to find a
near-optimal policy.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning has recently led to impressive and widely recognized results in several
challenging application domains, including game-play, e.g., of classical games (Go) and Atari games.
In these applications, a clearly defined reward function, i.e., whether a game is won or lost in the case
of Go or the number of achieved points in the case of Atari games, is optimized by a reinforcement
learning agent interacting with the environment.
However, in many applications it is very difficult to specify a reward function that captures all
important aspects. For instance, in an autonomous driving application, the reward function of an
autonomous vehicle should capture many different desiderata, including the time to reach a specified
goal, safe driving characteristics, etc. In such situations, learning from demonstrations can be a
remedy, transforming the need of specifying the reward function to the task of providing an expert’s
demonstrations of desired behaviour; we will refer to this expert as the teacher. Based on these
demonstrations, a learning agent, or simply learner attempts to infer a (stochastic) policy that
approximates the feature counts of the teacher’s demonstrations. Examples for algorithms that can
be used to that end are those in [Abbeel and Ng, 2004] and [Ziebart et al., 2008], which use inverse
reinforcement learning (IRL) to estimate a reward function for which the demonstrated behaviour is
optimal, and then derive a policy based on that.
For this strategy to be successful, i.e., for the learner to find a policy that achieves good performance
with respect to the reward function set by the teacher, the learner has to know what features the teacher
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

