Overfitting or perfect fitting? Risk bounds for
classification and regression rules that interpolate
Mikhail Belkin
The Ohio State University

Daniel Hsu
Columbia University

Partha P. Mitra
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory

Abstract
Many modern machine learning models are trained to achieve zero or near-zero
training error in order to obtain near-optimal (but non-zero) test error. This phenomenon of strong generalization performance for “overfitted” / interpolated classifiers appears to be ubiquitous in high-dimensional data, having been observed in
deep networks, kernel machines, boosting and random forests. Their performance
is consistently robust even when the data contain large amounts of label noise.
Very little theory is available to explain these observations. The vast majority of
theoretical analyses of generalization allows for interpolation only when there is
little or no label noise. This paper takes a step toward a theoretical foundation
for interpolated classifiers by analyzing local interpolating schemes, including
geometric simplicial interpolation algorithm and singularly weighted k-nearest
neighbor schemes. Consistency or near-consistency is proved for these schemes in
classification and regression problems. Moreover, the nearest neighbor schemes
exhibit optimal rates under some standard statistical assumptions.
Finally, this paper suggests a way to explain the phenomenon of adversarial examples, which are seemingly ubiquitous in modern machine learning, and also
discusses some connections to kernel machines and random forests in the interpolated regime.

1

Introduction

The central problem of supervised inference is to predict labels of unseen data points from a set
of labeled training data. The literature on this subject is vast, ranging from classical parametric
and non-parametric statistics [48, 49] to more recent machine learning methods, such as kernel
machines [39], boosting [36], random forests [15], and deep neural networks [25]. There is a
wealth of theoretical analyses for these methods based on a spectrum of techniques including nonparametric estimation [46], capacity control such as VC-dimension or Rademacher complexity [40],
and regularization theory [42]. In nearly all of these results, theoretical analysis of generalization
requires “what you see is what you get” setup, where prediction performance on unseen test data
is close to the performance on the training data, achieved by carefully managing the bias-variance
trade-off. Furthermore, it is widely accepted in the literature that interpolation has poor statistical
properties and should be dismissed out-of-hand. For example, in their book on non-parametric
statistics, Györfi et al. [26, page 21] say that a certain procedure “may lead to a function which
interpolates the data and hence is not a reasonable estimate”.
Yet, this is not how many modern machine learning methods are used in practice. For instance, the
best practice for training deep neural networks is to first perfectly fit the training data [35]. The
resulting (zero training loss) neural networks after this first step can already have good performance
on test data [53]. Similar observations about models that perfectly fit training data have been
E-mail: mbelkin@cse.ohio-state.edu, djhsu@cs.columbia.edu, mitra@cshl.edu
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

