Learning to Exploit Stability for 3D Scene Parsing

Yilun Du
MIT CSAIL

Zhijian Liu
MIT CSAIL

Hector Basevi
University of Birmingham

William T. Freeman
MIT CSAIL

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT CSAIL

Aleš Leonardis
University of Birmingham
Jiajun Wu
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
Human scene understanding uses a variety of visual and non-visual cues to perform
inference on object types, poses, and relations. Physics is a rich and universal
cue that we exploit to enhance scene understanding. In this paper, we integrate
the physical cue of stability into the learning process by looping in a physics
engine into bottom-up recognition models, and apply it to the problem of 3D scene
parsing. We first show that applying physics supervision to an existing scene
understanding model increases performance, produces more stable predictions, and
allows training to an equivalent performance level with fewer annotated training
examples. We then present a novel architecture for 3D scene parsing named Prim
R-CNN, learning to predict bounding boxes as well as their 3D size, translation,
and rotation. With physics supervision, Prim R-CNN outperforms existing scene
understanding approaches on this problem. Finally, we show that finetuning with
physics supervision on unlabeled real images improves real domain transfer of
models training on synthetic data.

1

Introduction

Human scene understanding is rich, and operates robustly using limited information. Physics
comprises invisible causal relationships that are ubiquitous in natural scenes and crucial in scene
understanding [Battaglia et al., 2013, Zhang et al., 2016]. In particular, the vast majority of natural
scenes are physically stable, a prior most systems for visual scene understanding do not exploit.
Visual scene understanding takes many forms. Most commonly, elements of a scene are detected,
classified, and localized, either through bounding boxes [Dai et al., 2016] or pixel labels [He et al.,
2017]. If object instances are known, object poses can be inferred directly [Brachmann et al., 2016].
Supervision here can take the form of ground truth pixel annotations, as well as pixel depth if depth
images are available. Physical supervision is more challenging to introduce because there are few
visual features directly associated with physical relationships. Image sequences enable the robust
inference of physical properties through movement of visual features [Stewart and Ermon, 2017], but
analysis of single images requires a different approach.
Machine learning has enabled end-to-end inference of object physical properties [Wu et al., 2015],
scene physical properties such as stability [Li et al., 2017], and prediction of future states [Lerer
et al., 2016, Wu et al., 2017a]. However, these systems have been trained in heavily constrained
domains and cannot easily be adapted to the variety present in natural scenes. In contrast, systems
that incorporate physics engines operate on discrete, interpretable representations; they are amenable
to levels of object abstraction, such as the approximation of geometry by simple geometric primitives,
and are more easily adaptable. Further, these types of abstractions can be more readily extracted
from natural scenes, as demonstrated by existing machine learning systems for semantic localization
Correspondence to: jiajunwu@mit.edu
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

