Practical exact algorithm for trembling-hand
equilibrium refinements in games

Gabriele Farina
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
gfarina@cs.cmu.edu

Nicola Gatti
DEIB
Politecnico di Milano
nicola.gatti@polimi.it

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Nash equilibrium strategies have the known weakness that they do not prescribe
rational play in situations that are reached with zero probability according to the
strategies themselves, for example, if players have made mistakes. Tremblinghand refinements—such as extensive-form perfect equilibria and quasi-perfect
equilibria—remedy this problem in sound ways. Despite their appeal, they have
not received attention in practice since no known algorithm for computing them
scales beyond toy instances. In this paper, we design an exact polynomial-time algorithm for finding trembling-hand equilibria in zero-sum extensive-form games.
It is several orders of magnitude faster than the best prior ones, numerically stable, and quickly solves game instances with tens of thousands of nodes in the
game tree. It enables, for the first time, the use of trembling-hand refinements in
practice.

1

Introduction

Nash equilibrium (NE) [Nash, 1950] is the most seminal solution concept in game theory. However,
in many games it is too permissive, prescribing unsatisfactory strategies. In the case of imperfectinformation extensive-form games, one limitation is that some NEs do not prescribe optimal play
after the player or the opponent has made a mistake. Other issues are that some NEs may prescribe
non-credible threats or weakly dominated strategies.
Since the classic paper by Selten [1975], trembles have played a crucial role in refining—that is,
further curtailing—the set of NEs, to address these issues. Intuitively, trembles represent potential mistakes by the players. Refined solutions then are limit points of NEs as the mistake probabilities approach zero (different refinement concepts have different additional constraints on the
trembles, which we will make specific in the next sections). The primary role of trembles is to
guarantee that the solutions are sequentially rational [Kreps and Wilson, 1982]. The two most famous trembling-hand solution concepts that refine NEs while guaranteeing sequential rationality
are quasi-perfect equilibria (QPEs) [van Damme, 1984] and extensive-form perfect equilibria (EFPEs) [Selten, 1975].1 In a QPE, a player plays optimally at every information set taking into account
possible future mistakes of her opponent but assuming that she will not make future mistakes. In an
1
Proper equilibria (PEs), proposed by Myerson [1978], are a non-empty subset of EFPEs, with the additional requirement that the worse an action is for a player, the lower the agent’s tremble probability on that

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

