Low-rank Interaction with Sparse Additive Effects
Model for Large Data Frames

Geneviève Robin
Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées
École Polytechnique, XPOP, INRIA
91120 Palaiseau, France
genevieve.robin@polytechnique.edu
Julie Josse
Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées
École Polytechnique, XPOP, INRIA
91120 Palaiseau, France
julie.josse@polytechnique.edu

Hoi-To Wai
Department of SE&EM
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, Hong Kong
htwai@se.cuhk.edu.hk
Olga Klopp
ESSEC Business School
CREST, ENSAE
95021 Cergy, France
klopp@essec.edu

Éric Moulines
Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées
École Polytechnique, XPOP, INRIA
91120 Palaiseau, France
eric.moulines@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
Many applications of machine learning involve the analysis of large data frames –
matrices collecting heterogeneous measurements (binary, numerical, counts, etc.)
across samples – with missing values. Low-rank models, as studied by Udell
et al. [27], are popular in this framework for tasks such as visualization, clustering
and missing value imputation. Yet, available methods with statistical guarantees
and efficient optimization do not allow explicit modeling of main additive effects
such as row and column, or covariate effects. In this paper, we introduce a lowrank interaction and sparse additive effects (LORIS) model which combines
matrix regression on a dictionary and low-rank design, to estimate main effects
and interactions simultaneously. We provide statistical guarantees in the form of
upper bounds on the estimation error of both components. Then, we introduce a
mixed coordinate gradient descent (MCGD) method which provably converges
sub-linearly to an optimal solution and is computationally efficient for large scale
data sets. We show on simulated and survey data that the method has a clear
advantage over current practices.

1

Introduction

Recently, a lot of effort has been devoted towards the efficient analysis of large data frames, a term
coined by Udell et al. [27]. A data frame is a large table of heterogeneous data (binary, numerical,
counts) with missing entries, where each row represents an example and each column a feature. In
order to analyze them, a powerful technique is to use low-rank models that embed rows and columns
of data frames into low-dimensional spaces [15, 25, 27], enabling effective data analytics such as
clustering, visualization and missing value imputation; see also [18] and the references therein.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

