How To Make the Gradients Small Stochastically:
Even Faster Convex and Nonconvex SGD∗
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu
Microsoft Research AI
Redmond, WA 98052
zeyuan@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) gives an optimal convergence rate when minimizing convex stochastic objectives f (x). However, in terms of making the gradients small, the original SGD does not give an optimal rate, even when f (x) is
convex.
If f (x) is convex, to find a point with gradient norm ε, we design an algorithm
SGD3 with a near-optimal rate e
O(ε−2 ), improving the best known rate O(ε−8/3 )
of [17]. If f (x) is nonconvex, to find its ε-approximate local minimum, we design an algorithm SGD5 with rate e
O(ε−3.5 ), where previously SGD variants only
e −4 ) [6, 14, 30]. This is no slower than the best known stochastic
achieve O(ε
version of Newton’s method in all parameter regimes [27].

1

Introduction

In convex optimization and machine learning, the classical goal is to design algorithms to decrease
objective values, that is, to find points x with f (x) − f (x∗ ) ≤ ε. In contrast, the rate of convergence
for the gradients, that is,
the number of iterations T needed to find a point x with k∇f (x)k ≤ ε,
is a harder problem and sometimes needs new algorithmic ideas [25]. For instance, in the fullgradient setting, accelerated gradient descent alone is suboptimal for this new goal, and one needs
additional tricks to get the fastest rate [25]. We review these tricks in Section 1.1.
In the convex (online) stochastic optimization, to the best of our knowledge, tight bounds are not
yet known for finding points with small gradients. The best recorded rate was T ∝ ε−8/3 [17], and
it was raised as an open question [1] regarding how to improve it.
In this paper, we design two new algorithms, SGD2 which gives rate T ∝ ε−5/2 using Nesterov’s
tricks, and SGD3 which gives an even better rate T ∝ ε−2 log3 1ε which is optimal up to log factors.
Motivation. Studying the rate of convergence for the minimizing gradients can be important at
least for the following two reasons.
• In many situations, points with small gradients fit better our final goals.
∗
The full version of this paper can be found on https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.02982. When this
paper was submitted to NeurIPS 2018, the “non-convex SGD” results were not included. We encourage the
readers to go to our full version to find out these “non-convex SGD” results.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

