Maximizing acquisition functions
for Bayesian optimization
James T. Wilson⇤
Imperial College London

Frank Hutter
University of Freiburg

Marc Peter Deisenroth
Imperial College London
PROWLER.io

Abstract
Bayesian optimization is a sample-efficient approach to global optimization that
relies on theoretically motivated value heuristics (acquisition functions) to guide
its search process. Fully maximizing acquisition functions produces the Bayes’
decision rule, but this ideal is difficult to achieve since these functions are frequently non-trivial to optimize. This statement is especially true when evaluating
queries in parallel, where acquisition functions are routinely non-convex, highdimensional, and intractable. We first show that acquisition functions estimated
via Monte Carlo integration are consistently amenable to gradient-based optimization. Subsequently, we identify a common family of acquisition functions, including EI and UCB, whose properties not only facilitate but justify use of greedy
approaches for their maximization.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) is a powerful framework for tackling complicated global optimization
problems [32, 40, 44]. Given a black-box function f : X ! Y, BO seeks to identify a maximizer
x⇤ 2 arg maxx2X f (x) while simultaneously minimizing incurred costs. Recently, these strategies
have demonstrated state-of-the-art results on many important, real-world problems ranging from
material sciences [17, 57], to robotics [3, 7], to algorithm tuning and configuration [16, 29, 53, 56].
From a high-level perspective, BO can be understood as the application of Bayesian decision theory
to optimization problems [11, 14, 45]. One first specifies a belief over possible explanations for f
using a probabilistic surrogate model and then combines this belief with an acquisition function L
to convey the expected utility for evaluating a set of queries X. In theory, X is chosen according
to Bayes’ decision rule as L’s maximizer by solving for an inner optimization problem [19, 42,
59]. In practice, challenges associated with maximizing L greatly impede our ability to live up to
this standard. Nevertheless, this inner optimization problem is often treated as a black-box unto
itself. Failing to address this challenge leads to a systematic departure from BO’s premise and,
consequently, consistent deterioration in achieved performance.
To help reconcile theory and practice, we present two modern perspectives for addressing BO’s
inner optimization problem that exploit key aspects of acquisition functions and their estimators.
First, we clarify how sample path derivatives can be used to optimize a wide range of acquisition
functions estimated via Monte Carlo (MC) integration. Second, we identify a common family of
submodular acquisition functions and show that its constituents can generally be expressed in a
more computer-friendly form. These acquisition functions’ properties enable greedy approaches to
efficiently maximize them with guaranteed near-optimal results. Finally, we demonstrate through
comprehensive experiments that these theoretical contributions directly translate to reliable and,
often, substantial performance gains.
⇤

Correspondence to j.wilson17@imperial.ac.uk

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

