Blind Deconvolutional Phase Retrieval via Convex
Programming

Ali Ahmed
Department of Electrical Engineering
Information Technology University
Lahore, Pakistan.
ali.ahmed@itu.edu.pk

Alireza Aghasi
Department of Business Analytics
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA.
aaghasi@gsu.edu

Paul Hand
College of Computer and Information Science
Northeastern University
Boston, MA.
p.hand@northeastern.edu

Abstract
We consider the task of recovering two real or complex m-vectors from phaseless
Fourier measurements of their circular convolution. Our method is a novel convex
relaxation that is based on a lifted matrix recovery formulation that allows a
nontrivial convex relaxation of the bilinear measurements from convolution. We
prove that if the two signals belong to known random subspaces of dimensions
k and n, then they can be recovered up to the inherent scaling ambiguity with
m >> (k + n) log2 m phaseless measurements. Our method provides the first
theoretical recovery guarantee for this problem by a computationally efficient
algorithm and does not require a solution estimate to be computed for initialization.
Our proof is based Rademacher complexity estimates. Additionally, we provide
an ADMM implementation of the method and provide numerical experiments that
verify the theory.

1

Introduction

This paper considers recovery of two unknown signals (real- or complex-valued) from the magnitude
only measurements of their convolution. Let w, and x be vectors residing in Hm , where H denotes
either R, or C. Moreover, denote by F the DFT matrix with entries F [ω, t] = √1m e−j2πωt/m , 1 ≤
ω, t ≤ m. We observe the phaseless Fourier coefficients of the circular convolution w ~ x of w, and
x
y = |F (w ~ x)|,

(1)

where |z| returns the element wise absolute value of the vector z. We are interested in recovering
w, and x from the phaseless measurements y of their circular convolution. In other words, the
problem concerns blind deconvolution of two signals from phaseless measurements. The problem
can also be viewed as identifying the structural properties on w such that its convolution with the
signal/image of interest x makes the phase retrieval of a signal x well-posed. Since w, and x
are both unknown, and in addition, the measurements are phaseless, the inverse problem becomes
severly ill-posed as many pairs of w, and x correspond to the same y. We show that this non-linear
problem can be efficiently solved, under Gaussian measurements, using a semidefinite program and
also theoretically prove this assertion. We also propose a heuristic approach to solve the proposed
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

