Mesh-TensorFlow:
Deep Learning for Supercomputers

Noam Shazeer, Youlong Cheng, Niki Parmar,
Dustin Tran, Ashish Vaswani, Penporn Koanantakool, Peter Hawkins, HyoukJoong Lee
Mingsheng Hong, Cliff Young, Ryan Sepassi, Blake Hechtman
Google Brain
{noam, ylc, nikip, trandustin, avaswani, penporn, phawkins,
hyouklee, hongm, cliffy, rsepassi, blakehechtman}@google.com

Abstract
Batch-splitting (data-parallelism) is the dominant distributed Deep Neural Network
(DNN) training strategy, due to its universal applicability and its amenability to
Single-Program-Multiple-Data (SPMD) programming. However, batch-splitting
suffers from problems including the inability to train very large models (due to
memory constraints), high latency, and inefficiency at small batch sizes. All of
these can be solved by more general distribution strategies (model-parallelism).
Unfortunately, efficient model-parallel algorithms tend to be complicated to discover, describe, and to implement, particularly on large clusters. We introduce
Mesh-TensorFlow, a language for specifying a general class of distributed tensor
computations. Where data-parallelism can be viewed as splitting tensors and operations along the "batch" dimension, in Mesh-TensorFlow, the user can specify
any tensor-dimensions to be split across any dimensions of a multi-dimensional
mesh of processors. A Mesh-TensorFlow graph compiles into a SPMD program
consisting of parallel operations coupled with collective communication primitives such as Allreduce. We use Mesh-TensorFlow to implement an efficient
data-parallel, model-parallel version of the Transformer [16] sequence-to-sequence
model. Using TPU meshes of up to 512 cores, we train Transformer models with
up to 5 billion parameters, surpassing state of the art results on WMT’14 Englishto-French translation task and the one-billion-word language modeling benchmark.
Mesh-Tensorflow is available at https://github.com/tensorflow/mesh .

1

Introduction

Batch-splitting (data-parallelism) is the dominant distributed Deep Neural Network (DNN) training strategy, due to its universal applicability and its amenability to Single-Program-Multiple-Data
(SPMD) programming. However, batch-splitting suffers from several major problems when training
very large models. The memory required to store parameters and/or activations and the time necessary to synchronize parameters can make purely-data-parallel algorithms impossible or inefficient.
Different distribution strategies (model-parallelism [7]) can solve these issues, but specifying these
strategies can be complicated, and the current MIMD implementations generate very large programs
which can be difficult to compile and to optimize.
We solve this problem by introducing Mesh-TensorFlow, a language for specifying a general class
of distributed tensor computations. Where data-parallelism can be viewed as splitting tensors and
operations along the "batch" dimension, in Mesh-TensorFlow, the user can specify any tensordimensions to be split across any dimensions of a multi-dimensional mesh of processors. A MeshTensorFlow graph compiles into a SPMD program consisting of parallel operations coupled with
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

