A convex program for bilinear inversion of sparse
vectors
Alireza Aghasi
Georgia State Business School
GSU, GA
aaghasi@gsu.edu

Ali Ahmed
Dept. of Electrical Engineering
ITU, Lahore
ali.ahmed@itu.edu.pk

Paul Hand
Dept. of Mathematics and College of Computer and Information Science
Northeastern University, MA
p.hand@northeastern.edu
Babhru Joshi
Dept. of Computational and Applied Mathematics
Rice University, TX
babhru.joshi@rice.edu

Abstract
We consider the bilinear inverse problem of recovering two vectors, x 2 RL and
w 2 RL , from their entrywise product. We consider the case where x and w have
known signs and are sparse with respect to known dictionaries of size K and N ,
respectively. Here, K and N may be larger than, smaller than, or equal to L. We
introduce `1 -BranchHull, which is a convex program posed in the natural parameter
space and does not require an approximate solution or initialization in order to
be stated or solved. We study the case where x and w are S1 - and S2 -sparse
with respect to a random dictionary, with the sparse vectors satisfying an effective
sparsity condition, and present a recovery guarantee that depends on the number of
measurements as L ⌦(S1 + S2 ) log2 (K + N ). Numerical experiments verify
that the scaling constant in the theorem is not too large. One application of this
problem is the sweep distortion removal task in dielectric imaging, where one of the
signals is a nonnegative reflectivity, and the other signal lives in a known subspace,
for example that given by dominant wavelet coefficients. We also introduce a
variants of `1 -BranchHull for the purposes of tolerating noise and outliers, and
for the purpose of recovering piecewise constant signals. We provide an ADMM
implementation of these variants and show they can extract piecewise constant
behavior from real images.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of recovering two unknown signals x and w in RL from observations y =
A(w, x), where A is a bilinear operator. Let B 2 RL⇥K and C 2 RL⇥N such that w = Bh and
x = Cm with khk0  S1 and kmk0  S2 . Let the bilinear operator A : RL ⇥ RL ! RL satisfy
y = A(w, x) = w

x,

(1)

where denotes entrywise product. The bilinear inverse problem (BIP) we consider is to find w and
x from y, B, C and sign (w), up to the inherent scaling ambiguity.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

