SLANG: Fast Structured Covariance Approximations
for Bayesian Deep Learning with Natural Gradient

Aaron Mishkin∗
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
amishkin@cs.ubc.ca

Frederik Kunstner∗
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Lausanne, Switzerland
frederik.kunstner@epfl.ch

Didrik Nielsen
RIKEN Center for AI Project
Tokyo, Japan
didrik.nielsen@riken.jp

Mark Schmidt
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
schmidtm@cs.ubc.ca

Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan
RIKEN Center for AI Project
Tokyo, Japan
emtiyaz.khan@riken.jp

Abstract
Uncertainty estimation in large deep-learning models is a computationally challenging task, where it is difficult to form even a Gaussian approximation to the
posterior distribution. In such situations, existing methods usually resort to a diagonal approximation of the covariance matrix despite the fact that these matrices are
known to result in poor uncertainty estimates. To address this issue, we propose
a new stochastic, low-rank, approximate natural-gradient (SLANG) method for
variational inference in large, deep models. Our method estimates a “diagonal
plus low-rank” structure based solely on back-propagated gradients of the network
log-likelihood. This requires strictly less gradient computations than methods that
compute the gradient of the whole variational objective. Empirical evaluations
on standard benchmarks confirm that SLANG enables faster and more accurate
estimation of uncertainty than mean-field methods, and performs comparably to
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has had enormous recent success in fields such as speech recognition and computer
vision. In these problems, our goal is to predict well and we are typically less interested in the
uncertainty behind the predictions. However, deep learning is now becoming increasingly popular
in applications such as robotics and medical diagnostics, where accurate measures of uncertainty
are crucial for reliable decisions. For example, uncertainty estimates are important for physicians
who use automated diagnosis systems to choose effective and safe treatment options. Lack of such
estimates may lead to decisions that have disastrous consequences.
The goal of Bayesian deep learning is to provide uncertainty estimates by integrating over the
posterior distribution of the parameters. Unfortunately, the complexity of deep learning models makes
∗

Equal contributions. This work was conducted during an internship at the RIKEN Center for AI project.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

