TADAM: Task dependent adaptive metric for
improved few-shot learning
Boris N. Oreshkin
Element AI
boris@elementai.com

Pau Rodriguez
Element AI, CVC-UAB
pau.rodriguez@elementai.com

Alexandre Lacoste
Element AI
allac@elementai.com

Abstract
Few-shot learning has become essential for producing models that generalize
from few examples. In this work, we identify that metric scaling and metric task
conditioning are important to improve the performance of few-shot algorithms.
Our analysis reveals that simple metric scaling completely changes the nature of
few-shot algorithm parameter updates. Metric scaling provides improvements
up to 14% in accuracy for certain metrics on the mini-Imagenet 5-way 5-shot
classification task. We further propose a simple and effective way of conditioning a
learner on the task sample set, resulting in learning a task-dependent metric space.
Moreover, we propose and empirically test a practical end-to-end optimization
procedure based on auxiliary task co-training to learn a task-dependent metric
space. The resulting few-shot learning model based on the task-dependent scaled
metric achieves state of the art on mini-Imagenet. We confirm these results on
another few-shot dataset that we introduce in this paper based on CIFAR100.

1

Introduction

Humans can learn to identify new categories from few examples, even from a single one [2]. Few-shot
learning has recently attracted significant attention [33, 28, 29, 24, 17, 16], as it aims to produce
models that can generalize from small amounts of labeled data. In the few-shot setting, one aims to
learn a model that extracts information from a set of support examples (sample set) to predict the
labels of instances from a query set. Recently, this problem has been reframed into the meta-learning
framework [22], i.e. the model is trained so that given a sample set or task, produces a classifier for
that specific task. Thus, the model is exposed to different tasks (or episodes) during the training
phase, and it is evaluated on a non-overlapping set of new tasks [33].
Two recent approaches have attracted significant attention in the few-shot learning domain: Matching
Networks [33], and Prototypical Networks [28]. In both approaches, the sample set and the query set
are embedded with a neural network, and nearest neighbor classification is used given a metric in the
embedded space. Since then, the problem of learning the most suitable metric for few-shot learning
has been of interest to the field [33, 28, 29, 17, 16]. Learning a metric space in the context of few-shot
learning generally implies identifying a suitable similarity measure (e.g. cosine or Euclidean), a
feature extractor mapping raw inputs onto similarity space (e.g. convolutional stack for images or
LSTM stack for text), a cost function to drive the parameter updates, and a training scheme (often
episodic). Although the individual components in this list have been explored, the relationships
between them have not received considerable attention.
In the current work we aim to close this gap. We show that taking into account the interaction
between the identified components leads to significant improvements in the few-shot generalization.
In particular, we show that a non-trivial interaction between the similarity metric and the cost function
can be exploited to improve the performance of a given similarity metric via scaling. Using this
mechanism we close more than the 10% gap in performance between the cosine similarity and
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

