Reversible Recurrent Neural Networks
Matthew MacKay, Paul Vicol, Jimmy Ba, Roger Grosse
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
{mmackay, pvicol, jba, rgrosse}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) provide state-of-the-art performance in processing sequential data but are memory intensive to train, limiting the flexibility
of RNN models which can be trained. Reversible RNNs—RNNs for which the
hidden-to-hidden transition can be reversed—offer a path to reduce the memory
requirements of training, as hidden states need not be stored and instead can be
recomputed during backpropagation. We first show that perfectly reversible RNNs,
which require no storage of the hidden activations, are fundamentally limited because they cannot forget information from their hidden state. We then provide a
scheme for storing a small number of bits in order to allow perfect reversal with
forgetting. Our method achieves comparable performance to traditional models
while reducing the activation memory cost by a factor of 10–15. We extend our
technique to attention-based sequence-to-sequence models, where it maintains
performance while reducing activation memory cost by a factor of 5–10 in the
encoder, and a factor of 10–15 in the decoder.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have attained state-of-the-art performance on a variety of tasks,
including speech recognition [Graves et al., 2013], language modeling [Melis et al., 2017, Merity
et al., 2017], and machine translation [Bahdanau et al., 2014, Wu et al., 2016]. However, RNNs are
memory intensive to train. The standard training algorithm is truncated backpropagation through time
(TBPTT) [Werbos, 1990, Rumelhart et al., 1986]. In this algorithm, the input sequence is divided into
subsequences of smaller length, say T . Each of them is processed and the gradient is backpropagated.
If H is the size of our model’s hidden state, the memory required for TBPTT is O(T H).
Decreasing the memory requirements of the TBPTT algorithm would allow us to increase the length
T of our truncated sequences, capturing dependencies over longer time scales. Alternatively, we could
increase the size H of our hidden state or use deeper input-to-hidden, hidden-to-hidden, or hidden-tooutput transitions, granting our model greater expressivity. Increasing the depth of these transitions
has been shown to increase performance in polyphonic music prediction, language modeling, and
neural machine translation (NMT) [Pascanu et al., 2013, Barone et al., 2017, Zilly et al., 2016].
Reversible recurrent network architectures present an enticing way to reduce the memory requirements
of TBPTT. Reversible architectures enable the reconstruction of the hidden state at the current timestep
given the next hidden state and the current input, which would enable us to perform TBPTT without
storing the hidden states at each timestep. In exchange, we pay an increased computational cost to
reconstruct the hidden states during backpropagation.
We first present reversible analogues of the widely used Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [Cho et al.,
2014] and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997] architectures.
We then show that any perfectly reversible RNN requiring no storage of hidden activations will fail
on a simple one-step prediction task. This task is trivial to solve even for vanilla RNNs, but perfectly
reversible models fail since they need to memorize the input sequence in order to solve the task.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

