Approximation algorithms for stochastic clustering∗

David G. Harris
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742
davidgharris29@gmail.com

Shi Li
University at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY. shil@buffalo.edu

Thomas Pensyl
Bandwidth, Inc.
Raleigh, NC
tpensyl@bandwidth.com
Aravind Srinivasan
Department of Computer Science and Institute for Advanced Computer Studies
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742
srin@cs.umd.edu
Khoa Trinh
Google
Mountain View, CA 94043
khoatrinh@google.com

Abstract
We consider stochastic settings for clustering, and develop provably-good
(approximation) algorithms for a number of these notions. These algorithms
allow one to obtain better approximation ratios compared to the usual deterministic
clustering setting. Additionally, they offer a number of advantages including
providing fairer clustering and clustering which has better long-term behavior for
each user. In particular, they ensure that every user is guaranteed to get good
service (on average). We also complement some of these with impossibility results.
KEYWORDS: clustering, k-center, k-median, lottery, approximation algorithms

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental problem in machine learning and data science. A general clustering
task is to partition the given data points into clusters such that the points inside the same cluster are
“similar” to each other. More formally, consider a set of datapoints C and a set of “potential cluster
centers” F, with a metric d on C ∪ F. We define n := |C ∪ F|. Given any set S ⊆ F, each j ∈ C is
associated with the key statistic d(j, S) = mini∈S d(i, j). The typical task in a clustering problem is
to select a set S ⊆ F, with a small size, in order to minimize the values of d(j, S). The size of the set
S is often fixed to a value k, and we typically “boil down” the large collection of values d(j, S) into
a single overall objective function. There are different clustering problems depending on the choice
of the objective function and the assumptions on sets C and F. The most popular problems include
• the k-center problem: minimize the maximum value maxj∈C d(j, S) given that F = C.
∗

Research supported in part by NSF Awards CNS-1010789, CCF-1422569 and CCF-1749864, CCF-1566356,
CCF-1717134 and by research awards from Adobe, Inc.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

