Computing Higher Order Derivatives of Matrix and
Tensor Expressions

Sören Laue
Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena
Germany
soeren.laue@uni-jena.de

Matthias Mitterreiter
Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena
Germany
matthias.mitterreiter@uni-jena.de

Joachim Giesen
Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena
Germany
joachim.giesen@uni-jena.de

Abstract
Optimization is an integral part of most machine learning systems and most numerical optimization schemes rely on the computation of derivatives. Therefore,
frameworks for computing derivatives are an active area of machine learning research. Surprisingly, as of yet, no existing framework is capable of computing
higher order matrix and tensor derivatives directly. Here, we close this fundamental
gap and present an algorithmic framework for computing matrix and tensor derivatives that extends seamlessly to higher order derivatives. The framework can be
used for symbolic as well as for forward and reverse mode automatic differentiation.
Experiments show a speedup of up to two orders of magnitude over state-of-the-art
frameworks when evaluating higher order derivatives on CPUs and a speedup of
about three orders of magnitude on GPUs.

1

Introduction

Recently, automatic differentiation has become popular in the machine learning community due to its
genericity, flexibility, and efficiency. Automatic differentiation lies at the core of most deep learning
frameworks and has made deep learning widely accessible. In principle, automatic differentiation
can be used for differentiating any code. In practice, however, it is primarily targeted at scalar
valued functions. Current algorithms and implementations do not produce very efficient code when
computing Jacobians or Hessians that, for instance, arise in the context of constrained optimization
problems. A simple yet instructive example is the function f (x) = x> Ax, where A is a square matrix
and x is a vector. The second order derivative of this function, i.e., its Hessian, is the matrix A> + A.
Frameworks like TensorFlow [1], Theano [23], PyTorch [16], or HIPS autograd [14] generate code for
the second order derivative of f that runs two to three orders of magnitude slower than the evaluation
of the expression A> + A.
In machine learning, automatic differentiation is mostly used for numerical optimization. Many
machine learning optimization problems are formulated in standard matrix language. This has not
only the advantage of a compact problem representation, but linear algebra expressions can also be
executed efficiently on modern CPUs and GPUs by mapping them onto highly tuned BLAS (basic
linear algebra subprograms) implementations that make extensive use of vectorization such as the
SSE and the AVX instruction sets or SIMD architectures. Ideally, these advantages are kept also
for the gradients and Hessians of the expressions that encode the optimization problem. This is the
purpose of matrix calculus that computes, if possible, derivatives of matrix expressions again as
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

