Discrimination-aware Channel Pruning
for Deep Neural Networks

Zhuangwei Zhuang1∗ , Mingkui Tan1∗† , Bohan Zhuang2∗ , Jing Liu1∗ ,
Yong Guo1 , Qingyao Wu1 , Junzhou Huang3,4 , Jinhui Zhu1†
1
South China University of Technology, 2 The University of Adelaide,
3
University of Texas at Arlington, 4 Tencent AI Lab
{z.zhuangwei, seliujing, guo.yong}@mail.scut.edu.cn, jzhuang@uta.edu
{mingkuitan, qyw, csjhzhu}@scut.edu.cn, bohan.zhuang@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Channel pruning is one of the predominant approaches for deep model compression.
Existing pruning methods either train from scratch with sparsity constraints on
channels, or minimize the reconstruction error between the pre-trained feature
maps and the compressed ones. Both strategies suffer from some limitations:
the former kind is computationally expensive and difficult to converge, whilst
the latter kind optimizes the reconstruction error but ignores the discriminative
power of channels. In this paper, we investigate a simple-yet-effective method
called discrimination-aware channel pruning (DCP) to choose those channels that
really contribute to discriminative power. To this end, we introduce additional
discrimination-aware losses into the network to increase the discriminative power of
intermediate layers and then select the most discriminative channels for each layer
by considering the additional loss and the reconstruction error. Last, we propose
a greedy algorithm to conduct channel selection and parameter optimization in
an iterative way. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method. For example, on ILSVRC-12, our pruned ResNet-50 with 30% reduction
of channels outperforms the baseline model by 0.39% in top-1 accuracy.

1

Introduction

Since 2012, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved great success in many computer
vision tasks, e.g., image classification [21, 41], face recognition [37, 42], object detection [35,
36], image generation [7, 3] and video analysis [38, 47]. However, deep models are often with a
huge number of parameters and the model size is very large, which incurs not only huge memory
requirement but also unbearable computation burden. As a result, deep learning methods are hard to
be applied on hardware devices with limited storage and computation resources, such as cell phones.
To address this problem, model compression is an effective approach, which aims to reduce the model
redundancy without significant degeneration in performance.
Recent studies on model compression mainly contain three categories, namely, quantization [34, 54],
sparse or low-rank compressions [10, 11], and channel pruning [27, 28, 51, 49]. Network quantization
seeks to reduce the model size by quantizing float weights into low-bit weights (e.g., 8 bits or
even 1 bit). However, the training is very difficult due to the introduction of quantization errors.
Making sparse connections can reach high compression rate in theory, but it may generate irregular
convolutional kernels which need sparse matrix operations for accelerating the computation. In
∗
†

Authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

