Hunting for Discriminatory Proxies
in Linear Regression Models

Samuel Yeom
Carnegie Mellon University
syeom@cs.cmu.edu

Anupam Datta
Carnegie Mellon University
danupam@cmu.edu

Matt Fredrikson
Carnegie Mellon University
mfredrik@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
A machine learning model may exhibit discrimination when used to make
decisions involving people. One potential cause for such outcomes is that the
model uses a statistical proxy for a protected demographic attribute. In this paper
we formulate a definition of proxy use for the setting of linear regression and
present algorithms for detecting proxies. Our definition follows recent work on
proxies in classification models, and characterizes a model’s constituent behavior
that: 1) correlates closely with a protected random variable, and 2) is causally
influential in the overall behavior of the model. We show that proxies in linear
regression models can be efficiently identified by solving a second-order cone
program, and further extend this result to account for situations where the use of
a certain input variable is justified as a “business necessity”. Finally, we present
empirical results on two law enforcement datasets that exhibit varying degrees
of racial disparity in prediction outcomes, demonstrating that proxies shed useful
light on the causes of discriminatory behavior in models.

1

Introduction

The use of machine learning in domains like insurance [23], criminal justice [18], and child welfare [28] raises concerns about fairness, as decisions based on model predictions may discriminate
on the basis of demographic attributes like race and gender. These concerns are driven by highprofile examples of models that appear to have discriminatory effect, ranging from gender bias in
job advertisements [10] to racial bias in same-day delivery services [21] and predictive policing [3].
Meanwhile, laws and regulations in various jurisdictions prohibit certain practices that have
discriminatory effect, regardless of whether the discrimination is intentional. For example, the
U.S. has recognized the doctrine of disparate impact since 1971, when the Supreme Court held in
Griggs v. Duke Power Co. [25] that the Duke Power Company had discriminated against its black
employees by requiring a high-school diploma for promotion when the diploma had little to do
with competence in the new job. These regulations pose a challenge for machine learning models,
which may give discriminatory predictions as an unintentional side effect of misconfiguration or
biased training data. Many competing definitions of disparate impact [3, 14] have been proposed in
efforts to address this challenge, but it has been shown that some of these definitions are impossible
to satisfy simultaneously [8]. Therefore, it is important to find a workable standard for detecting
discriminatory behavior in models.
Much prior work [19, 30] has focused on the four-fifths rule [17] or variants thereof, which are
relaxed versions of the demographic parity requirement that different demographic groups should
receive identical outcomes on average. However, demographic parity does not necessarily make
a model fair. For example, consider an attempt to “repair” a racially discriminatory predictive
policing model by arbitrarily lowering the risk scores of some members of the disadvantaged race
until demographic parity is reached. The resulting model is still unfair to individual members of
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

