Moonshine: Distilling with Cheap Convolutions

Elliot J. Crowley
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
elliot.j.crowley@ed.ac.uk

Gavin Gray
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
g.d.b.gray@ed.ac.uk

Amos Storkey
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
a.storkey@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Many engineers wish to deploy modern neural networks in memory-limited settings;
but the development of flexible methods for reducing memory use is in its infancy,
and there is little knowledge of the resulting cost-benefit. We propose structural
model distillation for memory reduction using a strategy that produces a student
architecture that is a simple transformation of the teacher architecture: no redesign
is needed, and the same hyperparameters can be used. Using attention transfer,
we provide Pareto curves/tables for distillation of residual networks with four
benchmark datasets, indicating the memory versus accuracy payoff. We show
that substantial memory savings are possible with very little loss of accuracy, and
confirm that distillation provides student network performance that is better than
training that student architecture directly on data.

1

Introduction

Despite advances in deep learning for a variety of tasks (LeCun et al., 2015), deployment of deep
learning into embedded devices e.g. wearable devices, digital cameras, vehicle navigation systems,
has been relatively slow due to resource constraints under which these devices operate. Big, memoryintensive neural networks do not fit on these devices, but do these networks have to be big and
expensive? The dominant run-time memory cost of neural networks is the number of parameters
that need to be stored. Can we have networks with substantially fewer parameters, without the
commensurate loss of performance?
It is possible to take a large pre-trained teacher network, and use its outputs to aid in the training of a
smaller student network (Ba & Caruana, 2014) through some distillation process. By doing this the
student network is more powerful than if it was trained solely on the training data, and is closer in
performance to the larger teacher. The lower-parameter student network typically has an architecture
that is more shallow, or thinner — by which we mean its filters have fewer channels (Romero et al.,
2015) — than the teacher. While it is not possible to arbitrarily approximate any network with
another (Urban et al., 2017), the limit in neural network performance is at least in part due to the
training algorithm, rather than its representational power.
In this paper, we take an alternative approach in designing our student networks. Instead of making
networks thinner, or more shallow, we take the standard convolutional block such networks possess
and replace it with a cheaper convolutional block, keeping the original architecture. For example,
in a Residual Network (ResNet) (He et al., 2016a) this standard block is a pair of sequential 3×3
convolutions. We show that for a comparable number of parameters, student networks that retain the
architecture of their teacher but with cheaper convolutional blocks outperform student networks with
the original blocks and smaller architectures.
The cheap convolutional blocks we suggest are described in Section 3 as well as an overview of the
methods we employ for distillation. In Section 4 we evaluate student networks with these blocks
on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky, 2009). Finally, in Section 5 we examine the efficacy
of such networks for the tasks of ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015) classification, and semantic
segmentation on the Cityscapes dataset (Cordts et al., 2016). Our claims are as follows:
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

