Bipartite Stochastic Block Models with Tiny Clusters

Stefan Neumann
University of Vienna
Faculty of Computer Science
Vienna, Austria
stefan.neumann@univie.ac.at

Abstract
We study the problem of finding clusters in random bipartite graphs. We present a
simple two-step algorithm which provably finds even tiny clusters of size O(nε ),
where n is the number of vertices in the graph
√ and ε > 0. Previous algorithms
were only able to identify clusters of size Ω( n). We evaluate the algorithm on
synthetic and on real-world data; the experiments show that the algorithm can find
extremely small clusters even in presence of high destructive noise.

1

Introduction

Finding clusters in bipartite graphs is a fundamental problem and has many applications. In practice,
the two parts of the bipartite graph usually correspond to objects from different domains and an edge
corresponds to an interaction between the objects. For example, paleontologists use biclustering to
find co-occurrences of localities (left side of the graph) and mammals (right side of the graph) [13];
bioinformaticians want to relate biological samples and gene expression levels [10]; in an online shop
setting, one wants to find clusters of customers and products.
Discovering clusters in bipartite graphs has been researched in many different settings. However,
most of these algorithms were heuristics and do not provide theoretical guarantees for the quality
of their results. This was recently addressed by Xu et al. [27] and Lim et al. [17] who initiated the
study of biclustering algorithms with formal guarantees. They considered random bipartite graphs
and proved under which conditions their algorithms can recover the ground-truth clusters.
In this paper, we consider a standard random graph model and propose a simple two-step algorithm
which provably discovers the ground-truth clusters in bipartite graphs: (1) Cluster the vertices on the
left side of the graph based on the similarity of their neighborhoods (Section 3). (2) Infer the right
side clusters based on the previously discovered left clusters using degree-thresholding (Section 4).
Our algorithm allows to recover even tiny clusters of size O(nε ), where n is the number of vertices
on the right√side of the graph and ε > 0. Previously, existing algorithms could only discover clusters
of size Ω( n). Note that finding tiny clusters is of high practical importance. For example, in an
online
shop with millions of products (n ≥ 106 ), finding only clusters of at least a thousand products
√
( n ≥ 103 ) is not very interesting. One would want the product clusters to be much smaller.
The formal guarantees of our algorithm are provided at the end of this section. From a high-level
point of view, the algorithm can be seen as a way to leverage formal guarantees for mixture models
and clustering algorithms into biclustering algorithms with formal guarantees. This partially explains
why heuristics such as “apply k-means to both sides of the graph” are very successful in practice.
Finally, we implement a version of the proposed algorithm (Section 5) and we evaluate it on synthetic
and on real-world data. The experiments show that in practice the algorithm can find extremely small
clusters and it outperforms all algorithms we compare with (Section 6).
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

