Size-Noise Tradeoffs in Generative Networks
Bolton Bailey
Matus Telgarsky
{boltonb2,mjt}@illinois.edu
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
This paper investigates the ability of generative networks to convert their input
noise distributions into other distributions. Firstly, we demonstrate a construction
that allows ReLU networks to increase the dimensionality of their noise distribution
by implementing a “space-filling” function based on iterated tent maps. We show
this construction is optimal by analyzing the number of affine pieces in functions
computed by multivariate ReLU networks. Secondly, we provide efficient ways
(using polylog(1/) nodes) for networks to pass between univariate uniform and
normal distributions, using a Taylor series approximation and a binary search
gadget for computing function inverses. Lastly, we indicate how high dimensional
distributions can be efficiently transformed into low dimensional distributions.

1

Introduction

This paper focuses on the representational capabilities of generative networks. A generative network
models a complex target distribution by taking samples from some efficiently-sampleable noise
distribution and mapping them to the target distribution using a neural network. What distributions
can a generative net approximate, and how well? Larger neural networks or networks with more noise
given as input have greater power to model distributions, but it is unclear how the use of one resource
can make up for the lack of the other. We seek to describe the relationship between these resources.
In our analysis, we make a few assumptions on the structure of the network and the noise. We focus
on the two most standard choices for noise distributions: The normal distribution, and the uniform
distribution on the unit hypercube [Arjovsky et al., 2017]. Henceforth, we will use the term “uniform
distribution” to refer to the uniform distribution on unit hypercubes, unless otherwise specified. We
look specifically at the case where the generative network is a fully-connected network with the ReLU
activation function (without weight sharing). The notion of approximation we use is the Wasserstein
distance, introduced for generative networks in Arjovsky et al. [2017], which is defined as follows:
Definition 1. For two distributions µ and ν on Rd , their Wasserstein distance is defined as
Z
W (µ, ν) := inf
|x − y|dπ(x, y),
π∈Π(µ,ν)

where Π(µ, ν) is the set of joint distributions having µ and ν as marginals.
Our results fall into three regimes, each covered in its own section:
Section 2: The case where the input dimension is less than the output dimension.
In this regime, we prove tight upper and lower bounds for the task of approximating higher
dimensional uniform distributions with lower dimensional distributions in terms of the
average width W and depth (number of layers) L of the network. The bounds are tight in
the sense that both give an accuracy of the form  = O(W )−O(L) (keeping input and output
dimensions fixed). Thus, this gives a good idea of the asymptotic behavior in this regime:
Error exponentially decays with the number of layers, and polynomially decays with the
number of nodes in the network.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

