Non-Adversarial Mapping with VAEs

Yedid Hoshen
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
The study of cross-domain mapping without supervision has recently attracted
much attention. Much of the recent progress was enabled by the use of adversarial
training as well as cycle constraints. The practical difficulty of adversarial training
motivates research into non-adversarial methods. In a recent paper, it was shown
that cross-domain mapping is possible without the use of cycles or GANs. Although
promising, this approach suffers from several drawbacks including costly inference
and an optimization variable for every training example preventing the method
from using large training sets. We present an alternative approach which is able to
achieve non-adversarial mapping using a novel form of Variational Auto-Encoder.
Our method is much faster at inference time, is able to leverage large datasets and
has a simple interpretation.

1

Introduction

Making analogies is a key component in human intelligence. Evidence for that is the significant
component of analogy questions in standardized intelligence tests. In order to achieve true artificial
intelligence it is likely that computers would need to be able to learn to make analogies. Although
making analogies with full supervision is very related to standard supervised learning which has been
at the core of machine learning research, the unsupervised setting which is far more challenging, has
received less attention. The task has been attempted over the last few decades, but positive results
have only recently been achieved for making analogies across very distant domains.
Let us consider two domains X and Y. Each domain contains an unordered set of samples. In the
unsupervised setting, we do not have correspondences between the samples of the two domains.
There are two different types of unsupervised analogies that can be learned between different domains:
matching and mapping. The matching task sets to find for each sample x in domain X , a sample in
domain Y which is the most analogous to it. The degree of analogy is either defined by humans or a
more objective computerized measure. The mapping task attempts to map each sample x in the X
domain to a new sample such that it appears to come from the Y domain while still being analogous
to x. A special case is exact matching [1] when the exact analogy for x appears in the Y domain
training set. In this case the optimal match is also the optimal mapped analogy.
In this work we tackle unsupervised mapping across domains. This task has only recently been
successfully attempted between sufficiently different domains. Nearly all successful methods but one,
have used the combination of two constraints: i) Adversarial domain confusion: the method trains a
mapping TXY (x) for mapping between domain X to domain Y. A discriminator DY () is trained to
distinguish between mapped X domain sample TXY (x) and original Y domain samples. Mapping
function T () and discriminator D() are trained in an adversarial fashion iteratively. The objective
is that at the end of training, mapped X domain samples will be indistinguishable from Y domain
samples. ii) The adversarial constraint, on its own, is not able to force mapped images to correspond
to a semantically related Y domain sample. An additional circularity constraint was found necessary
where mappings are learned from both X → Y and Y → X . The constraint is that a sample mapped
to the other domain and back to the original domain will be unchanged by this mapping. This was
found effective at preserving semantic information across mappings.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

