Automating Bayesian optimization
with Bayesian optimization

Gustavo Malkomes, Roman Garnett
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130
{luizgustavo, garnett}@wustl.edu

Abstract
Bayesian optimization is a powerful tool for global optimization of expensive
functions. One of its key components is the underlying probabilistic model used for
the objective function f . In practice, however, it is often unclear how one should
appropriately choose a model, especially when gathering data is expensive. We introduce a novel automated Bayesian optimization approach that dynamically selects
promising models for explaining the observed data using Bayesian optimization
in model space. Crucially, we account for the uncertainty in the choice of model;
our method is capable of using multiple models to represent its current belief about
f and subsequently using this information for decision making. We argue, and
demonstrate empirically, that our approach automatically finds suitable models for
the objective function, which ultimately results in more-efficient optimization.

1

Introduction

Global optimization of expensive, potentially gradient-free functions has long been a critical component of many complex problems in science and engineering. As an example, imagine that we want to
tune the hyperparameters of a deep neural network in a self-driving car. That is, we want to maximize
the generalization performance of the machine learning algorithm, but the functional form of the
objective function f is unknown and even a single function evaluation is costly — it might take hours
(or even days!) to train the network. These features render the optimization particularly difficult.
Bayesian optimization has nonetheless shown remarkable success on optimizing expensive gradientfree functions [8, 1, 18]. Bayesian optimization works by maintaining a probabilistic belief about
the objective function and designing a so-called acquisition function that intelligently indicates the
most-promising locations to evaluate f next. Although the design of acquisition functions has been
the subject of a great deal of research, how to appropriately model f has received comparatively less
attention [17], despite being a decisive factor for performance. In fact, this was considered the most
important problem in Bayesian optimization by Močkus [12], in a seminal work in the field:
“The development of some system of a priori distributions suitable for different
classes of the function f is probably the most important problem in the application
of [the] Bayesian approach to ... global optimization” (Močkus 1974, p. 404).
In this work, we develop a search mechanism for appropriate surrogate models (prior distributions) to
the objective function f . Inspired by Malkomes et al. [11], our model-search procedure operates via
Bayesian optimization in model space. Our method does not prematurely commit to a single model;
instead, it uses several models to form a belief about the objective function and plan where the next
evaluation should be. Our adaptive model averaging approach accounts for model uncertainty, which
more realistically copes with the limited information available in practical Bayesian optimization
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

