Cluster Variational Approximations for Structure
Learning of Continuous-Time Bayesian Networks
from Incomplete Data

Dominik Linzner1 and Heinz Koeppl1,2
Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology
2
Department of Biology
Technische Universität Darmstadt
{dominik.linzner, heinz.koeppl}@bcs.tu-darmstadt.de

1

Abstract
Continuous-time Bayesian networks (CTBNs) constitute a general and powerful
framework for modeling continuous-time stochastic processes on networks. This
makes them particularly attractive for learning the directed structures among interacting entities. However, if the available data is incomplete, one needs to simulate
the prohibitively complex CTBN dynamics. Existing approximation techniques,
such as sampling and low-order variational methods, either scale unfavorably in
system size, or are unsatisfactory in terms of accuracy. Inspired by recent advances
in statistical physics, we present a new approximation scheme based on cluster
variational methods that significantly improves upon existing variational approximations. We can analytically marginalize the parameters of the approximate CTBN,
as these are of secondary importance for structure learning. This recovers a scalable
scheme for direct structure learning from incomplete and noisy time-series data.
Our approach outperforms existing methods in terms of scalability.

1

Introduction

Learning directed structures among multiple entities from data is an important problem with broad
applicability, especially in biological sciences, such as genomics [1] or neuroscience [20]. With
prevalent methods of high-throughput biology, thousands of molecular components can be monitored
simultaneously in abundance and time. Changes of biological processes can be modeled as transitions
of a latent state, such as expression or non-expression of a gene, or activation/inactivation of protein
activity. However, processes at the bio-molecular level evolve across vastly different time-scales [12].
Hence, tracking every transition between states is unrealistic. Additionally, biological systems are, in
general, strongly corrupted by measurement- or intrinsic noise.
In previous numerical studies, continuous-time Bayesian networks (CTBNs) [13] have been shown
to outperform competing methods for reconstruction of directed networks, such as ones based on
Granger causality or the closely related dynamic Bayesian networks [1]. Yet, CTBNs suffer from
the curse of dimensionality, prevalent in multi-component systems. This becomes problematic if
observations are incomplete, as then the latent state of a CTBN has to be laboriously estimated [15].
In order to tackle this problem, approximation methods through sampling [8, 7, 19], or variational
approaches [5, 6] have been investigated. These, however, either fail to treat high-dimensional spaces
because of sample sparsity, are unsatisfactory in terms of accuracy, or provide good accuracy at the
cost of an only locally consistent description.
In this manuscript, we present, to the best of our knowledge, the first direct structure learning method
for CTBNs based on variational inference. We extend the framework of variational inference for
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

