On Controllable Sparse Alternatives to Softmax

Anirban Laha1†∗ Saneem A. Chemmengath1∗ Priyanka Agrawal1 Mitesh M. Khapra2
Karthik Sankaranarayanan1
Harish G. Ramaswamy2
1
IBM Research 2 Robert Bosch Center for DS and AI, and Dept of CSE, IIT Madras

Abstract
Converting an n-dimensional vector to a probability distribution over n objects
is a commonly used component in many machine learning tasks like multiclass
classification, multilabel classification, attention mechanisms etc. For this, several
probability mapping functions have been proposed and employed in literature such
as softmax, sum-normalization, spherical softmax, and sparsemax, but there is very
little understanding in terms how they relate with each other. Further, none of the
above formulations offer an explicit control over the degree of sparsity. To address
this, we develop a unified framework that encompasses all these formulations as
special cases. This framework ensures simple closed-form solutions and existence
of sub-gradients suitable for learning via backpropagation. Within this framework,
we propose two novel sparse formulations, sparsegen-lin and sparsehourglass, that
seek to provide a control over the degree of desired sparsity. We further develop
novel convex loss functions that help induce the behavior of aforementioned
formulations in the multilabel classification setting, showing improved performance.
We also demonstrate empirically that the proposed formulations, when used to
compute attention weights, achieve better or comparable performance on standard
seq2seq tasks like neural machine translation and abstractive summarization.

1

Introduction

Various widely used probability mapping functions such as sum-normalization, softmax, and spherical
softmax enable mapping of vectors from the euclidean space to probability distributions. The
need for such functions arises in multiple problem settings like multiclass classification [1, 2],
reinforcement learning [3, 4] and more recently in attention mechanism [5, 6, 7, 8, 9] in deep neural
networks, amongst others. Even though softmax is the most prevalent approach amongst them, it
has a shortcoming in that its outputs are composed of only non-zeroes and is therefore ill-suited
for producing sparse probability distributions as output. The need for sparsity is motivated by
parsimonious representations [10] investigated in the context of variable or feature selection. Sparsity
in the input space offers benefits of model interpretability as well as computational benefits whereas
on the output side, it helps in filtering large output spaces, for example in large scale multilabel
classification settings [11]. While there have been several such mapping functions proposed in
literature such as softmax [4], spherical softmax [12, 13] and sparsemax [14, 15], very little is
understood in terms of how they relate to each other and their theoretical underpinnings. Further, for
sparse formulations, often there is a need to trade-off interpretability for accuracy, yet none of these
formulations offer an explicit control over the desired degree of sparsity.
Motivated by these shortcomings, in this paper, we introduce a general formulation encompassing all
such probability mapping functions which serves as a unifying framework to understand individual
formulations such as hardmax, softmax, sum-normalization, spherical softmax and sparsemax as special cases, while at the same time helps in providing explicit control over degree of sparsity. With the
∗

Equal contribution by the first two authors. Corresponding authors: {anirlaha,saneem.cg}@in.ibm.com.
†This author was also briefly associated with IIT Madras during the course of this work.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

