FishNet: A Versatile Backbone for Image, Region,
and Pixel Level Prediction
Shuyang Sun1 , Jiangmiao Pang3 , Jianping Shi2 , Shuai Yi2 , Wanli Ouyang1
1
The University of Sydney 2 SenseTime Research 3 Zhejiang University
shuyang.sun@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
The basic principles in designing convolutional neural network (CNN) structures
for predicting objects on different levels, e.g., image-level, region-level, and pixellevel, are diverging. Generally, network structures designed specifically for image
classification are directly used as default backbone structure for other tasks including detection and segmentation, but there is seldom backbone structure designed
under the consideration of unifying the advantages of networks designed for pixellevel or region-level predicting tasks, which may require very deep features with
high resolution. Towards this goal, we design a fish-like network, called FishNet.
In FishNet, the information of all resolutions is preserved and refined for the final
task. Besides, we observe that existing works still cannot directly propagate the
gradient information from deep layers to shallow layers. Our design can better
handle this problem. Extensive experiments have been conducted to demonstrate
the remarkable performance of the FishNet. In particular, on ImageNet-1k, the
accuracy of FishNet is able to surpass the performance of DenseNet and ResNet
with fewer parameters. FishNet was applied as one of the modules in the winning entry of the COCO Detection 2018 challenge. The code is available at
https://github.com/kevin-ssy/FishNet.

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has been found to be effective for learning better feature
representations in the field of computer vision [17, 26, 28, 9, 37, 27, 4]. Thereby, the design of CNN
becomes a fundamental task that can help to boost the performance of many other related tasks. As
the CNN becomes increasingly deeper, recent works endeavor to refine or reuse the features from
previous layers through identity mappings [8] or concatenation [13].
The CNNs designed for image-level, region-level, and pixel-level tasks begin to diverge in network
structure. Networks for image classification use consecutive down-sampling to obtain deep features
of low resolution. However, the features with low resolution are not suitable for pixel-level or even
region-level tasks. Direct use of high-resolution shallow features for region and pixel-level tasks,
however, does not work well. In order to obtain deeper features with high resolution, the well-known
network structures for pixel-level tasks use U-Net or hourglass-like networks [22, 24, 30]. Recent
works on region-level tasks like object detection also use networks with up-sampling mechanism
[21, 19] so that small objects can be described by the features with relatively high resolution.
Driven by the success of using high-resolution features for region-level and pixel-level tasks, this
paper proposes a fish-like network, namely FishNet, which enables the features of high resolution to
contain high-level semantic information. In this way, features pre-trained from image classification
are more friendly for region and pixel level tasks.
We carefully design a mechanism that have the following three advantages.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

