Bayesian Model Selection Approach to Boundary
Detection with Non-Local Priors
Fei Jiang
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
The University of Hong Kong
feijiang@hku.hk
Guosheng Yin
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
The University of Hong Kong
gyin@hku.hk

Dominici Francesca
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
Harvard University
fdominic@hsph.harvard.edu

Abstract
Based on non-local prior distributions, we propose a Bayesian model selection
(BMS) procedure for boundary detection in a sequence of data with multiple
systematic mean changes. The BMS method can effectively suppress the nonboundary spike points with large instantaneous changes. We speed up the algorithm
by reducing the multiple change points to a series of single change point detection
problems. We establish the consistency of the estimated number and locations of
the change points under various prior distributions. Extensive simulation studies
are conducted to compare the BMS with existing methods, and our approach is
illustrated with application to the magnetic resonance imaging guided radiation
therapy data.

1

Introduction

Traditional change point detection algorithms often apply to the situation where the occurrence
frequency of the change points is relatively consistent across the signals. For example, the narrowestover-threshold (NOT) algorithm [1] is more suitable when different segments between the change
points have comparable lengths, and the stepwise marginal likelihood (SML) method [5] works better
to identify frequent change points. However, in practice it is often the case that distances between
consecutive change points may vary dramatically, while only those with certain distance gaps are of
interest. For such settings, we develop a computationally efficient Bayesian model selection (BMS)
approach to identifying multiple change points.
The inconsistent gaps between the change points can be observed from the signals generated by
the magnetic resonance imaging guided radiation therapy (MRgRT). When radiations travel in the
magnetic field, the dose can be significantly enhanced near the boundaries between different tissues or
organs inside human bodies. As shown by Figure 1, the Duke Mid-sized Optical-CT System (DMOS)
is developed to identify the dose changes near the region of such boundary artifact. It also exhibits
the profile of dose intensities as the radiation travels through the dosimeter, where the boundaries on
and inside the dosimeter can be distinguished by the notable peaks in the signals. In the experiment,
radiations enter the cylindrical dosimeter from different directions, and a sequence of dose intensities
ordered by their distances to the sources are recorded. Because the dosimeter is circular and there is a
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

