Multimodal Generative Models for Scalable
Weakly-Supervised Learning

Mike Wu
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94025
wumike@stanford.edu

Noah Goodman
Departments of Computer Science and Psychology
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94025
ngoodman@stanford.edu

Abstract
Multiple modalities often co-occur when describing natural phenomena. Learning
a joint representation of these modalities should yield deeper and more useful
representations. Previous generative approaches to multi-modal input either do
not learn a joint distribution or require additional computation to handle missing
data. Here, we introduce a multimodal variational autoencoder (MVAE) that uses
a product-of-experts inference network and a sub-sampled training paradigm to
solve the multi-modal inference problem. Notably, our model shares parameters
to efficiently learn under any combination of missing modalities. We apply the
MVAE on four datasets and match state-of-the-art performance using many fewer
parameters. In addition, we show that the MVAE is directly applicable to weaklysupervised learning, and is robust to incomplete supervision. We then consider two
case studies, one of learning image transformations—edge detection, colorization,
segmentation—as a set of modalities, followed by one of machine translation
between two languages. We find appealing results across this range of tasks.

1

Introduction

Learning from diverse modalities has the potential to yield more generalizable representations. For
instance, the visual appearance and tactile impression of an object converge on a more invariant
abstract characterization [32]. Similarly, an image and a natural language caption can capture
complimentary but converging information about a scene [28, 31]. While fully-supervised deep
learning approaches can learn to bridge modalities, generative approaches promise to capture the joint
distribution across modalities and flexibly support missing data. Indeed, multimodal data is expensive
and sparse, leading to a weakly supervised setting of having only a small set of examples with all
observations present, but having access to a larger dataset with one (or a subset of) modalities.
We propose a novel multimodal variational autoencoder (MVAE) to learn a joint distribution under
weak supervision. The VAE [11] jointly trains a generative model, from latent variables to observations, with an inference network from observations to latents. Moving to multiple modalities
and missing data, we would naively need an inference network for each combination of modalities.
However, doing so would result in an exponential explosion in the number of trainable parameters.
Assuming conditional independence among the modalities, we show that the correct inference network will be a product-of-experts [8], a structure which reduces the number of inference networks
to one per modality. While the inference networks can be best trained separately, the generative
model requires joint observations. Thus we propose a sub-sampled training paradigm in which
fully-observed examples are treated as both fully and partially observed (for each gradient update).
Altogether, this provides a novel and useful solution to the multi-modal inference problem.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

