Lifelong Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Jorge A. Mendez, Shashank Shivkumar, and Eric Eaton
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
{mendezme,shashs,eeaton}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Methods for learning from demonstration (LfD) have shown success in acquiring
behavior policies by imitating a user. However, even for a single task, LfD may
require numerous demonstrations. For versatile agents that must learn many tasks
via demonstration, this process would substantially burden the user if each task
were learned in isolation. To address this challenge, we introduce the novel problem
of lifelong learning from demonstration, which allows the agent to continually
build upon knowledge learned from previously demonstrated tasks to accelerate
the learning of new tasks, reducing the amount of demonstrations required. As
one solution to this problem, we propose the first lifelong learning approach to
inverse reinforcement learning, which learns consecutive tasks via demonstration,
continually transferring knowledge between tasks to improve performance.

1

Introduction

In many applications, such as personal robotics or intelligent virtual assistants, a user may want
to teach an agent to perform some sequential decision-making task. Often, the user may be able
to demonstrate the appropriate behavior, allowing the agent to learn the customized task through
imitation. Research in inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) [29, 1, 43, 21, 31, 28] has shown success
with framing the learning from demonstration (LfD) problem as optimizing a utility function from user
demonstrations. IRL assumes that the user acts to optimize some reward function in performing the
demonstrations, even if they cannot explicitly specify that reward function as in typical reinforcement
learning (RL).1 IRL seeks to recover this reward function from demonstrations, and then use it to train
an optimal policy. Learning the reward function instead of merely copying the user’s policy provides
the agent with a portable representation of the task. Most IRL approaches have focused on an agent
learning a single task. However, as AI systems become more versatile, it is increasingly likely that
the agent will be expected to learn multiple tasks over its lifetime. If it learned each task in isolation,
this process would cause a substantial burden on the user to provide numerous demonstrations.
To address this challenge, we introduce the novel problem of lifelong learning from demonstration, in
which an agent will face multiple consecutive LfD tasks and must optimize its overall performance.
By building upon its knowledge from previous tasks, the agent can reduce the number of user
demonstrations needed to learn a new task. As one illustrative example, consider a personal service
robot learning to perform household chores from its human owner. Initially, the human might want to
teach the robot to load the dishwasher by providing demonstrations of the task. At a later time, the
user could teach the robot to set the dining table. These tasks are clearly related since they involve
manipulating dinnerware and cutlery, and so we would expect the robot to leverage any relevant
knowledge obtained from loading the dishwasher while setting the table for dinner. Additionally, we
would hope the robot could improve its understanding of the dishwasher task with any additional
1
Complex RL tasks require similarly complex reward functions, which are often hand-coded. This handcoding would be very cumbersome for most users, making demonstrations better for training novel behavior.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

