Persistence Fisher Kernel: A Riemannian Manifold
Kernel for Persistence Diagrams

Tam Le
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan
tam.le@riken.jp
Makoto Yamada
Kyoto University, Japan
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan
makoto.yamada@riken.jp

Abstract
Algebraic topology methods have recently played an important role for statistical
analysis with complicated geometric structured data such as shapes, linked twist
maps, and material data. Among them, persistent homology is a well-known tool
to extract robust topological features, and outputs as persistence diagrams (PDs).
However, PDs are point multi-sets which can not be used in machine learning
algorithms for vector data. To deal with it, an emerged approach is to use kernel
methods, and an appropriate geometry for PDs is an important factor to measure the
similarity of PDs. A popular geometry for PDs is the Wasserstein metric. However,
Wasserstein distance is not negative definite. Thus, it is limited to build positive
definite kernels upon the Wasserstein distance without approximation. In this work,
we rely upon the alternative Fisher information geometry to propose a positive
definite kernel for PDs without approximation, namely the Persistence Fisher (PF)
kernel. Then, we analyze eigensystem of the integral operator induced by the
proposed kernel for kernel machines. Based on that, we derive generalization error
bounds via covering numbers and Rademacher averages for kernel machines with
the PF kernel. Additionally, we show some nice properties such as stability and
infinite divisibility for the proposed kernel. Furthermore, we also propose a linear
time complexity over the number of points in PDs for an approximation of our
proposed kernel with a bounded error. Throughout experiments with many different
tasks on various benchmark datasets, we illustrate that the PF kernel compares
favorably with other baseline kernels for PDs.

1

Introduction

Using algebraic topology methods for statistical data analysis has been recently received a lot of
attention from machine learning community [Chazal et al., 2015, Kwitt et al., 2015, Bubenik, 2015,
Kusano et al., 2016, Chen and Quadrianto, 2016, Carriere et al., 2017, Hofer et al., 2017, Adams et al.,
2017, Kusano et al., 2018]. Algebraic topology methods can produce a robust descriptor which can
give useful insight when one deals with complicated geometric structured data such as shapes, linked
twist maps, and material data. More specifically, algebraic topology methods are applied in various
research fields such as biology [Kasson et al., 2007, Xia and Wei, 2014, Cang et al., 2015], brain
science [Singh et al., 2008, Lee et al., 2011, Petri et al., 2014], and information science [De Silva
et al., 2007, Carlsson et al., 2008], to name a few.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

