Deep Dynamical Modeling and Control of
Unsteady Fluid Flows

Jeremy Morton∗
jmorton2@stanford.edu

Freddie D. Witherden∗
fdw@stanford.edu

Antony Jameson †
antony.jameson@tamu.edu

Mykel J. Kochenderfer∗
mykel@stanford.edu

Abstract
The design of flow control systems remains a challenge due to the nonlinear nature
of the equations that govern fluid flow. However, recent advances in computational
fluid dynamics (CFD) have enabled the simulation of complex fluid flows with high
accuracy, opening the possibility of using learning-based approaches to facilitate
controller design. We present a method for learning the forced and unforced dynamics of airflow over a cylinder directly from CFD data. The proposed approach,
grounded in Koopman theory, is shown to produce stable dynamical models that
can predict the time evolution of the cylinder system over extended time horizons.
Finally, by performing model predictive control with the learned dynamical models,
we are able to find a straightforward, interpretable control law for suppressing
vortex shedding in the wake of the cylinder.

1

Introduction

Fluid flow control represents a significant challenge, with the potential for high impact in a variety of
sectors, most notably the automotive and aerospace industries. While the time evolution of fluid flows
can be described by the Navier-Stokes equations, their nonlinear nature means that many control
techniques, largely derived for linear systems, prove ineffective when applied to fluid flows. An
illuminating test case is the canonical problem of suppressing vortex shedding in the wake of airflow
over a cylinder. This problem has been studied extensively experimentally and computationally,
with the earliest experiments dating back to the 1960s [1]–[6]. These studies have shown that
controller design can prove surprisingly difficult, as controller effectiveness is highly sensitive to
flow conditions, measurement configuration, and feedback gains [3], [5]. Nonetheless, at certain
flow conditions vortex suppression can be achieved with a simple proportional control law based on
a single sensor measurement in the cylinder wake. Thus, while the design of flow controllers may
present considerable challenges, effective controllers may in fact prove relatively easy to implement.
Recent advances in computational fluid dynamics (CFD) have enabled the numerical simulation of
previously intractable flow problems for complex geometries [7]–[11]. Such simulations are generally
run at great computational expense, and generate vast quantities of data. In response, the field of
reduced-order modeling (ROM) has attracted great interest, with the aim of learning efficient dynamical models from the generated data. This research has yielded a wide array of techniques for learning
data-driven dynamical models, including balanced truncation, proper orthogonal decomposition, and
dynamic mode decomposition [12]. Recent work has sought to incorporate reduced-order models
with robust- and optimal-control techniques to devise controllers for nonlinear systems [6], [13], [14].
In parallel, the machine learning community has devoted significant attention to learning-based
control of complex systems. Model-free control approaches attempt to learn control policies without
∗
†

Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University
Department of Aerospace Engineering, Texas A&M University

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

