How to tell when a clustering is (approximately)
correct using convex relaxations
Marina Meila⇤
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195

Abstract
We introduce the Sublevel Set (SS) method, a generic method to obtain sufficient
guarantees of near-optimality and uniqueness (up to small perturbations) for a
clustering. This method can be instantiated for a variety of clustering loss functions
for which convex relaxations exist. Obtaining the guarantees in practice amounts to
solving a convex optimization. We demonstrate the applicability of this method by
obtaining distribution free guarantees for K-means clustering on realistic data sets.

1

Introduction

This paper proposes a framework for providing theoretical guarantees for clustering, without making
(untestable) assumptions about the data generating process. The main question we address is: can a
user tell, with no prior knowledge, if the clustering C returned by a clustering algorithm is meaningful?
This is the fundamental problem of cluster validation. We build on the idea of [Mei06] who proposed
that: to be meaninful, a clustering C must be both “good” and the only “good” clustering of the data
D, up to small perturbations. Such a clustering is called stable. Data that contains a stable clustering
is said to be clusterable.
In this paper, we adopt the loss-based clustering framework, where for a given number of clusters K,
the best clustering of the data is the one that minimizes a loss function Loss(D, C). This framework
includes K-means, K-medians, graph partitioning, as well as model-based clustering (by letting the
loss function be the data log-likelihood.2 ). Consequently, a good clustering C has low Loss(D, C),
in a way that will become precise later. Supposing that it is possible to find a good clustering, the
challenge is to verify that C is stable without enumerating all the other clusterings. Hence this work
will show how to obtain theorems like the following.
Stability Theorem (⇤). Given a clustering C of data set D, a function Loss(D, C), and technical
conditions T , there is an ✏ such that d(C, C 0 )  ✏ whenever Loss(D, C 0 )  Loss(D, C).
If we can show this for a clustering C, it means that C captures structure existing in the data, thus it is
meaningful. It should also be evident, that it is not possible to obtain such guarantees in general; they
can only exist for clusterable data, as illustrated in Figure 1.
The rest of the paper will describe a generic method for obtaining technical conditions T and stability
theorems such as Stability Theorem (⇤) above for loss-based clustering (section 2). We will illustrate
the working of this method for the K-means cost function (sections 3 and 6), and will present further
instantiations in Section 4 and related work in Section 5. Section 7 concludes the paper. While the idea
of using stability as in (⇤) was introduced by [Mei06] who used spectral bounds, the contributions of
this paper are (1) to greatly expand the scope of [Mei06] from spectral bounds to general tractable
⇤

2

www.stat.washington.edu/mmp
Restrict to hard clusterings only.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

