Parsimonious Bayesian deep networks

Mingyuan Zhou
Department of IROM, McCombs School of Business
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Combining Bayesian nonparametrics and a forward model selection strategy, we
construct parsimonious Bayesian deep networks (PBDNs) that infer capacityregularized network architectures from the data and require neither cross-validation
nor fine-tuning when training the model. One of the two essential components of
a PBDN is the development of a special infinite-wide single-hidden-layer neural
network, whose number of active hidden units can be inferred from the data. The
other one is the construction of a greedy layer-wise learning algorithm that uses a
forward model selection criterion to determine when to stop adding another hidden
layer. We develop both Gibbs sampling and stochastic gradient descent based
maximum a posteriori inference for PBDNs, providing state-of-the-art classification accuracy and interpretable data subtypes near the decision boundaries, while
maintaining low computational complexity for out-of-sample prediction.

1

Introduction

To separate two linearly separable classes, a simple linear classifier such logistic regression will often
suffice, in which scenario adding the capability to model nonlinearity not only complicates the model
and increases computation, but also often harms rather improves the performance by increasing the
risk of overfitting. On the other hand, for two classes not well separated by a single hyperplane,
a linear classifier is often inadequate, and hence it is common to use either kernel support vector
machines [1, 2] or deep neural networks [3–5] to nonlinearly transform the covariates, making the
two classes become more linearly separable in the transformed covariate space. While being able to
achieve high classification accuracy, they both have clear limitations. For a kernel based classifier, its
number of support vectors often increases linearly in the size of training data [6], making it not only
computationally expensive and memory inefficient to train for big data, but also slow in out-of-sample
predictions. A deep neural network could be scalable with an appropriate network structure, but it is
often cumbersome to tune the network depth (number of layers) and width (number of hidden units)
of each hidden layer [5], and has the danger of overfitting the training data if a deep neural network,
which is often equipped with a larger than necessary modeling capacity, is not carefully regularized.
Rather than making an uneasy choice in the first place between a linear classifier, which has fast
computation and resists overfitting but may not provide sufficient class separation, and an overcapacitized model, which often wastes computation and requires careful regularization to prevent
overfitting, we propose a parsimonious Bayesian deep network (PBDN) that builds its capacity
regularization into the greedy-layer-wise construction and training of the deep network. More
specifically, we transform the covariates in a layer-wise manner, with each layer of transformation
designed to facilitate class separation via the use of the noisy-OR interactions of multiple weighted
linear hyperplanes. Related to kernel support vector machines, the hyperplanes play a similar role
as support vectors in transforming the covariate space, but they are inferred from the data and their
number increases at a much slower rate with the training data size. Related to deep neural networks,
the proposed multi-layer structure gradually increases its modeling capability by increasing its number
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

