Contextual Stochastic Block Models
Yash Deshpande∗

Andrea Montanari †

Elchanan Mossel‡

Subhabrata Sen§

Abstract
We provide the first information theoretic tight analysis for inference of latent
community structure given a sparse graph along with high dimensional node
covariates, correlated with the same latent communities. Our work bridges recent
theoretical breakthroughs in the detection of latent community structure without
nodes covariates and a large body of empirical work using diverse heuristics
for combining node covariates with graphs for inference. The tightness of our
analysis implies in particular, the information theoretical necessity of combining
the different sources of information. Our analysis holds for networks of large
degrees as well as for a Gaussian version of the model.

1

Introduction

Data clustering is a widely used primitive in exploratory data analysis and summarization. These
methods discover clusters or partitions that are assumed to reflect a latent partitioning of the data with
semantic significance. In a machine learning pipeline, results of such a clustering may then be used
for downstream supervised tasks, such as feature engineering, privacy-preserving classification or
fair allocation [CMS11, KGB+ 12, CDPF+ 17].
At risk of over-simplification, there are two settings that are popular in literature. In graph clustering,
the dataset of n objects is represented as a symmetric similarity matrix A = (Aij )1≤i,j≤n . For
instance, A can be binary, where Aij = 1 (or 0) denotes that the two objects i, j are similar (or not).
It is, then, natural to interpret A as the adjacency matrix of a graph. This can be carried over to
non-binary settings by considering weighted graphs. On the other hand, in more traditional (binary)
classification problems, the n objects are represented as p-dimensional feature or covariate vectors
b1 , b2 , · · · , bn . This feature representation can be the input for a clustering method such as k-means,
or instead used to construct a similarity matrix A, which in turn is used for clustering or partitioning.
These two representations are often taken to be mutually exclusive and, in fact, interchangeable.
Indeed, just as feature representations can be used to construct similarity matrices, popular spectral
methods [NJW02, VL07] implicitly construct a low-dimensional feature representation from the
similarity matrices.
This paper is motivated by scenarios where the graph, or similarity, representation A ∈ Rn×n , and
the feature representation B = [b1 , b2 , . . . , bn ] ∈ Rp×n provide independent, or complementary,
information on the latent clustering of the n objects. (Technically, we will assume that A and B
are conditionally independent given the node labels.) We argue that in fact in almost all practical
graph clustering problems, feature representations provide complementary information of the latent
clustering. This is indeed the case in many social and biological networks, see e.g. [NC16] and
references within.
As an example, consider the ‘political blogs’ dataset [AG05]. This is a directed network of political
blogs during the 2004 US presidential election, with a link between two blogs if one referred to the
∗

Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Departments of Electrical Engineering and Statistics, Stanford University
‡
Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
§
Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

