PCA of high dimensional random walks with
comparison to neural network training

Joseph M. Antognini∗
Whisper AI
joe.antognini@gmail.com

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein
Google Brain
jaschasd@google.com

Abstract
One technique to visualize the training of neural networks is to perform PCA on
the parameters over the course of training and to project to the subspace spanned by
the first few PCA components. In this paper we compare this technique to the PCA
of a high dimensional random walk. We compute the eigenvalues and eigenvectors
of the covariance of the trajectory and prove that in the long trajectory and high
dimensional limit most of the variance is in the first few PCA components, and that
the projection of the trajectory onto any subspace spanned by PCA components is a
Lissajous curve. We generalize these results to a random walk with momentum and
to an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck processes (i.e., a random walk in a quadratic potential)
and show that in high dimensions the walk is not mean reverting, but will instead be
trapped at a fixed distance from the minimum. We finally analyze PCA projected
training trajectories for: a linear model trained on CIFAR-10; a fully connected
model trained on MNIST; and ResNet-50-v2 trained on Imagenet. In all cases,
both the distribution of PCA eigenvalues and the projected trajectories resemble
those of a random walk with drift.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (NNs) are extremely high dimensional objects. A popular deep NN for image
recognition tasks, ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016), has ∼25 million parameters for example, and it is
common for language models to have more than one billion parameters (Jozefowicz et al., 2016). This
overparameterization may be responsible for NN’s impressive generalization performance (Novak
et al., 2018). Simultaneously, the high dimensional nature of NNs makes them difficult to reason
about.
Over the decades of NN research, the common lore about the geometry of the loss landscape of NNs
has changed dramatically. In the early days of NN research it was believed that NNs were difficult
to train because they tended to get stuck in suboptimal local minima. Later, Dauphin et al. (2014)
argued that the true scourge of NN optimization was saddle points, not local minima. Choromanska
et al. (2015) further used a spherical spin-glass model to conjecture that local minima of NNs are
not much worse than global minima. Baity-Jesi et al. (2018) showed that in the typical case of an
over-parameterized NN the dynamics of NN optimization are different from glassy systems, and
claimed that the difficulties with NN optimization were instead due to vast plateaus where the gradient
is very small. There has also been active debate as to whether the geometry of the loss landscape
around minima can inform the NN’s ability to generalize. Hochreiter & Schmidhuber (1997) and
Keskar et al. (2017) have claimed that NNs that generalize better tend to find flatter minima, though
Dinh et al. (2017) countered that due to the scale-free nature of NNs, there always exist sharp minima
that generalize equally well.
∗

Work done as a Google AI Resident.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

