Integrated accounts of behavioral and neuroimaging
data using flexible recurrent neural network models
Amir Dezfouli12# Richard Morris3† Fabio Ramos3‡ Peter Dayan4§ Bernard W. Balleine1⇤
1
UNSW Sydney 2 Data61, CSIRO 3 University of Sydney 4 Gatsby Unit, UCL
#
akdezfuli@gmail.com † richardumorris@gmail.com § p.dayan@ucl.ac.uk
‡
fabio.ramos@sydney.edu.au ⇤ bernard.balleine@unsw.edu.au

Abstract
Neuroscience studies of human decision-making abilities commonly involve subjects completing a decision-making task while BOLD signals are recorded using
fMRI. Hypotheses are tested about which brain regions mediate the effect of past
experience, such as rewards, on future actions. One standard approach to this is
model-based fMRI data analysis, in which a model is fitted to the behavioral data,
i.e., a subject’s choices, and then the neural data are parsed to find brain regions
whose BOLD signals are related to the model’s internal signals. However, the
internal mechanics of such purely behavioral models are not constrained by the
neural data, and therefore might miss or mischaracterize aspects of the brain. To
address this limitation, we introduce a new method using recurrent neural network
models that are flexible enough to be jointly fitted to the behavioral and neural data.
We trained a model so that its internal states were suitably related to neural activity
during the task, while at the same time its output predicted the next action a subject
would execute. We then used the fitted model to create a novel visualization of
the relationship between the activity in brain regions at different times following
a reward and the choices the subject subsequently made. Finally, we validated
our method using a previously published dataset. We found that the model was
able to recover the underlying neural substrates that were discovered by explicit
model engineering in the previous work, and also derived new results regarding the
temporal pattern of brain activity.

1

Introduction

Decision-making circuitry in the brain enables humans and animals to learn from the consequences
of their past actions to adjust their future choices. The role of different brain regions in this circuitry
has been the subject of extensive research in the past [Gold and Shadlen, 2007, Doya, 2008], with one
of the main challenges being that decisions – and thus the neural activity that causes them – are not
only affected by the immediate events in the task, but are also affected by a potentially long history
of previous inputs, such as rewards, actions and environmental cues. As an example, assume that
subjects make choices in a bandit task while their brain activity is recorded using fMRI, and we seek
to determine which brain regions are involved in reward processing. Key signals, such as reward
prediction errors, are not only determined by the current reward, but also a potentially extensive
history of past inputs. Thus, it is inadequate merely to find brain regions showing marked BOLD
changes just in response to reward.
An influential approach to address the above problem has been to use model-based analysis of fMRI
data [e.g., O’Doherty et al., 2007, Cohen et al., 2017], which involves training a computational model
using behavioral data and then searching the brain for regions whose BOLD activity is related to the
internal signals and variables of the model. Examples include fitting a reinforcement-learning model
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

