Model-Agnostic Private Learning

Raef Bassily∗

Om Thakkar†

Abhradeep Thakurta‡

Abstract
We design differentially private learning algorithms that are agnostic to the learning model assuming access to a limited amount of unlabeled public data. First,
we provide a new differentially private algorithm for answering a sequence of m
online classification queries (given by a sequence of m unlabeled public feature
vectors) based on a private training set. Our algorithm follows the paradigm of
subsample-and-aggregate, in which any generic non-private learner is trained on
disjoint subsets of the private training set, and then for each classification query,
the votes of the resulting classifiers ensemble are aggregated in a differentially
private fashion. Our private aggregation is based on a novel combination of the
distance-to-instability framework [26], and the sparse-vector technique [15, 18].
We show that our algorithm makes a conservative use of the privacy budget. In
particular, if the underlying non-private learner yields a classification error of at
most α ∈ (0, 1), then our construction answers more queries, by at least a factor of 1/α in some cases, than what is implied by a straightforward application
of the advanced composition theorem for differential privacy. Next, we apply the
knowledge transfer technique to construct a private learner that outputs a classifier,
which can be used to answer an unlimited number of queries. In the PAC model,
we analyze our construction and prove upper bounds on the sample complexity
for both the realizable and the non-realizable cases. Similar to non-private sample
complexity, our bounds are completely characterized by the VC dimension of the
concept class.

1

Introduction

The main goal in the standard setting of differentially private learning is to design a differentially
private learner that, given a private training set as input, outputs a model (or, a classifier) that is
safe to publish. Despite being a natural way to define the private learning problem, there are several
limitations with this standard approach. First, there are pessimistic lower bounds in various learning
problems implying that the error associated with the final private model will generally have necessary dependence on the dimensionality of the model [2], or the size of the model class [9]. Second,
this approach often requires non-trivial, white-box modification of the existing non-private learners [19, 11, 21, 26, 2, 27, 1], which can make some of these constructions less practical since they
require making changes in the infrastructure of the existing systems. Third, designing algorithms
for this setting often requires knowledge about the underlying structure of the learning problem,
e.g., specific properties of the model class [4, 5, 9]; or convexity, compactness, and other geometric
properties of the model space [2, 27].
We study the problem of differentially private learning when the learner has access to a limited
amount of public unlabeled data. Our central goal is to characterize in a basic model, such as the
standard PAC model, the improvements one can achieve for private learning in such a relaxed setting
∗

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, The Ohio State University. bassily.1@osu.edu
Department of Computer Science, Boston University. omthkkr@bu.edu
‡
Department of Computer Science, University of California Santa Cruz. aguhatha@ucsc.edu

†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

