MetaGAN: An Adversarial Approach to Few-Shot
Learning

Ruixiang Zhang∗ †
MILA, Université de Montréal
sodabeta7@gmail.com

Tong Che∗
MILA, Université de Montréal
tongcheprivate@gmail.com

Yoshua Bengio
MILA, Université de Montréal, CIFAR Senior Fellow
yoshua.bengio@mila.quebec

Zoubin Ghahramani
University of Cambridge
zoubin@cam.ac.uk
Yangqiu Song
HKUST
yqsong@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a conceptually simple and general framework called
MetaGAN for few-shot learning problems. Most state-of-the-art few-shot classification models can be integrated with MetaGAN in a principled and straightforward
way. By introducing an adversarial generator conditioned on tasks, we augment
vanilla few-shot classification models with the ability to discriminate between real
and fake data. We argue that this GAN-based approach can help few-shot classifiers to learn sharper decision boundary, which could generalize better. We show
that with our MetaGAN framework, we can extend supervised few-shot learning
models to naturally cope with unlabeled data. Different from previous work in
semi-supervised few-shot learning, our algorithms can deal with semi-supervision
at both sample-level and task-level. We give theoretical justifications of the strength
of MetaGAN, and validate the effectiveness of MetaGAN on challenging few-shot
image classification benchmarks.

1

INTRODUCTION

Deep neural networks have achieved great success in many artificial intelligence tasks. However, they
tend to struggle when data is scarce or when they need to adapt to new tasks within a few numbers of
steps. On the other hand, humans are able to learn new concepts quickly, given just a few examples.
The reason for this performance gap between human and artificial learners is usually explained as
that humans can effectively utilize prior experiences and knowledge when learning a new task, while
artificial learners usually seriously overfit without the necessary prior knowledge.
Meta-learning [Thrun, 1998, Hochreiter et al., 2001] addresses this problem by training a particular
adaptation strategy to a distribution of similar tasks, trying to extract transferable patterns useful
for many tasks. Recently, many different meta-learning or few-shot learning algorithms have been
proposed. These algorithms may take the forms of learning a shared metric [Sung et al., 2018, Snell
et al., 2017], a shared initialization of network parameters [Finn et al., 2017], shared optimization
algorithms [Ravi and Larochelle, 2017, Munkhdalai et al., 2017, Munkhdalai and Yu, 2017], or
generic inference networks [Santoro et al., 2016, Mishra et al., 2018] . In the context of few-shot
classification, these algorithms try to learn a good strategy to form a correct decision boundary
between different classes from only a few samples of data in each class.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done at HKUST

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

