Lifted Weighted Mini-Bucket

Alexander Ihler
University of California Irvine
Irvine, CA 92637-3435
ihler@ics.uci.edu

Nicholas Gallo
University of California Irvine
Irvine, CA 92637-3435
ngallo1@uci.edu

Abstract
Many graphical models, such as Markov Logic Networks (MLNs) with evidence,
possess highly symmetric substructures but no exact symmetries. Unfortunately,
there are few principled methods that exploit these symmetric substructures to
perform efficient approximate inference. In this paper, we present a lifted variant of
the Weighted Mini-Bucket elimination algorithm which provides a principled way
to (i) exploit the highly symmetric substructure of MLN models, and (ii) incorporate
high-order inference terms which are necessary for high quality approximate
inference. Our method has significant control over the accuracy-time trade-off of
the approximation, allowing us to generate any-time approximations. Experimental
results demonstrate the utility of this class of approximations, especially in models
with strong repulsive potentials.

1

Introduction

Many applications require computing likelihoods and marginal probabilities over a distribution
defined by a graphical model, tasks which are intractable in general [24]. This has motivated the
development of approximate inference techniques with controlled computational cost. Inference in
these settings often involves reasoning over a set of regions (subsets of variables), with larger regions
providing higher accuracy at a higher cost. This paper utilizes the Weighted Mini-Bucket (WMB)
[10] algorithm which employs a simple heuristic method of region selection that mimics a variable
elimination procedure.
Recently, there has been interest in modeling large problems with repeated potentials and structure,
often described with a Markov Logic Network (MLN) language [16]. Such models arise in many
settings such as social network analysis (e.g. estimating voting habits), collective classification (e.g.
classifying text in connected web-pages), and many others [16]. In these settings, lifted inference
refers to a broad class of techniques, both exact [3, 15, 21] and approximate [4, 11, 13, 5, 12, 9],
that exploit model symmetries. Most of these methods work well when the model possesses welldefined symmetries [4, 11, 13, 5, 12, 14], but break down in unpredictable ways in the presence of
unstructured model perturbations present in most practical settings. The problem of asymmetries in
the approximate inference structure is compounded when higher order inference terms (for which
lifted inference requires higher order model symmetry) are incorporated [14, 20, 5].
Methods to control computational cost in the presence of asymmetries are largely heuristic, such
as [19] which presents a belief propagation procedure that approximates messages in a symmetric
form. Other works create an over-symmetric approximate model [23, 22] on which inference is
run, but provide no guarantees on its relation to the original problem. Similar to our work, [17]
employ (non-weighted) mini-bucket inference; however, they too rely on over-symmetric model
approximation heuristics to control computational cost.
This paper addresses the shortcomings of the methods described above with a lifted variant of
Weighted mini-bucket (LWMB) that is able to (i) trade-off inference cost with accuracy in a controlled
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

