Constant Regret, Generalized Mixability, and Mirror
Descent
Zakaria Mhammedi
Research School of Computer Science
Australian National University and DATA61
zak.mhammedi@anu.edu.au

Robert C. Williamson
Research School of Computer Science
Australian National University and DATA61
bob.williamson@anu.edu.au

Abstract
We consider the setting of prediction with expert advice; a learner makes predictions
by aggregating those of a group of experts. Under this setting, and for the right
choice of loss function and “mixing” algorithm, it is possible for the learner to
achieve a constant regret regardless of the number of prediction rounds. For
example, a constant regret can be achieved for mixable losses using the aggregating
algorithm. The Generalized Aggregating Algorithm (GAA) is a name for a family
of algorithms parameterized by convex functions on simplices (entropies), which
reduce to the aggregating algorithm when using the Shannon entropy S. For a given
entropy Φ, losses for which a constant regret is possible using the GAA are called
Φ-mixable. Which losses are Φ-mixable was previously left as an open question.
We fully characterize Φ-mixability and answer other open questions posed by [6].
We show that the Shannon entropy S is fundamental in nature when it comes to
mixability; any Φ-mixable loss is necessarily S-mixable, and the lowest worst-case
regret of the GAA is achieved using the Shannon entropy. Finally, by leveraging
the connection between the mirror descent algorithm and the update step of the
GAA, we suggest a new adaptive generalized aggregating algorithm and analyze
its performance in terms of the regret bound.

1

Introduction

Two fundamental problems in learning are how to aggregate information and under what circumstances can one learn fast. In this paper, we consider the problems jointly, extending the understanding
and characterization of exponential mixing due to [10], who showed that not only does the “aggregating algorithm” learn quickly when the loss is suitably chosen, but that it is in fact a generalization of
classical Bayesian updating, to which it reduces when the loss is log-loss [12]. We consider a general
class of aggregating schemes, going beyond Vovk’s exponential mixing, and provide a complete
characterization of the mixing behavior for general losses and general mixing schemes parameterized
by an arbitrary entropy function.
In the game of prediction with expert advice a learner predicts the outcome of a random variable
(outcome of the environment) by aggregating the predictions of a pool of experts. At the end of
each prediction round, the outcome of the environment is announced and the learner and experts
suffer losses based on their predictions. We are interested in algorithms that the learner can use to
“aggregate” the experts’ predictions and minimize the regret at the end of the game. In this case,
the regret is defined as the difference between the cumulative loss of the learner and that of the best
expert in hindsight after T rounds.
The Aggregating Algorithm (AA) [10] achieves a constant regret — a precise notion of fast learning
— for mixable losses; that is, the regret is bounded from above by a constant R` which depends only
on the loss function ` and not on the number of rounds T . It is worth mentioning that mixability
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

