Learning long-range spatial dependencies
with horizontal gated recurrent units

Drew Linsley, Junkyung Kim, Vijay Veerabadran, Charlie Windolf, Thomas Serre
Carney Institute for Brain Science
Department of Cognitive Linguistic & Psychological Sciences
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
{drew_linsley,junkyung_kim,vijay_veerabadran,thomas_serre}@brown.edu

Abstract
Progress in deep learning has spawned great successes in many engineering applications. As a prime example, convolutional neural networks, a type of feedforward
neural networks, are now approaching – and sometimes even surpassing – human
accuracy on a variety of visual recognition tasks. Here, however, we show that
these neural networks and their recent extensions struggle in recognition tasks
where co-dependent visual features must be detected over long spatial ranges. We
introduce a visual challenge, Pathfinder, and describe a novel recurrent neural
network architecture called the horizontal gated recurrent unit (hGRU) to learn
intrinsic horizontal connections – both within and across feature columns. We
demonstrate that a single hGRU layer matches or outperforms all tested feedforward hierarchical baselines including state-of-the-art architectures with orders of
magnitude more parameters.

1

Introduction

Consider Fig. 1a which shows a sample image from a representative segmentation dataset [1]
(left) and the corresponding contour map produced by a state-of-the-art deep convolutional neural
network (CNN) [2] (right). Although this task has long been considered challenging because of the
need to integrate global contextual information with inherently ambiguous local edge information,
modern CNNs are capable to detect contours in natural scenes at a level that rivals that of human
observers [2–6]. Now, consider Fig. 1b which depicts a variant of a visual psychology task referred
to as “Pathfinder” [7]. Reminiscent of the everyday task of reading a subway map to plan a commute
(Fig. 1c), the goal in Pathfinder is to determine if two white circles in an image are connected by a
path. These images are visually simple compared to natural images like the one shown in Fig. 1a,
and the task is indeed easy for human observers [7]. Nonetheless, we will demonstrate that modern
CNNs struggle to solve this task.
Why is it that a CNN can accurately detect contours in a natural scene like Fig. 1a but also struggle
to integrate paths in the stimuli shown in Fig. 1b? In principle, the ability of CNNs to learn such
long-range spatial dependencies is limited by their localized receptive fields (RFs) – hence the need
to consider deeper networks because they allow the buildup of larger and more complex RFs. Here,
we use a large-scale analysis of CNN performance on the Pathfinder challenge to demonstrate that
simply increasing depth in feedforward networks constitutes an inefficient solution to learning the
long-range spatial dependencies needed to solve the Pathfinder challenge.
An alternative solution to problems that stress long-range spatial dependencies is provided by biology.
The visual cortex contains abundant horizontal connections which mediate non-linear interactions
between neurons across distal regions of the visual field [8, 9]. These intrinsic connections, popularly
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

