Leveraging the Exact Likelihood of Deep Latent
Variable Models
Jes Frellsen
Department of Computer Science
IT University of Copenhagen
jefr@itu.dk

Pierre-Alexandre Mattei
Department of Computer Science
IT University of Copenhagen
pima@itu.dk

Abstract
Deep latent variable models (DLVMs) combine the approximation abilities of deep
neural networks and the statistical foundations of generative models. Variational
methods are commonly used for inference; however, the exact likelihood of these
models has been largely overlooked. The purpose of this work is to study the
general properties of this quantity and to show how they can be leveraged in
practice. We focus on important inferential problems that rely on the likelihood:
estimation and missing data imputation. First, we investigate maximum likelihood
estimation for DLVMs: in particular, we show that most unconstrained models
used for continuous data have an unbounded likelihood function. This problematic
behaviour is demonstrated to be a source of mode collapse. We also show how to
ensure the existence of maximum likelihood estimates, and draw useful connections
with nonparametric mixture models. Finally, we describe an algorithm for missing
data imputation using the exact conditional likelihood of a DLVM. On several data
sets, our algorithm consistently and significantly outperforms the usual imputation
scheme used for DLVMs.

1

Introduction

Dimension reduction aims at summarizing multivariate data using a small number of features that
constitute a code. Earliest attempts rested on linear projections, leading to Hotelling’s (1933) principal
component analysis (PCA) that has been vastly explored and perfected over the last century (Jolliffe
and Cadima, 2016). In recent years, the field has been vividly animated by the successes of latent
variable models that probabilistically use the low-dimensional features to define powerful generative
models. Usually, these latent variable models transform the random code into parameters of a simple
distribution. Linear mappings were initially considered, giving rise to factor analysis (Bartholomew
et al., 2011) and probabilistic principal component analysis (Tipping and Bishop, 1999). In recent
years, much work has been done regarding nonlinear mappings parametrised by deep neural networks,
following the seminal papers of Rezende et al. (2014) and Kingma and Welling (2014). These
models have led to impressive empirical performance in unsupervised or semi-supervised generative
modelling of images (Siddharth et al., 2017), molecular structures (Kusner et al., 2017; GómezBombarelli et al., 2018), arithmetic expressions (Kusner et al., 2017), and single-cell gene expression
data (Grønbech et al., 2018). This paper is an investigation of the statistical properties of these models,
which remain essentially unknown.
1.1

Deep latent variable models

In their most common form, deep latent variable models (DLVMs) assume that we are in the presence
of a data matrix X = (x1 , ..., xn )T ∈ X n that we wish to explain using some latent variables
Z = (z1 , ..., zn )T ∈ Rn×d . We assume that (xi , zi )i≤n are independent and identically distributed
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

