Learning a High Fidelity Pose Invariant Model for
High-resolution Face Frontalization

Jie Cao, Yibo Hu, Hongwen Zhang, Ran He∗, Zhenan Sun
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CASIA
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
{jie.cao,yibo.hu,hongwen.zhang}@cripac.ia.ac.cn {rhe,znsun}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Face frontalization refers to the process of synthesizing the frontal view of a
face from a given profile. Due to self-occlusion and appearance distortion in the
wild, it is extremely challenging to recover faithful results and preserve texture
details in a high-resolution. This paper proposes a High Fidelity Pose Invariant
Model (HF-PIM) to produce photographic and identity-preserving results. HF-PIM
frontalizes the profiles through a novel texture warping procedure and leverages a
dense correspondence field to bind the 2D and 3D surface spaces. We decompose
the prerequisite of warping into dense correspondence field estimation and facial
texture map recovering, which are both well addressed by deep networks. Different
from those reconstruction methods relying on 3D data, we also propose Adversarial
Residual Dictionary Learning (ARDL) to supervise facial texture map recovering
with only monocular images. Exhaustive experiments on both controlled and
uncontrolled environments demonstrate that the proposed method not only boosts
the performance of pose-invariant face recognition but also dramatically improves
high-resolution frontalization appearances.

1

Introduction

Face frontalization refers to predicting the frontal view image from a given profile. It is an effective
preprocessing method for pose-invariant face recognition. Frontalized profile faces can be directly
used by general face recognition methods without retraining the recognition models. Recent studies
have shown that frontalization is a promising approach to address long-standing problems caused
by pose variation in face recognition system. Additionally, generating photographic frontal faces
are beneficial for a series of face-related tasks, including face reconstruction, face attribute analysis,
facial animation, etc.
Due to the appealing prospect in theories and applications, research interest has been lasting for years.
In the early stage, most traditional face frontalization methods [8, 14, 15, 9, 40] are 3D-based. These
methods mainly leverage theories in monocular face reconstruction to recover 3D faces, and then
render frontal view images. The well-known 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) [2] has been widely
employed to express facial shape and appearance information. Recently, great breakthroughs have
been made by the methods based on generative adversarial networks (GAN) [10]. Those methods
frontalize faces from the perspective of 2D image-to-image translation and build deep networks
with novel architectures. The visual realism has been improved significantly, for instance, in MultiPIE [11], some synthesized results [20, 37] from small pose profiles are so photographic that it
is difficult for human observers to distinguish them from the real ones. Furthermore, frontalized
∗

Ran He is the corresponding author.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

