Adversarial Text Generation via
Feature-Mover’s Distance
Liqun Chen1 , Shuyang Dai1 , Chenyang Tao1 , Dinghan Shen1 ,
Zhe Gan2 , Haichao Zhang4 , Yizhe Zhang3 , Lawrence Carin1
1
Duke University, 2 Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research, 3 Microsoft Research, 4 Baidu Research
liqun.chen@duke.edu

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have achieved significant success in
generating real-valued data. However, the discrete nature of text hinders the
application of GAN to text-generation tasks. Instead of using the standard GAN
objective, we propose to improve text-generation GAN via a novel approach
inspired by optimal transport. Specifically, we consider matching the latent feature
distributions of real and synthetic sentences using a novel metric, termed the featuremover’s distance (FMD). This formulation leads to a highly discriminative critic and
easy-to-optimize objective, overcoming the mode-collapsing and brittle-training
problems in existing methods. Extensive experiments are conducted on a variety
of tasks to evaluate the proposed model empirically, including unconditional text
generation, style transfer from non-parallel text, and unsupervised cipher cracking.
The proposed model yields superior performance, demonstrating wide applicability
and effectiveness.

1

Introduction

Natural language generation is an important building block in many applications, such as machine
translation [5], dialogue generation [36], and image captioning [14]. While these applications
demonstrate the practical value of generating coherent and meaningful sentences in a supervised
setup, unsupervised text generation, which aims to estimate the distribution of real text from a
corpus, is still challenging. Previous approaches, that often maximize the log-likelihood of each
ground-truth word given prior observed words [41], typically suffer from exposure bias [6, 47], i.e.,
the discrepancy between training and inference stages. During inference, each word is generated in
sequence based on previously generated words, while during training ground-truth words are used for
each timestep [27, 53, 58].
Recently, adversarial training has emerged as a powerful paradigm to address the aforementioned
issues. The generative adversarial network (GAN) [21] matches the distribution of synthetic and
real data by introducing a two-player adversarial game between a generator and a discriminator.
The generator is trained to learn a nonlinear function that maps samples from a given (simple) prior
distribution to synthetic data that appear realistic, while the discriminator aims to distinguish the fake
data from real samples. GAN can be trained efficiently via back-propagation through the nonlinear
function of the generator, which typically requires the data to be continuous (e.g., images). However,
the discrete nature of text renders the model non-differentiable, hindering use of GAN in natural
language processing tasks.
Attempts have been made to overcome such difficulties, which can be roughly divided into two
categories. The first includes models that combine ideas from GAN and reinforcement learning
(RL), framing text generation as a sequential decision-making process. Specifically, the gradient
of the generator is estimated via the policy-gradient algorithm. Prominent examples from this
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

