Constructing Unrestricted Adversarial Examples
with Generative Models
Yang Song
Stanford University
yangsong@cs.stanford.edu

Rui Shu
Stanford University
ruishu@cs.stanford.edu

Nate Kushman
Microsoft Research
nkushman@microsoft.com

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Adversarial examples are typically constructed by perturbing an existing data point
within a small matrix norm, and current defense methods are focused on guarding
against this type of attack. In this paper, we propose unrestricted adversarial
examples, a new threat model where the attackers are not restricted to small normbounded perturbations. Different from perturbation-based attacks, we propose to
synthesize unrestricted adversarial examples entirely from scratch using conditional
generative models. Specifically, we first train an Auxiliary Classifier Generative
Adversarial Network (AC-GAN) to model the class-conditional distribution over
data samples. Then, conditioned on a desired class, we search over the AC-GAN
latent space to find images that are likely under the generative model and are
misclassified by a target classifier. We demonstrate through human evaluation that
unrestricted adversarial examples generated this way are legitimate and belong to
the desired class. Our empirical results on the MNIST, SVHN, and CelebA datasets
show that unrestricted adversarial examples can bypass strong adversarial training
and certified defense methods designed for traditional adversarial attacks.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms are known to be susceptible to adversarial examples: imperceptible
perturbations to samples from the dataset can mislead cutting edge classifiers [1, 2]. This has raised
concerns for safety-critical AI applications because, for example, attackers could use them to mislead
autonomous driving vehicles [3, 4, 5] or hijack voice controlled intelligent agents [6, 7, 8].
To mitigate the threat of adversarial examples, a large number of methods have been developed.
These include augmenting training data with adversarial examples [2, 9, 10, 11], removing adversarial
perturbations [12, 13, 14], and encouraging smoothness for the classifier [15]. Recently, [16, 17]
proposed theoretically-certified defenses based on minimizing upper bounds of the training loss under
worst-case perturbations. Although inspired by different perspectives, a shared design principle of
current defense methods is to make classifiers more robust to small perturbations of their inputs.
In this paper, we introduce a more general attack mechanism where adversarial examples are
constructed entirely from scratch instead of perturbing an existing data point by a small amount. In
practice, an attacker might want to change an input significantly while not changing the semantics.
Taking traffic signs as an example, an adversary performing perturbation-based attacks can draw
graffiti [4] or place stickers [18] on an existing stop sign in order to exploit a classifier. However,
the attacker might want to go beyond this and replace the original stop sign with a new one that
was specifically manufactured to be adversarial. In the latter case, the new stop sign does not have
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

