Graph Oracle Models, Lower Bounds, and Gaps for
Parallel Stochastic Optimization
Blake Woodworth
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
blake@ttic.edu
Adam Smith
Boston University
ads22@bu.edu

Brendan McMahan
Google
mcmahan@google.com

Jialei Wang
Two Sigma Investments
jialei.wang@twosigma.com
Nathan Srebro⇤
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We suggest a general oracle-based framework that captures different parallel
stochastic optimization settings described by a dependency graph, and derive
generic lower bounds in terms of this graph. We then use the framework and derive
lower bounds for several specific parallel optimization settings, including delayed
updates and parallel processing with intermittent communication. We highlight
gaps between lower and upper bounds on the oracle complexity, and cases where
the “natural” algorithms are not known to be optimal.

1

Introduction

Recently, there has been great interest in stochastic optimization and learning algorithms that leverage
parallelism, including e.g. delayed updates arising from pipelining and asynchronous concurrent
processing, synchronous single-instruction-multiple-data parallelism, and parallelism across distant
devices. With the abundance of parallelization settings and associated algorithms, it is important to
precisely formulate the problem, which allows us to ask questions such as “is there a better method
for this problem than what we have?” and “what is the best we could possibly expect?”
Oracle models have long been a useful framework for formalizing stochastic optimization and
learning problems. In an oracle model, we place limits on the algorithm’s access to the optimization
objective, but not what it may do with the information it receives. This allows us to obtain sharp
lower bounds, which can be used to argue that an algorithm is optimal and to identify gaps between
current algorithms and what might be possible. Finding such gaps can be very useful—for example,
the gap between the first order optimization lower bound of Nemirovski et al. [21] and the best known
algorithms at the time inspired Nesterov’s accelerated gradient descent algorithm [22].
We propose an oracle framework for formalizing different parallel optimization problems. We specify
the structure of parallel computation using an “oracle graph” which indicates how an algorithm
accesses the oracle. Each node in the graph corresponds to a single stochastic oracle query, and that
query (e.g. the point at which a gradient is calculated) must be computed using only oracle accesses
in ancestors of the node. We generally think of each stochastic oracle access as being based on a
single data sample, thus involving one or maybe a small number of vector operations.
In Section 3 we devise generic lower bounds for parallel optimization problems in terms of simple
properties of the associated oracle graph, namely the length of the longest dependency chain and
the total number of nodes. In Section 4 we study specific parallel optimization settings in which
⇤

Part of this work was done while visiting Google.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

