Boosted Sparse and Low-Rank Tensor Regression

Lifang He
Weill Cornell Medicine
lifanghescut@gmail.com

Kun Chen∗
University of Connecticut
kun.chen@uconn.edu

Jiayu Zhou
Michigan State Universtiy
dearjiayu@gmail.com

Wanwan Xu
University of Connecticut
wanwan.xu@uconn.edu

Fei Wang
Weill Cornell Medicine
few2001@med.cornell.edu

Abstract
We propose a sparse and low-rank tensor regression model to relate a univariate
outcome to a feature tensor, in which each unit-rank tensor from the CP decomposition of the coefficient tensor is assumed to be sparse. This structure is both
parsimonious and highly interpretable, as it implies that the outcome is related
to the features through a few distinct pathways, each of which may only involve
subsets of feature dimensions. We take a divide-and-conquer strategy to simplify
the task into a set of sparse unit-rank tensor regression problems. To make the
computation efficient and scalable, for the unit-rank tensor regression, we propose
a stagewise estimation procedure to efficiently trace out its entire solution path. We
show that as the step size goes to zero, the stagewise solution paths converge exactly
to those of the corresponding regularized regression. The superior performance of
our approach is demonstrated on various real-world and synthetic examples.

1

Introduction

Regression analysis is commonly used for modeling the relationship between a predictor vector
x ∈ RI and a scalar response y. Typically a good regression model can achieve two goals: accurate
prediction on future response and parsimonious interpretation of the dependence structure between
y and x [Hastie et al., 2009]. As a general setup, it fits M training samples {(xm , y m )}M
m=1 via
minimizing a regularized loss, i.e., a loss L(·) plus a regularization term Ω(·), as follows
1 XM
L(hxm , wi, y m ) + λΩ(w),
(1)
min
m=1
w M
where w ∈ RI is the regression coefficient vector, h·, ·i is the standard Euclidean inner product,
and λ > 0 is the regularization parameter. For example, the sum of squared loss with `1 -norm
regularization leads to the celebrated LASSO approach [Tibshirani, 1996], which performs sparse
estimation of w and thus has implicit feature selection embedded therein.
In many modern real-world applications, the predictors/features are represented more naturally as
higher-order tensors, such as videos and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans. In this case, if
we want to predict a response variable for each tensor, a naive approach is to perform linear regression
on the vectorized data (e.g., by stretching the tensor element by element). However, it completely
ignores the multidimensional structure of the tensor data, such as the spatial coherence of the voxels.
This motivates the tensor regression framework [Yu and Liu, 2016, Zhou et al., 2013], which treats
each observation as a tensor X and learns a tensor coefficient W via regularized model fitting:
1 XM
min
L(hX m , Wi, y m ) + λΩ(W).
(2)
m=1
W M
∗

Corresponding Author

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

