ChannelNets: Compact and Efficient Convolutional
Neural Networks via Channel-Wise Convolutions
Hongyang Gao
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX
hongyang.gao@tamu.edu

Zhengyang Wang
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX
zhengyang.wang@tamu.edu

Shuiwang Ji
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX
sji@tamu.edu

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown great capability of solving
various artificial intelligence tasks. However, the increasing model size has raised
challenges in employing them in resource-limited applications. In this work, we
propose to compress deep models by using channel-wise convolutions, which replace dense connections among feature maps with sparse ones in CNNs. Based on
this novel operation, we build light-weight CNNs known as ChannelNets. ChannelNets use three instances of channel-wise convolutions; namely group channel-wise
convolutions, depth-wise separable channel-wise convolutions, and the convolutional classification layer. Compared to prior CNNs designed for mobile devices,
ChannelNets achieve a significant reduction in terms of the number of parameters
and computational cost without loss in accuracy. Notably, our work represents the
first attempt to compress the fully-connected classification layer, which usually
accounts for about 25% of total parameters in compact CNNs. Experimental results
on the ImageNet dataset demonstrate that ChannelNets achieve consistently better
performance compared to prior methods.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have demonstrated great capability of solving visual recognition tasks. Since AlexNet [11] achieved remarkable success on the ImageNet Challenge [3], various
deeper and more complicated networks [19, 21, 5] have been proposed to set the performance records.
However, the higher accuracy usually comes with an increasing amount of parameters and computational cost. For example, the VGG16 [19] has 128 million parameters and requires 15, 300
million floating point operations (FLOPs) to classify an image. In many real-world applications,
predictions need to be performed on resource-limited platforms such as sensors and mobile phones,
thereby requiring compact models with higher speed. Model compression aims at exploring a tradeoff
between accuracy and efficiency.
Recently, significant progress has been made in the field of model compression [7, 15, 23, 6, 24].
The strategies for building compact and efficient CNNs can be divided into two categories; those
are, compressing pre-trained networks or designing new compact architectures that are trained from
scratch. Studies in the former category were mostly based on traditional compression techniques such
as product quantization [23], pruning [17], hashing [1], Huffman coding [4], and factorization [12, 9].
The second category has already been explored before model compression. Inspired by the NetworkIn-Network architecture [14], GoogLeNet [21] included the Inception module to build deeper networks without increasing model sizes and computational cost. Through factorizing convolutions, the
Inception module was further improved by [22]. The depth-wise separable convolution, proposed
in [18], generalized the factorization idea and decomposed the convolution into a depth-wise convolution and a 1 ⇥ 1 convolution. The operation has been shown to be able to achieve competitive
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

