Algebraic tests of general Gaussian latent tree models

Dennis Leung
Department of Data Sciences and Operations
University of Southern California
dmhleung@uw.edu
Mathias Drton
Department of Statistics, University of Washington &
Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Copenhagen
md5@uw.edu

Abstract
We consider general Gaussian latent tree models in which the observed variables
are not restricted to be leaves of the tree. Extending related recent work, we
give a full semi-algebraic description of the set of covariance matrices of any
such model. In other words, we find polynomial constraints that characterize
when a matrix is the covariance matrix of a distribution in a given latent tree
model. However, leveraging these constraints to test a given such model is often
complicated by the number of constraints being large and by singularities of
individual polynomials, which may invalidate standard approximations to relevant
probability distributions. Illustrating with the star tree, we propose a new testing
methodology that circumvents singularity issues by trading off some statistical
estimation efficiency and handles cases with many constraints through recent
advances on Gaussian approximation for maxima of sums of high-dimensional
random vectors. Our test avoids the need to maximize the possibly multimodal
likelihood function of such models and is applicable to models with larger number
of variables. These points are illustrated in numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Latent tree models are associated to a tree-structured graph in which some nodes represent observed
variables and others represent unobserved (latent) variables. Due to their tractability, these models
have found many applications in fields ranging from the traditional life sciences, biology and
psychology to contemporary areas such as artificial intelligence and computer vision; refer to Mourad
et al. [2013] for a comprehensive review. In this paper, we study the problem of testing the goodnessof-fit of a postulated Gaussian latent tree model to an observed dataset. In a low dimensional
setting where the number of observed variables is small relative to the sample size at hand, testing is
usually based on the likelihood ratio which measures the divergence in maximum likelihood between
the postulated latent tree model and an unconstrained Gaussian model. This, however, requires
maximization of the possibly multimodal likelihood function of latent tree models. In contrast, recent
work of Shiers et al. [2016] takes a different approach and leverages known polynomial constraints
on the covariance matrix of the observed variables in a given Gaussian latent tree. Specifically, the
postulated latent tree is tested with an aggregate statistic formed from estimates of the polynomial
quantities involved. This approach can be traced back to Spearman [1904] and Wishart [1928]; also
see Drton et al. [2007, 2008].
We make the following new contributions. In Section 2, we extend the polynomial characterization of
Shiers et al. [2016] to cases where observed nodes may also be inner nodes of the tree as considered,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

