Dual Swap Disentangling

Zunlei Feng
Zhejiang University
zunleifeng@zju.edu.cn

Xinchao Wang
Stevens Institute of Technology
xinchao.wang@stevens.edu

Chenglong Ke
Zhejiang University
chenglongke@zju.edu.cn

Anxiang Zeng
Alibaba Group
renzhong@taobao.com

Dacheng Tao
University of Sydney
dctao@sydney.edu.au

Mingli Song∗
Zhejiang University
brooksong@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning interpretable disentangled representations is a crucial yet challenging
task. In this paper, we propose a weakly semi-supervised method, termed as Dual Swap Disentangling (DSD), for disentangling using both labeled and unlabeled
data. Unlike conventional weakly supervised methods that rely on full annotations
on the group of samples, we require only limited annotations on paired samples
that indicate their shared attribute like the color. Our model takes the form of a
dual autoencoder structure. To achieve disentangling using the labeled pairs, we
follow a “encoding-swap-decoding” process, where we first swap the parts of their
encodings corresponding to the shared attribute, and then decode the obtained hybrid codes to reconstruct the original input pairs. For unlabeled pairs, we follow
the “encoding-swap-decoding” process twice on designated encoding parts and
enforce the final outputs to approximate the input pairs. By isolating parts of the
encoding and swapping them back and forth, we impose the dimension-wise modularity and portability of the encodings of the unlabeled samples, which implicitly
encourages disentangling under the guidance of labeled pairs. This dual swap
mechanism, tailored for semi-supervised setting, turns out to be very effective.
Experiments on image datasets from a wide domain show that our model yields
state-of-the-art disentangling performances.

1

Introduction

Disentangling aims at learning dimension-wise interpretable representations from data. For example,
given an image dataset of human faces, disentangling should produce representations or encodings
for which part corresponds to interpretable attributes like facial expression, hairstyle, and color of
the eye. It is therefore a vital step for many machine learning tasks including transfer learning
(Lake et al. [2017]), reinforcement learning (Higgins et al. [2017a]) and visual concepts learning
(Higgins et al. [2017b]).
Existing disentangling methods can be broadly classified into two categories, supervised approaches and unsupervised ones. Methods in the former category focus on utilizing annotated data to
explicitly supervise the input-to-attribute mapping. Such supervision may take the form of partitioning the data into subsets which vary only along some particular dimension (Kulkarni et al.
[2015], Bouchacourt et al. [2017]), or labeling explicitly specific sources of variation of the data
(Kingma et al. [2014], Siddharth et al. [2017], Perarnau et al. [2016], Wang et al. [2017]). Despite
their promising results, supervised methods, especially for deep-learning ones, usually require a
large number of training samples which are often expensive to obtain.
∗

Corresponding author.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

