Variational Learning on Aggregate Outputs
with Gaussian Processes
Ho Chung Leon Law∗
Dino Sejdinovic†
University of Oxford
University of Oxford
Seth Flaxman§
Imperial College London

Ewan Cameron‡
University of Oxford

Katherine Battle‡
University Of Oxford

Tim CD Lucas‡
University of Oxford

Kenji Fukumizu¶
Institute of Statistical Mathematics

Abstract
While a typical supervised learning framework assumes that the inputs and the
outputs are measured at the same levels of granularity, many applications, including
global mapping of disease, only have access to outputs at a much coarser level
than that of the inputs. Aggregation of outputs makes generalization to new
inputs much more difficult. We consider an approach to this problem based on
variational learning with a model of output aggregation and Gaussian processes,
where aggregation leads to intractability of the standard evidence lower bounds. We
propose new bounds and tractable approximations, leading to improved prediction
accuracy and scalability to large datasets, while explicitly taking uncertainty into
account. We develop a framework which extends to several types of likelihoods,
including the Poisson model for aggregated count data. We apply our framework
to a challenging and important problem, the fine-scale spatial modelling of malaria
incidence, with over 1 million observations.

1

Introduction

A typical supervised learning setup assumes existence of a set of input-output examples {(x` , y` )}`
from which a functional relationship or a conditional probabilistic model of outputs given inputs can be
learned. A prototypical use-case is the situation where obtaining outputs y? for new, previously unseen,
inputs x? is costly, i.e., labelling is expensive and requires human intervention, but measurements
of inputs are cheap and automated. Similarly, in many applications, due to a much greater cost
in acquiring labels, they are only available at a much coarser resolution than the level at which
the inputs are available and at which we wish to make predictions. This is the problem of weakly
supervised learning on aggregate outputs [14, 20], which has been studied in the literature in a
variety of forms, with classification and regression notably being developed separately and without
any unified treatment which can allow more flexible observation models. In this contribution, we
consider a framework of observation models of aggregated outputs given bagged inputs, which reside
in exponential families. While we develop a more general treatment, the main focus in the paper is
on the Poisson likelihood for count data, which is motivated by the applications in spatial statistics.
In particular, we consider the important problem of fine-scale mapping of diseases. High resolution
maps of infectious disease risk can offer a powerful tool for developing National Strategic Plans,
∗

Department of Statistics, Oxford, UK. <ho.law@stats.ox.ac.uk>
Department of Statistics, Oxford, UK. Alan Turing Institute, London, UK. <dino.sejdinovic@stats.ox.ac.uk>
‡
Big Data Institute, Oxford, UK. <dr.ewan.cameron@gmail.com, timcdlucas@gmail.com, katherine.battle@bdi.ox.ac.uk>
§
Department of Mathematics and Data Science Institute, London, UK. <s.flaxman@imperial.ac.uk>
¶
Tachikawa, Tokyo, Japan. <fukumizu@ism.ac.jp>
†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

