Partially-Supervised Image Captioning

Peter Anderson
Macquarie University∗
Sydney, Australia
p.anderson@mq.edu.au

Stephen Gould
Australian National University
Canberra, Australia
stephen.gould@anu.edu.au

Mark Johnson
Macquarie University
Sydney, Australia
mark.johnson@mq.edu.au

Abstract
Image captioning models are becoming increasingly successful at describing the
content of images in restricted domains. However, if these models are to function
in the wild — for example, as assistants for people with impaired vision — a much
larger number and variety of visual concepts must be understood. To address this
problem, we teach image captioning models new visual concepts from labeled
images and object detection datasets. Since image labels and object classes can be
interpreted as partial captions, we formulate this problem as learning from partiallyspecified sequence data. We then propose a novel algorithm for training sequence
models, such as recurrent neural networks, on partially-specified sequences which
we represent using finite state automata. In the context of image captioning, our
method lifts the restriction that previously required image captioning models to be
trained on paired image-sentence corpora only, or otherwise required specialized
model architectures to take advantage of alternative data modalities. Applying our
approach to an existing neural captioning model, we achieve state of the art results
on the novel object captioning task using the COCO dataset. We further show that
we can train a captioning model to describe new visual concepts from the Open
Images dataset while maintaining competitive COCO evaluation scores.

1

Introduction

The task of automatically generating image descriptions, i.e., image captioning [1–3], is a longstanding and challenging problem in artificial intelligence that demands both visual and linguistic
understanding. To be successful, captioning models must be able to identify and describe in natural
language the most salient elements of an image, such as the objects present and their attributes, as
well as the spatial and semantic relationships between objects [3]. The recent resurgence of interest
in this task has been driven in part by the development of new and larger benchmark datasets such as
Flickr 8K [4], Flickr 30K [5] and COCO Captions [6]. However, even the largest of these datasets,
COCO Captions, is still based on a relatively small set of 91 underlying object classes. As a result,
despite continual improvements to image captioning models and ever-improving COCO caption
evaluation scores [7–10], captioning models trained on these datasets fail to generalize to images
in the wild [11]. This limitation severely hinders the use of these models in real applications, for
example as assistants for people with impaired vision [12].
In this work, we use weakly-annotated data (readily available in object detection datasets and labeled
image datasets) to improve image captioning models by increasing the number and variety of visual
concepts that can be successfully described. Compared to image captioning datasets such as COCO
Captions, several existing object detection datasets [14] and labeled image datasets [15, 16] are much
larger and contain many more visual concepts. For example, the recently released Open Images
dataset V4 [14] contains 1.9M images human-annotated with object bounding boxes for 600 object
∗

Now at Georgia Tech (peter.anderson@gatech.edu)

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

