Fully Understanding The Hashing Trick

Lior Kamma ∗
Department of Computer Science
Aarhus University, Denmark
lior.kamma@cs.au.dk

Casper Freksen ∗
Department of Computer Science
Aarhus University, Denmark
cfreksen@cs.au.dk

Kasper Green Larsen ∗
Department of Computer Science
Aarhus University, Denmark
larsen@cs.au.dk

Abstract
Feature hashing, also known as the hashing trick, introduced by Weinberger et
al. (2009), is one of the key techniques used in scaling-up machine learning
algorithms. Loosely speaking, feature hashing uses a random sparse projection
matrix A : Rn → Rm (where m  n) in order to reduce the dimension of the data
from n to m while approximately preserving the Euclidean norm. Every column
of A contains exactly one non-zero entry, equals to either −1 or 1.
Weinberger et al. showed tail bounds on kAxk22 . Specifically they showed that for
every ε, δ, if kxk∞ /kxk2 is sufficiently small, and m is sufficiently large, then
Pr[ | kAxk22 − kxk22 | < εkxk22 ] ≥ 1 − δ .

These bounds were later extended by Dasgupta et al. (2010) and most recently
refined by Dahlgaard et al. (2017), however, the true nature of the performance
of this key technique, and specifically the correct tradeoff between the pivotal
parameters kxk∞ /kxk2 , m, ε, δ remained an open question.
We settle this question by giving tight asymptotic bounds on the exact tradeoff
between the central parameters, thus providing a complete understanding of the
performance of feature hashing. We complement the asymptotic bound with
empirical data, which shows that the constants “hiding” in the asymptotic notation
are, in fact, very close to 1, thus further illustrating the tightness of the presented
bounds in practice.

1

Introduction

Dimensionality reduction that approximately preserves Euclidean distances is a key tool used as a
preprocessing step in many geometric, algebraic and classification algorithms, whose performance
heavily depends on the dimension of the input. Loosely speaking, a distance-preserving dimensionality reduction is an (often random) embedding of a high-dimensional Euclidean space into a space
of low dimension, such that pairwise distances are approximately preserved (with high probability).
Its applications range upon nearest neighbor search [AC09, HIM12, AIL+ 15], classification and
regression [RR08, MM09, PBMID14], manifold learning [HWB08] sparse recovery [CT06] and
numerical linear algebra [CW09, MM13, Sár06]. For more applications see, e.g. [Vem05].
One of the most fundamental results in the field was presented in the seminal paper by Johnson and
Lindenstrauss [JL84].
∗

All authors contributed equally, and are presented in alphabetical order.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

