Preference Based Adaptation for Learning Objectives

Yao-Xiang Ding
Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
{dingyx, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
In many real-world learning tasks, it is hard to directly optimize the true performance measures, meanwhile choosing the right surrogate objectives is also difficult. Under this situation, it is desirable to incorporate an optimization of objective process into the learning loop based on weak modeling of the relationship
between the true measure and the objective. In this work, we discuss the task of
objective adaptation, in which the learner iteratively adapts the learning objective
to the underlying true objective based on the preference feedback from an oracle.
We show that when the objective can be linearly parameterized, this preference
based learning problem can be solved by utilizing the dueling bandit model. A
novel sampling based algorithm DL2 M is proposed to learn the optimal parameter,
which enjoys strong theoretical guarantees and efficient empirical performance.
To avoid learning a hypothesis from scratch after each objective function update,
a boosting based hypothesis adaptation approach is proposed to efficiently adapt
any pre-learned element hypotheses to the current objective. We apply the overall
approach to multi-label learning, and show that the proposed approach achieves
significant performance under various multi-label performance measures.

1

Introduction

Machine learning approaches have already been applied on many real-world tasks, in which the target is usually to optimize some task-specific performance measures. For complex problems, the performance measures are usually hard to be optimized directly, such as the click-through-rate in online
advertisement and the profit gain in recommendation system design. Instead of directly optimizing
these complex measures, surrogate objectives with better mathematical properties are designed to
simplify optimization. It is obvious that whether the objective is correctly designed essentially affects the application performance. However, it also requires delicate knowledge on the relationship
between the true measure and the objective, which is sometimes difficult and challenging to acquire.
Under this situation, it is more desirable to learn both objective and hypothesis simultaneously.
Based on this motivation, we consider the novel scenario of learning with objective adaptation from
preference feedback. Under this scenario, in each iteration of the objective adaptation process, the
learner maintains a pair of objective functions, as well as the corresponding learned hypotheses,
obtained from the latest two iterations. An oracle then provides a preference over the pair of hypotheses to the learner, according to the true task performance measure. Based on this preference
information, the learner updates both the objective function and the corresponding hypothesis. In
special, this formulation even allows us to model complex scenerios when the true performance measure is not quantified, such as subjective human preference. It is expected that the objective function
converges to the optimal one so that the learned hypothesis optimizes the true performance measure.
In this work, we focus on the following linear parameterized objective function class. Denote the
objective by Lw , w ∈ W, in which W is the parameter space, and w = [w1 w2 · · · wK ] is a K
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

