Nearly tight sample complexity bounds
for learning mixtures of Gaussians
via sample compression schemes∗
Hassan Ashtiani
Department of Computing and Software
McMaster University, and
Vector Institute, ON, Canada
zokaeiam@mcmaster.ca

Shai Ben-David
School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, ON, Canada
shai@uwaterloo.ca

Nicholas J. A. Harvey
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada
nickhar@cs.ubc.ca

Christopher Liaw
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada
cvliaw@cs.ubc.ca

Abbas Mehrabian
School of Computer Science
McGill University
Montréal, QC, Canada
abbasmehrabian@gmail.com

Yaniv Plan
Department of Mathematics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada
yaniv@math.ubc.ca

Abstract
Θ(kd2 /ε2 ) samples are necessary and sufficient for learning a
We prove that e
mixture of k Gaussians in Rd , up to error ε in total variation distance. This improves
both the known upper bounds and lower bounds for this problem. For mixtures
of axis-aligned Gaussians, we show that e
O(kd/ε2 ) samples suffice, matching a
known lower bound.
The upper bound is based on a novel technique for distribution learning based on a
notion of sample compression. Any class of distributions that allows such a sample
compression scheme can also be learned with few samples. Moreover, if a class of
distributions has such a compression scheme, then so do the classes of products
and mixtures of those distributions. The core of our main result is showing that the
class of Gaussians in Rd has a small-sized sample compression.

1

Introduction

Estimating distributions from observed data is a fundamental task in statistics that has been studied
for over a century. This task frequently arises in applied machine learning and it is common to
assume that the distribution can be modeled using a mixture of Gaussians. Popular software packages
have implemented heuristics, such as the EM algorithm, for learning a mixture of Gaussians. The
theoretical machine learning community also has a rich literature on distribution learning; the recent
survey [9] considers learning structured distributions, and the survey [13] focuses on mixtures of
Gaussians.
This paper develops a general technique for distribution learning, then employs this technique in the
important setting of mixtures of Gaussians. The theoretical model we adopt is density estimation:
∗

For the full version of this paper see [2].

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

