Deep Generative Models with Learnable
Knowledge Constraints

Zhiting Hu, Zichao Yang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
Xiaodan Liang, Lianhui Qin, Haoye Dong, Eric P. Xing
Carnegie Mellon University, Petuum Inc.
{zhitingh,zichaoy,rsalakhu,xiaodan1}@cs.cmu.edu, eric.xing@petuum.com

Abstract
The broad set of deep generative models (DGMs) has achieved remarkable advances. However, it is often difficult to incorporate rich structured domain knowledge with the end-to-end DGMs. Posterior regularization (PR) offers a principled
framework to impose structured constraints on probabilistic models, but has limited
applicability to the diverse DGMs that can lack a Bayesian formulation or even
explicit density evaluation. PR also requires constraints to be fully specified a
priori, which is impractical or suboptimal for complex knowledge with learnable
uncertain parts. In this paper, we establish mathematical correspondence between
PR and reinforcement learning (RL), and, based on the connection, expand PR to
learn constraints as the extrinsic reward in RL. The resulting algorithm is modelagnostic to apply to any DGMs, and is flexible to adapt arbitrary constraints with
the model jointly. Experiments on human image generation and templated sentence
generation show models with learned knowledge constraints by our algorithm
greatly improve over base generative models.

1

Introduction

Generative models provide a powerful mechanism for learning data distributions and simulating
samples. Recent years have seen remarkable advances especially on the deep approaches [16, 25]
such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [15], Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [27],
auto-regressive networks [29, 42], and so forth. However, it is usually difficult to exploit in these
various deep generative models rich problem structures and domain knowledge (e.g., the human
body structure in image generation, Figure 1). Many times we have to hope the deep networks can
discover the structures from massive data by themselves, leaving much valuable domain knowledge
unused. Recent efforts of designing specialized network architectures or learning disentangled
representations [5, 23] are usually only applicable to specific knowledge, models, or tasks. It is
therefore highly desirable to have a general means of incorporating arbitrary structured knowledge
with any types of deep generative models in a principled way.
On the other hand, posterior regularization (PR) [13] is a principled framework to impose knowledge
constraints on posterior distributions of probabilistic models, and has shown effectiveness in regulating
the learning of models in different context. For example, [21] extends PR to incorporate structured
logic rules with neural classifiers. However, the previous approaches are not directly applicable to the
general case of deep generative models, as many of the models (e.g., GANs, many auto-regressive
networks) are not straightforwardly formulated with the probabilistic Bayesian framework and do not
possess a posterior distribution or even meaningful latent variables. Moreover, PR has required a
priori fixed constraints. That means users have to fully specify the constraints beforehand, which can
be impractical due to heavy engineering, or suboptimal without adaptivity to the data and models. To
extend the scope of applicable knowledge and reduce engineering burden, it is necessary to allow
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

