Zeroth-order (Non)-Convex Stochastic Optimization
via Conditional Gradient and Gradient Updates
Krishnakumar Balasubramanian
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
kbala@ucdavis.edu
Saeed Ghadimi ⇤
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering
Princeton University
sghadimi@princeton.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose and analyze zeroth-order stochastic approximation algorithms for nonconvex and convex optimization. Specifically, we propose generalizations of the conditional gradient algorithm achieving rates similar to the standard
stochastic gradient algorithm using only zeroth-order information. Furthermore,
under a structural sparsity assumption, we first illustrate an implicit regularization
phenomenon where the standard stochastic gradient algorithm with zeroth-order
information adapts to the sparsity of the problem at hand by just varying the stepsize. Next, we propose a truncated stochastic gradient algorithm with zeroth-order
information, whose rate depends only poly-logarithmically on the dimensionality.

1

Introduction

In this work, we propose and analyze algorithms for solving the following stochastic optimization
problem
⇢
Z
min f (x) = E⇠ [F (x, ⇠)] =

x2X

F (x, ⇠) dP (⇠) ,

(1.1)

where X is a closed convex subset of Rd . The case of nonconvex objective function f is ubiquitous
in modern deep learning problems and developing provable algorithms for such problems has been a
topic of intense research in the recent years [16, 11], along with the more standard convex case [1].
Several methods are available for solving such stochastic optimization problems under access to
different oracle information, for example, function queries (zeroth-order oracle), gradient queries
(first-order oracle), and higher-order oracles. In this work, we assume that we only have access to
noisy evaluation of f through a stochastic zeroth-order oracle described in detail in Assumption 1.
This oracle setting is motivated by several applications where only noisy function queries of problem
(1.1) is available and obtaining higher-order information might not be possible. Such a situation
occurs frequently for example, in simulation based modeling [29], selecting the tuning parameters
of deep neural networks [32] and design of black-box attacks to deep networks [3]. It is worth
noting that recently such zeroth-order optimization techniques have also been applied in the field of
reinforcement learning [30, 4, 20]. Furthermore, methods using similar oracles have been studied in
the literature under the name of derivative-free optimization [33, 5], bayesian optimization [21] and
optimization with bandit feedback [2].
⇤

Both authors contributed equally and are listed in alphabetical order.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

