Semi-supervised Deep Kernel Learning:
Regression with Unlabeled Data by Minimizing
Predictive Variance
Neal Jean∗, Sang Michael Xie∗, Stefano Ermon
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
{nealjean, xie, ermon}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Large amounts of labeled data are typically required to train deep learning models.
For many real-world problems, however, acquiring additional data can be expensive
or even impossible. We present semi-supervised deep kernel learning (SSDKL), a
semi-supervised regression model based on minimizing predictive variance in the
posterior regularization framework. SSDKL combines the hierarchical representation learning of neural networks with the probabilistic modeling capabilities of
Gaussian processes. By leveraging unlabeled data, we show improvements on a
diverse set of real-world regression tasks over supervised deep kernel learning and
semi-supervised methods such as VAT and mean teacher adapted for regression.

1

Introduction

The prevailing trend in machine learning is to automatically discover good feature representations
through end-to-end optimization of neural networks. However, most success stories have been enabled
by vast quantities of labeled data [1]. This need for supervision poses a major challenge when we
encounter critical scientific and societal problems where fine-grained labels are difficult to obtain.
Accurately measuring the outcomes that we care about—e.g., childhood mortality, environmental
damage, or extreme poverty—can be prohibitively expensive [2, 3, 4]. Although these problems
have limited data, they often contain underlying structure that can be used for learning; for example,
poverty and other socioeconomic outcomes are strongly correlated over both space and time.
Semi-supervised learning approaches offer promise when few labels are available by allowing models
to supplement their training with unlabeled data [5]. Mostly focusing on classification tasks, these
methods often rely on strong assumptions about the structure of the data (e.g., cluster assumptions,
low data density at decision boundaries [6]) that generally do not apply to regression [7, 8, 9, 10, 11].
In this paper, we present semi-supervised deep kernel learning, which addresses the challenge of semisupervised regression by building on previous work combining the feature learning capabilities of
deep neural networks with the ability of Gaussian processes to capture uncertainty [12, 3, 13]. SSDKL
incorporates unlabeled training data by minimizing predictive variance in the posterior regularization
framework, a flexible way of encoding prior knowledge in Bayesian models [14, 15, 16].
Our main contributions are the following:
• We introduce semi-supervised deep kernel learning (SSDKL) for the largely unexplored
domain of deep semi-supervised regression. SSDKL is a regression model that combines
∗

denotes equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

