Tree-to-tree Neural Networks for Program
Translation
Xinyun Chen
UC Berkeley
xinyun.chen@berkeley.edu

Chang Liu
UC Berkeley
liuchang2005acm@gmail.com

Dawn Song
UC Berkeley
dawnsong@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Program translation is an important tool to migrate legacy code in one language
into an ecosystem built in a different language. In this work, we are the first
to employ deep neural networks toward tackling this problem. We observe that
program translation is a modular procedure, in which a sub-tree of the source tree
is translated into the corresponding target sub-tree at each step. To capture this
intuition, we design a tree-to-tree neural network to translate a source tree into a
target one. Meanwhile, we develop an attention mechanism for the tree-to-tree
model, so that when the decoder expands one non-terminal in the target tree, the
attention mechanism locates the corresponding sub-tree in the source tree to guide
the expansion of the decoder. We evaluate the program translation capability of our
tree-to-tree model against several state-of-the-art approaches. Compared against
other neural translation models, we observe that our approach is consistently better
than the baselines with a margin of up to 15 points. Further, our approach can
improve the previous state-of-the-art program translation approaches by a margin
of 20 points on the translation of real-world projects.

1

Introduction

Programs are the main tool for building computer applications, the IT industry, and the digital world.
Various programming languages have been invented to facilitate programmers to develop programs
for different applications. At the same time, the variety of different programming languages also
introduces a burden when programmers want to combine programs written in different languages
together. Therefore, there is a tremendous need to enable program translation between different
programming languages.
Nowadays, to translate programs between different programming languages, typically programmers
would manually investigate the correspondence between the grammars of the two languages, then
develop a rule-based translator. However, this process can be inefficient and error-prone. In this
work, we make the first attempt to examine whether we can leverage deep neural networks to build a
program translator automatically.
Intuitively, the program translation problem in its format is similar to a natural language translation
problem. Some previous work propose to adapt phrase-based statistical machine translation (SMT)
for code migration [21, 16, 22]. Recently, neural network approaches, such as sequence-to-sequencebased models, have achieved the state-of-the-art performance on machine translation [4, 9, 13, 14, 30].
In this work, we study neural machine translation methods to handle the program translation problem.
However, a big challenge making a sequence-to-sequence-based model ineffective is that, unlike
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

