Training DNNs with Hybrid Block Floating Point

Mario Drumond
Ecocloud
EPFL
mario.drumond@epfl.ch

Tao Lin
Ecocloud
EPFL
tao.lin@epfl.ch

Martin Jaggi
Ecocloud
EPFL
martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Babak Falsafi
Ecocloud
EPFL
babak.falsafi@epfl.ch

Abstract
The wide adoption of DNNs has given birth to unrelenting computing requirements,
forcing datacenter operators to adopt domain-specific accelerators to train them.
These accelerators typically employ densely packed full-precision floating-point
arithmetic to maximize performance per area. Ongoing research efforts seek to
further increase that performance density by replacing floating-point with fixedpoint arithmetic. However, a significant roadblock for these attempts has been fixed
point’s narrow dynamic range, which is insufficient for DNN training convergence.
We identify block floating point (BFP) as a promising alternative representation
since it exhibits wide dynamic range and enables the majority of DNN operations to
be performed with fixed-point logic. Unfortunately, BFP alone introduces several
limitations that preclude its direct applicability. In this work, we introduce HBFP,
a hybrid BFP-FP approach, which performs all dot products in BFP and other
operations in floating point. HBFP delivers the best of both worlds: the high
accuracy of floating point at the superior hardware density of fixed point. For a
wide variety of models, we show that HBFP matches floating point’s accuracy while
enabling hardware implementations that deliver up to 8.5× higher throughput.

1

Introduction

Today’s online services are ubiquitous, offering custom-tailored content to billions of daily users.
Service customization is often provided using deep neural networks (DNNs) deployed at a massive
scale in datacenters. Delivering faster DNN inference and more accurate training is often limited
by the arithmetic density of the underlying hardware platform. Most service providers resort to
GPUs as the platform of choice for training neural networks because they offer higher arithmetic
density per silicon area than CPUs, through full precision floating-point (FP32) units. However, the
computational power required by DNNs has been increasing so quickly that even traditional GPUs
cannot satisfy the demand, pushing both accelerators and high-end GPUs towards narrow arithmetic
to improve logic density. For instance, NVIDIA’s Volta [1] GPU employs half-precision floating
point (FP16) arithmetic while Google employs a custom 16-bit floating point representation in the
second and third versions of the TPU [2] architecture.
Following the same approach, there have been research efforts to replace narrow floating point with
even denser fixed-point representations. Fixed-point arithmetic promises excellent gains in both
speed and density. For instance, 8-bit fixed-point multipliers occupy 5.8× less area and consume
5.5× less energy than their FP16 counterpart [3]. Unfortunately, training with fixed-point, or even
with FP16, has yielded mixed results due to the limited range inherent in these representations [4].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

