Hybrid Retrieval-Generation Reinforced Agent for
Medical Image Report Generation

Christy Y. Li∗
Duke University
yl558@duke.edu

Xiaodan Liang†
Carnegie Mellon University
xiaodan1@cs.cmu.edu

Zhiting Hu
Carnegie Mellon University
zhitingh@cs.cmu.edu

Eric P. Xing
Petuum, Inc
epxing@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Generating long and coherent reports to describe medical images poses challenges
to bridging visual patterns with informative human linguistic descriptions. We
propose a novel Hybrid Retrieval-Generation Reinforced Agent (HRGR-Agent)
which reconciles traditional retrieval-based approaches populated with human prior
knowledge, with modern learning-based approaches to achieve structured, robust,
and diverse report generation. HRGR-Agent employs a hierarchical decisionmaking procedure. For each sentence, a high-level retrieval policy module chooses
to either retrieve a template sentence from an off-the-shelf template database, or
invoke a low-level generation module to generate a new sentence. HRGR-Agent
is updated via reinforcement learning, guided by sentence-level and word-level
rewards. Experiments show that our approach achieves the state-of-the-art results
on two medical report datasets, generating well-balanced structured sentences with
robust coverage of heterogeneous medical report contents. In addition, our model
achieves the highest detection precision of medical abnormality terminologies, and
improved human evaluation performance.

1

Introduction

Beyond the traditional visual captioning task [41, 28, 43, 40, 18] that produces one single sentence,
generating long and topic-coherent stories or reports to describe visual contents (images or videos)
has recently attracted increasing research interests [19, 35, 22], posed as a more challenging and
realistic goal towards bridging visual patterns with human linguistic descriptions. Particularly, report
generation has several challenges to be resolved: 1) The generated report is a long narrative consisting
of multiple sentences or paragraphs, which must have a plausible logic and consistent topics; 2) There
is a presumed content coverage and specific terminology/phrases, depending on the task at hand.
For example, a sports game report should describe competing teams, wining points, and outstanding
players [38]. 3) The content ordering is very crucial. For example, a sports game report usually talks
about the competition results before describing teams and players in detail.
As one of the most representative and practical report generation task, the desired medical image
report generation must satisfy more critical protocols and ensure the correctness of medical term
usage. As shown in Figure 1, a medical report consists of a findings section describing medical
observations in details of both normal and abnormal features, an impression or conclusion sentence
∗
†

This work was conducted when Christy Y. Li was at Petuum, Inc.
Corresponding author.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

