Single-Agent Policy Tree Search With Guarantees

Laurent Orseau
DeepMind, London, UK
lorseau@google.com

Levi H. S. Lelis∗
Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Brazil
levi.lelis@ufv.br

Tor Lattimore
DeepMind, London, UK
lattimore@google.com

Théophane Weber
DeepMind, London, UK
theophane@google.com

Abstract
We introduce two novel tree search algorithms that use a policy to guide search.
The first algorithm is a best-first enumeration that uses a cost function that allows
us to prove an upper bound on the number of nodes to be expanded before reaching
a goal state. We show that this best-first algorithm is particularly well suited for
“needle-in-a-haystack” problems. The second algorithm is based on sampling and
we prove an upper bound on the expected number of nodes it expands before
reaching a set of goal states. We show that this algorithm is better suited for
problems where many paths lead to a goal. We validate these tree search algorithms
on 1,000 computer-generated levels of Sokoban, where the policy used to guide the
search comes from a neural network trained using A3C. Our results show that the
policy tree search algorithms we introduce are competitive with a state-of-the-art
domain-independent planner that uses heuristic search.

1

Introduction

Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) algorithms [Coulom, 2007, Browne et al., 2012] have been recently
applied with great success to several problems such as Go, Chess, and Shogi [Silver et al., 2016, 2017].
Such algorithms are well adapted to stochastic and adversarial domains, due to their sampling nature
and the convergence guarantee to min-max values. However, the sampling procedure used in MCTS
algorithms is not well-suited for other kinds of problems [Nakhost, 2013], such as deterministic
single-agent problems where the objective is to find any solution at all. In particular, if the reward is
very sparse—for example the agent is rewarded only at the end of the task—MCTS algorithms revert
to uniform search. In practice such algorithms can be guided by a heuristic but, to the best of our
knowledge, no bound is known that depends on the quality of the heuristic. For such cases one may
use instead other traditional search approaches such as A* [Hart et al., 1968] and Greedy Best-First
Search (GBFS) [Doran and Michie, 1966], which are guided by a heuristic cost function.
In this paper we tackle single-agent problems from the perspective of policy-guided search. One
may view policy-guided search as a special kind of heuristic search in which a policy, instead of a
heuristic function, is provided as input to the search algorithm. As a policy is a probability distribution
over sequences of actions, this allows us to provide theoretical guarantees that cannot be offered
by value (e.g., reward-based) functions: we can bound the number of node expansions—roughly
speaking, the search time—depending on the probability of the sequences of actions that reach
the goal. We propose two different algorithms with different strengths and weaknesses. The first
algorithm, called LevinTS, is based on Levin search [Levin, 1973] and we derive a strict upper
bound on the number of nodes to search before finding the least-cost solution. The second algorithm,
∗

This work was carried out while L. H. S. Lelis was at the University of Alberta, Canada.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

