Overcoming Language Priors in Visual Question
Answering with Adversarial Regularization

Sainandan Ramakrishnan
Aishwarya Agrawal
Stefan Lee
Georgia Institute of Technology
{sainandancv, aishwarya, steflee}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Modern Visual Question Answering (VQA) models have been shown to rely
heavily on superficial correlations between question and answer words learned
during training – e.g. overwhelmingly reporting the type of room as kitchen or
the sport being played as tennis, irrespective of the image. Most alarmingly, this
shortcoming is often not well reflected during evaluation because the same strong
priors exist in test distributions; however, a VQA system that fails to ground
questions in image content would likely perform poorly in real-world settings.
In this work, we present a novel regularization scheme for VQA that reduces
this effect. We introduce a question-only model that takes as input the question
encoding from the VQA model and must leverage language biases in order to
succeed. We then pose training as an adversarial game between the VQA model
and this question-only adversary – discouraging the VQA model from capturing
language biases in its question encoding. Further, we leverage this question-only
model to estimate the increase in model confidence after considering the image,
which we maximize explicitly to encourage visual grounding. Our approach is a
model agnostic training procedure and simple to implement. We show empirically
that it can improve performance significantly on a bias-sensitive split of the VQA
dataset for multiple base models – achieving state-of-the-art on this task. Further,
on standard VQA tasks, our approach shows significantly less drop in accuracy
compared to existing bias-reducing VQA models.

1

Introduction

The task of answering questions about visual content – called Visual Question Answering (VQA) –
presents a rich set of artificial intelligence challenges spanning computer vision and natural language
processing. Successful VQA models must understand the question posed in natural language, identify
relevant entities, object, and relationships in the image, and perform grounded reasoning to deduce the
correct answer. In response to these challenges, there has been extensive work on VQA in recent years
both in terms of dataset curation [6, 12, 2, 17, 13, 32, 3] and modeling [2, 5, 28, 14, 16, 4, 22, 20].
This widespread interest in VQA has resulted in increasingly sophisticated models achieving higher
and higher performance on increasingly large benchmark datasets; however, recent studies have
demonstrated that many models tend to have poor image grounding, instead heavily leveraging
superficial correlations between questions and answers in the training dataset to answer questions
[1, 30, 15, 12]. As a result, these models often exhibit undesirable behaviors – blindly outputting an
answer based on first few words in the question (e.g. reflexively answering ‘What sport ...’ questions
with ‘tennis’) or failing to generalize to novel attribute-noun combinations (e.g. being unable to
identify a ‘green hydrant’ despite seeing both hydrants and green objects during training). Perhaps
most dissatisfying of all, standard evaluation protocols on benchmark datasets often fail to pick up on
these trends due to the presence of the same strong language priors in their test datasets.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

