MiME: Multilevel Medical Embedding of Electronic
Health Records for Predictive Healthcare
Edward Choi⇤
Google Brain
edwardchoi@google.com

Cao Xiao
IBM Research
cxiao@us.ibm.com

Walter F. Stewart†
HINT Consultants
wfs502000@yahoo.com

Jimeng Sun
Georgia Institute of Technology
jsun@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Deep learning models exhibit state-of-the-art performance for many predictive
healthcare tasks using electronic health records (EHR) data, but these models
typically require training data volume that exceeds the capacity of most healthcare
systems. External resources such as medical ontologies are used to bridge the
data volume constraint, but this approach is often not directly applicable or useful
because of inconsistencies with terminology. To solve the data insufficiency challenge, we leverage the inherent multilevel structure of EHR data and, in particular,
the encoded relationships among medical codes. We propose Multilevel Medical
Embedding (MiME) which learns the multilevel embedding of EHR data while
jointly performing auxiliary prediction tasks that rely on this inherent EHR structure without the need for external labels. We conducted two prediction tasks, heart
failure prediction and sequential disease prediction, where MiME outperformed
baseline methods in diverse evaluation settings. In particular, MiME consistently
outperformed all baselines when predicting heart failure on datasets of different
volumes, especially demonstrating the greatest performance improvement (15% relative gain in PR-AUC over the best baseline) on the smallest dataset, demonstrating
its ability to effectively model the multilevel structure of EHR data.

1

Introduction

The rapid growth of electronic health record (EHR) data has motivated use of deep learning models
and demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in diagnostics [26, 13, 12, 27], disease detection [14,
10, 17], risk prediction [20, 32], and patient subtyping [3, 6]. However, training optimal deep learning
models typically requires a large volume (i.e. number of patient records and features per record)
Most health systems do not have the data volume required to optimize performance of these models,
especially for less common services (e.g. intensive care units (ICU)) or rare conditions.
External resources, particularly medical ontologies have been used to address data volume insufficiencies [12, 31, 7]. For example [12], latent embedding of a clinical code (e.g. diagnosis code) can
be learned as a convex combination of the embeddings of the code itself and its ancestors on the
ontology graph. However, medical ontologies are often not available or not directly applicable due to
the nonstandard, or idiosyncratic use of terminology and complex terminology mapping from one
health system’s EHR to another. For example, many clinics still use their own in-house terminologies
⇤
†

Work done at Georgia Institute of Technology.
Work done at Sutter Health.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

