Representer Point Selection for
Explaining Deep Neural Networks

Chih-Kuan Yeh∗

Joon Sik Kim ∗
Ian E.H. Yen
Pradeep Ravikumar
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{cjyeh, joonsikk, eyan, pradeepr}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We propose to explain the predictions of a deep neural network, by pointing to the
set of what we call representer points in the training set, for a given test point prediction. Specifically, we show that we can decompose the pre-activation prediction
of a neural network into a linear combination of activations of training points, with
the weights corresponding to what we call representer values, which thus capture
the importance of that training point on the learned parameters of the network. But
it provides a deeper understanding of the network than simply training point influence: with positive representer values corresponding to excitatory training points,
and negative values corresponding to inhibitory points, which as we show provides
considerably more insight. Our method is also much more scalable, allowing for
real-time feedback in a manner not feasible with influence functions.

1

Introduction

As machine learning systems start to be more widely used, we are starting to care not just about the
accuracy and speed of the predictions, but also why it made its specific predictions. While we need not
always care about the why of a complex system in order to trust it, especially if we observe that the
system has high accuracy, such trust typically hinges on the belief that some other expert has a richer
understanding of the system. For instance, while we might not know exactly how planes fly in the air,
we trust some experts do. In the case of machine learning models however, even machine learning
experts do not have a clear understanding of why say a deep neural network makes a particular
prediction. Our work proposes to address this gap by focusing on improving the understanding of
experts, in addition to lay users. In particular, expert users could then use these explanations to further
fine-tune the system (e.g. dataset/model debugging), as well as suggest different approaches for
model training, so that it achieves a better performance.
Our key approach to do so is via a representer theorem for deep neural networks, which might be of
independent interest even outside the context of explainable ML. We show that we can decompose
the pre-activation prediction values into a linear combination of training point activations, with
the weights corresponding to what we call representer values, which can be used to measure the
importance of each training point has on the learned parameter of the model. Using these representer
values, we select representer points – training points that have large/small representer values – that
could aid the understanding of the model’s prediction.
Such representer points provide a richer understanding of the deep neural network than other approaches that provide influential training points, in part because of the meta-explanation underlying
our explanation: a positive representer value indicates that a similarity to that training point is excita∗

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

