Learning Pipelines with Limited Data and Domain
Knowledge: A Study in Parsing Physics Problems

Mrinmaya Sachan♣ Avinava Dubey♣ Tom Mitchell♣ Dan Roth♠ Eric P. Xing♣♦
♣
Machine Learning Department, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
♠
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania
♦
Petuum Inc.
{mrinmays,akdubey,tom.mitchell,epxing}@cs.cmu.edu
danroth@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
As machine learning becomes more widely used in practice, we need new methods
to build complex intelligent systems that integrate learning with existing software,
and with domain knowledge encoded as rules. As a case study, we present such
a system that learns to parse Newtonian physics problems in textbooks. This
system, Nuts&Bolts, learns a pipeline process that incorporates existing code,
pre-learned machine learning models, and human engineered rules. It jointly trains
the entire pipeline to prevent propagation of errors, using a combination of labelled
and unlabelled data. Our approach achieves a good performance on the parsing
task, outperforming the simple pipeline and its variants. Finally, we also show how
Nuts&Bolts can be used to achieve improvements on a relation extraction task
and on the end task of answering Newtonian physics problems.

1

Introduction

End-to-end learning is the new buzz word in machine learning. Models trained in an end-to-end
manner have achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on various tasks like image classification,
machine translation and speech recognition. However, a common barrier for using end-to-end learning
is the amount of data needed to train the model. For reference, the SOTA image classification model,
VGGNet [43], is trained on 1.2M images with category labels and the SOTA machine translation
model, GNMT [52], is trained on a dataset of 6M sentence pairs, 340M words. One possible remedy
to the issue of data-hungriness is to incorporate domain knowledge. However, due to the very nature
of the methods used, incorporating domain knowledge in end-to-end learning is challenging [47].
In contrast, pipelines [51] decompose a complex
task into a series of easier-to-handle sub-tasks
(stages), where the local predictor at a particular
stage depends on predictions from previous stages.
Pipelines can be tuned with small amount of labeled data and it is easier to incorporate domain
knowledge expressed as rules, existing software
and pre-learnt components. However, pipelining
suffers from propagation of local errors [11].

The figure shows three forces
applied to a trunk that moves
leftward by 3.00 m over a
frictionless floor. The force
magnitudes are F1 = 5.00N, F2 =
9.00N, and F3 = 3.00N, and the
indicated angle is θ = 60.0°.
During the displacement, what is
the net work done on the trunk
by the three forces?

F2
θ

F1

F3

Objects: {block, floor}
Relative Position: lie-above(block, floor)
Forces acting on block:{F 1 , F 2 , F 3 }
Forces acting on floor: {}
Force Directions: {F 1 : left, F 2 : right θ above horizontal, F 3 : down}

Thus, we propose Nuts&Bolts: an approach
for learning pipelines with labeled data, unlabeled Figure 1: Above: An example Newtonian physics
data, existing software and domain knowledge ex- problem. Below: Diagram parsed in formal language.
pressed as rules. By jointly learning the pipeline,
Nuts&Bolts retains the advantages of end-to-end learning (i.e. doesn’t suffer from error propagation). Furthermore, it allows for easy incorporation of domain knowledge and reduces the amount of
supervision required, removing the two key shortcomings of end-to-end learning.
We are motivated by the novel task of parsing Newtonian physics problems into formal language
(see Figure 1). This is useful as it builds a computer ingestable rich semantic representation of
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

