Multi-domain Causal Structure Learning
in Linear Systems

⇤

AmirEmad Ghassami⇤, Negar Kiyavash† , Biwei Huang‡ , Kun Zhang‡
Department of ECE, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA.
†
School of ISyE and ECE, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
‡
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Abstract
We study the problem of causal structure learning in linear systems from observational data given in multiple domains, across which the causal coefficients and/or
the distribution of the exogenous noises may vary. The main tool used in our
approach is the principle that in a causally sufficient system, the causal modules, as
well as their included parameters, change independently across domains. We first
introduce our approach for finding causal direction in a system comprising two
variables and propose efficient methods for identifying causal direction. Then we
generalize our methods to causal structure learning in networks of variables. Most
of previous work in structure learning from multi-domain data assume that certain
types of invariance are held in causal modules across domains. Our approach
unifies the idea in those works and generalizes to the case that there is no such
invariance across the domains. Our proposed methods are generally capable of
identifying causal direction from fewer than ten domains. When the invariance
property holds, two domains are generally sufficient.

1

Introduction

Consider a system comprised of two dependent random variables X and Y with no latent confounders.
Assuming that the dependency is due to a unidirectional causation, how can we determine which
variable is the cause and which one is the effect? The golden standard for answering this question is
performing controlled experiments or interventions on the variables. Randomizing or intervening on
the cause variable may change the effect variable, but not vice versa [Ebe07]. The issue with this
approach is that in many cases performing experiments are expensive, unethical, impossible, or even
undefined. Therefore, there is a high interest in finding causal relations from purely observational data.
Unfortunately, for a general system, using traditional conditional independence-based methods on
purely observational data can identify a structure only up to its Markov equivalence [SGS00, Pea09].
For instance, for the aforementioned system of only two variables, the structures X ! Y and
Y ! X (arrow indicates the causal direction), are Markov equivalent. Therefore, extra assumptions
are required to make the problem well-defined.
One successful approach in the literature is to restrict the data generating model. For the case that data
is generated from a structural equation model with additive noise [Bol89], if the noise is non-Gaussian
[SHHK06], or if the equations are non-linear with some mild conditions [ZC06, HJM+ 09, ZH09],
the structure may be identifiable. Note that for additive noise models, in the basic case of a linear
system with Gaussian noise, the causal direction is non-identifiable [SHHK06].
Another recently developing approach is to assume that the data is non-homogenous and is gathered
from several different distributions [Hoo90, TP01, PBM16, ZHZ+ 17, GSKZ17, HZZ+ 17]. In many
real-life settings, the data generating distribution may vary over time, or the dataset may be gathered
from different domains and hence, not follow a single distribution. While such data is usually
problematic in statistical analysis and causes restrictions on the learning power, this property can be
⇤

Correspondence to: AmirEmad Ghassami, email: ghassam2@illinois.edu.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

