On Fast Leverage Score Sampling and Optimal
Learning
Alessandro Rudi⇤
INRIA – Sierra team,
ENS, Paris

Daniele Calandriello⇤
LCSL – IIT & MIT,
Genoa, Italy

Luigi Carratino
University of Genoa,
Genoa, Italy

Lorenzo Rosasco
University of Genoa,
LCSL – IIT & MIT

Abstract
Leverage score sampling provides an appealing way to perform approximate computations for large matrices. Indeed, it allows to derive faithful approximations
with a complexity adapted to the problem at hand. Yet, performing leverage scores
sampling is a challenge in its own right requiring further approximations. In this
paper, we study the problem of leverage score sampling for positive definite matrices defined by a kernel. Our contribution is twofold. First we provide a novel
algorithm for leverage score sampling and second, we exploit the proposed method
in statistical learning by deriving a novel solver for kernel ridge regression. Our
main technical contribution is showing that the proposed algorithms are currently
the most efficient and accurate for these problems.

1

Introduction

A variety of machine learning problems require manipulating and performing computations with
large matrices that often do not fit memory. In practice, randomized techniques are often employed to
reduce the computational burden. Examples include stochastic approximations [1], columns/rows
subsampling and more general sketching techniques [2, 3]. One of the simplest approach is uniform
column sampling [4, 5], that is replacing the original matrix with a subset of columns chosen
uniformly at random. This approach is fast to compute, but the number of columns needed for a
prescribed approximation accuracy does not take advantage of the possible low rank structure of the
matrix at hand. As discussed in [6], leverage score sampling provides a way to tackle this shortcoming.
Here columns are sampled proportionally to suitable weights, called leverage scores (LS) [7, 6]. With
this sampling strategy, the number of columns needed for a prescribed accuracy is governed by the
so called effective dimension which is a natural extension of the notion of rank. Despite these nice
properties, performing leverage score sampling provides a challenge in its own right, since it has
complexity in the same order of an eigendecomposition of the original matrix. Indeed, much effort
has been recently devoted to derive fast and provably accurate algorithms for approximate leverage
score sampling [2, 8, 6, 9, 10].
In this paper, we consider these questions in the case of positive semi-definite matrices, central for
example in Gaussian processes [11] and kernel methods [12]. Sampling approaches in this context
are related to the so called Nyström approximation [13] and Nyström centers selection problem [11],
and are widely studied both in practice [4] and in theory [5]. Our contribution is twofold. First,
we propose and study BLESS, a novel algorithm for approximate leverage scores sampling. The
first solution to this problem is introduced in [6], but has poor approximation guarantees and high
time complexity. Improved approximations are achieved by algorithms recently proposed in [8] and
[9]. In particular, the approach in [8] can obtain good accuracy and very efficient computations but
only as long as distributed resources are available. Our first technical contribution is showing that
our algorithm can achieve state of the art accuracy and computational complexity without requiring
⇤

Equal contribution. Respective emails: alessandro.rudi@inria.fr, daniele.calandriello@iit.it

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

