RetGK: Graph Kernels based on Return Probabilities
of Random Walks
Zhen Zhang, Mianzhi Wang, Yijian Xiang, Yan Huang, and Arye Nehorai
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130
{zhen.zhang, mianzhi.wang, yijian.xiang, yanhuang640, nehorai}@wustl.edu

Abstract
Graph-structured data arise in wide applications, such as computer vision, bioinformatics, and social networks. Quantifying similarities among graphs is a fundamental problem. In this paper, we develop a framework for computing graph kernels,
based on return probabilities of random walks. The advantages of our proposed
kernels are that they can effectively exploit various node attributes, while being
scalable to large datasets. We conduct extensive graph classification experiments to
evaluate our graph kernels. The experimental results show that our graph kernels
significantly outperform existing state-of-the-art approaches in both accuracy and
computational efficiency.

1

Introduction

Structured data modeled as graphs arise in many application domains, such as computer vision,
bioinformatics, and social network mining. One interesting problem for graph-type data is quantifying
their similarities based on the connectivity structure and attribute information. Graph kernels, which
are positive definite functions on graphs, are powerful similarity measures, in the sense that they
make various kernel-based learning algorithms, for example, clustering, classification, and regression,
applicable to structured data. For instance, it is possible to classify proteins by predicting whether a
given protein is an enzyme or not.
There are several technical challenges in developing effective graph kernels: (i) When designing graph
kernels, one might come across the graph isomorphism problem, a well-known NP problem. The
kernels should satisfy the isomorphism-invariant property, while being informative on the topological
structure difference. (ii) Graphs are usually coupled with multiple types of node attributes, e.g.,
discrete1 or continuous attributes. For example, a chemical compound may have both discrete and
continuous attributes, which respectively describe the type and position of atoms. A crucial problem
is how to integrate the graph structure and node attribute information in graph kernels. (iii) In some
applications, e.g., social networks, graphs tend to be very large, with thousands or even millions of
nodes, which requires strongly scalable graph kernels.
In this work, we propose novel methods to overcome these challenges. We revisit the concept
of random walks, introducing a new node structural role descriptor, the return probability feature
(RPF). We rigorously show that the RPF is isomorphism-invariant and encodes very rich connectivity
information. Moreover, RPF allows us to consider attributed and nonattributed graphs in a unified
framework. With the RPF, we can embed (non-)attributed graphs into a Hilbert space. After that, we
naturally obtain our return probability-based graph kernels ("RetGK" for short). Combining with the
approximate feature maps technique, we represent each graph with a multi-dimensional tensor and
design a family of computationally efficient graphs kernels.
1

In the literature, the discrete node attributes are usually called "labels".

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

