Neural Proximal Gradient Descent for Compressive
Imaging

Morteza Mardani1 , Qingyun Sun4 , Shreyas Vasawanala2 , Vardan Papyan3 ,
Hatef Monajemi3 , John Pauly1 , and David Donoho3
Depts. of 1 Electrical Eng., 2 Radiology, 3 Statistics, and 4 Mathematics; Stanford University
morteza,qysun,vasanawala,papyan,monajemi,pauly,donoho@stanford.edu

Abstract
Recovering high-resolution images from limited sensory data typically leads to a
serious ill-posed inverse problem, demanding inversion algorithms that effectively
capture the prior information. Learning a good inverse mapping from training data
faces severe challenges, including: (i) scarcity of training data; (ii) need for plausible reconstructions that are physically feasible; (iii) need for fast reconstruction,
especially in real-time applications. We develop a successful system solving all
these challenges, using as basic architecture the recurrent application of proximal
gradient algorithm. We learn a proximal map that works well with real images
based on residual networks. Contraction of the resulting map is analyzed, and
incoherence conditions are investigated that drive the convergence of the iterates.
Extensive experiments are carried out under different settings: (a) reconstructing
abdominal MRI of pediatric patients from highly undersampled Fourier-space
data and (b) superresolving natural face images. Our key findings include: 1. a
recurrent ResNet with a single residual block unrolled from an iterative algorithm
yields an effective proximal which accurately reveals MR image details. 2. Our
architecture significantly outperforms conventional non-recurrent deep ResNets by
2dB SNR; it is also trained much more rapidly. 3. It outperforms state-of-the-art
compressed-sensing Wavelet-based methods by 4dB SNR, with 100x speedups in
reconstruction time.

1

Introduction

Linear inverse problems appear broadly in image restoration tasks, in applications ranging from
natural image superresolution to biomedical image reconstruction. In such tasks, one oftentimes
encounters a seriously ill-posed recovery task, which necessitates regularization with proper statistical
priors. This is however impeded by the following challenges: c1) real-time and interactive tasks
demand a low overhead for inference; e.g., imagine MRI visualization for neurosurgery [1], or,
interactive superresolution on cell phones [2]; c2) the need for recovering plausible images that are
consistent with the physical model; this is particularly important for medical diagnosis, which is
sensitive to artifacts; c3) and limited labeled training data especially for medical imaging.
Conventional compressed sensing (CS) relies on sparse coding of images in a proper transform domain
via a universal `1 -regularization; see e.g., [3, 4, 5]. To automate the time-intensive iterative softthresholding algorithm (ISTA) for sparse coding, [6] puts forth the learned ISTA (LISTA). Relying
on soft-thresholding it trains a simple (single dense layer) recurrent network to map measurements to
the `1 sparse code as a surrogate for the `0 code. [7] advocates a wider class of functions derived
from proximal operators. [8] also adopts LSTMs to learn the minimal `0 sparse code, where the
learned network was seen to improve the RIP of coherent dictionaries. Sparse recovery however is
the common objective of [8, 6], and the measurement model is not explicitly taken into account. No
guarantees were also provided for the convergence and quality of the iterates.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

