Flexible Neural Representation for Physics Prediction
Damian Mrowca1,⇤, Chengxu Zhuang2,⇤, Elias Wang3,⇤, Nick Haber2,4,5 , Li Fei-Fei1 ,
Joshua B. Tenenbaum7,8 , and Daniel L. K. Yamins1,2,6
Department of Computer Science1 , Psychology2 , Electrical Engineering3 , Pediatrics4 and
Biomedical Data Science5 , and Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute6 , Stanford, CA 94305
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences7 , and Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory8 , MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139
{mrowca, chengxuz, eliwang}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Humans have a remarkable capacity to understand the physical dynamics of objects
in their environment, flexibly capturing complex structures and interactions at
multiple levels of detail. Inspired by this ability, we propose a hierarchical particlebased object representation that covers a wide variety of types of three-dimensional
objects, including both arbitrary rigid geometrical shapes and deformable materials. We then describe the Hierarchical Relation Network (HRN), an end-to-end
differentiable neural network based on hierarchical graph convolution, that learns
to predict physical dynamics in this representation. Compared to other neural
network baselines, the HRN accurately handles complex collisions and nonrigid
deformations, generating plausible dynamics predictions at long time scales in
novel settings, and scaling to large scene configurations. These results demonstrate
an architecture with the potential to form the basis of next-generation physics
predictors for use in computer vision, robotics, and quantitative cognitive science.

1

Introduction

Humans efficiently decompose their environment into objects, and reason effectively about the
dynamic interactions between these objects [43, 45]. Although human intuitive physics may be
quantitatively inaccurate under some circumstances [32], humans make qualitatively plausible guesses
about dynamic trajectories of their environments over long time horizons [41]. Moreover, they either
are born knowing, or quickly learn about, concepts such as object permanence, occlusion, and
deformability, which guide their perception and reasoning [42].
An artificial system that could mimic such abilities would be of great use for applications in computer
vision, robotics, reinforcement learning, and many other areas. While traditional physics engines
constructed for computer graphics have made great strides, such routines are often hard-wired
and thus challenging to integrate as components of larger learnable systems. Creating end-to-end
differentiable neural networks for physics prediction is thus an appealing idea. Recently, Chang et al.
[11] and Battaglia et al. [4] have illustrated the use of neural networks to predict physical object
interactions in (mostly) 2D scenarios by proposing object-centric and relation-centric representations.
Common to these works is the treatment of scenes as graphs, with nodes representing object point
masses and edges describing the pairwise relations between objects (e.g. gravitational, spring-like, or
repulsing relationships). Object relations and physical states are used to compute the pairwise effects
between objects. After combining effects on an object, the future physical state of the environment is
predicted on a per-object basis. This approach is very promising in its ability to explicitly handle
⇤

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

