Scalable Laplacian K-modes

Imtiaz Masud Ziko ∗
ÉTS Montreal

Eric Granger
ÉTS Montreal

Ismail Ben Ayed
ÉTS Montreal

Abstract
We advocate Laplacian K-modes for joint clustering and density mode finding,
and propose a concave-convex relaxation of the problem, which yields a parallel
algorithm that scales up to large datasets and high dimensions. We optimize a
tight bound (auxiliary function) of our relaxation, which, at each iteration, amounts
to computing an independent update for each cluster-assignment variable, with
guaranteed convergence. Therefore, our bound optimizer can be trivially distributed
for large-scale data sets. Furthermore, we show that the density modes can be
obtained as byproducts of the assignment variables via simple maximum-value
operations whose additional computational cost is linear in the number of data
points. Our formulation does not need storing a full affinity matrix and computing its eigenvalue decomposition, neither does it perform expensive projection
steps and Lagrangian-dual inner iterates for the simplex constraints of each point.
Furthermore, unlike mean-shift, our density-mode estimation does not require
inner-loop gradient-ascent iterates. It has a complexity independent of featurespace dimension, yields modes that are valid data points in the input set and is
applicable to discrete domains as well as arbitrary kernels. We report comprehensive experiments over various data sets, which show that our algorithm yields very
competitive performances in term of optimization quality (i.e., the value of the
discrete-variable objective at convergence) and clustering accuracy.

1

Introduction

We advocate Laplacian K-modes for joint clustering and density mode finding, and propose a
concave-convex relaxation of the problem, which yields a parallel algorithm that scales up to large
data sets and high dimensions. Introduced initially in the work of Wang and Carreira-Perpinán [33],
the model solves the following constrained optimization problem for L clusters and data points
X = {xp ∈ RD , p = 1, . . . , N }:
(
)
N X
L
X
λX
2
min
E(Z) := −
zp,l k(xp , ml ) +
k(xp , xq )kzp − zq k
Z
2 p,q
p=1 l=1
X
ml = arg max
zp,l k(xp , y)
y∈X

p

t

1 zp = 1, zp ∈ {0, 1}L ∀p

(1)

t

where, for each point p, zp = [zp,1 , . . . , zp,L ] denotes a binary assignment vector, which is constrained to be within the L-dimensional simplex: zp,l = 1 if p belongs to cluster l and zp,l = 0
otherwise. Z is the N × L matrix whose rows are given by the zp ’s. k(xp , xq ) are pairwise affinities,
which can be either learned or evaluated in an unsupervised way via a kernel function.
Model (1) integrates several powerful and well-known ideas in clustering. First, it identifies density
modes [18, 8], as in popular mean-shift. Prototype ml is a cluster mode and, therefore, a valid data
∗

Corresponding author email: imtiaz-masud.ziko.1@etsmtl.ca

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

