Optimal Subsampling with Influence Functions

Eric Brochu
Tableau Software
Vancouver, BC, Canada
ebrochu@tableau.com

Daniel Ting
Tableau Software
Seattle, WA, USA
dting@tableau.com

Abstract
Subsampling is a common and often effective method to deal with the computational challenges of large datasets. However, for most statistical models, there is no
well-motivated approach for drawing a non-uniform subsample. We show that the
concept of an asymptotically linear estimator and the associated influence function
leads to asymptotically optimal sampling probabilities for a wide class of popular
models. This is the only tight optimality result for subsampling we are aware of as
other methods only provide probabilistic error bounds or optimal rates. We also
show that these optimal weights can differ depending on whether the task is parameter estimation or prediction. Furthermore, for linear regression models, which
have well-studied procedures for non-uniform subsampling, we empirically show
our optimal influence function based method outperforms previous approaches
even when using approximations to the optimal probabilities.

1

Introduction

As the amount of data increases, the question arises as to how best to deal with the large datasets.
While computational platforms such as Spark [28] and Ray [23] help process large datasets once
a desired model is chosen, simply using smaller data can be a faster solution for exploratory data
modeling, rapid prototyping, or other tasks where the accuracy obtainable from the full dataset is
not needed. Sampling provides a flexible summarization of the data that can be applied to almost all
tasks in a simple, straightforward manner.
Ideally, data is sampled efficiently, preferentially sampling the data that will accurately approximate
the estimates from the full data set. However, we show existing preferential sampling techniques are
inefficient and can demonstrate pathological behavior. Furthermore, most methods are inflexible as
they are derived only for specific linear or logistic regression models.
We propose using the influence function as a measure of sampling importance. The influence function
measures the change in an objective or values of interest due to a single point. It is a particularly
general approach as many model and estimators, such as maximum likelihood and M-estimators,
can be cast in the framework, and it can work with non-differentiable objectives. We prove that the
regularized version of our sampling design is asymptotically optimal among all regularized designs
of the same expected size. While other sampling methods provide probabilistic guarantees on the
resulting samples, we do not know of other results that can claim optimality.
Beyond the improved performance of our method, the influence-based approach allows one to understand the problem of optimal subsampling. The influence function and the notion of asymptotically
linear estimators reduces the problem of accurately approximating an estimate on the full data set to
a problem of calculating the mean over influence functions. Thus, the problem of finding an optimal
sampling probabilities, or sampling design, for estimating a model is converted to the more straightforward problem of generating an optimal sampling design for a mean. This design can depend on the
specific task on hand. In particular, efficient sampling designs to estimate the parameters of a model
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

