Adversarially Robust Optimization
with Gaussian Processes
Ilija Bogunovic
LIONS, EPFL
ilija.bogunovic@epfl.ch
Stefanie Jegelka
MIT CSAIL
stefje@mit.edu

Jonathan Scarlett
National University of Singapore
scarlett@comp.nus.edu.sg
Volkan Cevher
LIONS, EPFL
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of Gaussian process (GP) optimization
with an added robustness requirement: The returned point may be perturbed by
an adversary, and we require the function value to remain as high as possible
even after this perturbation. This problem is motivated by settings in which the
underlying functions during optimization and implementation stages are different,
or when one is interested in finding an entire region of good inputs rather than only
a single point. We show that standard GP optimization algorithms do not exhibit
the desired robustness properties, and provide a novel confidence-bound based
algorithm S TABLE O PT for this purpose. We rigorously establish the required number of samples for S TABLE O PT to find a near-optimal point, and we complement
this guarantee with an algorithm-independent lower bound. We experimentally
demonstrate several potential applications of interest using real-world data sets,
and we show that S TABLE O PT consistently succeeds in finding a stable maximizer
where several baseline methods fail.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GP) provide a powerful means for sequentially optimizing a black-box function
f that is costly to evaluate and for which noisy point evaluations are available. Since its introduction,
this approach has successfully been applied to numerous applications, including robotics [21],
hyperparameter tuning [30], recommender systems [34], environmental monitoring [31], and more.
In many such applications, one is faced with various forms of uncertainty that are not accounted for
by standard algorithms. In robotics, the optimization is often performed via simulations, creating a
mismatch between the assumed function and the true one; in hyperparameter tuning, the function is
typically similarly mismatched due to limited training data; in recommendation systems and several
other applications, the underlying function is inherently time-varying, so the returned solution may
become increasingly stale over time; the list goes on.
In this paper, we address these considerations by studying the GP optimization problem with an
additional requirement of adversarial robustness: The returned point may be perturbed by an
adversary, and we require the function value to remain as high as possible even after this perturbation.
This problem is of interest not only for attaining improved robustness to uncertainty, but also for
settings where one seeks a region of good points rather than a single point, and for other related
max-min optimization settings (see Section 4 for further discussion).
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

