3D Steerable CNNs: Learning Rotationally
Equivariant Features in Volumetric Data

Maurice Weiler*
University of Amsterdam
m.weiler@uva.nl
Max Welling
University of Amsterdam, CIFAR,
Qualcomm AI Research
m.welling@uva.nl

Mario Geiger*
EPFL
mario.geiger@epfl.ch

Wouter Boomsma
University of Copenhagen
wb@di.ku.dk

Taco Cohen
Qualcomm AI Research
taco.cohen@gmail.com

Abstract
We present a convolutional network that is equivariant to rigid body motions.
The model uses scalar-, vector-, and tensor fields over 3D Euclidean space to
represent data, and equivariant convolutions to map between such representations.
These SE(3)-equivariant convolutions utilize kernels which are parameterized
as a linear combination of a complete steerable kernel basis, which is derived
analytically in this paper. We prove that equivariant convolutions are the most
general equivariant linear maps between fields over R3 . Our experimental results
confirm the effectiveness of 3D Steerable CNNs for the problem of amino acid
propensity prediction and protein structure classification, both of which have
inherent SE(3) symmetry.

1

Introduction

Increasingly, machine learning techniques are being applied in the natural sciences. Many problems
in this domain, such as the analysis of protein structure, exhibit exact or approximate symmetries.
It has long been understood that the equations that define a model or natural law should respect
the symmetries of the system under study, and that knowledge of symmetries provides a powerful
constraint on the space of admissible models. Indeed, in theoretical physics, this idea is enshrined
as a fundamental principle, known as Einstein’s principle of general covariance. Machine learning,
which is, like physics, concerned with the induction of predictive models, is no different: our models
must respect known symmetries in order to produce physically meaningful results.
A lot of recent work, reviewed in Sec. 2, has focused on the problem of developing equivariant
networks, which respect some known symmetry. In this paper, we develop the theory of SE(3)equivariant networks. This is far from trivial, because SE(3) is both non-commutative and noncompact. Nevertheless, at run-time, all that is required to make a 3D convolution equivariant using our
method, is to parameterize the convolution kernel as a linear combination of pre-computed steerable
basis kernels. Hence, the 3D Steerable CNN incorporates equivariance to symmetry transformations
without deviating far from current engineering best practices.
The architectures presented here fall within the framework of Steerable G-CNNs [8, 10, 40, 45],
which represent their input as fields over a homogeneous space (R3 in this case), and use steerable
* Equal Contribution. MG initiated the project, derived the kernel space constraint, wrote the first network
implementation and ran the Shrec17 experiment. MW solved the kernel constraint analytically, designed the
anti-aliased kernel sampling in discrete space and coded / ran many of the CATH experiments.
Source code is available at https://github.com/mariogeiger/se3cnn.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

