The committee machine: Computational to statistical
gaps in learning a two-layers neural network

Benjamin Aubin?† , Antoine Maillard† , Jean Barbier⊗♦†
Florent Krzakala† , Nicolas Macris⊗ , Lenka Zdeborová?

Abstract
Heuristic tools from statistical physics have been used in the past to locate the
phase transitions and compute the optimal learning and generalization errors in
the teacher-student scenario in multi-layer neural networks. In this contribution,
we provide a rigorous justification of these approaches for a two-layers neural
network model called the committee machine. We also introduce a version of
the approximate message passing (AMP) algorithm for the committee machine
that allows to perform optimal learning in polynomial time for a large set of
parameters. We find that there are regimes in which a low generalization error is
information-theoretically achievable while the AMP algorithm fails to deliver it;
strongly suggesting that no efficient algorithm exists for those cases, and unveiling
a large computational gap.

While the traditional approach to learning and generalization follows the Vapnik-Chervonenkis [1]
and Rademacher [2] worst-case type bounds, there has been a considerable body of theoretical work
on calculating the generalization ability of neural networks for data arising from a probabilistic model
within the framework of statistical mechanics [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. In the wake of the need to understand
the effectiveness of neural networks and also the limitations of the classical approaches [8], it is of
interest to revisit the results that have emerged thanks to the physics perspective. This direction is
currently experiencing a strong revival, see e.g. [9, 10, 11, 12].
Of particular interest is the so-called teacher-student approach, where labels are generated by feeding
i.i.d. random samples to a neural network architecture (the teacher) and are then presented to another
neural network (the student) that is trained using these data. Early studies computed the information
theoretic limitations of the supervised learning abilities of the teacher weights by a student who is
given m independent n-dimensional examples with α ≡ m/n = Θ(1) and n → ∞ [3, 4, 7]. These
works relied on non-rigorous heuristic approaches, such as the replica and cavity methods [13, 14].
Additionally no provably efficient algorithm was provided to achieve the predicted learning abilities,
and it was thus difficult to test those predictions, or to assess the computational difficulty.
Recent developments in statistical estimation and information theory —in particular of approximate
message passing algorithms (AMP) [15, 16, 17, 18], and a rigorous proof of the replica formula for
the optimal generalization error [11]— allowed to settle these two missing points for single-layer
neural networks (i.e. without any hidden variables). In the present paper, we leverage on these works,
and provide rigorous asymptotic predictions and corresponding message passing algorithm for a class
of two-layers networks.
? Institut de Physique Théorique, CNRS & CEA & Université Paris-Saclay, Saclay, France.
† Laboratoire de Physique Statistique, CNRS & Sorbonnes Universités & École Normale Supérieure, PSL
University, Paris, France.
⊗ Laboratoire de Théorie des Communications, Faculté Informatique et Communications, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne, Suisse.
♦ International Center for Theoretical Physics, Trieste, Italy.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

