Visual Reinforcement Learning with Imagined Goals

Ashvin Nair∗, Vitchyr Pong∗ , Murtaza Dalal, Shikhar Bahl, Steven Lin, Sergey Levine
University of California, Berkeley
{anair17,vitchyr,mdalal,shikharbahl,stevenlin598,svlevine}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
For an autonomous agent to fulfill a wide range of user-specified goals at test time,
it must be able to learn broadly applicable and general-purpose skill repertoires.
Furthermore, to provide the requisite level of generality, these skills must handle
raw sensory input such as images. In this paper, we propose an algorithm that
acquires such general-purpose skills by combining unsupervised representation
learning and reinforcement learning of goal-conditioned policies. Since the particular goals that might be required at test-time are not known in advance, the agent
performs a self-supervised “practice” phase where it imagines goals and attempts
to achieve them. We learn a visual representation with three distinct purposes: sampling goals for self-supervised practice, providing a structured transformation of
raw sensory inputs, and computing a reward signal for goal reaching. We also propose a retroactive goal relabeling scheme to further improve the sample-efficiency
of our method. Our off-policy algorithm is efficient enough to learn policies that
operate on raw image observations and goals for a real-world robotic system, and
substantially outperforms prior techniques.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms hold the promise of allowing autonomous agents, such as
robots, to learn to accomplish arbitrary tasks. However, the standard RL framework involves learning
policies that are specific to individual tasks, which are defined by hand-specified reward functions.
Agents that exist persistently in the world can prepare to solve diverse tasks by setting their own
goals, practicing complex behaviors, and learning about the world around them. In fact, humans
are very proficient at setting abstract goals for themselves, and evidence shows that this behavior is
already present from early infancy [43], albeit with simple goals such as reaching. The behavior and
representation of goals grows more complex over time as they learn how to manipulate objects and
locomote. How can we begin to devise a reinforcement learning system that sets its own goals and
learns from experience with minimal outside intervention and manual engineering?
In this paper, we take a step toward this goal by designing an RL framework that jointly learns
representations of raw sensory inputs and policies that achieve arbitrary goals under this representation
by practicing to reach self-specified random goals during training. To provide for automated and
flexible goal-setting, we must first choose how a general goal can be specified for an agent interacting
with a complex and highly variable environment. Even providing the state of such an environment
to a policy is a challenge. For instance, a task that requires a robot to manipulate various objects
would require a combinatorial representation, reflecting variability in the number and type of objects
in the current scene. Directly using raw sensory signals, such as images, avoids this challenge, but
learning from raw images is substantially harder. In particular, pixel-wise Euclidean distance is
not an effective reward function for visual tasks since distances between images do not correspond
to meaningful distances between states [36, 49]. Furthermore, although end-to-end model-free
∗

Equal contribution. Order was determined by coin flip.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

