TETRIS: TilE-matching the TRemendous Irregular
Sparsity

Yu Ji1,2,3

Ling Liang3

Lei Deng3

Youyang Zhang1

Youhui Zhang1,2∗ Yuan Xie3

{jiy15,zhang-yy15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,zyh02@tsinghua.edu.cn
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Beijing Innovation Center for Future Chip
{lingliang,leideng,yuanxie}@ece.ucsb.edu
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara

Abstract
Compressing neural networks by pruning weights with small magnitudes can
significantly reduce the computation and storage cost. Although pruning makes
the model smaller, it is difficult to get a practical speedup in modern computing
platforms such as CPU and GPU due to the irregularity. Structural pruning has
attracted a lot of research interest to make sparsity hardware-friendly. Increasing the
sparsity granularity can lead to better hardware utilization, but it will compromise
the sparsity for maintaining accuracy.
In this work, we propose a novel method, TETRIS, to achieve both better hardware
utilization and higher sparsity. Just like a tile-matching game2 , we cluster the
irregularly distributed weights with small value into structured groups by reordering
the input/output dimension and structurally prune them. Results show that it
can achieve comparable sparsity with the irregular element-wise pruning and
demonstrate negligible accuracy loss. The experiments also show ideal speedup,
which is proportional to the sparsity, on GPU platforms. Our proposed method
provides a new solution toward algorithm and architecture co-optimization for
accuracy-efficiency trade-off.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success in a wide spectrum of applications, such
as computer vision [1, 2, 3], speech recognition [4, 5], and language translation [6]. However, the
huge memory overhead and intensive computation requirement limit the execution performance
on cloud platforms and also impede the porting onto edge devices with constraints on resource
and energy. Model compression by pruning can significantly reduce the storage and computation
cost [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. They can achieve impressive compression rate by pruning weights with
small magnitudes and then retraining the model to recover the accuracy.
Although pruning makes the model smaller, it requires specialized sparse BLAS library or customized
hardware [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18] to accelerate its execution. On general computing platforms (e.g.,
CPU and GPU), the performance of the pruned sparse model may be even worse than the original
dense one if the sparsity is not sufficiently high [19, 20]. This is because these general computing
∗

Corresponding Author
A tile-matching game is a type of game where the player manipulates tiles in order to make them disappear
according to a matching criterion. Tetris is one of the most famous tile-matching games. Our approach is doing
the same thing that clusters the unimportant items and structurally prunes them.
2

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

