Gaussian Process Prior Variational Autoencoders
Francesco Paolo Casale†∗ , Adrian V Dalca‡§ , Luca Saglietti†¶ ,
Jennifer Listgarten] , Nicolo Fusi†
†

‡

Microsoft Research New England, Cambridge (MA), USA
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, MIT, Cambridge (MA), USA
§
Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, MGH, HMS, Boston (MA), USA;
¶
Italian Institute for Genomic Medicine, Torino, Italy
]
EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley (CA), USA.
∗
frcasale@microsoft.com

Abstract
Variational autoencoders (VAE) are a powerful and widely-used class of models
to learn complex data distributions in an unsupervised fashion. One important
limitation of VAEs is the prior assumption that latent sample representations are independent and identically distributed. However, for many important datasets, such
as time-series of images, this assumption is too strong: accounting for covariances
between samples, such as those in time, can yield to a more appropriate model
specification and improve performance in downstream tasks. In this work, we
introduce a new model, the Gaussian Process (GP) Prior Variational Autoencoder
(GPPVAE), to specifically address this issue. The GPPVAE aims to combine the
power of VAEs with the ability to model correlations afforded by GP priors. To
achieve efficient inference in this new class of models, we leverage structure in
the covariance matrix, and introduce a new stochastic backpropagation strategy
that allows for computing stochastic gradients in a distributed and low-memory
fashion. We show that our method outperforms conditional VAEs (CVAEs) and an
adaptation of standard VAEs in two image data applications.

1

Introduction

Dimensionality reduction is a fundamental approach to compression of complex, large-scale data
sets, either for visualization or for pre-processing before application of supervised approaches.
Historically, dimensionality reduction has been framed in one of two modeling camps: the simple and
rich capacity language of neural networks; or the probabilistic formalism of generative models, which
enables Bayesian capacity control and provides uncertainty over latent encodings. Recently, these
two formulations have been combined through the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and
Welling, 2013), wherein the expressiveness of neural networks was used to model both the mean and
the variance of a simple likelihood. In these models, latent encodings are assumed to be identically
and independently distributed (iid ) across both latent dimensions and samples. Despite this simple
prior, the model lacks conjugacy, exact inference is intractable and variational inference is used. In
fact, the main contribution of the Kingma et al. paper is to introduce an improved, general approach
for variational inference (also developed in Rezende et al. (2014)).
One important limitation of the VAE model is the prior assumption that latent representations of
samples are iid , whereas in many important problems, accounting for sample structure is crucial
for correct model specification and consequently, for optimal results. For example, in autonomous
driving, or medical imaging (Dalca et al., 2015; Lonsdale et al., 2013), high dimensional images are
correlated in time—an iid prior for these would not be sensible because, a priori, two images that
were taken closer in time should have more similar latent representations than images taken further
apart. More generally, one can have multiple sequences of images from different cars, or medical
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

