Optimization of Smooth Functions with Noisy
Observations: Local Minimax Rates
Yining Wang, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, Aarti Singh
Department of Machine Learning and Statistics
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA
{yiningwa,aarti}@cs.cmu.edu, siva@stat.cmu.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of global optimization of an unknown non-convex smooth
function with noisy zeroth-order feedback. We propose a local minimax framework
to study the fundamental difficulty of optimizing smooth functions with adaptive
function evaluations. We show that for functions with fast growth around their
global minima, carefully designed optimization algorithms can identify a near
global minimizer with many fewer queries than worst-case global minimax theory
predicts. For the special case of strongly convex and smooth functions, our implied
convergence rates match the ones developed for zeroth-order convex optimization
problems. On the other hand, we show that in the worst case no algorithm can
converge faster than the minimax rate of estimating an unknown functions in `8 norm. Finally, we show that non-adaptive algorithms, although optimal in a global
minimax sense, do not attain the optimal local minimax rate.

1

Introduction

Global function optimization with stochastic (zeroth-order) query oracles is an important problem in
optimization, machine learning and statistics. To optimize an unknown bounded function f : X ÞÑ R
defined on a known compact d-dimensional domain X Ď Rd , the data analyst makes n active queries
x1 , . . . , xn P X and observes
yt “ f pxt q ` wt ,

i.i.d.

wt „ N p0, 1q, 1 t “ 1, . . . , n.

(1)

The queries x1 , . . . , xt are active in the sense that the selection of xt can depend on previous queries
pn P X is produced that
and their responses x1 , y1 , . . . , xt´1 , yt´1 . After n queries, an estimate x
approximately minimizes the unknown function f . Such “active query” models are relevant in a
broad range of (noisy) global optimization applications, for instance in hyper-parameter tuning of
machine learning algorithms [40] and sequential design in material synthesis experiments where the
goal is to maximize strengths of the produced materials [35, 41]. Sec. 2.1 gives a rigorous formulation
of the active query model and contrasts it with the classical passive query model.
pn is measured by the difference of f pp
xn q and the global minimum of f :
The error of an estimate x
xn ; f q :“ f pp
xn q ´ f ˚
Lpp

where f ˚ :“ inf f pxq.
xPX

(2)

Throughout the paper we take X to be the d-dimensional unit cube r0, 1sd , while our results can be
easily generalized to other compact domains satisfying minimal regularity conditions.
When f belongs to a smoothness class, say the Hölder class with exponent α, a straightforward
global optimization method is to first sample n points uniformly at random from X and then construct
1

The exact distribution of εt is not important, and our results hold for sub-Gaussian noise too.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

