Differentially Private k-Means with Constant
Multiplicative Error

Haim Kaplan
Tel Aviv University and Google
haimk@post.tau.ac.il

Uri Stemmer∗
Ben-Gurion University
u@uri.co.il

Abstract
We design new differentially private algorithms for the Euclidean k-means problem,
both in the centralized model and in the local model of differential privacy. In both
models, our algorithms achieve significantly improved error guarantees than the
previous state-of-the-art. In addition, in the local model, our algorithm significantly
reduces the number of interaction rounds.
Although the problem has been widely studied in the context of differential privacy,
all of the existing constructions achieve only super constant approximation factors.
We present—for the first time—efficient private algorithms for the problem with
constant multiplicative error. Furthermore, we show how to modify our algorithms
so they compute private coresets for k-means clustering in both models.

1

Introduction

Clustering, and in particular center based clustering, are central problems in unsupervised learning.
Several cost objectives have been intensively studied for center based clustering, such as minimizing
the sum or the maximum of the distances of the input points to the centers. Most often the data
is embedded in Euclidean space and the distances that we work with are Euclidean distances. In
particular, probably the most studied center based clustering problem is the Euclidean k-means
problem. In this problem we are given a set of n input points in Rd and our goal is to find k centers
that minimize the sum of squared distances between each input point to its nearest center.2 When
privacy is not a concern one usually solves this problem by running Lloyd’s algorithm [25] initialized
by k-means++ [4]. This produces k-centers of cost that is no worse than O(log k) times the cost of
the optimal centers and typically much lower in practice.
The huge applicability of k-means clustering, together with the increasing awareness and demand
for user privacy, motivated the study of privacy preserving k-means algorithms. It is especially
desirable to achieve differential privacy [12], a privacy notion which has been widely adopted by
the academic community as well as big corporations like Google, Apple, and Microsoft. Indeed,
constructions of differentially private k-means algorithms have received a lot of attention over the last
14 years [8, 28, 14, 18, 27, 33, 31, 32, 17, 6, 29, 21]. In this work we design new differentially private
k-means algorithms, both for the centralized model (where a trusted curator collects the sensitive
information and analyzes it with differential privacy) and for the local model (where each respondent
randomizes her answers to the data curator to protect her privacy). In both models, our algorithms
offer significant improvements over the previous state-of-the-art.
∗
Work done while the second author was a postdoctoral researcher at the Weizmann Institute of Science,
supported by a Koshland fellowship, and by the Israel Science Foundation (grants 950/16 and 5219/17).
2
The sum of squares is nice to work with since we do not have to compute square roots. Furthermore, for a
given cluster its center of mass is the minimizer of the sum of the squared distances. These properties make
k-means to be the favorite cost objective for center based clustering.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

