Learning in Games with Lossy Feedback

Zhengyuan Zhou
Stanford University
zyzhou@stanford.edu

Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, LIG
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Nicholas Bambos
Stanford University
bambos@stanford.edu

Peter Glynn
Stanford University
glynn@stanford.edu

Susan Athey
Stanford University
athey@stanford.edu

Yinyu Ye
Stanford University
yinyu-ye@stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider a game-theoretical multi-agent learning problem where the feedback
information can be lost during the learning process and rewards are given by a
broad class of games known as variationally stable games. We propose a simple
variant of the classical online gradient descent algorithm, called reweighted online
gradient descent (ROGD) and show that in variationally stable games, if each
agent adopts ROGD, then almost sure convergence to the set of Nash equilibria is
guaranteed, even when the feedback loss is asynchronous and arbitrarily corrrelated
among agents. We then extend the framework to deal with unknown feedback loss
probabilities by using an estimator (constructed from past data) in its replacement.
Finally, we further extend the framework to accomodate both asynchronous loss
and stochastic rewards and establish that multi-agent ROGD learning still converges
to the set of Nash equilibria in such settings. Together, these results contribute
to the broad lanscape of multi-agent online learning by significantly relaxing the
feedback information that is required to achieve desirable outcomes.

1

Introduction

In multi-agent online learning [13, 14, 21, 45], a set of agents repeatedly interact with the environment
and each other while accumulating rewards in an online manner. The key feature in this problem is
that to each agent, the environment consists of all other agents who are simultaneously making such
sequential decisions, and hence, each agent’s reward depends not only on their own action, but also
on the joint action of all other agents. A common way to model reward structures in this multi-agent
online learning setting is through a repeated but otherwise unknown stage game: the reward of the
i-th agent at iteration n is ri (ani , an−i ), where ani is agent i’s action at n and an−i is the vector of all
other agents’s actions at stage n.
Even though the underlying stage game is fixed (i.e. each ri (·) is fixed), from each agent’s own
perspective, its reward is nevertheless a time-varying function when viewed solely as a function
of its own action, i.e., rin (·) = ri (·, an−i ), and it needs to select an action ani before receiving
the reward rin (ani ). As such, each agent is exactly engaged in a classical online learning process
[9, 23, 42, 43]. In this context, there is a fruitful line of existing literature providing a rich source
of online learning algorithms to minimize the standard performance metric known as regret [10],
PT
t
t t
t
defined as RegAlg
T = maxai ∈A
t=1 {ri (ai ) − ri (ai )} with the sequence of actions ai generated
by some online learning algorithm Alg. These algorithms, already classical, include “follow-theregularized-leader” [26], online gradient descent [57], multiplicative/exponential weights [3], online
mirror descent [44], and many others. Perhaps the simplest algorithm in the above list is Zinkevich’s
online gradient descent (OGD) method, where the agent simply takes a gradient step (using their
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

