Neural Interaction Transparency (NIT):
Disentangling Learned Interactions for
Improved Interpretability

Michael Tsang1 , Hanpeng Liu1 , Sanjay Purushotham1 , Pavankumar Murali2 , and Yan Liu1
1
2
University of Southern California
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
{tsangm,hanpengl,spurusho,yanliu.cs}@usc.edu, pavanm@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Neural networks are known to model statistical interactions, but they entangle the
interactions at intermediate hidden layers for shared representation learning. We
propose a framework, Neural Interaction Transparency (NIT), that disentangles the
shared learning across different interactions to obtain their intrinsic lower-order
and interpretable structure. This is done through a novel regularizer that directly
penalizes interaction order. We show that disentangling interactions reduces a
feedforward neural network to a generalized additive model with interactions,
which can lead to transparent models that perform comparably to the state-of-theart models. NIT is also flexible and efficient; it can learn generalized additive
models with maximum K-order interactions by training only O(1) models.

1

Introduction

Feedforward neural networks are typically viewed as powerful predictive models possessing the
ability to universally approximate any function [13]. Because neural networks are increasingly used
in critical domains, including healthcare and finance [2, 22, 9, 5, 30], there is a strong desire to
understand how they make predictions. One of the key issues preventing neural networks from being
visualizable and understandable is that they assume the variable relationships in data are extremely
high-dimensional and complex [23]. Specifically, each hidden neuron takes as input all nodes from
the previous layer and creates a high-order interaction between these nodes.
A fundamental challenge facing the interpretability of neural networks is the entangling of feature
interactions within the networks. An interaction is entangled in a neural network if any hidden unit
learns an interaction out of separate true feature interactions. For example, suppose that a feedforward
neural network is trained on data consisting of two multiplicative pairwise interactions, x1 x2 and
x3 x4 . The neural network entangles the interactions if any hidden unit learns an interaction between
all four variables {1, 2, 3, 4}. Figure 1 shows how this interaction entangling is generally true.
Although a relatively small percentage of hidden units in the first hidden layer entangle the pairwise
interactions, as soon as the second hidden layer, nearly all hidden units entangle the interactions when
at least one of them is present. Previous works have studied how to disentangle factors of variation
in neural networks [4, 18, 14], but none of them have addressed the entangling of interactions. It
remains an open problem of how to learn an interpretable neural network by disentangling feature
interactions.
In this work, we propose the Neural Interaction Transparency (NIT) framework to learn interpretable
feedforward neural networks. NIT learns to separate feature interactions within the neural network by
novel use of regularization. The framework corresponds to reducing a feedforward neural network into
a generalized additive model with interactions [20, 2], which can lead to an accurate and transparent
model [30, 29]. By disentangling interactions, we are able to learn this exact model faster, and it is
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

