Computing Kantorovich-Wasserstein Distances on
d-dimensional histograms using (d + 1)-partite graphs

Gennaro Auricchio, Stefano Gualandi, Marco Veneroni
Università degli Studi di Pavia, Dipartimento di Matematica “F. Casorati"
gennaro.auricchio01@universitadipavia.it,
stefano.gualandi@unipv.it, marco.veneroni@unipv.it
Federico Bassetti
Politecnico di Milano, Dipartimento di Matematica
federico.bassetti@polimi.it

Abstract
This paper presents a novel method to compute the exact Kantorovich-Wasserstein
distance between a pair of d-dimensional histograms having n bins each. We prove
that this problem is equivalent to an uncapacitated minimum cost flow problem on
d+1
a (d + 1)-partite graph with (d + 1)n nodes and dn d arcs, whenever the cost
is separable along the principal d-dimensional directions. We show numerically
the benefits of our approach by computing the Kantorovich-Wasserstein distance
of order 2 among two sets of instances: gray scale images and d-dimensional bio
medical histograms. On these types of instances, our approach is competitive with
state-of-the-art optimal transport algorithms.

1

Introduction

The computation of a measure of similarity (or dissimilarity) between pairs of objects is a crucial
subproblem in several applications in Computer Vision [24, 25, 22], Computational Statistic [17],
Probability [6, 8], and Machine Learning [29, 12, 14, 5]. In mathematical terms, in order to compute
the similarity between a pair of objects, we want to compute a distance. If the distance is equal to
zero the two objects are considered to be equal; the more the two objects are different, the greater is
their distance value. For instance, the Euclidean norm is the most used distance function to compare a
pair of points in Rd . Note that the Euclidean distance requires only O(d) operations to be computed.
When computing the distance between complex discrete objects, such as for instance a pair of discrete
measures, a pair of images, a pair of d-dimensional histograms, or a pair of clouds of points, the
Kantorovich-Wasserstein distance [31, 30] has proved to be a relevant distance function [24], which
has both nice mathematical properties and useful practical implications. Unfortunately, computing
the Kantorovich-Wasserstein distance requires the solution of an optimization problem. Even if
the optimization problem is polynomially solvable, the size of practical instances to be solved is
very large, and hence the computation of Kantorovich-Wasserstein distances implies an important
computational burden.
The optimization problem that yields the Kantorovich-Wasserstein distance can be solved with
different methods. Nowadays, the most popular methods are based on (i) the Sinkhorn’s algorithm
[11, 28, 3], which solves (heuristically) a regularized version of the basic optimal transport problem,
and (ii) Linear Programming-based algorithms [13, 15, 20], which exactly solve the basic optimal
transport problem by formulating and solving an equivalent uncapacitated minimum cost flow
problem. For a nice overview of both computational approaches, we refer the reader to Chapters 2
and 3 in [23], and the references therein contained.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

