BourGAN: Generative Networks with Metric
Embeddings
Chang Xiao

Peilin Zhong
Changxi Zheng
Columbia University
{chang, peilin, cxz}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses the mode collapse for generative adversarial networks (GANs).
We view modes as a geometric structure of data distribution in a metric space.
Under this geometric lens, we embed subsamples of the dataset from an arbitrary
metric space into the `2 space, while preserving their pairwise distance distribution.
Not only does this metric embedding determine the dimensionality of the latent
space automatically, it also enables us to construct a mixture of Gaussians to draw
latent space random vectors. We use the Gaussian mixture model in tandem with a
simple augmentation of the objective function to train GANs. Every major step of
our method is supported by theoretical analysis, and our experiments on real and
synthetic data confirm that the generator is able to produce samples spreading over
most of the modes while avoiding unwanted samples, outperforming several recent
GAN variants on a number of metrics and offering new features.

1

Introduction

In unsupervised learning, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [1] is by far one of the most
widely used methods for training deep generative models. However, difficulties of optimizing GANs
have also been well observed [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. One of the most prominent issues is mode collapse,
a phenomenon in which a GAN, after learning from a data distribution of multiple modes, generates
samples landed only in a subset of the modes. In other words, the generated samples lack the diversity
as shown in the real dataset, yielding a much lower entropy distribution.
We approach this challenge by questioning two fundamental properties of GANs. i) We question
the commonly used multivariate Gaussian that generates random vectors for the generator network.
We show that in the presence of separated modes, drawing random vectors from a single Gaussian
may lead to arbitrarily large gradients of the generator, and a better choice is by using a mixture of
Gaussians. ii) We consider the geometric interpretation of modes, and argue that the modes of a
data distribution should be viewed under a specific distance metric of data items – different metrics
may lead to different distributions of modes, and a proper metric can result in interpretable modes.
From this vantage point, we address the problem of mode collapse in a general metric space. To
our knowledge, despite the recent attempts of addressing mode collapse [3, 9, 10, 6, 11, 12], both
properties remain unexamined.
Technical contributions. We introduce BourGAN, an enhancement of GANs to avoid mode collapse in any metric space. In stark contrast to all existing mode collapse solutions, BourGAN draws
random vectors from a Gaussian mixture in a low-dimensional latent space. The Gaussian mixture is
constructed to mirror the mode structure of the provided dataset under a given distance metric. We
derive the construction algorithm from metric embedding theory, namely the Bourgain Theorem [13].
Not only is using metric embeddings theoretically sound (as we will show), it also brings significant
advantages in practice. Metric embeddings enable us to retain the mode structure in the `2 latent space
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

