Deep Homogeneous Mixture Models:
Representation, Separation, and Approximation

Priyank Jaini
Department of Computer Science & Waterloo AI Institute
University of Waterloo
pjaini@uwaterloo.ca
Pascal Poupart
University of Waterloo, Vector Institute & Waterloo AI Institute
ppoupart@uwaterloo.ca
Yaoliang Yu
Department of Computer Science & Waterloo AI Institute
University of Waterloo
yaoliang.yu@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
At their core, many unsupervised learning models provide a compact representation
of homogeneous density mixtures, but their similarities and differences are not
always clearly understood. In this work, we formally establish the relationships
among latent tree graphical models (including special cases such as hidden Markov
models and tensorial mixture models), hierarchical tensor formats and sum-product
networks. Based on this connection, we then give a unified treatment of exponential separation in exact representation size between deep mixture architectures
and shallow ones. In contrast, for approximate representation, we show that the
conditional gradient algorithm can approximate any homogeneous mixture within
 accuracy by combining O(1/2 ) “shallow” architectures, where the hidden constant may decrease (exponentially) with respect to the depth. Our experiments on
both synthetic and real datasets confirm the benefits of depth in density estimation.

1

Introduction

Multivariate density estimation, a widely studied problem in statistics and machine learning [28],
is becoming even more relevant nowadays due to the availability of huge amounts of unlabeled
data in various applications. Many unsupervised and semi-supervised learning algorithms either
implicitly (e.g. generative adversarial networks) or explicitly estimate (some functional of) the
underlying density function. In this work, we study the problem of density estimation with an explicit
representation through finite mixture models (FMMs) [19], which have endured thorough scientific
scrutiny over decades. The popularity of FMMs is largely due to their simplicity, interpretability,
and universality, in the sense that, given sufficiently many components (satisfying mild conditions),
FMMs can approximate any distribution to an arbitrary level of accuracy [22].
Many familiar unsupervised models in machine learning, at their core, provide a compact representation of homogeneous density mixtures. This list includes (but is not limited to) hidden Markov
models (HMM), the recently proposed tensorial mixture models (TMM) [26], latent tree graphical models (LTM)[21], hierarchical tensor formats (HTF) [13], and sum-product networks (SPN)
[9; 24]. However, despite all being a certain form of FMM, the precise relationships among these
models are not always well-understood. Our first contribution fills this gap: we prove (roughly) that
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

