Enhancing the Accuracy and Fairness
of Human Decision Making

Isabel Valera∗
MPI for Intelligent Systems
ivalera@tue.mpg.de

Adish Singla†
MPI-SWS
adishs@mpi-sws.org

Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez‡
MPI-SWS
manuelgr@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Societies often rely on human experts to take a wide variety of decisions affecting
their members, from jail-or-release decisions taken by judges and stop-and-frisk
decisions taken by police officers to accept-or-reject decisions taken by academics.
In this context, each decision is taken by an expert who is typically chosen uniformly
at random from a pool of experts. However, these decisions may be imperfect
due to limited experience, implicit biases, or faulty probabilistic reasoning. Can
we improve the accuracy and fairness of the overall decision making process by
optimizing the assignment between experts and decisions?
In this paper, we address the above problem from the perspective of sequential
decision making and show that, for different fairness notions in the literature, it
reduces to a sequence of (constrained) weighted bipartite matchings, which can
be solved efficiently using algorithms with approximation guarantees. Moreover, these algorithms also benefit from posterior sampling to actively trade
off exploitation—selecting expert assignments which lead to accurate and fair
decisions—and exploration—selecting expert assignments to learn about the experts’ preferences. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms on both
synthetic and real-world data and show that they can significantly improve both the
accuracy and fairness of the decisions taken by pools of experts.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there have been increasing concerns about the potential for unfairness of algorithmic
decision making. Moreover, these concerns have been often supported by empirical studies, which
have provided, e.g., evidence of racial discrimination [8, 10]. As a consequence, there have been
a flurry of work on developing computational mechanisms to make sure that the machine learning
methods that fuel algorithmic decision making are fair [3, 4, 5, 6, 13, 14, 15]. In contrast, to the
best of our knowledge, there is a lack of machine learning methods to ensure accuracy and fairness
in human decision making, which is still prevalent in a wide range of critical applications such as,
e.g., jail-or-release decisions by judges, stop-and-frisk decisions by police officers or accept-or-reject
decisions by academics. In this work, we take a first step towards filling this gap.
More specifically, we focus on a problem setting that fits a variety of real-world applications, including
the ones mentioned above: binary decisions come sequentially over time and each decision need to
be taken by a human decision maker, typically an expert, who is chosen from a pool of experts. For
example, in jail-or-release decisions, the expert is a judge who needs to decide whether she grants
bail to a defendant; in stop-and-frisk decisions, the expert is a police officer who needs to decide
whether she stop (and potentially frisk) a pedestrian; or, in accept-or-reject decisions, the expert is
an academic who needs to decide whether a paper is accepted in a conference (or a journal). In
this context, our goal is then to find the optimal assignments between human decision makers and
∗

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems. Max Planck Ring 4, 472076 Tuebingen (Germany).
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems (MPI-SWS). Campus E1 5, 66123 Saarbruecken (Germany).
‡
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems. Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse, G26, 67663 Kaiserslautern (Germany).
†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

