Improved Network Robustness
with Adversary Critic

Alexander Matyasko, Lap-Pui Chau
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
aliaksan001@ntu.edu.sg, elpchau@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Ideally, what confuses neural network should be confusing to humans. However,
recent experiments have shown that small, imperceptible perturbations can change
the network prediction. To address this gap in perception, we propose a novel
approach for learning robust classifier. Our main idea is: adversarial examples
for the robust classifier should be indistinguishable from the regular data of the
adversarial target. We formulate a problem of learning robust classifier in the
framework of Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN), where the adversarial
attack on classifier acts as a generator, and the critic network learns to distinguish
between regular and adversarial images. The classifier cost is augmented with
the objective that its adversarial examples should confuse the adversary critic. To
improve the stability of the adversarial mapping, we introduce adversarial cycleconsistency constraint which ensures that the adversarial mapping of the adversarial
examples is close to the original. In the experiments, we show the effectiveness
of our defense. Our method surpasses in terms of robustness networks trained
with adversarial training. Additionally, we verify in the experiments with human
annotators on MTurk that adversarial examples are indeed visually confusing.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are powerful representation learning models which achieve near-human
performance in image [1] and speech [2] recognition tasks. Yet, state-of-the-art networks are sensitive
to small input perturbations. [3] showed that adding adversarial noise to inputs produces images
which are visually similar to the original inputs but which the network misclassifies with high
confidence. In speech recognition, [4] introduced an adversarial attack, which can change any audio
waveform, such that the corrupted signal is over 99.9% similar to the original but transcribes to any
targeted phrase. The existence of adversarial examples puts into question generalization ability of
deep neural networks, reduces model interpretability, and limits applications of deep learning in
safety and security-critical environments [5, 6].
Adversarial training [7, 8, 9] is the most popular approach to improve network robustness. Adversarial
examples are generated online using the latest snapshot of the network parameters. The generated
adversarial examples are used to augment training dataset. Then, the classifier is trained on the
mixture of the original and the adversarial images. In this way, adversarial training smoothens a
decision boundary in the vicinity of the training examples. Adversarial training (AT) is an intuitive
and effective defense, but it has some limitations. AT is based on the assumption that adversarial
noise is label non-changing. If the perturbation is too large, the adversarial noise may change the true
underlying label of the input. Secondly, adversarial training discards the dependency between the
model parameters and the adversarial noise. As a result, the neural network may fail to anticipate
changes in the adversary and overfit the adversary used during training.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

