Semi-crowdsourced Clustering with
Deep Generative Models

Yucen Luo, Tian Tian, Jiaxin Shi, Jun Zhu∗, Bo Zhang
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, THBI Lab, BNRist Center,
State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys., Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{luoyc15,shijx15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, rossowhite@163.com
{dcszj,dcszb}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We consider the semi-supervised clustering problem where crowdsourcing provides
noisy information about the pairwise comparisons on a small subset of data, i.e.,
whether a sample pair is in the same cluster. We propose a new approach that
includes a deep generative model (DGM) to characterize low-level features of
the data, and a statistical relational model for noisy pairwise annotations on its
subset. The two parts share the latent variables. To make the model automatically
trade-off between its complexity and fitting data, we also develop its fully Bayesian
variant. The challenge of inference is addressed by fast (natural-gradient) stochastic
variational inference algorithms, where we effectively combine variational message
passing for the relational part and amortized learning of the DGM under a unified
framework. Empirical results on synthetic and real-world datasets show that our
model outperforms previous crowdsourced clustering methods.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a classic data analysis problem when the taxonomy of data is unknown in advance. Its
main goal is to divide samples into disjunct clusters based on the similarity between them. Clustering
is useful in various application areas including computer vision [21], bioinformatics [28], anomaly
detection [2], etc. When the feature vectors of samples are observed, most clustering algorithms
require a similarity or distance metric defined in the feature space, so that the optimization objective
can be built. Since different metrics may result in entirely different clustering results, and general
geometry metrics may not meet the intention of the tasks’ designer, many clustering approaches
learn the metric from the side-information provided by domain experts [30], thus the manual labeling
procedure of experts could be a bottleneck for the learning pipeline.
Crowdsourcing is an efficient way to collect human feedbacks [12]. It distributes micro-tasks to
a group of ordinal web workers in parallel, so the whole task can be done fast with relatively low
cost. It has been used on annotating large-scale machine learning datasets such as ImageNet [6], and
can also be used to collect side-information for clustering. However, directly collecting labels from
crowds may lead to low-quality results due to the lack of expertise of workers. Consider an example
of labeling a set of images of flowers from different species. One could show images to the web
workers and ask them to identify the corresponding species, but such tasks require the workers to be
experts in identifying the flowers and have all the species in their minds, which is not always possible.
A more reasonable and easier task is to ask the workers to compare pairs of flower images and to
answer whether they are in the same species or not. Then specific clustering methods are required to
discover the clusters from the noisy feedbacks.
To solve above clustering problems with pairwise similarity labels between samples from the crowds,
Crowdclustering [8] discovers the clusters within the dataset using a Bayesian hierarchical model.
∗

corresponding author

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

