Optimization for Approximate Submodularity
Avinatan Hassidim
Bar Ilan University and Google
avinatan@cs.biu.ac.il

Yaron Singer
Harvard University
yaron@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of maximizing a submodular function when given access
to its approximate version. Submodular functions are heavily studied in a wide
variety of disciplines since they are used to model many real world phenomena
and are amenable to optimization. There are many cases however in which the
phenomena we observe is only approximately submodular and the optimization
guarantees cease to hold. In this paper we describe a technique that yields strong
guarantees for maximization of monotone submodular functions from approximate
surrogates under cardinality and intersection of matroid constraints. In particular,
we show tight guarantees for maximization under a cardinality constraint and
1/(1 + P ) approximation under intersection of P matroids.

1

Introduction

In this paper we study maximization of approximately submodular functions. For nearly half a
century submodular functions have been extensively studied since they are amenable to optimization
and are recognized as an effective modeling instrument. In machine learning, submodular functions
capture a variety of objectives that include entropy, diversity, image segmentation, and clustering.
Although submodular functions are used to model real world phenomena, in many cases the functions
we encounter are only approximately submodular. This is either due to the fact that the objectives are
not exactly submodular, or alternatively they are, but we only observe their approximate version.
In the literature, approximate utility functions are modeled as surrogates of the original function that
have been corrupted by random variables drawn i.i.d from some distribution. Some examples include:
• Revealed preference theory. Luce’s famous model assumes that an agent’s revealed utility
f˜ : 2N ! R can be approximated by a well-behaved utility function f : 2N ! R s.t.
f˜(S) = f (S) + ⇠S for every S ✓ N where ⇠S is drawn i.i.d from a distribution [CE16]. f˜
is a utility function that approximates f , and multiple queries to f˜ return the same response;
• Statistics and learning theory. The assumption in learning is that the data we observe is
generated by f˜(x) = f (x) + ⇠x where f is in some well-behaved hypothesis class and ⇠x
is drawn i.i.d from some distribution. The use of f˜ is not to model corruption by noise but
rather the fact that data is not exactly manufactured by a function in the hypothesis class;
• Active learning. There is a long line of work on noise-robust learning where one has access
to a noisy membership oracle f˜(x) = f (x) + ⇠x and for every x we have that ⇠x is drawn
i.i.d from a distribution [Ang88, GKS90, Jac94, SS95, BF02, Fel09]. In this model as well,
the oracle is consistent and multiple queries return the same response. For set functions,
one can consider active learning in experimental design applications where the objective
function is often submodular and the goal would be to optimize f : 2N ! R given f˜.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

