A Simple Cache Model for Image Recognition

Emin Orhan
aeminorhan@gmail.com
Baylor College of Medicine & New York University

Abstract
Training large-scale image recognition models is computationally expensive.
This raises the question of whether there might be simple ways to improve
the test performance of an already trained model without having to re-train
or fine-tune it with new data. Here, we show that, surprisingly, this is
indeed possible. The key observation we make is that the layers of a deep
network close to the output layer contain independent, easily extractable
class-relevant information that is not contained in the output layer itself.
We propose to extract this extra class-relevant information using a simple
key-value cache memory to improve the classification performance of the
model at test time. Our cache memory is directly inspired by a similar
cache model previously proposed for language modeling (Grave et al., 2017).
This cache component does not require any training or fine-tuning; it can
be applied to any pre-trained model and, by properly setting only two
hyper-parameters, leads to significant improvements in its classification
performance. Improvements are observed across several architectures and
datasets. In the cache component, using features extracted from layers close
to the output (but not from the output layer itself) as keys leads to the
largest improvements. Concatenating features from multiple layers to form
keys can further improve performance over using single-layer features as keys.
The cache component also has a regularizing effect, a simple consequence
of which is that it substantially increases the robustness of models against
adversarial attacks.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are currently the state of the art models in a wide range of image
recognition problems. In the standard supervised learning setting, training these models
typically requires a large number of labeled examples. This causes at least two potential
problems. First, the large model and training set sizes make it computationally expensive to
train these models. Thus, it would be desirable to ensure that the model’s performance is as
good as it can be, given a particular budget of training data and training time. Secondly,
these models might have difficulties in cases where correct classification depends on the
detection of rare but distinctive features in an image that do not occur frequently enough in
the training data. In this paper, we propose a method that addresses both of these problems.
Our key observation is that the layers of a deep neural network close to the output layer contain
independent, easily extractable class-relevant information that is not already contained in
the output layer itself. We propose to extract this extra class-relevant information with a
simple key-value cache memory that is directly inspired by Grave et al. [3], where a similar
cache model was introduced in the context of language modeling.
Our model addresses the two problems described above. First, by properly setting only
two hyper-parameters, we show that a pre-trained model’s performance at test time can
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

