Uncertainty Sampling is Preconditioned Stochastic
Gradient Descent on Zero-One Loss
Percy Liang
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA
pliang@cs.stanford.edu

Stephen Mussmann
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA
mussmann@stanford.edu

Abstract
Uncertainty sampling, a popular active learning algorithm, is used to reduce the
amount of data required to learn a classifier, but it has been observed in practice to
converge to different parameters depending on the initialization and sometimes to
even better parameters than standard training on all the data. In this work, we give
a theoretical explanation of this phenomenon, showing that uncertainty sampling
on a convex (e.g., logistic) loss can be interpreted as performing a preconditioned
stochastic gradient step on the population zero-one loss. Experiments on synthetic
and real datasets support this connection.

1

Introduction

Active learning algorithms aim to learn parameters with less data by querying labels adaptively.
However, since such algorithms change the sampling distribution, they can introduce bias in the
learned parameters. While there has been some work to understand this (Schütze et al., 2006; Bach,
2007; Dasgupta and Hsu, 2008; Beygelzimer et al., 2009), the most common algorithm, “uncertainty
sampling” (Lewis and Gale, 1994; Settles, 2010), remains elusive. One of the oddities of uncertainty
sampling is that sometimes the bias is helpful: uncertainty sampling with a subset of the data can
yield lower error than random sampling on all the data (Schohn and Cohn, 2000; Bordes et al., 2005;
Chang et al., 2017). But sometimes, uncertainty sampling can vastly underperform, and in general,
different initializations can yield different parameters asymptotically. Despite the wealth of theory
on active learning (Balcan et al., 2006; Hanneke et al., 2014), a theoretical account of uncertainty
sampling is lacking.
In this paper, we characterize the dynamics of a variant of uncertainty sampling to explain the bias
introduced. For convex models, we show that uncertainty sampling with respect to a convex loss on all
the points is performing a preconditioned 1 stochastic gradient step on the (non-convex) population
zero-one loss. Furthermore, each uncertainty sampling iterate in expectation moves in a descent
direction of the zero-one loss, unless the parameters are at an approximate stationary point. This
explains why uncertainty sampling sometimes achieves lower zero-one loss than random sampling,
since that is the quantity it implicitly optimizes. At the same time, as the zero-one loss is non-convex,
we can get stuck in a local minimum with higher zero-one loss (see Figure 1).
Empirically, we validate the properties of uncertainty sampling on a simple synthetic dataset for
intuition as well as 25 real-world datasets. Our new connection between uncertainty sampling and the
zero-one loss minimization clarifies the importance of a good (sufficiently large) seed set, rather than
1

Preconditioned refers to multiplication of a symmetric positive semidefinite matrix to the (stochastic)
gradient for (stochastic) gradient descent (Li, 2018; Klein et al., 2011). It is often chosen to approximate the
inverse Hessian.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

