Gradient Descent Meets Shift-and-Invert
Preconditioning for Eigenvector Computation

Zhiqiang Xu
Cognitive Computing Lab (CCL), Baidu Research
National Engineering Laboratory of Deep Learning Technology and Application, China

xuzhiqiang04@baidu.com

Abstract
Shift-and-invert preconditioning, as a classic acceleration technique for the leading eigenvector computation, has received much attention again recently, owing
to fast least-squares solvers for efficiently approximating matrix inversions in
power iterations. In this work, we adopt an inexact Riemannian gradient descent perspective to investigate this technique on the effect of the step-size scheme.
The shift-and-inverted power method is included as a special case with adaptive
step-sizes. Particularly, two other step-size settings, i.e., constant step-sizes and
Barzilai-Borwein (BB) step-sizes, are examined theoretically and/or empirically.
We present a novel convergence
analysis for the constant step-size setting that
√
λ1
achieves a rate at Õ( λ1 −λp+1 ), where λi represents the i-th largest eigenvalue
of the given real symmetric matrix and p is the multiplicity of λ1 . Our experimental studies show that the proposed algorithm can be significantly faster than the
shift-and-inverted power method in practice.

1

Introduction

Eigenvector computation is a fundamental problem in numerical algebra and often of central importance to a variety of scientific and engineering computing tasks such as principal component analysis
[Fan et al., 2018], spectral clustering [Ng et al., 2001], low-rank matrix approximation [Hastie et al.,
2015, Liu and Li, 2014], among others. Classic solvers for this problem are power methods and
Lanczos algorithms [Golub and Van Loan, 1996]. Although Lanczos algorithms possess the optimal
convergence rate Õ( √λ 1−λ ), it seems not amenable to stochastic optimization. People thus tend to
1
2
develop faster algorithms on top of power methods [Arora et al., 2012, 2013, Hardt and Price, 2014,
Shamir, 2015, Garber and Hazan, 2015, Garber et al., 2016, Lei et al., 2016, Wang et al., 2017]. One
notable technique among them is the shift-and-invert preconditioning that has revived recently for
this purpose [Garber and Hazan, 2015, Garber et al., 2016, Wang et al., 2017, Gao et al., 2017]. Using this technique, each power iteration step can be reduced to approximately solving a linear system
subproblem that can leverage fast least-squares solvers, e.g., accelerated gradient descent (AGD)
[Nesterov, 2014] or stochastic variance reduced gradient (SVRG) [Johnson and Zhang, 2013].
In this work, we take a Riemannian gradient descent view to investigate the shift-and-invert preconditioning for the leading eigenvector computation on the effect of the step-size scheme. The resulting
algorithm thus is termed as the shift-and-inverted Riemannian gradient descent eigensolver, or SIrgEIGS for short. It includes the shift-and-invert preconditioned power method (termed as SI-PM for
short) as a special case with adaptive step-sizes. Applying the shift-and-invert preconditioning technique needs to locate an appropriate upper bound of the largest eigenvalue, i.e., σ > λ1 , as the shift
parameter. We reply on the crude phase of the shift-and-inverted power method [Garber and Hazan,
2015, Garber et al., 2016] to get this upper bound in theory. However, in practice, the plain power
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

