Deep Poisson gamma dynamical systems

Dandan Guo,
Bo Chen∗,
Hao Zhang
National Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing
Collaborative Innovation Center of Information Sensing and Understanding
Xidian University, Xi’an, China
gdd_xidian@126.com, bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn, zhanghao_xidian@163.com
Mingyuan Zhou
McCombs School of Business
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We develop deep Poisson-gamma dynamical systems (DPGDS) to model sequentially observed multivariate count data, improving previously proposed models by
not only mining deep hierarchical latent structure from the data, but also capturing
both first-order and long-range temporal dependencies. Using sophisticated but
simple-to-implement data augmentation techniques, we derived closed-form Gibbs
sampling update equations by first backward and upward propagating auxiliary
latent counts, and then forward and downward sampling latent variables. Moreover, we develop stochastic gradient MCMC inference that is scalable to very
long multivariate count time series. Experiments on both synthetic and a variety
of real-world data demonstrate that the proposed model not only has excellent
predictive performance, but also provides highly interpretable multilayer latent
structure to represent hierarchical and temporal information propagation.

1

Introduction

The need to model time-varying count vectors x1 , ..., xT appears in a wide variety of settings,
such as text analysis, international relation study, social interaction understanding, and natural
language processing [1–9]. To model these count data, it is important to not only consider the
sparsity of high-dimensional data and robustness to over-dispersed temporal patterns, but also
capture complex dependencies both within and across time steps. In order to move beyond linear
dynamical systems (LDS) [10] and its nonlinear generalization [11] that often make the Gaussian
assumption [12], the gamma process dynamic Poisson factor analysis (GP-DPFA) [5] factorizes
the observed time-varying count vectors under the Poisson likelihood as xt ∼ Poisson(Φθ t ), and
transmit temporal information smoothly by evolving the factor scores with a gamma Markov chain
as θ t ∼ Gamma(θ t−1 , β), which has highly desired strong non-linearity. To further capture crossfactor temporal dependence, a transition matrix Π is further used in Poisson–gamma dynamical
system (PGDS) [7] as θ t ∼ Gamma(Πθ t−1 , β). However, these shallow models may still have
shortcomings in capturing long-range temporal dependencies [8]. For example, if given θ t , then θ t+1
no longer depends on θ t−k for all k ≥ 1.
Deep probabilistic models are widely used to capture the relationships between latent variables across
multiple stochastic layers [4, 8, 13–16]. For example, deep dynamic Poisson factor analysis (DDPFA)
∗

Corresponding author

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

