Total stochastic gradient algorithms and applications
in reinforcement learning

Paavo Parmas
Neural Computation Unit
Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University
Okinawa, Japan
paavo.parmas@oist.jp

Abstract
Backpropagation and the chain rule of derivatives have been prominent; however,
the total derivative rule has not enjoyed the same amount of attention. In this work
we show how the total derivative rule leads to an intuitive visual framework for
creating gradient estimators on graphical models. In particular, previous ”policy
gradient theorems” are easily derived. We derive new gradient estimators based
on density estimation, as well as a likelihood ratio gradient, which ”jumps” to an
intermediate node, not directly to the objective function. We evaluate our methods
on model-based policy gradient algorithms, achieve good performance, and present
evidence towards demystifying the success of the popular PILCO algorithm [5].

1

Introduction

A central problem in machine learning is estimating the gradient of the expectation of a random
d
variable with respect to the parameters of the distribution dζ
Ex∼p(x;ζ) [φ(x)]. Some examples include:
the gradient of the expected classification error of a model over the data generating distribution,
the gradient of the expected evidence lower bound w.r.t. the variational parameters in variational
inference [9], or the gradient of the expected reward w.r.t. the policy parameters in reinforcement
learning [20]. Usually, such an estimator is needed not just through a single computation, but
through a computation graph; a good overview of related problems is given by [18]. Previously,
Schulman et al. provided a method to obtain gradient estimators on stochastic computation graphs by
differentiating a surrogate loss [18]. While the work provided an elegant method to obtain gradient
estimators using automatic differentiation, the resulting stochastic computation graph framework
has formal rules, which uniquely define one specific type of estimator, and it is not suitable for
describing general gradient estimation techniques. For example, determinstic policy gradients [19] or
total propagation [14] are not covered by the framework. In contrast, in probabilistic inference, the
successful probabilistic graphical model framework [15] only describes the structure of a model, while
there are many different choices of algorithms to perform inference. We aim for a similar framework
for gradient computation, which we call probabilistic computation graphs. Our framework uses the
∂f
∂f db
total derivative rule df
da = ∂a + ∂b da to decompose the gradient into a sum of partial derivatives along
different computational paths, while leaving open the choice of estimator for the partial derivatives.
We begin by introducing typical gradient estimators in the literature, then explain our new theorem,
novel estimators using a non-standard decomposition of the total derivative, and experimental results.
Nomenclature All variables will be considered as column vectors, and gradients are represented
as matrices where each row corresponds to one output variable, and each column corresponds
to one input variable—this allows applying the chain rule by simple matrix multiplication, i.e.
df (x)
dvec(Σ)
∂f ∂x
dΣ
dy = ∂x ∂y . Matrices are vectorised with the vec(∗) operator, i.e. dx means
dx .
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

