Constructing Deep Neural Networks by Bayesian
Network Structure Learning

Raanan Y. Rohekar
Intel AI Lab

Shami Nisimov
Intel AI Lab

Yaniv Gurwicz
Intel AI Lab

raanan.yehezkel@intel.com

shami.nisimov@intel.com

yaniv.gurwicz@intel.com

Guy Koren
Intel AI Lab

Gal Novik
Intel AI Lab

guy.koren@intel.com

gal.novik@intel.com

Abstract
We introduce a principled approach for unsupervised structure learning of deep
neural networks. We propose a new interpretation for depth and inter-layer connectivity where conditional independencies in the input distribution are encoded
hierarchically in the network structure. Thus, the depth of the network is determined
inherently. The proposed method casts the problem of neural network structure
learning as a problem of Bayesian network structure learning. Then, instead of
directly learning the discriminative structure, it learns a generative graph, constructs
its stochastic inverse, and then constructs a discriminative graph. We prove that
conditional-dependency relations among the latent variables in the generative graph
are preserved in the class-conditional discriminative graph. We demonstrate on
image classification benchmarks that the deepest layers (convolutional and dense)
of common networks can be replaced by significantly smaller learned structures,
while maintaining classification accuracy—state-of-the-art on tested benchmarks.
Our structure learning algorithm requires a small computational cost and runs
efficiently on a standard desktop CPU.

1

Introduction

Over the last decade, deep neural networks have proven their effectiveness in solving many challenging problems in various domains such as speech recognition (Graves & Schmidhuber, 2005),
computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Girshick et al., 2014; Szegedy et al., 2015) and machine
translation (Collobert et al., 2011). As compute resources became more available, large scale models
having millions of parameters could be trained on massive volumes of data, to achieve state-of-the-art
solutions. Building these models requires various design choices such as network topology, cost
function, optimization technique, and the configuration of related hyper-parameters.
In this paper, we focus on the design of network topology—structure learning. Generally, exploration
of this design space is a time consuming iterative process that requires close supervision by a human
expert. Many studies provide guidelines for design choices such as network depth (Simonyan &
Zisserman, 2014), layer width (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016), building blocks (Szegedy et al.,
2015), and connectivity (He et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2016). Based on these guidelines, these studies
propose several meta-architectures, trained on huge volumes of data. These were applied to other
tasks by leveraging the representational power of their convolutional layers and fine-tuning their
deepest layers for the task at hand (Donahue et al., 2014; Hinton et al., 2015; Long et al., 2015; Chen
et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2015). However, these meta-architectures may be unnecessarily large and
require large computational power and memory for training and inference.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

