Layer-Wise Coordination between Encoder and
Decoder for Neural Machine Translation
Tianyu He1 † ∗
hetianyu@mail.ustc.edu.cn
Di He3
di_he@pku.edu.cn

Xu Tan2 †
xuta@microsoft.com

Yingce Xia2
yingce.xia@microsoft.com

Tao Qin2
taoqin@microsoft.com

Zhibo Chen1
chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

Tie-Yan Liu2
tie-yan.liu@microsoft.com
1
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in
Geo-spatial Information Processing and Application System,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University

Abstract
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has achieved remarkable progress with the
quick evolvement of model structures. In this paper, we propose the concept of
layer-wise coordination for NMT, which explicitly coordinates the learning of
hidden representations of the encoder and decoder together layer by layer, gradually from low level to high level. Specifically, we design a layer-wise attention
and mixed attention mechanism, and further share the parameters of each layer
between the encoder and decoder to regularize and coordinate the learning. Experiments show that combined with the state-of-the-art Transformer model, layer-wise
coordination achieves improvements on three IWSLT and two WMT translation
tasks. More specifically, our method achieves 34.43 and 29.01 BLEU score on
WMT16 English-Romanian and WMT14 English-German tasks, outperforming
the Transformer baseline.

1

Introduction

Neural Machine Translation (NMT) is a challenging task that attracts a lot of attention in recent
years [5, 2, 18, 29, 7, 33, 28, 27, 35, 37, 9], and the structure of NMT models has evolved quickly.
The first design of NMT model is based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [5]. Then the
attention mechanism [2] is introduced to better model the alignment between source and target tokens.
Deeper architectures are adopted later to increase the expressiveness of NMT models [36, 7, 33].
Recently, Convolutional Neural Network [7] and self-attention [33] based models are invented, which
achieve the state-of-the-art performance in many broadly adopted translation tasks.
While those models employ different basic building blocks (e.g., RNN, CNN, or self-attention),
they are all under the typical encoder-decoder framework: The encoder takes the source tokens as
inputs and generates a set of hidden representations for those tokens layer by layer, gradually from
∗
†

The work was done when the first author was an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.
The first and second author contribute equally to this work.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

