GPyTorch: Blackbox Matrix-Matrix Gaussian
Process Inference with GPU Acceleration
Jacob R. Gardner∗, Geoff Pleiss∗,
David Bindel, Kilian Q. Weinberger, Andrew Gordon Wilson
Cornell University
{jrg365,kqw4,andrew}@cornell.edu,
{geoff,bindel}@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Despite advances in scalable models, the inference tools used for Gaussian processes (GPs) have yet to fully capitalize on developments in computing hardware.
We present an efficient and general approach to GP inference based on Blackbox
Matrix-Matrix multiplication (BBMM). BBMM inference uses a modified batched
version of the conjugate gradients algorithm to derive all terms for training and
inference in a single call. BBMM reduces the asymptotic complexity of exact GP
inference from O(n3 ) to O(n2 ). Adapting this algorithm to scalable approximations and complex GP models simply requires a routine for efficient matrix-matrix
multiplication with the kernel and its derivative. In addition, BBMM uses a specialized preconditioner to substantially speed up convergence. In experiments we show
that BBMM effectively uses GPU hardware to dramatically accelerate both exact
GP inference and scalable approximations. Additionally, we provide GPyTorch, a
software platform for scalable GP inference via BBMM, built on PyTorch.

1

Introduction

The past years have witnessed unprecedented innovation in deep learning. This progress has involved
innovations in network designs [18, 20, 24, 26, 30], but it also has benefited vastly from improvements
in optimization [6], and excellent software implementations such as PyTorch, MXNet, TensorFlow
and Caffe [1, 8, 28, 38]. Broadly speaking, the gains in optimization originate in large part from
insights in stochastic gradient optimization [6, 7, 23, 27, 29, 31], effectively trading off unnecessary
exactness for speed and in some cases regularization. Moreover, the advantages of modern software
frameworks for deep learning include rapid prototyping, easy access to specialty compute hardware
(such as GPUs), and blackbox optimization through automatic differentiation.
Similarly, Gaussian process research has undergone significant innovations in recent years [9, 21, 45,
49–51] — in particular to improve scalability to large data sets. However, the tools most commonly
used for GP inference do not effectively utilize modern hardware, and new models require significant
implementation efforts. Often, in fact, the model and the inference engine are tightly coupled
and consequently many complex models like multi-output GPs and scalable GP approximations
require custom inference procedures [5, 22]. This entanglement of model specification and inference
procedure impedes rapid prototyping of different model types, and obstructs innovation in the field.
In this paper, we address this gap by introducing a highly efficient framework for Gaussian process
inference. Whereas previous inference approaches require the user to provide routines for computing
the full GP marginal log likelihood for a sufficiently complex model, our framework only requires
access to a blackbox routine that performs matrix-matrix multiplications with the kernel matrix and
its derivative. Accordingly, we refer to our method as Blackbox Matrix-Matrix (BBMM) Inference.
∗

Equal contribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

