Out of the Box: Reasoning with Graph Convolution
Nets for Factual Visual Question Answering

Medhini Narasimhan, Svetlana Lazebnik, Alexander G. Schwing
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{medhini2, slazebni, aschwing}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Accurately answering a question about a given image requires combining observations with general knowledge. While this is effortless for humans, reasoning
with general knowledge remains an algorithmic challenge. To advance research
in this direction a novel ‘fact-based’ visual question answering (FVQA) task has
been introduced recently along with a large set of curated facts which link two
entities, i.e., two possible answers, via a relation. Given a question-image pair,
deep network techniques have been employed to successively reduce the large set
of facts until one of the two entities of the final remaining fact is predicted as the
answer. We observe that a successive process which considers one fact at a time
to form a local decision is sub-optimal. Instead, we develop an entity graph and
use a graph convolutional network to ‘reason’ about the correct answer by jointly
considering all entities. We show on the challenging FVQA dataset that this leads
to an improvement in accuracy of around 7% compared to the state of the art.

1

Introduction

When answering questions about images, we easily combine the visualized situation with general
knowledge that is available to us. However, for algorithms, an effortless combination of general
knowledge with observations remains challenging, despite significant work which aims to leverage
these mechanisms for autonomous agents and virtual assistants.
In recent years, a significant amount of research has investigated algorithms for visual question
answering (VQA) [2, 19, 32, 43, 44, 63], visual question generation (VQG) [21, 30, 36, 49], and visual
dialog [12,13,20], paving the way to autonomy for artificial agents operating in the real world. Images
and questions in these datasets cover a wide range of perceptual abilities such as counting, object
recognition, object localization, and even logical reasoning. However, for many of these datasets
the questions can be answered solely based on the visualized content, i.e., no general knowledge is
required. Therefore, numerous approaches address VQA, VQG and dialog tasks by extracting visual
cues using deep network architectures [1, 2, 11, 16, 18, 19, 24, 32, 33, 35, 41, 44, 53, 56, 57, 59, 60, 63, 65,
66, 68], while general knowledge remains unavailable.
To bridge this discrepancy between human behavior and present day algorithmic design, Wang et
al. [50] introduced a novel ‘fact-based’ VQA (FVQA) task, and an accompanying dataset containing
images, questions with corresponding answers and a knowledge base (KB) of facts extracted from
three different sources: WebChild [47], DBPedia [3] and ConceptNet [45]. Unlike classical VQA
datasets, a question in the FVQA dataset is answered by a collective analysis of the information in
the image and the KB of facts. Each question is mapped to a single supporting fact which contains
the answer to the question. Thus, answering a question requires analyzing the image and choosing
the right supporting fact, for which Wang et al. [50] propose a keyword-matching technique. This
approach suffers when the question doesn’t focus on the most obvious visual concept and when there
are synonyms and homographs. Moreover, special information about the visual concept type and
the answer source make it hard to generalize their approach to other datasets. We addressed these
issues in our previous work [38], where we proposed a learning-based approach which embeds the
image question pairs and the facts to the same space and ranks the facts according to their relevance.
We observed a significant improvement in performance which motivated us to explore other learning
based methods, particularly those which exploit the graphical structure of the facts.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

