Complex Gated Recurrent Neural Networks

Moritz Wolter
Institute for Computer Science
University of Bonn
wolter@cs.uni-bonn.de

Angela Yao
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
yaoa@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Complex numbers have long been favoured for digital signal processing, yet
complex representations rarely appear in deep learning architectures. RNNs, widely
used to process time series and sequence information, could greatly benefit from
complex representations. We present a novel complex gated recurrent cell, which
is a hybrid cell combining complex-valued and norm-preserving state transitions
with a gating mechanism. The resulting RNN exhibits excellent stability and
convergence properties and performs competitively on the synthetic memory and
adding task, as well as on the real-world tasks of human motion prediction.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are widely used for processing time series and sequential information. The difficulties of training RNNs, especially when trying to learn long-term dependencies,
are well-established, as RNNs are prone to vanishing and exploding gradients [2, 12, 31]. Heuristics
developed to alleviate some of the optimization instabilities and learning difficulties include gradient
clipping [9, 29], gating [4, 12], and using norm-preserving state transition matrices [1, 13, 16, 40].
Gating, as used in gated recurrent units (GRUs) [4] and long short-term memory (LSTM) networks [12], has become common-place in recurrent architectures. Gates facilitate the learning of
longer term temporal relationships [12]. Furthermore, in the presence of noise in the input signal,
gates can protect the cell state from undesired updates, thereby improving overall stability and
convergence.
A matrix W is norm-preserving if its repeated multiplication with a vector leaves the vector norm
unchanged, i.e.kWhk2 = khk2 . Norm-preserving state transition matrices are particularly interesting
for RNNs because they preserve gradients over time [1], thereby preventing both the vanishing
and exploding gradient problem. To be norm-preserving, state transition matrices need to be either
orthogonal or unitary1 . Complex numbers have long been favored for signal processing [11, 24, 27]. A
complex signal does not simply double the dimensionality of the signal. Instead, the representational
richness of complex signals is rooted in its physical relevance and the mathematical theory of
complex analysis. Complex arithmetic, and in particular multiplication, is different from its real
counterpart and allows us to construct novel network architectures with several desirable properties.
Despite networks being complex-valued, however, it is often necessary to work with real-valued cost
functions and/or existing real-valued network components. Mappings from C → R are therefore
indispensable. Unfortunately such functions violate the Cauchy-Riemann equations and are not
complex-differentiable in the traditional sense. We advocate the use of Wirtinger calculus [39] (also
known as CR-calculus [21]), which makes it possible to define complex (partial) derivatives, even
when working with non-holomorph or non-analytic functions.
1

Unitary matrices are the complex analogue of orthogonal matrices, i.e. a complex matrix W is unitary if
T
T
T
WW = W W = I, where W is its conjugate transpose and I is the identity matrix.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

