Interpreting Neural Network Judgments via
Minimal, Stable, and Symbolic Corrections

Xin Zhang
CSAIL, MIT
xzhang@csail.mit.edu

Armando Solar-Lezama
CSAIL, MIT
asolar@csail.mit.edu

Rishabh Singh
Google Brain
rising@google.com

Abstract
We present a new algorithm to generate minimal, stable, and symbolic corrections to
an input that will cause a neural network with ReLU activations to change its output.
We argue that such a correction is a useful way to provide feedback to a user when
the network’s output is different from a desired output. Our algorithm generates
such a correction by solving a series of linear constraint satisfaction problems. The
technique is evaluated on three neural network models: one predicting whether an
applicant will pay a mortgage, one predicting whether a first-order theorem can
be proved efficiently by a solver using certain heuristics, and the final one judging
whether a drawing is an accurate rendition of a canonical drawing of a cat.

1

Introduction

When machine learning is used to make decisions about people in the real world, it is extremely
important to be able to explain the rationale behind those decisions. Unfortunately, for systems
based on deep learning, it is often not even clear what an explanation means; showing someone the
sequence of operations that computed a decision provides little actionable insight. There have been
some recent advances towards making deep neural networks more interpretable (e.g. [21]) using
two main approaches: i) generating input prototypes that are representative of abstract concepts
corresponding to different classes [23] and ii) explaining network decisions by computing relevance
scores to different input features [1]. However, these explanations do not provide direct actionable
insights regarding how to cause the prediction to move from an undesirable class to a desirable class.
In this paper, we argue that for the specific class of judgment problems, minimal, stable, and symbolic
corrections are an ideal way of explaining a neural network decision. We use the term judgment to
refer to a particular kind of binary decision problem where a user presents some information to an
algorithm that is supposed to pass judgment on its input. The distinguishing feature of judgments
relative to other kinds of decision problems is that they are asymmetric; if I apply for a loan and I get
the loan, I am satisfied, and do not particularly care for an explanation; even the bank may not care
as long as on aggregate the algorithm makes the bank money. On the other hand, I very much care
if the algorithm denies my mortgage application. The same is true for a variety of problems, from
college admissions, to parole, to hiring decisions. In each of these cases, the user expects a positive
judgment, and would like an actionable explanation to accompany a negative judgment.
We argue that a correction is a useful form of feedback; what could I have done differently to elicit
a positive judgment? For example, if I applied for a mortgage, knowing that I would have gotten a
positive judgment if my debt to income ratio (DTI) was 10% lower is extremely useful; it is actionable
information that I can use to adjust my finances. We argue, however, that the most useful corrections
are those that are minimal, stable and symbolic.
First, in order for a correction to be actionable, the corrected input should be as similar as possible
from the original offending input. For example, knowing that a lower DTI would have given me the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

