Trading robust representations for sample complexity
through self-supervised visual experience

Andrea Tacchetti∗

Stephen Voinea

Georgios Evangelopoulos†

The Center for Brains, Minds and Machines, MIT
McGovern Institute for Brain Research at MIT
Cambridge, MA, USA
{atacchet, voinea, gevang}@mit.edu

Abstract
Learning in small sample regimes is among the most remarkable features of the
human perceptual system. This ability is related to robustness to transformations,
which is acquired through visual experience in the form of weak- or self-supervision
during development. We explore the idea of allowing artificial systems to learn
representations of visual stimuli through weak supervision prior to downstream supervised tasks. We introduce a novel loss function for representation learning using
unlabeled image sets and video sequences, and experimentally demonstrate that
these representations support one-shot learning and reduce the sample complexity
of multiple recognition tasks. We establish the existence of a trade-off between
the sizes of weakly supervised, automatically obtained from video sequences, and
fully supervised data sets. Our results suggest that equivalence sets other than
class labels, which are abundant in unlabeled visual experience, can be used for
self-supervised learning of semantically relevant image embeddings.

1

Introduction

Transformation invariance and learning in small sample regimes are among the most remarkable
abilities of the human perceptual system, and arguably the ones that have proven most difficult to
replicate in artificial systems. For example, while humans effortlessly recognize new faces after
seeing a single image, despite changes in pose, illumination, or facial expression, convolutional neural
networks require thousands of examples to achieve similar degrees of generalization. Crucially, these
two abilities are mathematically and computationally related in the sense that robust representations
of perceptual input support low-sample generalization [1, 6, 27, 8, 30].
Neuroscientists have long debated whether exposure to specific modes of visual experience, such
as spatial proximity or sequential presentation, is necessary to learn visual representations that are
robust to complex transformations, or if most of these abilities are innate and independent of visual
experience [23, 24, 29]. Experiments on chicks reared in highly controlled visual environments
revealed that being exposed to temporally smooth object transitions during development is necessary
to acquire robustness to 3D rotations [36]. Similarly, newborn monkeys deprived of any visual
experience of faces were found not to exhibit a face selective cortical area [4]. These results highlight
that exposure to a naturalistic visual experience is key to learning invariant representations, and more
in general to the development of a powerful visual system.
Motivated by these findings, we aim to bridge the sample complexity divide between artificial and
biological perception systems. We argue that while humans can learn new visual concepts from few
examples, they do so by relying on the rich and exhaustive visual experience acquired during and
∗

Currently with DeepMind. † Currently with X, Alphabet.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

