Revisiting (, γ, τ )-similarity learning for
domain adaptation

Sofien Dhouib
Univ Lyon, INSA-Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, UJM-Saint Etienne, CNRS,
Inserm, CREATIS UMR 5220, U1206, F-69100, LYON, France
sofiane.dhouib@creatis.insa-lyon.fr
Ievgen Redko∗
Univ Lyon, UJM-Saint-Etienne, CNRS, Institut d Optique Graduate School Laboratoire
Hubert Curien UMR 5516, F-42023, Saint-Etienne, France
ievgen.redko@univ-st-etienne.fr

Abstract
Similarity learning is an active research area in machine learning that tackles
the problem of finding a similarity function tailored to an observable data
sample in order to achieve efficient classification. This learning scenario has
been generally formalized by the means of a (, γ, τ )−good similarity learning
framework in the context of supervised classification and has been shown to
have strong theoretical guarantees. In this paper, we propose to extend the
theoretical analysis of similarity learning to the domain adaptation setting,
a particular situation occurring when the similarity is learned and then
deployed on samples following different probability distributions. We give
a new definition of an (, γ)−good similarity for domain adaptation and
prove several results quantifying the performance of a similarity function
on a target domain after it has been trained on a source domain. We
particularly show that if the source distribution dominates the target one,
then principally new domain adaptation learning bounds can be proved.

1

Introduction

Many popular supervised learning algorithms rely on pairwise metrics calculated based on
the instances of a given data set in order to learn a classifier. For instance, a famous family
of k-nearest neighbors algorithms [1] uses distance matrices in order to define the label of a
given test point while support vector machines [2] can be extended to handle the non-linear
classification using kernel functions. Despite a widespread use of metrics in machine learning,
existing distances often do not capture the intrinsic geometry of data with respect to the
labels of the available data points. To tackle this problem, the emerging field of metric
learning [3, 4] (also known as similarity learning) aims to provide solutions that allow to learn
pairwise metrics explicitly from the data, thus making them tailored for the classification or
regression problem at hand.
From the theoretical point of view, similarity learning was extensively analyzed in two seminal
papers of [5, 6] based on the (, γ, τ )−good similarity framework for binary classification.
∗

The author was at CREATIS when this work was done.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

