Hierarchical Graph Representation Learning with
Differentiable Pooling

Rex Ying
rexying@stanford.edu
Stanford University

Jiaxuan You
jiaxuan@stanford.edu
Stanford University

Christopher Morris
christopher.morris@udo.edu
TU Dortmund University
William L. Hamilton
wleif@stanford.edu
Stanford University

Xiang Ren
xiangren@usc.edu
University of Southern California
Jure Leskovec
jure@cs.stanford.edu
Stanford University

Abstract
Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) have revolutionized the field of graph
representation learning through effectively learned node embeddings, and achieved
state-of-the-art results in tasks such as node classification and link prediction.
However, current GNN methods are inherently flat and do not learn hierarchical
representations of graphs—a limitation that is especially problematic for the task
of graph classification, where the goal is to predict the label associated with an
entire graph. Here we propose D IFF P OOL, a differentiable graph pooling module
that can generate hierarchical representations of graphs and can be combined with
various graph neural network architectures in an end-to-end fashion. D IFF P OOL
learns a differentiable soft cluster assignment for nodes at each layer of a deep
GNN, mapping nodes to a set of clusters, which then form the coarsened input
for the next GNN layer. Our experimental results show that combining existing
GNN methods with D IFF P OOL yields an average improvement of 5–10% accuracy
on graph classification benchmarks, compared to all existing pooling approaches,
achieving a new state-of-the-art on four out of five benchmark data sets.

1

Introduction

In recent years there has been a surge of interest in developing graph neural networks (GNNs)—
general deep learning architectures that can operate over graph structured data, such as social network
data [16, 21, 36] or graph-based representations of molecules [7, 11, 15]. The general approach with
GNNs is to view the underlying graph as a computation graph and learn neural network primitives
that generate individual node embeddings by passing, transforming, and aggregating node feature
information across the graph [15, 16]. The generated node embeddings can then be used as input to
any differentiable prediction layer, e.g., for node classification [16] or link prediction [32], and the
whole model can be trained in an end-to-end fashion.
However, a major limitation of current GNN architectures is that they are inherently flat as they
only propagate information across the edges of the graph and are unable to infer and aggregate the
information in a hierarchical way. For example, in order to successfully encode the graph structure
of organic molecules, one would ideally want to encode the local molecular structure (e.g., individual
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

