A Retrieve-and-Edit Framework for
Predicting Structured Outputs

Tatsunori B. Hashimoto
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
thashim@stanford.edu
Yonatan Oren
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
yonatano@stanford.edu

Kelvin Guu
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
kguu@stanford.edu
Percy Liang
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
pliang@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
For the task of generating complex outputs such as source code, editing existing
outputs can be easier than generating complex outputs from scratch. With this
motivation, we propose an approach that first retrieves a training example based on
the input (e.g., natural language description) and then edits it to the desired output
(e.g., code). Our contribution is a computationally efficient method for learning
a retrieval model that embeds the input in a task-dependent way without relying
on a hand-crafted metric or incurring the expense of jointly training the retriever
with the editor. Our retrieve-and-edit framework can be applied on top of any
base model. We show that on a new autocomplete task for GitHub Python code
and the Hearthstone cards benchmark, retrieve-and-edit significantly boosts the
performance of a vanilla sequence-to-sequence model on both tasks.

1

Introduction

In prediction tasks with complex outputs, generating well-formed outputs is challenging, as is wellknown in natural language generation [20, 28]. However, the desired output might be a variation of
another, previously-observed example [14, 13, 30, 18, 24]. Other tasks ranging from music generation
to program synthesis exhibit the same phenomenon: many songs borrow chord structure from other
songs, and software engineers routinely adapt code from Stack Overflow.
Motivated by these observations, we adopt the following retrieve-and-edit framework (Figure 1):
1. Retrieve: Given an input x, e.g., a natural language description ‘Sum the first two elements
in tmp’, we use a retriever to choose a similar training example (x0 , y 0 ), such as ‘Sum the
first 5 items in Customers’.
2. Edit: We then treat y 0 from the retrieved example as a “prototype” and use an editor to edit
it into the desired output y appropriate for the input x.
While many existing methods combine retrieval and editing [13, 30, 18, 24], these approaches rely on
a fixed hand-crafted or generic retrieval mechanism. One drawback to this approach is that designing
a task-specific retriever is time-consuming, and a generic retriever may not perform well on tasks
where x is structured or complex [40]. Ideally, the retrieval metric would be learned from the data in
a task-dependent way: we wish to consider x and x0 similar only if their corresponding outputs y and
y 0 differ by a small, easy-to-perform edit. However, the straightforward way of training a retriever
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

