On Misinformation Containment in
Online Social Networks
Guangmo (Amo) Tong
Department of Computer and Information Sciences
University of Delaware
amotong@udel.edu

Weili Wu
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Dallas
weiliwu@utdallas.edu

Ding-Zhu Du
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Dallas
dzdu@utdallas.edu

Abstract
The widespread online misinformation could cause public panic and serious economic damages. The misinformation containment problem aims at limiting the
spread of misinformation in online social networks by launching competing campaigns. Motivated by realistic scenarios, we present an analysis of the misinformation containment problem for the case when an arbitrary number of cascades
are allowed. This paper makes four contributions. First, we provide a formal
model for multi-cascade diffusion and introduce an important concept called as
cascade priority. Second, we show that the misinformation containment problem
1− 4
cannot be approximated within a factor of Ω(2log n ) in polynomial time unless
N P ⊆ DT IM E(npolylog n ). Third, we introduce several types of cascade priority
that are frequently seen in real social networks. Finally, we design novel algorithms
for solving the misinformation containment problem. The effectiveness of the
proposed algorithm is supported by encouraging experimental results.

1

Introduction

The past years have witnessed a drastic increase in the usage of online social networks. By the end
of April 2018, there are totally 3.03 billion active social media users and each Internet user has an
average of 7.6 social media accounts [24]. Despite allowing efficient exchange of information, online
social networks have provided platforms for misinformation. Misinformation may lead to serious
economic consequences and even cause panics. For example, it was reported by NDTV that the
misinformation on social media led to Pune violence in January 2018.1 Recently, the rapid spread
of misinformation has been on the list of top global risks according to World Economic Forum 2 .
Therefore, effective strategies on misinformation control are imperative.
Information propagates through social networks via cascades and each cascade starts to spread
from certain seed users. When misinformation is detected, a feasible strategy is to launch counter
campaigns competing against the misinformation [1]. Such counter campaigns are usually called
as positive cascades. The misinformation containment (MC) problem aims at selecting seed users
for positive cascades such that the misinformation can be effectively restrained. The existing works
1

https://www.ndtv.com/mumbai-news/misinformation-on-social-media-led-to-pune-violence-minister1795562
2
http://reports.weforum.org/global-risks-2018/digital-wildfires/
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

