Adversarial Multiple Source Domain Adaptation
Han Zhao†⇤, Shanghang Zhang†‡⇤ , Guanhang Wu†
João P. Costeira‡ , José M. F. Moura† , Geoffrey J. Gordon†
†
‡
Carnegie Mellon University
IST, Universidade de Lisboa
{hzhao1,shanghaz,guanhanw,moura,ggordon}@andrew.cmu.edu,
jpc@isr.ist.utl.pt

Abstract
While domain adaptation has been actively researched, most algorithms focus on
the single-source-single-target adaptation setting. In this paper we propose new
generalization bounds and algorithms under both classification and regression settings for unsupervised multiple source domain adaptation. Our theoretical analysis
naturally leads to an efficient learning strategy using adversarial neural networks:
we show how to interpret it as learning feature representations that are invariant
to the multiple domain shifts while still being discriminative for the learning task.
To this end, we propose multisource domain adversarial networks (MDAN) that
approach domain adaptation by optimizing task-adaptive generalization bounds.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of MDAN, we conduct extensive experiments
showing superior adaptation performance on both classification and regression
problems: sentiment analysis, digit classification, and vehicle counting.

1

Introduction

The success of machine learning has been partially attributed to rich datasets with abundant annotations [40]. Unfortunately, collecting and annotating such large-scale training data is prohibitively
expensive and time-consuming. To solve these limitations, different labeled datasets can be combined
to build a larger one, or synthetic training data can be generated with explicit yet inexpensive annotations [41]. However, due to the possible shift between training and test samples, learning algorithms
based on these cheaper datasets still suffer from high generalization error. Domain adaptation (DA)
focuses on such problems by establishing knowledge transfer from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain, and by exploring domain-invariant structures and representations to bridge the
gap [38]. Both theoretical results [8, 22, 32, 33, 49] and algorithms [1, 2, 6, 19, 20, 23, 25, 26, 30, 39]
for DA have been proposed. Most theoretical results and algorithms with respect to DA focus on
the single-source-single-target setting [17, 31, 42, 45, 46]. However, in many application scenarios,
the labeled data available may come from multiple domains with different distributions. As a result,
naive application of the single-source-single-target DA algorithms may lead to suboptimal solutions.
Such problem calls for an efficient technique for multiple source domain adaptation. Some existing
multisource DA methods [16, 23, 24, 43, 51] cannot lead to effective deep learning based algorithms,
leaving much space to be improved for their performance.
In this paper, we analyze the multiple source domain adaptation problem and propose an adversarial
learning strategy based on our theoretical results. Specifically, we give new generalization bounds for
both classification and regression problems under domain adaptation when there are multiple source
domains with labeled instances and one target domain with unlabeled instances. Our theoretical
results build on the seminal theoretical model for domain adaptation introduced by Blitzer et al. [9]
and Ben-David et al. [8], where a divergence measure, known as the H-divergence, was proposed
to measure the distance between two distributions based on a given hypothesis space H. Our new
result generalizes the bound [8, Thm. 2] to the case when there are multiple source domains, and
⇤

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

