Scalable Coordinated Exploration in
Concurrent Reinforcement Learning

Maria Dimakopoulou
Stanford University
madima@stanford.edu

Ian Osband
Google DeepMind
iosband@google.com

Benjamin Van Roy
Stanford University
bvr@stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider a team of reinforcement learning agents that concurrently operate
in a common environment, and we develop an approach to efficient coordinated
exploration that is suitable for problems of practical scale. Our approach builds on
seed sampling[1] and randomized value function learning [11]. We demonstrate
that, for simple tabular contexts, the approach is competitive with previously
proposed tabular model learning methods [1]. With a higher-dimensional problem
and a neural network value function representation, the approach learns quickly
with far fewer agents than alternative exploration schemes.

1

Introduction

Consider a farm of robots operating concurrently, learning how to carry out a task, as studied in
[3]. There are benefits to scale, since a larger number of robots can gather and share larger volumes
of data that enable each to learn faster. These benefits are most dramatic if the robots explore
in a coordinated fashion, diversifying their learning goals and adapting appropriately as data is
gathered. Web services present a similar situation, as considered in [18]. Each user is served by an
agent, and the collective of agents can accelerate learning by intelligently coordinating how they
experiment. Considering its importance, the problem of coordinated exploration in reinforcement
learning has received surprisingly little attention; while [3] and [18] consider teams of agents that
gather data in parallel, they do not address coordination of data gathering, though this can be key to
team performance. Dimakopolou and Van Roy [1] recently identified properties that are essential
to efficient coordinated exploration and proposed suitable tabular model learning methods based on
seed sampling. Though this represents a conceptual advance, the methods do not scale to meet the
needs of practical applications, which require generalization to address intractable state spaces. In
this paper, we develop scalable reinforcement learning algorithms that aim to efficiently coordinate
exploration and we present computational results that establish their substantial benefit.
Work on coordinated exploration builds on a large literature that addresses efficient exploration in
single-agent reinforcement learning (see, e.g., [6, 5, 21]). A growing segment of this literature studies
and extends posterior sampling for reinforcement learning (PSRL) [19], which has led to statistically
efficient and computationally tractable approaches to exploration [10, 12, 13]. The methods we will
propose leverage this line of work, particularly the use of randomized value function learning [14].
The problem we address is known as concurrent reinforcement learning [18, 15, 4, 16, 1]. A
team of reinforcement learning agents interact with the same unknown environment, share data
with one another, and learn in parallel how to operate effectively. To learn efficiently in such
settings, the agents should coordinate their exploratory effort. Three properties essential to efficient
coordinated exploration, identified in [1], are real-time adaptivity to shared observations, commitment
to carry through with action sequences that reveal new information, and diversity across learning
opportunities pursued by different agents. That paper demonstrated that upper-confidence-bound
(UCB) exploration schemes for concurrent reinforcement learning (concurrent UCRL), such as those
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

