Learning safe policies with expert guidance
Jessie Huang1
Fa Wu12
Doina Precup1
Yang Cai1
1
School of Computer Science, McGill University
2
Zhejiang Demetics Medical Technology
{jiexi.huang,fa.wu2}@mcgill.ca, {dprecup,cai}@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
We propose a framework for ensuring safe behavior of a reinforcement learning
agent when the reward function may be difficult to specify. In order to do this,
we rely on the existence of demonstrations from expert policies, and we provide
a theoretical framework for the agent to optimize in the space of rewards consistent with its existing knowledge. We propose two methods to solve the resulting
optimization: an exact ellipsoid-based method and a method in the spirit of the
"follow-the-perturbed-leader" algorithm. Our experiments demonstrate the behavior of our algorithm in both discrete and continuous problems. The trained agent
safely avoids states with potential negative effects while imitating the behavior of
the expert in the other states.

1

Introduction

In Reinforcement Learning (RL), agent behavior is driven by an objective function defined through
the specification of rewards. Misspecified rewards may lead to negative side effects [3], when the
agent acts unpredictably responding to the aspects of the environment that the designer overlooked,
and potentially causes harms to the environment or itself. As the environment gets richer and more
complex, it becomes more challenging to specify and balance rewards for every one of its aspects.
Yet if we want to have some type of safety guarantees in terms of the behavior of an agent learned by
RL once it is deployed in the real world, it is crucial to have a learning algorithm that is robust to
mis-specifications.
We assume that the agent has some knowledge about the reward function either through past experience or demonstrations from experts. The goal is to choose a robust/safe policy that achieves
high reward with respect to any reward function that is consistent with the agent’s knowledge 1 .We
formulate this as a maxmin learning problem where the agent chooses a policy and an adversary
chooses a reward function that is consistent with the agent’s current knowledge and minimizes the
agent’s reward. The goal of the agent is to learn a policy that maximizes the worst possible reward.
We assume that the reward functions are linear in some feature space. Our formulation has two
appealing properties: (1) it allows us to combine demonstrations from multiple experts even though
they may disagree with each other; and (2) the training environment/MDP in which the experts
operate need not be the same as the testing environment/MDP where the agent will be deployed, our
results hold as long as the testing and training MDPs share the same feature space. As an application,
our algorithm can learn a maxmin robust policy in a new environment that contains a few features
that are not present in the training environment. See our gridworld experiment in Section 5.
Our first result (Theorem 1) shows that given any algorithm that can find the optimal policy for
an MDP in polynomial time, we can solve the maxmin learning problem exactly in polynomial
1
Note that the safety as used here is more in the context of AI safety, and a policy is safe because it is robust
to misspecified rewards and the consequent negative side effects.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

