The Price of Privacy for Low-rank Factorization

Jalaj Upadhyay
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD - 21201, USA.
jalaj@jhu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study what price one has to pay to release differentially private
low-rank factorization of a matrix. We consider various settings that are close
to the real world applications of low-rank factorization: (i) the manner in which
matrices are updated (row by row or in an arbitrary manner), (ii) whether matrices
are distributed or not, and (iii) how the output is produced (once at the end of all
updates, also known as one-shot algorithms or continually). Even though these
settings are well studied without privacy, surprisingly, there are no private algorithm
for these settings (except when a matrix is updated row by row). We present the
first set of differentially private algorithms for all these settings.
Our algorithms when private matrix is updated in an arbitrary manner promise
differential privacy with respect to two stronger privacy guarantees than previously
studied, use space and time comparable to the non-private algorithm, and achieve
optimal accuracy. To complement our positive results, we also prove that the space
required by our algorithms is optimal up to logarithmic factors. When data matrices
are distributed over multiple servers, we give a non-interactive differentially private
algorithm with communication cost independent of dimension. In concise, we
give algorithms that incur optimal cost across all parameters of interest. We also
perform experiments to verify that all our algorithms perform well in practice and
outperform the best known algorithm until now for large range of parameters.

1

Introduction

Low-rank factorization (LRF) of matrices is a fundamental component used in many applications, such
as clustering [15, 19, 43], data mining [5], recommendation systems [20], information retrieval [49,
53], learning distributions [2, 34], and web search [1, 36]. In these applications, given an m × n
matrix A, a common approach is to first compute three matrices: a diagonal positive semidefinite
e k ∈ Rk×k and two matrices, U
e k ∈ Rm×k and V
e k ∈ Rn×k , with orthonormal columns.
matrix Σ
T
e
e
e
The requirement then is that the product B := UΣV is as close to A as possible. More formally,
Problem 1. (α, β, γ, k)-LRF. Given parameters 0 < α, β < 1, γ, a matrix A ∈ Rm×n matrix, the
e k, Σ
e k , and V
e k such that
target rank k, compute a rank-k matrix factorization U
h
i
e kΣ
e kV
e T kF ≤ (1 + α)kA − [A]k kF + γ ≥ 1 − β,
Pr kA − U
k
where k · kF denotes the Frobenius norm, and [A]k is the best rank-k approximation of A. We refer
to the parameter γ as the additive error and to α as the multiplicative error.
Practical matrices are often large, distributed over many servers and are dynamically updated [41, 42]
and hence many works have considered these settings in order to reduce latency, synchronization
issues and resource overhead [6, 9, 16, 13, 14, 17, 27, 40, 44, 48, 52]. Moreover, these applications use
confidential dataset and use of ad hoc mechanism can lead to serious privacy leaks [47]. Therefore,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

