Statistical and Computational Trade-Offs
in Kernel K-Means
Daniele Calandriello
LCSL – IIT & MIT,
Genoa, Italy

Lorenzo Rosasco
University of Genoa,
LCSL – IIT & MIT

Abstract
We investigate the efficiency of k-means in terms of both statistical and computational requirements. More precisely, we study a Nyström approach to kernel
k-means. We analyze the statistical properties of the proposed method and show
that it achieves the same accuracy of exact kernel k-means with only a fraction
√
of computations. Indeed, we prove under basic assumptions that sampling n
Nyström landmarks allows to greatly reduce computational costs without incurring
in any loss of accuracy. To the best of our knowledge this is the first result of this
kind for unsupervised learning.

1

Introduction

Modern applications require machine learning algorithms to be accurate as well as computationally
efficient, since data-sets are increasing in size and dimensions. Understanding the interplay and
trade-offs between statistical and computational requirements is then crucial [31, 30]. In this paper,
we consider this question in the context of clustering, considering a popular nonparametric approach,
namely kernel k-means [33]. K-means is arguably one of most common approaches to clustering and
produces clusters with piece-wise linear boundaries. Its kernel version allows to consider nonlinear
boundaries, greatly improving the flexibility of the approach. Its statistical properties have been
studied [15, 24, 10] and from a computational point of view it requires manipulating an empirical
kernel matrix. As for other kernel methods, this latter operation becomes unfeasible for large scale
problems and deriving approximate computations is subject of a large body of recent works, see for
example [34, 16, 29, 35, 25] and reference therein.
In this paper we are interested into quantifying the statistical effect of computational approximations.
Arguably one could expect the latter to induce some loss of accuracy. In fact, we prove that, perhaps
surprisingly, there are favorable regimes where it is possible maintain optimal statistical accuracy
while significantly reducing computational costs. While a similar phenomenon has been recently
shown in supervised learning [31, 30, 12], we are not aware of similar results for other learning tasks.
Our approach is based on considering a Nyström approach to kernel k-means based on sampling a
subset of training set points (landmarks) that can be used to approximate the kernel matrix [3, 34,
13, 14, 35, 25]. While there is a vast literature on the properties of Nyström methods for kernel
approximations [25, 3], experience from supervised learning show that better results can be derived
focusing on the task of interest, see discussion in [7]. The properties of Nyström approximations for
k-means has been recently studied in [35, 25]. Here they focus only on the computational aspect of
the problem, and provide fast methods that achieve an empirical cost only a multiplicative factor
larger than the optimal one.
Our analysis is aimed at combining both statistical and computational results. Towards this end
we derive a novel additive bound on the empirical cost that can be used to bound the true object
of interest: the expected cost. This result can be combined with probabilistic
results to show that
√
optimal statistical accuracy can be obtained considering only O( n) Nyström landmark points,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

