Efficient Formal Safety Analysis of Neural Networks
Shiqi Wang, Kexin Pei, Justin Whitehouse, Junfeng Yang, Suman Jana
Columbia University, NYC, NY 10027, USA
{tcwangshiqi, kpei, jaw2228, junfeng, suman}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Neural networks are increasingly deployed in real-world safety-critical domains
such as autonomous driving, aircraft collision avoidance, and malware detection.
However, these networks have been shown to often mispredict on inputs with minor
adversarial or even accidental perturbations. Consequences of such errors can be
disastrous and even potentially fatal as shown by the recent Tesla autopilot crashes.
Thus, there is an urgent need for formal analysis systems that can rigorously check
neural networks for violations of different safety properties such as robustness
against adversarial perturbations within a certain L-norm of a given image. An
effective safety analysis system for a neural network must be able to either ensure
that a safety property is satisfied by the network or find a counterexample, i.e.,
an input for which the network will violate the property. Unfortunately, most
existing techniques for performing such analysis struggle to scale beyond very
small networks and the ones that can scale to larger networks suffer from high
false positives and cannot produce concrete counterexamples in case of a property
violation. In this paper, we present a new efficient approach for rigorously checking
different safety properties of neural networks that significantly outperforms existing
approaches by multiple orders of magnitude. Our approach can check different
safety properties and find concrete counterexamples for networks that are 10×
larger than the ones supported by existing analysis techniques. We believe that our
approach to estimating tight output bounds of a network for a given input range
can also help improve the explainability of neural networks and guide the training
process of more robust neural networks.

1

Introduction

Over the last few years, significant advances in neural networks have resulted in their increasing
deployments in critical domains including healthcare, autonomous vehicles, and security. However,
recent work has shown that neural networks, despite their tremendous success, often make dangerous
mistakes, especially for rare corner case inputs. For example, most state-of-the-art neural networks
have been shown to produce incorrect outputs for adversarial inputs specifically crafted by adding
minor human-imperceptible perturbations to regular inputs [36, 14]. Similarly, seemingly minor
changes in lighting or orientation of an input image have been shown to cause drastic mispredictions
by the state-of-the-art neural networks [29, 30, 37]. Such mistakes can have disastrous and even
potentially fatal consequences. For example, a Tesla car in autopilot mode recently caused a fatal
crash as it failed to detect a white truck against a bright sky with white clouds [3].
A principled way of minimizing such mistakes is to ensure that neural networks satisfy simple
safety/security properties such as the absence of adversarial inputs within a certain L-norm of a given
image or the invariance of the network’s predictions on the images of the same object under different
lighting conditions. Ideally, given a neural network and a safety property, an automated checker
should either guarantee that the property is satisfied by the network or find concrete counterexamples
demonstrating violations of the safety property. The effectiveness of such automated checkers hinges
on how accurately they can estimate the decision boundary of the network.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

