Differentially Private Uniformly Most Powerful Tests
for Binomial Data
Aleksandra Slavković
Department of Statistics
Penn State University
University Park, PA 16802
sesa@psu.edu

Jordan Awan
Department of Statistics
Penn State University
University Park, PA 16802
awan@psu.edu

Abstract
We derive uniformly most powerful (UMP) tests for simple and one-sided hypotheses for a population proportion within the framework of Differential Privacy (DP),
optimizing finite sample performance. We show that in general, DP hypothesis tests
can be written in terms of linear constraints, and for exchangeable data can always
be expressed as a function of the empirical distribution. Using this structure, we
prove a ‘Neyman-Pearson lemma’ for binomial data under DP, where the DP-UMP
only depends on the sample sum. Our tests can also be stated as a post-processing
of a random variable, whose distribution we coin “Truncated-Uniform-Laplace”
(Tulap), a generalization of the Staircase and discrete Laplace distributions. Furthermore, we obtain exact p-values, which are easily computed in terms of the
Tulap random variable. We show that our results also apply to distribution-free
hypothesis tests for continuous data. Our simulation results demonstrate that our
tests have exact type I error, and are more powerful than current techniques.

1

Introduction

Differential Privacy (DP), introduced by DMNS06, offers a rigorous measure of disclosure risk. To
satisfy DP, a procedure cannot be a deterministic function of the sensitive data, but must incorporate
additional randomness, beyond sampling. Subject to the DP constraint, it is natural to search for a
procedure which maximizes the utility of the output. Many works address the goal of minimizing the
distance between the output of the randomized DP procedure and standard non-private algorithms,
but few attempt to infer properties about the underlying population (for some notable exceptions,
see related work), which is typically the goal in statistics and scientific research. In this paper, we
study the setting where each individual contributes a sensitive binary value, and we wish to infer the
population proportion via hypothesis tests, subject to DP. In particular, we derive uniformly most
powerful (UMP) tests for simple and one-sided hypotheses, optimizing finite sample performance.
UMP tests are fundamental to classical statistics, being closely linked to sufficiency, likelihood
inference, and confidence sets. However, finding UMP tests can be hard and in many cases they do
not even exist (see Sch96, Section 4.4). Our results are the first to achieve UMP tests under (, δ)−DP,
and are among the first steps towards a general theory of optimal inference under DP.

Related work Vu and Slavković [VS09] are among the first to perform hypothesis tests under
DP. They develop private tests for population proportions as well as for independence in 2 × 2
contingency tables. In both settings, they fix the noise adding distribution, and use approximate
sampling distributions to perform these DP tests. A similar approach is used by Sol14 to develop tests
for normally distributed data. The work of VS09 is extended by WLK15 and GLRV16, developing
additional tests for multinomial data. To implement their tests, WLK15 develop asymptotic sampling
distributions, verifying via simulations that the type I errors are reliable. On the other hand, GLRV16
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

