Estimating Learnability in the Sublinear Data Regime

Weihao Kong
Stanford University
whkong@stanford.edu

Gregory Valiant
Stanford University
gvaliant@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating how well a model class is capable of fitting
a distribution of labeled data. We show that it is possible to accurately estimate
this “learnability” even when given an amount of data that is too small to reliably
learn any accurate model. Our first result applies to the setting where the data is
drawn from a d-dimensional distribution with isotropic covariance, and the label
of each datapoint is an√arbitrary noisy function of the datapoint. In this setting,
we show that with O( d) samples, one can accurately estimate the fraction of
the variance of the label that can be explained via the best linear function of the
data. For comparison, even if the labels are noiseless linear functions of the data, a
sample size linear in the dimension, d, is required to learn any function correlated
with the underlying model. Our estimation approach also applies to the setting
where the data distribution has an (unknown) arbitrary covariance matrix, allowing
these techniques to be applied to settings where the model class consists of a
linear function applied to a nonlinear embedding of the data. In this setting we
give a consistent estimator of the fraction of explainable variance that uses o(d)
samples. Finally, our techniques also extend to the setting of binary classification,
where we obtain analogous results under the logistic model, for estimating the
classification accuracy of the best linear classifier. We demonstrate the practical
viability of our approaches on synthetic and real data. This ability to estimate the
explanatory value of a set of features (or dataset), even in the regime in which there
is too little data to realize that explanatory value, may be relevant to the scientific
and industrial settings for which data collection is expensive and there are many
potentially relevant feature sets that could be collected.

1

Introduction

Given too little labeled data to learn a model or classifier, is it possible to determine whether an
accurate classifier or predictor exists? For example, consider a setting where you are given n
datapoints with real-valued labels drawn from some distribution of interest, D. Suppose you are in
the regime in which n is too small to learn an accurate prediction model; might it still be possible
to estimate the performance that would likely be obtained if, hypothetically, you were to gather
more data, say a dataset of size n0  n and train a model on that data? We answer this question
affirmatively, and show that in the settings of linear regression and binary classification via linear
(or logistic) classifiers, it is possible to estimate the likely performance of a (hypothetical) predictor
trained on a larger hypothetical dataset, even given an amount of data that is sublinear in the amount
that would be required to learn such a predictor.
For concreteness, we begin by describing the flavor of our results in a very basic setting: learning a
noisy linear function of high-dimensional data. Suppose we are given access to independent samples
from a d-dimensional isotropic Gaussian, and each sample, x ∈ Rd is labeled according to a noisy
linear function y = hx, βi + η, where β is the true model and the noise η is drawn (independently)
from a distribution of (unknown) variance δ 2 . One natural goal is to estimate the signal to noise ratio,
1 − δ 2 /Var[Y ], namely estimating how much of the variation in the label we could hope to explain.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

