The Pessimistic Limits and Possibilities of
Margin-based Losses in Semi-supervised Learning
Jesse H. Krijthe
Radboud University, The Netherlands
jkrijthe@gmail.com

Marco Loog
Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
University of Copenhagen, Denmark
m.loog@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Consider a classification problem where we have both labeled and unlabeled data
available. We show that for linear classifiers defined by convex margin-based surrogate losses that are decreasing, it is impossible to construct any semi-supervised
approach that is able to guarantee an improvement over the supervised classifier
measured by this surrogate loss on the labeled and unlabeled data. For convex
margin-based loss functions that also increase, we demonstrate safe improvements
are possible.

1

Introduction

Semi-supervised learning has been reported to deliver encouraging results in various settings, e.g.
for object detection in computer vision (Rasmus et al., 2015), protein function prediction from
sequence data (Weston et al., 2005) or prediction of cancer recurrence (Shi & Zhang, 2011) in the
bio-medical domain and part-of-speech tagging in natural language processing (Elworthy, 1994). In
other settings, however, using unlabeled data has been shown to lead to a decrease in performance
when compared to the supervised solution (Elworthy, 1994; Cozman & Cohen, 2006). For semisupervised classifiers to be used safely in practice, we may at least want some guarantee that they do
not reduce performance compared to their supervised alternatives. Some have attempted to provide
such guarantees either empirically by restrictions on the parameters to be estimated (Loog, 2010)
or under particular assumptions on the data (Li & Zhou, 2015). In general, however, it is unclear
for what classifiers one can construct ‘safe’ semi-supervised approaches that can be expected to not
decrease performance, or whether this is at all possible.
1.1

Safety and Pessimism

This work explores whether and, if so, how we can guarantee unlabeled data to improve, or at least
not decrease the performance of a semi-supervised classifier in comparison to a supervised classifier.
‘Pessimism’ refers to the property that we want this guarantee to hold for every single instantiation of
a problem, even for the worst possible unknown labeling of the unlabeled data. The reason we choose
such a strict criterion is that it is the only criterion that can guarantee (with probability one), that
performance degradation will not occur, for the particular dataset one is faced with. Therefore, a semisupervised approach can only be called truly safe if it guarantees non-degradation of performance in
this pessimistic sense. Note that the labelings that we will be considering are not as pessimistic as
they first appear: because performance is compared to the supervised classifier, these labelings will
be optimistic with respect to the supervised classifier, as will become apparent when we formally
define the criterion for safe semi-supervised learning in Equation (3).
We compare the performance of the supervised and semi-supervised classifier measured on the labeled
and unlabeled data. This is, strictly speaking, a transductive setting (Joachims, 1999), where one
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

