Fast Rates of ERM and Stochastic Approximation:
Adaptive to Error Bound Conditions

Mingrui Liu† , Xiaoxuan Zhang† , Lijun Zhang‡ , Rong Jin\ , Tianbao Yang†
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
‡
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
\
Machine Intelligence Technology, Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
mingrui-liu@uiowa.edu, zljzju@gmail.com, tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu

†

Abstract
Error bound conditions (EBC) are properties that characterize the growth of an
objective function when a point is moved away from the optimal set. They have
recently received increasing attention for developing optimization algorithms with
fast convergence. However, the studies of EBC in statistical learning are hitherto
still limited. The main contributions of this paper are two-fold. First, we develop
fast and intermediate rates of empirical risk minimization (ERM) under EBC
for risk minimization with Lipschitz continuous, and smooth convex random
functions. Second, we establish fast and intermediate rates of an efficient stochastic
approximation (SA) algorithm for risk minimization with Lipschitz continuous
random functions, which requires only one pass of n samples and adapts to EBC.
e √n)
For both approaches, the convergence rates span a full spectrum between O(1/
e
and O(1/n)
depending on the power constant in EBC, and could be even faster
than O(1/n) in special cases for ERM. Moreover, these convergence rates are
automatically adaptive without using any knowledge of EBC.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we focus on the following stochastic convex optimization problems arising in statistical
learning and many other fields:
min P (w) , Ez∼P [f (w, z)],
(1)
w∈W

and more generally
min P (w) , Ez∼P [f (w, z)] + r(w),

w∈W

(2)

where f (·, z) : W → R is a random function depending on a random variable z ∈ Z that follows
a distribution P, r(w) is a lower semi-continuous convex function. In statistical learning [48], the
problem above is also referred to as risk minimization where z is interpreted as data, w is interpreted
as a model (or hypothesis), f (·, ·) is interpreted as a loss function, and r(·) is a regularization. For
example, in supervised learning one can take z = (x, y) - a pair of feature vector x ∈ X ⊆ Rd
and label y ∈ Y, f (w, z) = `(w(x), y) - a loss function measuring the error of the prediction
w(x) : X → Y made by the model w. Nonetheless, we emphasize that the risk minimization
problem (1) is more general than supervised learning and could be more challenging (c.f. [35]). In
this paper, we assume that W ⊆ Rd is a compact and convex set. Let W∗ = arg minw∈W P (w)
denote the optimal set and P∗ = minw∈W P (w) denote the optimal risk.
There are two popular approaches for solving the risk minimization problem. The first one is by
empirical risk minimization that minimizes the empirical risk defined over a set of n i.i.d. samples
drawn from the same distribution P (sometimes with a regularization term on the model). The second
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

