SplineNets:
Continuous Neural Decision Graphs

Cem Keskin
cemkeskin@google.com

Shahram Izadi
shahrami@google.com

Abstract
We present SplineNets, a practical and novel approach for using conditioning in
convolutional neural networks (CNNs). SplineNets are continuous generalizations
of neural decision graphs, and they can dramatically reduce runtime complexity
and computation costs of CNNs, while maintaining or even increasing accuracy.
Functions of SplineNets are both dynamic (i.e., conditioned on the input) and
hierarchical (i.e., conditioned on the computational path). SplineNets employ a
unified loss function with a desired level of smoothness over both the network
and decision parameters, while allowing for sparse activation of a subset of nodes
for individual samples. In particular, we embed infinitely many function weights
(e.g. filters) on smooth, low dimensional manifolds parameterized by compact
B-splines, which are indexed by a position parameter. Instead of sampling from
a categorical distribution to pick a branch, samples choose a continuous position
to pick a function weight. We further show that by maximizing the mutual information between spline positions and class labels, the network can be optimally
utilized and specialized for classification tasks. Experiments show that our approach can significantly increase the accuracy of ResNets with negligible cost in
speed, matching the precision of a 110 level ResNet with a 32 level SplineNet.

1

Introduction and Related Work

There is a growing body of literature applying conditioning to CNNs, where only parts of the network are selectively active to save runtime complexity and compute. Approaches use conditioning
to scale model complexity without an explosion of computational cost e.g. [1] or increase runtime
efficiency by reducing model size and compute without degrading accuracy e.g. [2]. In this paper we
present a new and practical approach for supporting conditional neural networks called SplineNets.
We demonstrate how these novel networks dramatically reduce runtime complexity and computation
cost beyond regular CNNs while maintaining or even increasing accuracy.
Conditional neural networks can be categorized into three main categories: (1) proxy objective
methods that train decision parameters via a surrogate loss function, (2) probabilistic (mixture of
experts) methods that assign scores to each branch and treat the loss as a weighted sum over all
branches, and (3) feature augmentation methods that augment the representations with the scores.
The first group relies on non-differentiable decision functions and trains decision parameters using
a proxy loss. Xiong et al. use a loss that maximizes distances between subclusters in their conditional convolutional network [3]. Baek et al. use purity of data activation according to the class
label [4], and Biçici et al. use information gain as the proxy objective [5]. While the former approach only allows soft decisions, the latter method uses argmax of a scoring function to sparsely
activate branches, which results in discontinuities in the loss function. Bulo et al. use multi-layered
perceptrons as decisions, and the network otherwise acts like a decision tree [6]. Denoyer et al. train
a tree structured network using the REINFORCE algorithm [7].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

