Gather-Excite: Exploiting Feature Context in
Convolutional Neural Networks
Jie Hu∗
Momenta
hujie@momenta.ai

Li Shen∗
Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
lishen@robots.ox.ac.uk

Gang Sun
Momenta
sungang@momenta.ai

Samuel Albanie∗
Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
albanie@robots.ox.ac.uk

Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
vedaldi@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
While the use of bottom-up local operators in convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) matches well some of the statistics of natural images, it may also prevent
such models from capturing contextual long-range feature interactions. In this work,
we propose a simple, lightweight approach for better context exploitation in CNNs.
We do so by introducing a pair of operators: gather, which efficiently aggregates
feature responses from a large spatial extent, and excite, which redistributes the
pooled information to local features. The operators are cheap, both in terms of
number of added parameters and computational complexity, and can be integrated
directly in existing architectures to improve their performance. Experiments on
several datasets show that gather-excite can bring benefits comparable to increasing
the depth of a CNN at a fraction of the cost. For example, we find ResNet-50
with gather-excite operators is able to outperform its 101-layer counterpart on
ImageNet with no additional learnable parameters. We also propose a parametric
gather-excite operator pair which yields further performance gains, relate it to the
recently-introduced Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks, and analyse the effects of
these changes to the CNN feature activation statistics.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNN) [21] are the gold-standard approach to problems such as image
classification [20, 35, 9], object detection [32] and image segmentation [3]. Thus, there is a significant
interest in improved CNN architectures. In computer vision, an idea that has often improved visual
representations is to augment functions that perform local decisions with functions that operate on
a larger context, providing a cue for resolving local ambiguities [39]. While the term “context” is
overloaded [6], in this work we focus specifically on feature context, namely the information captured
by the feature extractor responses (i.e. the CNN feature maps) as a whole, spread over the full spatial
extent of the input image.
In many standard CNN architectures the receptive fields of many feature extractors are theoretically
already large enough to cover the input image in full. However, the effective size of such fields is
in practice considerably smaller [27]. This may be one factor explaining why improving the use of
context in deep networks can lead to better performance, as has been repeatedly demonstrated in
object detection and other applications [1, 26, 48].
∗

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

