Global Non-convex Optimization
with Discretized Diffusions
Murat A. Erdogdu 1,2
erdogdu@cs.toronto.edu
1

Lester Mackey 3
lmackey@ microsoft.com

Ohad Shamir 4
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 Microsoft Research 4 Weizmann Institute of Science

Abstract
An Euler discretization of the Langevin diffusion is known to converge to the
global minimizers of certain convex and non-convex optimization problems. We
show that this property holds for any suitably smooth diffusion and that different
diffusions are suitable for optimizing different classes of convex and non-convex
functions. This allows us to design diffusions suitable for globally optimizing
convex and non-convex functions not covered by the existing Langevin theory. Our
non-asymptotic analysis delivers computable optimization and integration error
bounds based on easily accessed properties of the objective and chosen diffusion.
Central to our approach are new explicit Stein factor bounds on the solutions
of Poisson equations. We complement these results with improved optimization
guarantees for targets other than the standard Gibbs measure.

1

Introduction

Consider the unconstrained and possibly non-convex optimization problem
minimize f (x).
x2Rd

Recent studies have shown that the Langevin algorithm – in which an appropriately scaled isotropic
Gaussian vector is added to a gradient descent update – globally optimizes f whenever the objective is
dissipative (hrf (x), xi ↵kxk22
for ↵ > 0) with a Lipschitz gradient [14, 25, 29]. Remarkably,
these globally optimized objectives need not be convex and can even be multimodal. The intuition
behind the success of the Langevin algorithm is that the stochastic optimization method approximately
tracks the continuous-time Langevin diffusion which admits the Gibbs measure – a distribution defined
by p (x) / exp( f (x)) – as its invariant distribution. Here, > 0 is an inverse temperature
parameter, and when is large, the Gibbs measure concentrates around its modes. As a result, for
large values of , a rapidly mixing Langevin algorithm will be close to a global minimum of f . In
this case, rapid mixing is ensured by the Lipschitz gradient and dissipativity. Due to its simplicity,
efficiency, and well-understood theoretical properties, the Langevin algorithm and its derivatives have
found numerous applications in machine learning [see, e.g., 28, 6].
In this paper, we prove an analogous global optimization property for the Euler discretization of
any smooth and dissipative diffusion and show that different diffusions are suitable for solving
different classes of convex and non-convex problems. Our non-asymptotic analysis, based on a
multidimensional version of Stein’s method, establishes explicit bounds on both integration and
optimization error. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• For any function f , we provide explicit O ✏12 bounds on the numerical integration error
of discretized dissipative diffusions. Our bounds depend only on simple properties of the

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

