Constrained Cross-Entropy Method for Safe
Reinforcement Learning

Min Wen
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
wenm@seas.upenn.edu
Ufuk Topcu
Department of Aerospace Engineering and Engineering Mechanics
University of Texas at Austin
utopcu@utexas.edu

Abstract
We study a safe reinforcement learning problem in which the constraints are defined as the expected cost over finite-length trajectories. We propose a constrained
cross-entropy-based method to solve this problem. The method explicitly tracks
its performance with respect to constraint satisfaction and thus is well-suited for
safety-critical applications. We show that the asymptotic behavior of the proposed algorithm can be almost-surely described by that of an ordinary differential
equation. Then we give sufficient conditions on the properties of this differential
equation for the convergence of the proposed algorithm. At last, we show with
simulation experiments that the proposed algorithm can effectively learn feasible policies without assumptions on the feasibility of initial policies, even with
non-Markovian objective functions and constraint functions.

1

Introduction

This paper studies the following constrained optimal control problem: given a dynamical system
model with continuous states and actions, a objective function and a constraint function, find a
controller that maximizes the objective function while satisfying the constraint. Although this topic
has been studied for decades within the control community [3], it is still challenging for practical
problems. To illustrate some major difficulties, consider the synthesis of a policy for a nonholonomic
mobile robot to reach a goal while avoiding obstacles (which introduces constraints) in a cost-efficient
way (which induces an objective). The obstacle-free state space is usually nonconvex. The equations
of the dynamical system model are typically highly nonlinear. Constraint functions and cost functions
may not be convex or differentiable in the state and action variables. There may even be hidden
variables that are not observable and make transitions and costs non-Markovian. Given all these
difficulties, we still need to compute a policy that is at least feasible and improve the cost objective as
much as possible.
Reinforcement learning (RL) methods have been widely used to learn optimal policies for agents with
complicated or even unknown dynamics. For problems with continuous state and action spaces, the
agent’s policy is usually modeled as a parameterized function of states such as deep neural networks
and later trained using policy gradient methods [35; 30; 27; 28; 21; 8; 29]. By encoding control tasks
as reward or cost functions, RL has successfully solved a wide range of tasks such as Atari games
[19; 20], the game of Go [31; 32], controlling simulated robots [36; 24] and real robots [15; 37; 22].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

