Manifold Structured Prediction
Alessandro Rudi •,1

Carlo Ciliberto •,∗ ,2

alessandro.rudi@inria.fr
1

Gian Maria Marconi 3 Lorenzo Rosasco 3,4

c.ciliberto@imperial.ac.uk

gian.maria.marconi@iit.it

lrosasco@mit.edu

INRIA - Département d’informatique, École Normale Supérieure - PSL Research University, Paris, France.
2
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College, London, UK.
3
Università degli studi di Genova & Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy.
4
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA.
•
Equal Contribution

Abstract
Structured prediction provides a general framework to deal with supervised problems where the outputs have semantically rich structure. While classical approaches
consider finite, albeit potentially huge, output spaces, in this paper we discuss how
structured prediction can be extended to a continuous scenario. Specifically, we
study a structured prediction approach to manifold valued regression. We characterize a class of problems for which the considered approach is statistically consistent
and study how geometric optimization can be used to compute the corresponding
estimator. Promising experimental results on both simulated and real data complete
our study.

1

Introduction

Regression and classification are probably the most classical machine learning problems and correspond to estimating a function with scalar and binary values, respectively. In practice, it is often
interesting to estimate functions with more structured outputs. When the output space can be assumed
to be a vector space, many ideas from regression can be extended, think for example to multivariate
[20] or functional regression [32]. However, a lack of a natural vector structure is a feature of many
practically interesting problems, such as ranking [18], quantile estimation [26] or graph prediction
[38]. In this latter case, the outputs are typically provided only with some distance or similarity function that can be used to design appropriate loss function. Knowledge of the loss is sufficient to analyze
an abstract empirical risk minimization approach within the framework of statistical learning theory,
but deriving approaches that are at the same time statistically sound and computationally feasible
is a key challenge. While ad-hoc solutions are available for many specific problems [15, 37, 24, 7],
structured prediction [5] provides a unifying framework where a variety of problems can be tackled
as special cases.
Classically, structured prediction considers problems with finite, albeit potentially huge, output spaces.
In this paper, we study how these ideas can be applied to non-discrete output spaces. In particular, we
consider the case where the output space is a Riemannian manifold, that is the problem of manifold
structured prediction (also called manifold valued regression [46]). While also in this case ad-hoc
methods are available [47], in this paper we adopt and study a structured prediction approach starting
from a framework proposed in [13]. Within this framework, it is possible to derive a statistically
sound, and yet computationally feasible, structured prediction approach as long as the loss function
satisfies suitable structural assumptions [14, 17, 29, 25, 12, 36]. Moreover we can guarantee that the
computed prediction is always an element of the manifold.
Our main technical contribution is a characterization of loss functions for manifold structured
prediction satisfying such a structural assumption. In particular, we consider the case where the
∗

Work performed while C.C. was at the University College London.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

