Bilevel Distance Metric Learning for
Robust Image Recognition

Jie Xu1,2 , Lei Luo2 , Cheng Deng1,∗ , Heng Huang2,3∗
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
2
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA, 3 JDDGlobal.com
jie.xu@pitt.edu,leiluo2017@pitt.edu
chdeng.xd@gmail.com,heng.huang@pitt.edu
1

Abstract
Metric learning, aiming to learn a discriminative Mahalanobis distance matrix M
that can effectively reflect the similarity between data samples, has been widely
studied in various image recognition problems. Most of the existing metric learning
methods input the features extracted directly from the original data in the preprocess phase. What’s worse, these features usually take no consideration of the local
geometrical structure of the data and the noise that exists in the data, thus they
may not be optimal for the subsequent metric learning task. In this paper, we
integrate both feature extraction and metric learning into one joint optimization
framework and propose a new bilevel distance metric learning model. Specifically,
the lower level characterizes the intrinsic data structure using graph regularized
sparse coefficients, while the upper level forces the data samples from the same
class to be close to each other and pushes those from different classes far away.
In addition, leveraging the KKT conditions and the alternating direction method
(ADM), we derive an efficient algorithm to solve the proposed new model. Extensive experiments on various occluded datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and
robustness of our method.

1

Introduction

Metric learning problem is concerned with learning an optimal distance matrix M that captures the
important relationships among data for a given task, i.e., assigning smaller distances between similar
items and larger distances between dissimilar items. Generally, metric learning can be formulated
as a minimal optimization about the objective function: µReg(M) + Loss(M, A), where Reg(M)
is a regularization term on the distance matrix M and Loss(M, A) is a loss function that penalizes
constraints. Different choices of regularization terms and constraints result in various metric learning
methods, e.g., large-margin nearest neighbor (LMNN) [16], information-theoretic metric learning
(ITML) [4], FANTOPE [7], CAP [5], etc. More recent works focus on using maximum correntropy
criterion [18], smoothed wasserstein distance [19], matrix variate Gaussian mixture distribution [11]
for metric learning formulations to improve the robustness. Although these methods achieve great
success, they all mainly focus on improving the discriminability of the distance matrix M but ignore
the discriminating power of input features. Especially, the descriptors of the sample pairs they address
are usually extracted directly from the original data in the preprocess phase without considering the
local geometrical structure of the data, thus such descriptors may not be optimal for the subsequent
metric learning task.
Besides metric learning methods, many other machine learning tasks such as clustering and dictionary
learning also suffer from the above limitation. To address this issue, the recently proposed solution
∗

J.X. and L.L. made equal contributions. C.D. and H.H. are corresponding authors.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

