Multi-armed Bandits with Compensation
Siwei Wang
IIIS, Tsinghua University
wangsw15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Longbo Huang⇤
IIIS, Tsinghua University
longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose and study the known-compensation multi-armed bandit (KCMAB)
problem, where a system controller offers a set of arms to many short-term players
for T steps. In each step, one short-term player arrives at the system. Upon
arrival, the player aims to select an arm with the current best average reward and
receives a stochastic reward associated with the arm. In order to incentivize players
to explore other arms, the controller provide proper payment compensations to
players. The objective of the controller is to maximize the total reward collected by
players while minimizing
total compensation. We first provide a compensation
P i logthe
T
lower bound ⇥( i KL
),
where i and KLi are the expected reward gap
i
and the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between distributions of arm i and
the best arm, respectively. We then analyze three algorithms for solving the
KCMAB problem, and obtain their regrets and compensations. We show that the
algorithms all achieve O(log T ) regret and O(log T ) compensation that match the
theoretical lower bounds. Finally, we present experimental results to demonstrate
the performance of the algorithms.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a game that lasts for an unknown time horizon T [4, 17]. In each time
slot, the controller pulls one out of N arms, and pulling different arms results in different feedbacks. In
the stochastic MAB model [12], feedbacks from each single arm follow a corresponding distribution,
which is unknown to the controller. These feedbacks are random variables independent of any other
events. After pulling the arm, the controller collects a reward that depends on the feedback. The
controller aims to maximize the sum of rewards during the game by choosing a proper arm to pull
in each time slot, and the decision can depend on all available information, i.e., past chosen arms
and feedbacks. The common metric for evaluating the performance of a policy is the value of regret,
defined as the expected difference between the controller’s reward and pulling an arm that generates
the largest expected reward.
The MAB formulation models the trade-off between exploration and exploitation, where exploration
concerns finding the potential best arms, but can result in pulling sub-optimal arms, while exploitation
aims at choosing arms with the current best performance and can lose reward if that arm is in
fact sub-optimal. Thus, optimizing this trade-off is very important for any controller seeking to
minimize regret. However, in many real-world applications, arms are not pulled by the controller
concerning long-term performance. Instead, actions are taken by short-term players interested in
optimizing their instantaneous reward. In this case, an important means is to provide monetary
compensations to players, so that they act as if they are pulling arms on behalf of the controller, to
jointly minimize regret, e.g., [8]. This is precisely our focus in this paper, i.e., we aim to design an
efficient incentivizing policy, so as to minimize regret while not giving away too much compensation.
⇤
This work is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Grants 61672316,
61303195, the Tsinghua Initiative Research Grant, and the China Youth 1000-Talent Grant

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

