Neural Networks Trained to Solve Differential
Equations Learn General Representations

Martin Magill
U. of Ontario Inst. of Tech.
martin.magill1@uoit.net

Faisal Z. Qureshi
U. of Ontario Inst. of Tech.
faisal.qureshi@uoit.ca

Hendrick W. de Haan
U. of Ontario Inst. of Tech.
hendrick.dehaan@uoit.ca

Abstract
We introduce a technique based on the singular vector canonical correlation analysis (SVCCA) for measuring the generality of neural network layers across a
continuously-parametrized set of tasks. We illustrate this method by studying generality in neural networks trained to solve parametrized boundary value problems
based on the Poisson partial differential equation. We find that the first hidden
layers are general, and that they learn generalized coordinates over the input domain. Deeper layers are successively more specific. Next, we validate our method
against an existing technique that measures layer generality using transfer learning
experiments. We find excellent agreement between the two methods, and note that
our method is much faster, particularly for continuously-parametrized problems.
Finally, we also apply our method to networks trained on MNIST, and show it is
consistent with, and complimentary to, another study of intrinsic dimensionality.

1

Introduction

Generality of a neural network layer indicates that it can be used successfully in neural networks
trained on a variety of tasks [19]. Previously, Yosinski et al. [19] developed a method for measuring
layer generality using transfer learning experiments, and used it to compare generality of layers
between two image classification tasks. In this work, we will study the generality of layers across a
continuously-parametrized set of tasks: a group of similar problems whose details are changed by
varying a real number. We found the transfer learning method for measuring generality prohibitively
expensive for this task. Instead, by relating generality to similarity, we develop a computationally
efficient measure of generality that uses the singular vector canonical correlation analysis (SVCCA).
We demonstrate this method by measuring layer generality in neural networks trained to solve
differential equations. We train fully-connected tanh neural networks (NNs) to solve Poisson’s
equation with a parametrized source term. The parameter of the source defines a family of related
boundary value problems (BVPs), and we measure the generality of layers in the trained NNs as the
parameter varies. We find the first layers to be general, and deeper layers to be progressively more
specific. Using the SVCCA, we are also able to visualize and interpret these general first layers.
We validate our approach by reproducing a subset of our results using the transfer learning experimental protocol of Yosinski et al. [19]. These very different methods produce consistent measurements of
generality. Further, our technique is several orders of magnitude faster to compute. Finally, we apply
our method to ReLU networks trained on the MNIST dataset [9], and compare to work by Li et al.
[11]. We discuss how the two analyses differ, but confirm that our results are consistent with theirs.
The main contributions of this work are:
1. We develop a method for efficiently computing layer generality over a continuouslyparametrized family of tasks using the SVCCA.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

