On Oracle-Efficient PAC RL with Rich Observations
Christoph Dann
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
cdann@cdann.net

Nan Jiang∗
UIUC
Urbana, Illinois
nanjiang@illinois.edu

Alekh Agarwal
Microsoft Research
Redmond, Washington
alekha@microsoft.com

John Langford
Microsoft Research
New York, New York
jcl@microsoft.com

Akshay Krishnamurthy
Microsoft Research
New York, New York
akshay@cs.umass.edu
Robert E. Schapire
Microsoft Research
New York, New York
schapire@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study the computational tractability of PAC reinforcement learning with rich
observations. We present new provably sample-efficient algorithms for environments with deterministic hidden state dynamics and stochastic rich observations.
These methods operate in an oracle model of computation—accessing policy and
value function classes exclusively through standard optimization primitives—and
therefore represent computationally efficient alternatives to prior algorithms that
require enumeration. With stochastic hidden state dynamics, we prove that the only
known sample-efficient algorithm, O LIVE [1], cannot be implemented in the oracle
model. We also present several examples that illustrate fundamental challenges of
tractable PAC reinforcement learning in such general settings.

1

Introduction

We study episodic reinforcement learning (RL) in environments with realistically rich observations
such as images or text, which we refer to broadly as contextual decision processes. We aim for
methods that use function approximation in a provably effective manner to find the best possible
policy through strategic exploration.
While such problems are central to empirical RL research [2], most theoretical results on strategic
exploration focus on tabular MDPs with small state spaces [3–10]. Comparatively little work exists
on provably effective exploration with large observation spaces that require generalization through
function approximation. The few algorithms that do exist either have poor sample complexity
guarantees [e.g., 11–14] or require fully deterministic environments [15, 16] and are therefore
inapplicable to most real-world applications and modern empirical RL benchmarks. This scarcity of
positive results on efficient exploration with function approximation can likely be attributed to the
challenging nature of this problem rather than a lack of interest by the research community.
On the statistical side, recent important progress was made by showing that contextual decision
processes (CDPs) with rich stochastic observations and deterministic dynamics over M hidden
states can be learned with a sample complexity polynomial in M [17]. This was followed by an
algorithm called O LIVE [1] that enjoys a polynomial sample complexity guarantee for a broader
range of CDPs, including ones with stochastic hidden state transitions. While encouraging, these
efforts focused exclusively on statistical issues, ignoring computation altogether. Specifically, the
proposed algorithms exhaustively enumerate candidate value functions to eliminate the ones that
violate Bellman equations, an approach that is computationally intractable for any function class of
∗

The work was done while NJ was a postdoc researcher at MSR NYC.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

