Representation Learning for Treatment Effect
Estimation from Observational Data
Liuyi Yao
SUNY at Buffalo
liuyiyao@buffalo.edu
Mengdi Huai
SUNY at Buffalo
mengdihu@buffalo.edu

Sheng Li
University of Georgia
sheng.li@uga.edu
Jing Gao
SUNY at Buffalo
jing@buffalo.edu

Yaliang Li
Tencent Medical AI Lab
yaliangli@tencent.com
Aidong Zhang
SUNY at Buffalo
azhang@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Estimating individual treatment effect (ITE) is a challenging problem in causal
inference, due to the missing counterfactuals and the selection bias. Existing ITE
estimation methods mainly focus on balancing the distributions of control and
treated groups, but ignore the local similarity information that provides meaningful constraints on the ITE estimation. In this paper, we propose a local similarity
preserved individual treatment effect (SITE) estimation method based on deep
representation learning. SITE preserves local similarity and balances data distributions simultaneously, by focusing on several hard samples in each mini-batch.
Experimental results on synthetic and three real-world datasets demonstrate the
advantages of the proposed SITE method, compared with the state-of-the-art ITE
estimation methods.

1

Introduction

Estimating the causal effect of an intervention/treatment at individual-level is an important problem
that can benefit many domains including health care [12, 1], digital marketing [6, 34, 24], and
machine learning [10, 37, 21, 23, 20]. For example, in the medical area, many pharmaceuticals
companies have developed various anti-hypertensive medicines and they all claim to be effective
for high blood pressure. However, for a specific patient, which one is more effective? Treatment
effect estimation methods are necessary to answer the above question, and it leads to better decision
making. Treatment effect could be estimated at either the group-level or individual-level. In this
paper, we focus on the individual treatment effect (ITE) estimation.
Two types of studies are usually conducted for estimating the treatment effect, including the randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and observational study. In RCTs, the treatment assignment is
controlled, and thus the distributions of treatment and control groups are known, which is a desired property for treatment effect estimation. However, conducting RCTs is expensive and timeconsuming, sometimes it even faces some ethical issues. Unlike RCTs, observational study directly
estimates treatment effects from the observed data, without any control on the treatment assignment. Owing to the easy access of observed data, observational studies, such as the potential outcome framework [27] and causal graphical models [26, 35], have been widely applied in various
domains [15, 38, 12].
Estimating individual treatment effect from observational data faces two major challenges, missing
counterfactuals and treatment selection bias. ITE is defined as the expected difference between the
treated outcome and control outcome. However, a unit can only belong to one group, and thus the
outcome of the other treatment (i.e., counterfactual) is always missing. Estimating counterfactual
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

