Occam’s razor is insufficient to infer the preferences
of irrational agents

Sören Mindermann ∗* †
Vector Institute
University of Toronto
soeren.mindermann@gmail.com

Stuart Armstrong* ‡
Future of Humanity Institute
University of Oxford
stuart.armstrong@philosophy.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) attempts to infer human rewards or preferences from observed behavior. Since human planning systematically deviates
from rationality, several approaches have been tried to account for specific human
shortcomings. However, the general problem of inferring the reward function of an
agent of unknown rationality has received little attention. Unlike the well-known
ambiguity problems in IRL, this one is practically relevant but cannot be resolved
by observing the agent’s policy in enough environments. This paper shows (1) that
a No Free Lunch result implies it is impossible to uniquely decompose a policy
into a planning algorithm and reward function, and (2) that even with a reasonable
simplicity prior/Occam’s razor on the set of decompositions, we cannot distinguish
between the true decomposition and others that lead to high regret. To address this,
we need simple ‘normative’ assumptions, which cannot be deduced exclusively
from observations.

1

Introduction

In today’s reinforcement learning systems, a simple reward function is often hand-crafted, and still
sometimes leads to undesired behaviors on the part of RL agent, as the reward function is not well
aligned with the operator’s true goals4 . As AI systems become more powerful and autonomous, these
failures will become more frequent and grave as RL agents exceed human performance, operate at
time-scales that forbid constant oversight, and are given increasingly complex tasks — from driving
cars to planning cities to eventually evaluating policies or helping run companies. Ensuring that
the agents behave in alignment with human values is known, appropriately, as the value alignment
problem [Amodei et al., 2016, Hadfield-Menell et al., 2016, Russell et al., 2015, Bostrom, 2014,
Leike et al., 2017].
One way of resolving this problem is to infer the correct reward function by observing human
behaviour. This is known as Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) [Ng and Russell, 2000, Abbeel and
Ng, 2004, Ziebart et al., 2008]. Often, learning a reward function is preferred over imitating a policy:
when the agent must outperform humans, transfer to new environments, or be interpretable. The
reward function is also usually a (much) more succinct and robust task representation than the policy,
especially in planning tasks [Abbeel and Ng, 2004]. Moreover, supervised learning of long-range and
goal-directed behavior is often difficult without the reward function [Ratliff et al., 2006].
∗

Equal contribution.
Work performed at Future of Humanity Institute.
‡
Further affiliation: Machine Intelligence Research Institute, Berkeley, USA.
4
See for example the game CoastRunners, where an RL agent didn’t finish the course, but instead
found a bug allowing it to get a high score by crashing round in circles https://blog.openai.com/
faulty-reward-functions/.
†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

