FastGRNN: A Fast, Accurate, Stable and Tiny
Kilobyte Sized Gated Recurrent Neural Network

Aditya Kusupati† , Manish Singh§ , Kush Bhatia‡ ,
Ashish Kumar‡ , Prateek Jain† and Manik Varma†
†
Microsoft Research India
§
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
‡
University of California Berkeley
{t-vekusu,prajain,manik}@microsoft.com, singhmanishiitd@gmail.com
kush@cs.berkeley.edu, ashish_kumar@berkeley.edu

Abstract
This paper develops the FastRNN and FastGRNN algorithms to address the twin
RNN limitations of inaccurate training and inefficient prediction. Previous approaches have improved accuracy at the expense of prediction costs making them
infeasible for resource-constrained and real-time applications. Unitary RNNs have
increased accuracy somewhat by restricting the range of the state transition matrix’s
singular values but have also increased the model size as they require a larger number of hidden units to make up for the loss in expressive power. Gated RNNs have
obtained state-of-the-art accuracies by adding extra parameters thereby resulting
in even larger models. FastRNN addresses these limitations by adding a residual
connection that does not constrain the range of the singular values explicitly and
has only two extra scalar parameters. FastGRNN then extends the residual connection to a gate by reusing the RNN matrices to match state-of-the-art gated RNN
accuracies but with a 2-4x smaller model. Enforcing FastGRNN’s matrices to be
low-rank, sparse and quantized resulted in accurate models that could be up to
35x smaller than leading gated and unitary RNNs. This allowed FastGRNN to
accurately recognize the "Hey Cortana" wakeword with a 1 KB model and to be
deployed on severely resource-constrained IoT microcontrollers too tiny to store
other RNN models. FastGRNN’s code is available at [30].

1

Introduction

Objective: This paper develops the FastGRNN (an acronym for a Fast, Accurate, Stable and Tiny
Gated Recurrent Neural Network) algorithm to address the twin RNN limitations of inaccurate
training and inefficient prediction. FastGRNN almost matches the accuracies and training times of
state-of-the-art unitary and gated RNNs but has significantly lower prediction costs with models
ranging from 1 to 6 Kilobytes for real-world applications.
RNN training and prediction: It is well recognized that RNN training is inaccurate and unstable
as non-unitary hidden state transition matrices could lead to exploding and vanishing gradients for
long input sequences and time series. An equally important concern for resource-constrained and
real-time applications is the RNN’s model size and prediction time. Squeezing the RNN model and
code into a few Kilobytes could allow RNNs to be deployed on billions of Internet of Things (IoT)
endpoints having just 2 KB RAM and 32 KB flash memory [17, 29]. Similarly, squeezing the RNN
model and code into a few Kilobytes of the 32 KB L1 cache of a Raspberry Pi or smartphone, could
significantly reduce the prediction time and energy consumption and make RNNs feasible for real32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

