Latent Alignment and Variational Attention

Yuntian Deng∗

Yoon Kim∗

Justin Chiu

Demi Guo

Alexander M. Rush

{dengyuntian@seas,yoonkim@seas,justinchiu@g,dguo@college,srush@seas}.harvard.edu

School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, USA

Abstract
Neural attention has become central to many state-of-the-art models in natural
language processing and related domains. Attention networks are an easy-to-train
and effective method for softly simulating alignment; however, the approach does
not marginalize over latent alignments in a probabilistic sense. This property makes
it difficult to compare attention to other alignment approaches, to compose it with
probabilistic models, and to perform posterior inference conditioned on observed
data. A related latent approach, hard attention, fixes these issues, but is generally
harder to train and less accurate. This work considers variational attention networks, alternatives to soft and hard attention for learning latent variable alignment
models, with tighter approximation bounds based on amortized variational inference. We further propose methods for reducing the variance of gradients to make
these approaches computationally feasible. Experiments show that for machine
translation and visual question answering, inefficient exact latent variable models
outperform standard neural attention, but these gains go away when using hard
attention based training. On the other hand, variational attention retains most of
the performance gain but with training speed comparable to neural attention.

1

Introduction

Attention networks [6] have quickly become the foundation for state-of-the-art models in natural
language understanding, question answering, speech recognition, image captioning, and more [15, 81,
16, 14, 63, 80, 71, 62]. Alongside components such as residual blocks and long-short term memory
networks, soft attention provides a rich neural network building block for controlling gradient flow
and encoding inductive biases. However, more so than these other components, which are often
treated as black-boxes, researchers use intermediate attention decisions directly as a tool for model
interpretability [43, 1] or as a factor in final predictions [25, 68]. From this perspective, attention
plays the role of a latent alignment variable [10, 37]. An alternative approach, hard attention [80],
makes this connection explicit by introducing a latent variable for alignment and then optimizing a
bound on the log marginal likelihood using policy gradients. This approach generally performs worse
(aside from a few exceptions such as [80]) and is used less frequently than its soft counterpart.
Still the latent alignment approach remains appealing for several reasons: (a) latent variables facilitate
reasoning about dependencies in a probabilistically principled way, e.g. allowing composition with
other models, (b) posterior inference provides a better basis for model analysis and partial predictions
than strictly feed-forward models, which have been shown to underperform on alignment in machine
translation [38], and finally (c) directly maximizing marginal likelihood may lead to better results.
∗

Equal contribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

