Geometrically Coupled Monte Carlo Sampling
Mark Rowland∗
University of Cambridge
mr504@cam.ac.uk
François Chalus
University of Cambridge
chalusf3@gmail.com

Krzysztof Choromanski*
Google Brain Robotics
kchoro@google.com

Aldo Pacchiano
University of California, Berkeley
pacchiano@berkeley.edu

Tamás Sarlós
Google Research
stamas@google.com

Adrian Weller
University of Cambridge
Alan Turing Institute
aw665@cam.ac.uk

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Monte Carlo sampling in high-dimensional, low-sample settings is important in
many machine learning tasks. We improve current methods for sampling in Euclidean spaces by avoiding independence, and instead consider ways to couple
samples. We show fundamental connections to optimal transport theory, leading
to novel sampling algorithms, and providing new theoretical grounding for existing strategies. We compare our new strategies against prior methods for improving
sample efficiency, including quasi-Monte Carlo, by studying discrepancy. We explore our findings empirically, and observe benefits of our sampling schemes for
reinforcement learning and generative modelling.

1

Introduction and related work

Monte Carlo (MC) methods are popular in many areas of machine learning, including approximate
Bayesian inference (Robert and Casella, 2005; Rezende et al., 2014; Kingma and Welling, 2014;
Welling and Teh, 2011), reinforcement learning (RL) (Salimans et al., 2017; Choromanski et al.,
2018c; Mania et al., 2018), and random feature approximations for kernel methods (Rahimi and
Recht, 2007; Yu et al., 2016). Typically, Monte Carlo samples are drawn independently. In many
applications, however, there may be an imbalance between the computational cost in drawing MC
samples from the distribution of interest, and the subsequent cost incurred due to downstream computation with the samples. For example, when a sample represents the configuration of weights in
a policy network for an RL problem, the cost of computing forward passes, backpropagating gradients through the network, and interacting with the environment, is much greater than drawing the
sample itself. Since a high proportion of total time is spent computing with each sample relative to
the cost of generating the sample, it may be possible to improve efficiency by replacing the default
of independent, identically distributed samples by samples with some non-trivial coupling.
Such approaches have been studied in computational statistics for decades, often under the guise of
variance reduction. Related methods such as control variates, quasi-Monte Carlo (QMC) (Halton,
1960; Aistleitner and Dick, 2015; Dick et al., 2015; Brauchart and Dick, 2012; Sloan and Wozniakowski, 1998; Avron et al., 2016)), herding (Chen et al., 2010; Huszar and Duvenaud, 2012) and
∗

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

