A Bayesian Approach to Generative Adversarial
Imitation Learning

Wonseok Jeon1 , Seokin Seo1 , Kee-Eung Kim1,2
School of Computing, KAIST, Republic of Korea
2
PROWLER.io
{wsjeon, siseo}@ai.kaist.ac.kr, kekim@cs.kaist.ac.kr
1

Abstract
Generative adversarial training for imitation learning has shown promising results
on high-dimensional and continuous control tasks. This paradigm is based on
reducing the imitation learning problem to the density matching problem, where
the agent iteratively refines the policy to match the empirical state-action visitation
frequency of the expert demonstration. Although this approach can robustly learn
to imitate even with scarce demonstration, one must still address the inherent
challenge that collecting trajectory samples in each iteration is a costly operation. To
address this issue, we first propose a Bayesian formulation of generative adversarial
imitation learning (GAIL), where the imitation policy and the cost function are
represented as stochastic neural networks. Then, we show that we can significantly
enhance the sample efficiency of GAIL leveraging the predictive density of the
cost, on an extensive set of imitation learning tasks with high-dimensional states
and actions.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning is the problem where an agent learns to mimic the demonstration provided by the
expert, in an environment with unknown cost function. Imitation learning with policy gradients [Ho
et al., 2016] is a recently proposed approach that uses gradient-based stochastic optimizers. Along
with trust-region policy optimization (TRPO) [Schulman et al., 2015] as the optimizer, it is shown
to be one of the most practical approaches that scales well to large-scale environments, i.e. highdimensional state and action spaces. Generative adversarial imitation learning (GAIL) [Ho and Ermon,
2016], which is of our primary interest, is a recent instance of imitation learning algorithms with
policy gradients. GAIL reformulates the imitation learning problem as a density matching problem,
and makes use of generative adversarial networks (GANs) [Goodfellow et al., 2014]. This is achieved
by generalizing the representation of the underlying cost function using neural networks, instead
of restricting it to the class of linear functions for the sake of simpler optimization. As a result, the
policy being learned becomes the generator, and the cost function becomes the discriminator. Based
on the promising results from GAIL, a number of improvements appeared in the literature [Wang
et al., 2017, Li et al., 2017].
Yet, one of the fundamental challenges lies in the fact that obtaining trajectory samples from the
environment is often very costly, e.g., physical robots situated in real-world. Among a number of
improved variants of GAIL, we remark that generative moment matching imitation learning (GMMIL) [Kim and Park, 2018], which uses kernel mean embedding to improve the discriminator training
just as in generative moment matching networks (GMMNs) [Li et al., 2015], was experimentally
shown to converge much faster and more stable compared to GAIL. This gives us a hint that a robust
discriminator is an important factor in improving the sample efficiency of generative-adversarial
approaches to imitation learning.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

