Image-to-image translation for cross-domain
disentanglement

Abel Gonzalez-Garcia
Computer Vision Center
agonzalez@cvc.uab.es

Joost van de Weijer
Computer Vision Center
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona

Yoshua Bengio
MILA
Université de Montréal

Abstract
Deep image translation methods have recently shown excellent results, outputting
high-quality images covering multiple modes of the data distribution. There has
also been increased interest in disentangling the internal representations learned
by deep methods to further improve their performance and achieve a finer control.
In this paper, we bridge these two objectives and introduce the concept of crossdomain disentanglement. We aim to separate the internal representation into three
parts. The shared part contains information for both domains. The exclusive
parts, on the other hand, contain only factors of variation that are particular to
each domain. We achieve this through bidirectional image translation based on
Generative Adversarial Networks and cross-domain autoencoders, a novel network
component. Our model offers multiple advantages. We can output diverse samples
covering multiple modes of the distributions of both domains, perform domainspecific image transfer and interpolation, and cross-domain retrieval without the
need of labeled data, only paired images. We compare our model to the state-ofthe-art in multi-modal image translation and achieve better results for translation
on challenging datasets as well as for cross-domain retrieval on realistic datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has greatly improved the quality of image-to-image translation methods. These
methods aim to learn a mapping that transforms images from one domain to another. Examples
include colorization, where the aim is to map a grayscale image to a plausible colored image of
the same scene [21, 47], and semantic segmentation, where an RGB image is translated to a map
indicating the semantic class of each pixel in the RGB image [13, 31]. Isola et al. [23] proposed
a general purpose image-to-image translation method. Their method is successfully applied to a
wide range of problems when paired data is available. The theory is further extended to unpaired
data by introducing a cycle consistency loss [49]. The U-Net [40] architecture is commonly used for
image-to-image translation. This network can be interpreted as an encoder-decoder network. The
encoder extracts the relevant information from the input domain and passes it on to the decoder,
which then transforms this information to the output domain. In spite of the current popularity of
these models, the learned representation (output of the encoder) has only been studied for some
related tasks [32, 44]. Here we investigate and impose structure to the specific representation learned
in image-to-image translation models.
Disentangling the accidental scene events, such as illumination, shadows, viewpoint and object
orientation from the intrinsic scene properties has been a long desired goal of computer vision [6, 42].
When applied to deep learning, this allows deep models to be aware of isolated factors of variation
affecting the represented entities [7, 34]. Therefore, models can marginalize information along a
particular factor of variation, should it be not relevant for the task at hand. Such a process can be
especially beneficial for tasks that are hindered by the presence of particular factors, for example,
varying illumination conditions in object recognition. Moreover, disentangled representations grant a
more precise control for those tasks that perform actions based on the representation.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

