Modelling sparsity, heterogeneity, reciprocity and
community structure in temporal interaction data

Xenia Miscouridou1 , François Caron1 , Yee Whye Teh1,2
1
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford
2
DeepMind
{miscouri, caron, y.w.teh}@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a novel class of network models for temporal dyadic interaction
data. Our objective is to capture important features often observed in social
interactions: sparsity, degree heterogeneity, community structure and reciprocity.
We use mutually-exciting Hawkes processes to model the interactions between
each (directed) pair of individuals. The intensity of each process allows interactions
to arise as responses to opposite interactions (reciprocity), or due to shared interests
between individuals (community structure). For sparsity and degree heterogeneity,
we build the non time dependent part of the intensity function on compound random
measures following (Todeschini et al., 2016). We conduct experiments on realworld temporal interaction data and show that the proposed model outperforms
competing approaches for link prediction, and leads to interpretable parameters.

1

Introduction

There is a growing interest in modelling and understanding temporal dyadic interaction data. Temporal
interaction data take the form of time-stamped triples (t, i, j) indicating that an interaction occurred
between individuals i and j at time t. Interactions may be directed or undirected. Examples of such
interaction data include commenting a post on an online social network, exchanging an email, or
meeting in a coffee shop. An important challenge is to understand the underlying structure that
underpins these interactions. To do so, it is important to develop statistical network models with
interpretable parameters, that capture the properties which are observed in real social interaction data.
One important aspect to capture is the community structure of the interactions. Individuals are often
affiliated to some latent communities (e.g. work, sport, etc.), and their affiliations determine their
interactions: they are more likely to interact with individuals sharing the same interests than to
individuals affiliated with different communities. An other important aspect is reciprocity. Many
events are responses to recent events of the opposite direction. For example, if Helen sends an email
to Mary, then Mary is more likely to send an email to Helen shortly afterwards. A number of papers
have proposed statistical models to capture both community structure and reciprocity in temporal
interaction data (Blundell et al., 2012; Dubois et al., 2013; Linderman and Adams, 2014). They use
models based on Hawkes processes for capturing reciprocity and stochastic block-models or latent
feature models for capturing community structure.
In addition to the above two properties, it is important to capture the global properties of the interaction
data. Interaction data are often sparse: only a small fraction of the pairs of nodes actually interact.
Additionally, they typically exhibit high degree (number of interactions per node) heterogeneity:
some individuals have a large number of interactions, whereas most individuals have very few,
therefore resulting in empirical degree distributions being heavy-tailed. As shown by Karrer and
Newman (2011), Gopalan et al. (2013) and Todeschini et al. (2016), failing to account explicitly for
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

