Global Gated Mixture of Second-order Pooling for
Improving Deep Convolutional Neural Networks

Qilong Wang1,2,∗,†, Zilin Gao2,∗ , Jiangtao Xie2 , Wangmeng Zuo3 , Peihua Li2,‡
1

Tianjin University, 2 Dalian University of Technology, 3 Harbin Institute of Technology
qlwang@tju.edu.cn, gzl@mail.dlut.edu.cn, jiangtaoxie@mail.dlut.edu.cn
wmzuo@hit.edu.cn, peihuali@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
In most of existing deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for classification,
global average (first-order) pooling (GAP) has become a standard module to summarize activations of the last convolution layer as final representation for prediction.
Recent researches show integration of higher-order pooling (HOP) methods clearly
improves performance of deep CNNs. However, both GAP and existing HOP
methods assume unimodal distributions, which cannot fully capture statistics of
convolutional activations, limiting representation ability of deep CNNs, especially
for samples with complex contents. To overcome the above limitation, this paper
proposes a global Gated Mixture of Second-order Pooling (GM-SOP) method to
further improve representation ability of deep CNNs. To this end, we introduce
a sparsity-constrained gating mechanism and propose a novel parametric SOP as
component of mixture model. Given a bank of SOP candidates, our method can
adaptively choose Top-K(K > 1) candidates for each input sample through the
sparsity-constrained gating module, and performs weighted sum of outputs of K
selected candidates as representation of the sample. The proposed GM-SOP can
flexibly accommodate a large number of personalized SOP candidates in an efficient
way, leading to richer representations. The deep networks with our GM-SOP can be
end-to-end trained, having potential to characterize complex, multi-modal distributions. The proposed method is evaluated on two large scale image benchmarks (i.e.,
downsampled ImageNet-1K and Places365), and experimental results show our
GM-SOP is superior to its counterparts and achieves very competitive performance.
The source code will be available at http://www.peihuali.org/GM-SOP.

1

Introduction

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved great success in a variety of computer
vision tasks, especially image classification [25]. During the past years, deep CNN architectures have
been widely studied and achieved remarkable progress [34, 36, 13, 17]. As one standard module in
deep CNN architectures [36, 13, 17, 5, 16], global average pooling (GAP) summarizes activations of
the last convolution layer for final prediction. However, GAP only collects first-order statistics while
neglecting richer higher-order ones, suffering from limited representation ability [7]. Recently, some
researchers propose to integrate trainable higher-order pooling (HOP) methods (e.g., second-order
and third-order pooling) into deep CNNs [19, 29, 39, 27, 8], which distinctly improve representation
ability of deep CNNs. However, both GAP and existing HOP methods adopt the unimodal distribution
∗

The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
This work was mainly done when he was with Dalian University of Technology.
‡
Peihua Li is the corresponding author.
†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

