Stochastic Nonparametric Event-Tensor
Decomposition

Shandian Zhe, Yishuai Du
School of Computing, University of Utah
zhe@cs.utah.edu, yishuai.du@utah.edu

Abstract
Tensor decompositions are fundamental tools for multiway data analysis. Existing
approaches, however, ignore the valuable temporal information along with data,
or simply discretize them into time steps so that important temporal patterns are
easily missed. Moreover, most methods are limited to multilinear decomposition
forms, and hence are unable to capture intricate, nonlinear relationships in data. To
address these issues, we formulate event-tensors, to preserve the complete temporal information for multiway data, and propose a novel Bayesian nonparametric
decomposition model. Our model can (1) fully exploit the time stamps to capture
the critical, causal/triggering effects between the interaction events, (2) flexibly
estimate the complex relationships between the entities in tensor modes, and (3)
uncover hidden structures from their temporal interactions. For scalable inference,
we develop a doubly stochastic variational Expectation-Maximization algorithm to
conduct an online decomposition. Evaluations on both synthetic and real-world
datasets show that our model not only improves upon the predictive performance
of existing methods, but also discovers interesting clusters underlying the data.

1

Introduction

Tensors represent the high-order interactions between entities in multiway data. Such interactions are
ubiquitous in real-world applications. For instance, in online shopping, users purchase commodities
under different web contexts — these interactions can be represented by a three mode tensor (user,
commodity, web context). To analyze tensor data, we use decomposition approaches — where we
jointly estimate a set of latent factors for each entity, and the mapping between the latent factors
and tensor entry values. The latent factors can reveal hidden structures of the entities, such as
clusters/communities; the mapping characterizes the entities’ relationships (in terms of their factor
representations), and can be used to predict missing entry values.
Despite the wide success of existing tensor decomposition algorithms (Tucker, 1966; Harshman,
1970; Kang et al., 2012; Choi and Vishwanathan, 2014), most methods assume a simple multilinear
decomposition form, which might be insufficient to estimate intricate, nonlinear relationships in data.
More important, most methods ignore the valuable temporal information along with data or exploit
them in a relatively coarse way. For instance, the time stamp of each interaction is usually abandoned
and only their counts are used for count tensor decomposition (Chi and Kolda, 2012; Hansen et al.,
2015; Hu et al., 2015b). More elegant approaches (Xiong et al., 2010; Schein et al., 2015, 2016)
discretize the time stamps into steps, e.g., weeks/months, and use a set of time factors to represent
each step. The tensor is hence augmented with a time mode. The decomposition may further use
Markov assumptions to encourage smooth transitions between the time factors (Xiong et al., 2010).
However, in each time step, the occurrences of the interactions are treated independently. Hence,
important temporal patterns, such as causal/triggering effects in adjacent interactions, cannot be well
modeled or captured.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

