Rectangular Bounding Process

Xuhui Fan
School of Mathematics & Statistics
University of New South Wales
xuhui.fan@unsw.edu.au

Bin Li
School of Computer Science
Fudan University
libin@fudan.edu.cn

Scott A. Sisson
School of Mathematics & Statistics
University of New South Wales
scott.sisson@unsw.edu.au

Abstract
Stochastic partition models divide a multi-dimensional space into a number of
rectangular regions, such that the data within each region exhibit certain types of
homogeneity. Due to the nature of their partition strategy, existing partition models
may create many unnecessary divisions in sparse regions when trying to describe
data in dense regions. To avoid this problem we introduce a new parsimonious
partition model – the Rectangular Bounding Process (RBP) – to efficiently partition
multi-dimensional spaces, by employing a bounding strategy to enclose data points
within rectangular bounding boxes. Unlike existing approaches, the RBP possesses
several attractive theoretical properties that make it a powerful nonparametric
partition prior on a hypercube. In particular, the RBP is self-consistent and as such
can be directly extended from a finite hypercube to infinite (unbounded) space. We
apply the RBP to regression trees and relational models as a flexible partition prior.
The experimental results validate the merit of the RBP in rich yet parsimonious
expressiveness compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Stochastic partition processes on a product space have found many real-world applications, such
as regression trees [5, 18, 22], relational modeling [17, 2, 21], and community detection [26, 16].
By tailoring a multi-dimensional space (or multi-dimensional array) into a number of rectangular
regions, the partition model can fit data using these “blocks” such that the data within each block
exhibit certain types of homogeneity. As one can choose an arbitrarily fine resolution of partition, the
data can be fitted reasonably well.
The cost of finer data fitness is that the partition model may induce unnecessary dissections in sparse
regions. Compared to the regular-grid partition process [17], the Mondrian process (MP) [32] is
more parsimonious for data fitting due to a hierarchical partition strategy; however, the strategy of
recursively cutting the space still cannot largely avoid unnecessary dissections in sparse regions.
Consider e.g. a regression tree on a multi-dimensional feature space: as data usually lie in some local
regions of the entire space, a “regular-grid” or “hierarchical” (i.e. kd-tree) partition model would
inevitably produce too many cuts in regions where data points rarely locate when it tries to fit data
in dense regions (see illustration in the left panel of Figure 1). It is accordingly challenging for a
partition process to balance fitness and parsimony.
Instead of this cutting-based strategy, we propose a bounding-based partition process – the Rectangular
Bounding Process (RBP) – to alleviate the above limitation. The RBP generates rectangular bounding
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

