Learning filter widths of spectral decompositions with
wavelets
Bülent Yener
Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180
yener@rpi.edu

Haidar Khan
Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180
khanh2@rpi.edu

Abstract
Time series classification using deep neural networks, such as convolutional neural networks (CNN), operate on the spectral decomposition of the time series
computed using a preprocessing step. This step can include a large number of
hyperparameters, such as window length, filter widths, and filter shapes, each
with a range of possible values that must be chosen using time and data intensive
cross-validation procedures. We propose the wavelet deconvolution (WD) layer
as an efficient alternative to this preprocessing step that eliminates a significant
number of hyperparameters. The WD layer uses wavelet functions with adjustable
scale parameters to learn the spectral decomposition directly from the signal. Using
backpropagation, we show the scale parameters can be optimized with gradient
descent. Furthermore, the WD layer adds interpretability to the learned time series
classifier by exploiting the properties of the wavelet transform. In our experiments,
we show that the WD layer can automatically extract the frequency content used
to generate a dataset. The WD layer combined with a CNN applied to the phone
recognition task on the TIMIT database achieves a phone error rate of 18.1%, a relative improvement of 4% over the baseline CNN. Experiments on a dataset where
engineered features are not available showed WD+CNN is the best performing
method. Our results show that the WD layer can improve neural network based
time series classifiers both in accuracy and interpretability by learning directly
from the input signal.

1

Introduction

The spectral decomposition of signals plays an integral role in problems involving time series classification or prediction using machine learning. Effective spectral decomposition requires knowledge
about the relevant frequency ranges present in an input signal. Since this information is usually
unknown, it is encoded as a set of hyperparameters that are hand-tuned for the problem of interest.
This approach can be summarized by the application of filters to a signal and transformation to
the time/frequency domain in a preprocessing step with the short-time Fourier transform (STFT)
[27], wavelet transform [10], or empirical mode decomposition [16]. The resulting time series of
frequency components is then used for the classification or prediction task. Examples of this approach
are present across the spectrum of problems involving time series, including financial time series
prediction [7], automatic speech recognition [41, 2, 38], and biological time series analysis [4, 24].
As the parameters of a spectral decomposition are important for time-series problems and are
generally not transferable, it is useful to develop methods to efficiently optimize the parameters for
each problem. Currently these methods are dominated by cross-validation procedures which incur
heavy costs in both computation time and data when used to optimize a large set of hyperparameters.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

