Identification and Estimation Of Causal Effects from
Dependent Data

Eli Sherman
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
esherman@jhu.edu

Ilya Shpitser
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
ilyas@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
The assumption that data samples are independent and identically distributed (iid)
is standard in many areas of statistics and machine learning. Nevertheless, in
some settings, such as social networks, infectious disease modeling, and reasoning
with spatial and temporal data, this assumption is false. An extensive literature
exists on making causal inferences under the iid assumption [17, 11, 26, 21], even
when unobserved confounding bias may be present. But, as pointed out in [19],
causal inference in non-iid contexts is challenging due to the presence of both
unobserved confounding and data dependence. In this paper we develop a general
theory describing when causal inferences are possible in such scenarios. We use
segregated graphs [20], a generalization of latent projection mixed graphs [28],
to represent causal models of this type and provide a complete algorithm for nonparametric identification in these models. We then demonstrate how statistical
inference may be performed on causal parameters identified by this algorithm.
In particular, we consider cases where only a single sample is available for parts
of the model due to full interference, i.e., all units are pathwise dependent and
neighbors’ treatments affect each others’ outcomes [24]. We apply these techniques
to a synthetic data set which considers users sharing fake news articles given the
structure of their social network, user activity levels, and baseline demographics
and socioeconomic covariates.

1

Introduction

The assumption of independent and identically distributed (iid) samples is ubiquitous in data analysis.
In many research areas, however, this assumption simply does not hold. For instance, social media
data often exhibits dependence due to homophily and contagion [19]. Similarly, in epidemiology,
data exhibiting herd immunity is likely dependent across units. Likewise, signal processing and
sequence learning often consider data that are spatially [8] or temporally [23] dependent.
In causal inference, dependence in data often manifests as interference wherein some units’ treatments
may causally affect other units’ outcomes [3, 9]. Herd immunity is a canonical example of interference since other subjects’ vaccination status causally affects the likelihood of a particular subject
contracting a disease. Even under the iid assumption, making causal inferences from observed data is
difficult due to the presence of unobserved confounding. This difficulty is worsened when interference
is present, as described in detail in [19]. In general, these difficulties prevent identification of causal
parameters of interest, making estimation of these parameters from data an ill-posed problem. An
extensive literature on identification of causal parameters (under the iid assumption) has been developed. The g-formula [17] identifies any interventional distribution in directed acylcic graph-based
(DAG) causal models without latent variables. Pearl showed that in certain cases identification is
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

