Learning Overparameterized Neural Networks via
Stochastic Gradient Descent on Structured Data
Yuanzhi Li
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
yuanzhil@stanford.edu

Yingyu Liang
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
yliang@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Neural networks have many successful applications, while much less theoretical
understanding has been gained. Towards bridging this gap, we study the problem of
learning a two-layer overparameterized ReLU neural network for multi-class classification via stochastic gradient descent (SGD) from random initialization. In the
overparameterized setting, when the data comes from mixtures of well-separated
distributions, we prove that SGD learns a network with a small generalization
error, albeit the network has enough capacity to fit arbitrary labels. Furthermore,
the analysis provides interesting insights into several aspects of learning neural
networks and can be verified based on empirical studies on synthetic data and on
the MNIST dataset.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have achieved great success in many applications, but despite a recent increase
of theoretical studies, much remains to be explained. For example, it is empirically observed that
learning with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in the overparameterized setting (i.e., learning a large
network with number of parameters larger than the number of training data points) does not lead to
overfitting [24, 31]. Some recent studies use the low complexity of the learned solution to explain the
generalization, but usually do not explain how the SGD or its variants favors low complexity solutions
(i.e., the inductive bias or implicit regularization) [3, 23]. It is also observed that overparameterization
and proper random initialization can help the optimization [28, 12, 26, 18], but it is also not well
understood why a particular initialization can improve learning. Moreover, most of the existing
works trying to explain these phenomenons in general rely on unrealistic assumptions about the data
distribution, such as Gaussian-ness and/or linear separability [32, 25, 10, 17, 7].
This paper thus proposes to study the problem of learning a two-layer overparameterized neural
network using SGD for classification, on data with a more realistic structure. In particular, the data
in each class is a mixture of several components, and components from different classes are well
separated in distance (but the components in each class can be close to each other). This is motivated
by practical data. For example, on the dataset MNIST [15], each class corresponds to a digit and can
have several components corresponding to different writing styles of the digit, and an image in it is
a small perturbation of one of the components. On the other hand, images that belong to the same
component are closer to each other than to an image of another digit. Analysis in this setting can then
help understand how the structure of the practical data affects the optimization and generalization.
In this setting, we prove that when the network is sufficiently overparameterized, SGD provably
learns a network close to the random initialization and with a small generalization error. This result
shows that in the overparameterized setting and when the data is well structured, though in principle
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

