Transfer of Deep Reactive Policies for MDP Planning

Aniket Bajpai, Sankalp Garg, Mausam
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi
New Delhi, India
{quantum.computing96, sankalp2621998}@gmail.com, mausam@cse.iitd.ac.in

Abstract
Domain-independent probabilistic planners input an MDP description in a factored
representation language such as PPDDL or RDDL, and exploit the specifics of
the representation for faster planning. Traditional algorithms operate on each
problem instance independently, and good methods for transferring experience
from policies of other instances of a domain to a new instance do not exist. Recently,
researchers have begun exploring the use of deep reactive policies, trained via deep
reinforcement learning (RL), for MDP planning domains. One advantage of deep
reactive policies is that they are more amenable to transfer learning.
In this paper, we present the first domain-independent transfer algorithm for MDP
planning domains expressed in an RDDL representation. Our architecture exploits
the symbolic state configuration and transition function of the domain (available
via RDDL) to learn a shared embedding space for states and state-action pairs for
all problem instances of a domain. We then learn an RL agent in the embedding
space, making a near zero-shot transfer possible, i.e., without much training on the
new instance, and without using the domain simulator at all. Experiments on three
different benchmark domains underscore the value of our transfer algorithm. Compared against planning from scratch, and a state-of-the-art RL transfer algorithm,
our transfer solution has significantly superior learning curves.

1

Introduction

The field of domain-independent planning designs planners that can be run for all symbolic planning
problems described in a given input representation. The planners use representation-specific algorithms, thus allowing themselves to be run on all domains that can be expressed in the representation.
Two popular representation languages for expressing probabilistic planning problems are PPDDL,
Probabilistic Planning Domain Description Language [Younes et al., 2005], and RDDL, Relational
Dynamic Influence Diagram Language [Sanner, 2010]. These languages express Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs) with potentially large state spaces using a factored representation. Most traditional
algorithms for PPDDL and RDDL planning solve each problem instance independently are not able
to share policies between two or more problems in the same domain [Mausam and Kolobov, 2012].
Very recently, probabilistic planning researchers have begun exploring ideas from deep reinforcement
learning, which approximates state-value or state-action mappings via deep neural networks. Deep
RL algorithms only expect a domain simulator and do not expect any domain model. Since the
RDDL or PPDDL models can always be converted to a simulator, every model-free RL algorithm is
applicable to the MDP planning setting. Recent results have shown competitive performance of deep
reactive policies generated by RL on several planning benchmarks [Fern et al., 2018, Toyer et al.,
2018].
Because neural models can learn latent representations, they can be effective at efficient transfer from
one problem to another. In this paper, we present the first domain-independent transfer algorithm for
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

