A Neural Compositional Paradigm
for Image Captioning

Bo Dai 1
Sanja Fidler 2,3,4
Dahua Lin 1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute 4 NVIDIA
bdai@ie.cuhk.edu.hk fidler@cs.toronto.edu dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
1

Abstract
Mainstream captioning models often follow a sequential structure to generate captions, leading to issues such as introduction of irrelevant semantics, lack of diversity
in the generated captions, and inadequate generalization performance. In this paper,
we present an alternative paradigm for image captioning, which factorizes the
captioning procedure into two stages: (1) extracting an explicit semantic representation from the given image; and (2) constructing the caption based on a recursive
compositional procedure in a bottom-up manner. Compared to conventional ones,
our paradigm better preserves the semantic content through an explicit factorization
of semantics and syntax. By using the compositional generation procedure, caption
construction follows a recursive structure, which naturally fits the properties of
human language. Moreover, the proposed compositional procedure requires less
data to train, generalizes better, and yields more diverse captions.

1

Introduction

Image captioning, the task to generate short descriptions for given images, has received increasing
attention in recent years. State-of-the-art models [1, 2, 3, 4] mostly adopt the encoder-decoder
paradigm [3], where the content of the given image is first encoded via a convolutional network into
a feature vector, which is then decoded into a caption via a recurrent network. In particular, the
words in the caption are produced in a sequential manner – the choice of each word depends on both
the preceding word and the image feature. Despite its simplicity and the effectiveness shown on
various benchmarks [5, 6], the sequential model has a fundamental problem. Specifically, it could not
reflect the inherent hierarchical structures of natural languages [7, 8] in image captioning and other
generation tasks, although it could implicitly capture such structures in tasks taking the complete
sentences as input, e.g. parsing [9], and classification [10].
As a result, sequential models have several significant drawbacks. First, they rely excessively on
n-gram statistics rather than hierarchical dependencies among words in a caption. Second, such
models usually favor the frequent n-grams [11] in the training set, which, as shown in Figure 1, may
lead to captions that are only correct syntactically but not semantically, containing semantic concepts
that are irrelevant to the conditioned image. Third, the entanglement of syntactic rules and semantics
obscures the dependency structure and makes sequential models difficult to generalize.
To tackle these issues, we propose a new paradigm for image captioning, where the extraction of
semantics (i.e. what to say) and the construction of syntactically correct captions (i.e. how to say) are
decomposed into two stages. Specifically, it derives an explicit representation of the semantic content
of the given image, which comprises a set of noun-phrases, e.g. a white cat, a cloudy sky or two
men. With these noun-phrases as the basis, it then proceeds to construct the caption through recursive
composition until a complete caption is obtained. In particular, at each step of the composition, a
higher-level phrase is formed by joining two selected sub-phrases via a connecting phrase. It is
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

