Predictive Uncertainty Estimation via Prior Networks
Andrey Malinin
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
am969@cam.ac.uk

Mark Gales
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
mjfg@eng.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Estimating how uncertain an AI system is in its predictions is important to improve
the safety of such systems. Uncertainty in predictive can result from uncertainty in
model parameters, irreducible data uncertainty and uncertainty due to distributional
mismatch between the test and training data distributions. Different actions might
be taken depending on the source of the uncertainty so it is important to be able to
distinguish between them. Recently, baseline tasks and metrics have been defined
and several practical methods to estimate uncertainty developed. These methods,
however, attempt to model uncertainty due to distributional mismatch either implicitly through model uncertainty or as data uncertainty. This work proposes a
new framework for modeling predictive uncertainty called Prior Networks (PNs)
which explicitly models distributional uncertainty. PNs do this by parameterizing
a prior distribution over predictive distributions. This work focuses on uncertainty
for classification and evaluates PNs on the tasks of identifying out-of-distribution
(OOD) samples and detecting misclassification on the MNIST and CIFAR-10
datasets, where they are found to outperform previous methods. Experiments on
synthetic and MNIST and CIFAR-10 data show that unlike previous non-Bayesian
methods PNs are able to distinguish between data and distributional uncertainty.

1

Introduction

Neural Networks (NNs) have become the dominant approach to addressing computer vision (CV) [1,
2, 3], natural language processing (NLP) [4, 5, 6], speech recognition (ASR) [7, 8] and bio-informatics
(BI) [9, 10] tasks. Despite impressive, and ever improving, supervised learning performance, NNs
tend to make over-confident predictions [11] and until recently have been unable to provide measures
of uncertainty in their predictions. Estimating uncertainty in a model’s predictions is important, as
it enables, for example, the safety of an AI system [12] to be increased by acting on the model’s
prediction in an informed manner. This is crucial to applications where the cost of an error is high,
such as in autonomous vehicle control and medical, financial and legal fields.
Recently notable progress has been made on predictive uncertainty for Deep Learning through
the definition of baselines, tasks and metrics [13] and the development of practical methods for
estimating uncertainty. One class of approaches stems from Bayesian Neural Networks [14, 15, 16,
17]. Traditionally, these approaches have been computationally more demanding and conceptually
more complicated than non-Bayesian NNs. Crucially, their performance depends on the form
of approximation made due to computational constraints and the nature of the prior distribution
over parameters. A recent development has been the technique of Monte-Carlo Dropout [18],
which estimates predictive uncertainty using an ensemble of multiple stochastic forward passes and
computing the mean and spread of the ensemble. This technique has been successfully applied to
tasks in computer vision [19, 20]. A number of non-Bayesian ensemble approaches have also been
proposed. One approach based on explicitly training an ensemble of DNNs, called Deep Ensembles
[11], yields competitive uncertainty estimates to MC dropout. Another class of approaches, developed
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

