Generalized Cross Entropy Loss for Training Deep
Neural Networks with Noisy Labels
Zhilu Zhang
Mert R. Sabuncu
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Meinig School of Biomedical Engineering
Cornell University
zz452@cornell.edu, msabuncu@cornell.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved tremendous success in a variety of
applications across many disciplines. Yet, their superior performance comes with
the expensive cost of requiring correctly annotated large-scale datasets. Moreover,
due to DNNs’ rich capacity, errors in training labels can hamper performance. To
combat this problem, mean absolute error (MAE) has recently been proposed as
a noise-robust alternative to the commonly-used categorical cross entropy (CCE)
loss. However, as we show in this paper, MAE can perform poorly with DNNs and
challenging datasets. Here, we present a theoretically grounded set of noise-robust
loss functions that can be seen as a generalization of MAE and CCE. Proposed loss
functions can be readily applied with any existing DNN architecture and algorithm,
while yielding good performance in a wide range of noisy label scenarios. We report
results from experiments conducted with CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and FASHIONMNIST datasets and synthetically generated noisy labels.

1

Introduction

The resurrection of neural networks in recent years, together with the recent emergence of large
scale datasets, has enabled super-human performance on many classification tasks [21, 28, 30].
However, supervised DNNs often require a large number of training samples to achieve a high level
of performance. For instance, the ImageNet dataset [6] has 3.2 million hand-annotated images.
Although crowdsourcing platforms like Amazon Mechanical Turk have made large-scale annotation
possible, some error during the labeling process is often inevitable, and mislabeled samples can
impair the performance of models trained on these data. Indeed, the sheer capacity of DNNs to
memorize massive data with completely randomly assigned labels [42] proves their susceptibility to
overfitting when trained with noisy labels. Hence, an algorithm that is robust against noisy labels
for DNNs is needed to resolve the potential problem. Furthermore, when examples are cheap and
accurate annotations are expensive, it can be more beneficial to have datasets with more but noisier
labels than less but more accurate labels [18].
Classification with noisy labels is a widely studied topic [8]. Yet, relatively little attention is given
to directly formulating a noise-robust loss function in the context of DNNs. Our work is motivated
by Ghosh et al. [9] who theoretically showed that mean absolute error (MAE) can be robust against
noisy labels under certain assumptions. However, as we demonstrate below, the robustness of MAE
can concurrently cause increased difficulty in training, and lead to performance drop. This limitation
is particularly evident when using DNNs on complicated datasets. To combat this drawback, we
advocate the use of a more general class of noise-robust loss functions, which encompass both MAE
and CCE. Compared to previous methods for DNNs, which often involve extra steps and algorithmic
modifications, changing only the loss function requires minimal intervention to existing architectures
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

