Evolution-Guided Policy Gradient in Reinforcement
Learning

Shauharda Khadka
Kagan Tumer
Collaborative Robotics and Intelligent Systems Institute
Oregon State University
{khadkas,kagan.tumer}@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) algorithms have been successfully applied to
a range of challenging control tasks. However, these methods typically suffer from
three core difficulties: temporal credit assignment with sparse rewards, lack of
effective exploration, and brittle convergence properties that are extremely sensitive
to hyperparameters. Collectively, these challenges severely limit the applicability
of these approaches to real-world problems. Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs), a
class of black box optimization techniques inspired by natural evolution, are well
suited to address each of these three challenges. However, EAs typically suffer
from high sample complexity and struggle to solve problems that require optimization of a large number of parameters. In this paper, we introduce Evolutionary
Reinforcement Learning (ERL), a hybrid algorithm that leverages the population of
an EA to provide diversified data to train an RL agent, and reinserts the RL agent
into the EA population periodically to inject gradient information into the EA. ERL
inherits EA’s ability of temporal credit assignment with a fitness metric, effective
exploration with a diverse set of policies, and stability of a population-based approach and complements it with off-policy DRL’s ability to leverage gradients for
higher sample efficiency and faster learning. Experiments in a range of challenging
continuous control benchmarks demonstrate that ERL significantly outperforms
prior DRL and EA methods.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have been successfully applied in a number of challenging
domains, ranging from arcade games [35, 36], board games [49] to robotic control tasks [3, 31]. A
primary driving force behind the explosion of RL in these domains is its integration with powerful nonlinear function approximators like deep neural networks. This partnership with deep learning, often
referred to as Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has enabled RL to successfully extend to tasks
with high-dimensional input and action spaces. However, widespread adoption of these techniques to
real-world problems is still limited by three major challenges: temporal credit assignment with long
time horizons and sparse rewards, lack of diverse exploration, and brittle convergence properties.
First, associating actions with returns when a reward is sparse (only observed after a series of actions)
is difficult. This is a common occurrence in most real world domains and is often referred to as the
temporal credit assignment problem [54]. Temporal Difference methods in RL use bootstrapping
to address this issue but often struggle when the time horizons are long and the reward is sparse.
Multi-step returns address this issue but are mostly effective in on-policy scenarios [10, 45, 46]. Offpolicy multi-step learning [34, 48] have been demonstrated to be stable in recent works but require
complementary correction mechanisms like importance sampling, Retrace [37, 59] and V-trace [14]
which can be computationally expensive and limiting.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

