Foreground Clustering for Joint Segmentation and
Localization in Videos and Images

Abhishek Sharma
Navinfo Europe Research, Eindhoven, NL ∗
kein.iitian@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper presents a novel framework in which video/image segmentation and
localization are cast into a single optimization problem that integrates information
from low level appearance cues with that of high level localization cues in a very
weakly supervised manner. The proposed framework leverages two representations at different levels, exploits the spatial relationship between bounding boxes
and superpixels as linear constraints and simultaneously discriminates between
foreground and background at bounding box and superpixel level. Different from
previous approaches that mainly rely on discriminative clustering, we incorporate
a foreground model that minimizes the histogram difference of an object across
all image frames. Exploiting the geometric relation between the superpixels and
bounding boxes enables the transfer of segmentation cues to improve localization
output and vice-versa. Inclusion of the foreground model generalizes our discriminative framework to video data where the background tends to be similar and thus,
not discriminative. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our unified framework on
the YouTube Object video dataset, Internet Object Discovery dataset and Pascal
VOC 2007.

1

Introduction

Localizing and segmenting objects in an image and video is a fundamental problem in computer vision
since it facilitates many high level vision tasks such as object recognition, action recognition (49),
natural language description (17) to name a few. Thus, any advancements in segmentation and
localization algorithm are automatically transferred to the performance of high level tasks (17).
With the success of deep networks, supervised top down segmentation methods obtain impressive
performance by learning on pixel level (28; 34) or bounding box labelled datasets (10; 12). Taking
into account the cost of obtaining such annotations, weakly supervised methods have gathered a lot
of interest lately (16; 7; 20). In this paper, we use very weak supervision to imply that labels are
given only at the image or video level and aim to jointly segment and localize the foreground object
given the weak supervision.
While great progress has been made in both image, video and 3D domain (20; 5; 40) using weak
supervision, most existing work are tailored for a specific task. Although UberNet (19) achieves
impressive results on multiple image perception tasks by training a deep network, we are not aware
of any similar universal network in the weak supervision domain that performs on both image and
video data. Part of the difficulty lies in defining a loss function that can explicitly model or exploit
the similarity between similar tasks using weak supervision only while simultaneously learning
multiple classifiers. More specifically, we address the following challenge: how can we use semantic
localization cues of bounding boxes to guide segmentation and leverage low level segmentation
appearance cues at superpixel level to improve localization.
∗

work done before

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

