Infinite-Horizon Gaussian Processes
Arno Solin∗
Aalto University
arno.solin@aalto.fi

James Hensman
PROWLER.io
james@prowler.io

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Gaussian processes provide a flexible framework for forecasting, removing noise,
and interpreting long temporal datasets. State space modelling (Kalman filtering)
enables these non-parametric models to be deployed on long datasets by reducing
the complexity to linear in the number of data points. The complexity is still
cubic in the state dimension m which is an impediment to practical application. In
certain special cases (Gaussian likelihood, regular spacing) the GP posterior will
reach a steady posterior state when the data are very long. We leverage this and
formulate an inference scheme for GPs with general likelihoods, where inference is
based on single-sweep EP (assumed density filtering). The infinite-horizon model
tackles the cubic cost in the state dimensionality and reduces the cost in the state
dimension m to O(m2 ) per data point. The model is extended to online-learning
of hyperparameters. We show examples for large finite-length modelling problems,
and present how the method runs in real-time on a smartphone on a continuous
data stream updated at 100 Hz.

1

Introduction

Gaussian process (GP, [25]) models provide a plug & play interpretable approach to probabilistic
modelling, and would perhaps be more widely applied if not for their associated computational
complexity: naïve implementations of GPs require the construction and decomposition of a kernel
matrix at cost O(n3 ), where n is the number of data. In this work, we consider GP time series
(i.e. GPs with one input dimension). In this case, construction of the kernel matrix can be avoided
by exploiting the (approximate) Markov structure of the process and re-writing the model as a
linear Gaussian state space model, which can then be solved using Kalman filtering (see, e.g., [27]).
The Kalman filter costs O(m3 n), where m is the dimension of the state space. We propose the
Infinite-Horizon GP approximation (IHGP), which reduces the cost to O(m2 n).
As m grows with the number of kernel components in the GP prior, this cost saving can be significant
for many GP models where m can reach hundreds. For example, the automatic statistician [6]
searches for kernels (on 1D datasets) using sums and products of kernels. The summing of two
kernels results in the concatenation of the state space (sum of the ms) and a product of kernels results
in the Kronecker sum of their statespaces (product of ms). This quickly results in very high state
dimensions; we show results with a similarly constructed kernel in our experiments.
We are concerned with real-time processing of long (or streaming) time-series with short and long
length-scale components, and non-Gaussian noise/likelihood and potential non-stationary structure.
We show how the IHGP can be applied in the streaming setting, including efficient estimation of the
marginal likelihood and associated gradients, enabling on-line learning of hyper (kernel) parameters.
We demonstrate this by applying our approach to a streaming dataset of two million points, as well as
providing an implementation of the method on an iPhone, allowing on-line learning of a GP model of
the phone’s acceleration.
∗

This work was undertaken whilst AS was a Visiting Research Fellow with University of Cambridge.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

