The Sample Complexity of Semi-Supervised Learning
with Nonparametric Mixture Models

Chen Dan1 , Liu Leqi1 , Bryon Aragam1 , Pradeep Ravikumar1 , Eric P. Xing1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Petuum Inc.
{cdan,leqil,naragam,pradeepr,epxing}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We study the sample complexity of semi-supervised learning (SSL) and introduce
new assumptions based on the mismatch between a mixture model learned from
unlabeled data and the true mixture model induced by the (unknown) class conditional distributions. Under these assumptions, we establish an Ω(K log K) labeled
sample complexity bound without imposing parametric assumptions, where K is
the number of classes. Our results suggest that even in nonparametric settings it is
possible to learn a near-optimal classifier using only a few labeled samples. Unlike previous theoretical work which focuses on binary classification, we consider
general multiclass classification (K > 2), which requires solving a difficult permutation learning problem. This permutation defines a classifier whose classification
error is controlled by the Wasserstein distance between mixing measures, and we
provide finite-sample results characterizing the behaviour of the excess risk of this
classifier. Finally, we describe three algorithms for computing these estimators
based on a connection to bipartite graph matching, and perform experiments to
illustrate the superiority of the MLE over the majority vote estimator.

1

Introduction

With the rapid growth of modern datasets and increasingly passive collection of data, labeled data
is becoming more and more expensive to obtain while unlabeled data remains cheap and plentiful
in many applications. Leveraging unlabeled data to improve the predictions of a machine learning
system is the problem of semi-supervised learning (SSL), which has been the source of many
empirical successes [1–3] and theoretical inquiries [4–16]. Commonly studied assumptions include
identifiability of the class conditional distributions [5, 6], the cluster assumption [10, 11] and the
manifold assumption [9, 12, 13, 15]. In this work, we propose a new type of assumption that loosely
combines ideas from both the identifiability and cluster assumption perspectives. Importantly, we
consider the general multiclass (K > 2) scenario, which introduces significant complications. In
this setting, we study the sample complexity and rates of convergence for SSL and propose simple
algorithms to implement the proposed estimators.
The basic question behind SSL is to connect the marginal distribution over the unlabeled data
P(X) to the regression function P(Y | X). We consider multiclass classification, so that Y ∈ Y =
{α1 , . . . , αK } for some K ≥ 2. In order to motivate our perspective, let F ∗ denote the marginal
density of the unlabeled samples and suppose that F ∗ can be written as a mixture model
F ∗ (x) =

K
X

λb fb (x).

(1)

b=1

Assuming the unlabeled data can be used to learn the mixture model (1), the question becomes when
is this mixture model useful for predicting Y ? Figure 1 illustrates an idealized example.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

