Why Is My Classifier Discriminatory?

Irene Y. Chen
MIT
iychen@mit.edu

Fredrik D. Johansson
MIT
fredrikj@mit.edu

David Sontag
MIT
dsontag@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Recent attempts to achieve fairness in predictive models focus on the balance
between fairness and accuracy. In sensitive applications such as healthcare or
criminal justice, this trade-off is often undesirable as any increase in prediction
error could have devastating consequences. In this work, we argue that the fairness
of predictions should be evaluated in context of the data, and that unfairness
induced by inadequate samples sizes or unmeasured predictive variables should
be addressed through data collection, rather than by constraining the model. We
decompose cost-based metrics of discrimination into bias, variance, and noise, and
propose actions aimed at estimating and reducing each term. Finally, we perform
case-studies on prediction of income, mortality, and review ratings, confirming
the value of this analysis. We find that data collection is often a means to reduce
discrimination without sacrificing accuracy.

1

Introduction

As machine learning algorithms increasingly affect decision making in society, many have raised
concerns about the fairness and biases of these algorithms, especially in applications to healthcare or
criminal justice, where human lives are at stake (Angwin et al., 2016; Barocas & Selbst, 2016). It is
often hoped that the use of automatic decision support systems trained on observational data will
remove human bias and improve accuracy. However, factors such as data quality and model choice
may encode unintentional discrimination, resulting in systematic disparate impact.
We study fairness in prediction of outcomes such as recidivism, annual income, or patient mortality.
Fairness is evaluated with respect to protected groups of individuals defined by attributes such as
gender or ethnicity (Ruggieri et al., 2010). Following previous work, we measure discrimination
in terms of differences in prediction cost across protected groups (Calders & Verwer, 2010; Dwork
et al., 2012; Feldman et al., 2015). Correcting for issues of data provenance and historical bias in
labels is outside of the scope of this work. Much research has been devoted to constraining models to
satisfy cost-based fairness in prediction, as we expand on below. The impact of data collection on
discrimination has received comparatively little attention.
Fairness in prediction has been encouraged by adjusting models through regularization (Bechavod
& Ligett, 2017; Kamishima et al., 2011), constraints (Kamiran et al., 2010; Zafar et al., 2017), and
representation learning (Zemel et al., 2013). These attempts can be broadly categorized as modelbased approaches to fairness. Others have applied data preprocessing to reduce discrimination (Hajian
& Domingo-Ferrer, 2013; Feldman et al., 2015; Calmon et al., 2017). For an empirical comparison,
see for example Friedler et al. (2018). Inevitably, however, restricting the model class or perturbing
training data to improve fairness may harm predictive accuracy (Corbett-Davies et al., 2017).
A tradeoff of predictive accuracy for fairness is sometimes difficult to motivate when predictions
influence high-stakes decisions. In particular, post-hoc correction methods based on randomizing
predictions (Hardt et al., 2016; Pleiss et al., 2017) are unjustifiable for ethical reasons in clinical tasks
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

