Deep Attentive Tracking via Reciprocative Learning

Shi Pu1
1

Yibing Song2 Chao Ma3 Honggang Zhang1∗ Ming-Hsuan Yang4
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
{pushi_519200, zhhg}@bupt.edu.cn
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
dynamicstevenson@gmail.com
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
chaoma@sjtu.edu.cn
4
University of California at Merced, Merced, U.S.A
mhyang@ucmerced.edu
https://ybsong00.github.io/nips18_tracking/index

Abstract
Visual attention, derived from cognitive neuroscience, facilitates human perception
on the most pertinent subset of the sensory data. Recently, significant efforts have
been made to exploit attention schemes to advance computer vision systems. For
visual tracking, it is often challenging to track target objects undergoing large
appearance changes. Attention maps facilitate visual tracking by selectively paying
attention to temporal robust features. Existing tracking-by-detection approaches
mainly use additional attention modules to generate feature weights as the classifiers
are not equipped with such mechanisms. In this paper, we propose a reciprocative
learning algorithm to exploit visual attention for training deep classifiers. The
proposed algorithm consists of feed-forward and backward operations to generate
attention maps, which serve as regularization terms coupled with the original
classification loss function for training. The deep classifier learns to attend to the
regions of target objects robust to appearance changes. Extensive experiments on
large-scale benchmark datasets show that the proposed attentive tracking method
performs favorably against the state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

The recent years have witnessed growing interest in developing visual tracking methods for various
vision applications. Visual attention plays an important role in facilitating tracking target objects
in videos. For example, the state-of-the-art trackers based on discriminative correlation filters
(DCFs) [21, 11] regress input features into a Gaussian response map for target localization. They
often apply empirical spatial weights to input features to suppress the boundary effect caused by
the Fourier transform. The spatial weights are generated by either a cosine [34] or a Gaussian [11]
function. From the perspective of visual attention, we interpret these spatial weights as a specific
type of attention maps. To improve the localization accuracy, the weights closer to the center regions
of the input features are set to be larger. However, using these empirical attention maps limits the
tracking performance when target objects undergo large movements. Meanwhile, deemphasizing
non-central regions tends to downgrade the target response, leading to inaccurate localizations.
On the other hand, two-stage tracking-by-detection approaches first draw a set of proposals and
then classify each proposal as either the target or the background. Visual attention has a great
potential of facilitating learning discriminative classifiers. Existing deep attentive trackers [8, 27]
∗

Honggang Zhang is the corresponding author.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

