With Friends Like These, Who Needs Adversaries?
Saumya Jetley∗1
Nicholas A. Lord∗ 1,2
Philip H.S. Torr1,2
1
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
2
Oxford Research Group, FiveAI Ltd.
{sjetley, nicklord, phst}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The vulnerability of deep image classification networks to adversarial attack is
now well known, but less well understood. Via a novel experimental analysis, we
illustrate some facts about deep convolutional networks for image classification that
shed new light on their behaviour and how it connects to the problem of adversaries.
In short, the celebrated performance of these networks and their vulnerability to
adversarial attack are simply two sides of the same coin: the input image-space
directions along which the networks are most vulnerable to attack are the same
directions which they use to achieve their classification performance in the first
place. We develop this result in two main steps. The first uncovers the fact that
classes tend to be associated with specific image-space directions. This is shown
by an examination of the class-score outputs of nets as functions of 1D movements
along these directions. This provides a novel perspective on the existence of
universal adversarial perturbations. The second is a clear demonstration of the
tight coupling between classification performance and vulnerability to adversarial
attack within the spaces spanned by these directions. Thus, our analysis resolves
the apparent contradiction between accuracy and vulnerability. It provides a new
perspective on much of the prior art and reveals profound implications for efforts
to construct neural nets that are both accurate and robust to adversarial attack.1

1

Introduction

Those studying deep networks find themselves forced to confront an apparent paradox. On the one
hand, there is the demonstrated success of networks in learning class distinctions on training sets that
seem to generalise well to unseen test data. On the other, there is the vulnerability of the very same
networks to adversarial perturbations that produce dramatic changes in class predictions despite being
counter-intuitive or even imperceptible to humans. A common understanding of the issue can be
stated as follows: “While deep networks have proven their ability to distinguish between their target
classes so as to generalise over unseen natural variations, they curiously possess an Achilles heel
which must be defended.” In fact, efforts to formulate attacks and counteracting defences of networks
have led to a dedicated competition [1] and a body of literature already too vast to summarise in total.
In the current work we attempt to demystify this phenomenon at a fundamental level. We base our
work on the geometric decision boundary analysis of [2], which we reinterpret and extend into a
framework that we believe is simpler and more illuminating with regards to the aforementioned
paradoxical behaviour of deep convolutional networks (DCNs) for image classification. Through
a fairly straightforward set of experiments and explanations, we clarify what it is that adversarial
examples represent, and indeed, what it is that modern DCNs do and do not currently do. In doing so,
we tie together work which has focused on adversaries per se with other work which has sought to
characterise the feature spaces learned by these networks.
∗
1

S. Jetley and N.A. Lord have contributed equally and assert joint first authorship.
Source code for replicating all experiments is provided at https://github.com/torrvision/whoneedsadversaries.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

