The Cluster Description Problem - Complexity
Results, Formulations and Approximations

Ian Davidson∗
Department of Computer Science
University of California - Davis

Antoine Gourru
Universite de Lyon (ERIC, Lyon 2)
antoine.gourru@univ-lyon2.fr

davidson@cs.ucdavis.edu

S. S. Ravi†
Biocomplexity Institute
University of Virginia
ssravi0@gmail.com

Abstract
Consider the situation where you are given an existing k-way clustering π. A
challenge for explainable AI is to find a compact and distinct explanation of each
cluster which in this paper is assumed to use instance-level descriptors/tags from
a common dictionary. Since the descriptors/tags were not given to the clustering
method, this is not a semi-supervised learning situation. We show that the feasibility
problem of testing whether any distinct description (not necessarily the most
compact) exists is generally intractable for just two clusters. This means that
unless P = NP, there cannot exist an efficient algorithm for the cluster description
problem. Hence, we explore ILP formulations for smaller problems and a relaxed
but restricted setting that leads to a polynomial time algorithm for larger problems.
We explore several extensions to the basic setting such as the ability to ignore
some instances and composition constraints on the descriptions of the clusters. We
show our formulation’s usefulness on Twitter data where the communities were
found using social connectivity (i.e. follower relation) but the explanation of the
communities is based on behavioral properties of the nodes (i.e. hashtag usage) not
available to the clustering method.

1

Introduction and Motivation

There are many clustering algorithms which perform well towards their aim of finding cohesive groups
of instances. The Louvain method [2] consistently generates useful results for graph clustering, spatial
data clustering methods such as DBScan [8] are used extensively for geographical data problems and a
plethora of clustering methods targeted towards images, documents and graphs exist [12, 22, 5, 20, 6].
However, a growing need for machine learning methods is the need for explainability. Here, we
explore the idea of taking an existing clustering defined by a partition π = {C1 , C2 , . . . , Ck } found
using data set X and explaining it using another data set Y . For example, X could be (as they are
in our experiments) the n × n adjacency matrix of a graph showing the structural relation between
individuals (e.g. the follower relation in Twitter) and Y an n × t behavioral information matrix
showing how often each individual posted on each of t different hashtags. Importantly only X and
not Y was used to find the clustering; hence, this is not a semi-supervised setting. This situation
∗

Institute of Advanced Studies Fellow 2017-2018 at Collegium de Lyon. Supplementary material and source
code available at www.cs.ucdavis.edu/~davidson/description-clustering.
†
Also with Dept. of Computer Science, University at Albany – State University of New York.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

