Improved Expressivity Through Dendritic Neural
Networks
Xundong Wu
Xiangwen Liu
Wei Li
Qing Wu
School of Computer Science and Technology
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
wuxundong@gmail.com, wuq@hdu.edu.cn

A typical biological neuron, such as a pyramidal neuron of the neocortex, receives thousands of
afferent synaptic inputs on its dendrite tree and sends the efferent axonal output downstream. In
typical artificial neural networks, dendrite trees are modeled as linear structures that funnel weighted
synaptic inputs to the cell bodies. However, numerous experimental and theoretical studies have
shown that dendritic arbors are far more than simple linear accumulators. That is, synaptic inputs can
actively modulate their neighboring synaptic activities; therefore, the dendritic structures are highly
nonlinear. In this study, we model such local nonlinearity of dendritic trees with our dendritic neural
network (DENN) structure and apply this structure to typical machine learning tasks. Equipped with
localized nonlinearities, DENNs can attain greater model expressivity than regular neural networks
while maintaining efficient network inference. Such strength is evidenced by the increased fitting
power when we train DENNs with supervised machine learning tasks. We also empirically show
that the locality structure of DENNs can improve the generalization performance, as exemplified by
DENNs outranking naive deep neural network architectures when tested on classification tasks from
the UCI machine learning repository.

1

Introduction

Deep learning algorithms have made remarkable achievements in a vast array of fields over the past
few years. Notably, deep convolutional neural networks have revolutionized computer vision research
and real-world applications. Inspired by biological neuronal networks in our brains, originally in the
form of a perceptron [37], an artificial neural network unit is typically constructed as a simple weighted
sum of synaptic inputs followed by feeding the P
summation result through an activation function.
m
Typical neural network units can be depicted as σ( i=1 wi xi ) and exemplified as components in Fig.
1(a). Such a scheme has been used in almost all modern neural network models.
In the physiological realm, however, as revealed by both experimental and modeling studies, biological
neurons are way more complicated than the simple weighted sum model described above. It is shown
that dendritic arbors (see Fig. A1 in appendix A for a schematic diagram of neurons and their
dendrite arbors) contain an abundance of ion channels that are active, in other words, superlinear
[41, 24, 23, 39, 25]. The existence of those active channels, combined with the leaky nature of
dendrite membrane, suggests that one synaptic input can have nonlinear influence on synapses that
are in its close proximity. In addition, studies on synapse plasticity also show strong evidence that the
biological machinery for plasticity also acts locally inside dendrites [24, 2]. Such properties greatly
elevate the contribution of local nonlinear components in neuronal outputs and empower neuronal
networks with much greater information processing ability [41, 17, 33, 25, 45, 32].
Despite the continual progress of deep learning research, the performance of artificial neural network
models is still very much inferior to that of biological neural networks, especially in small data
learning regimes. Naturally, we want to return to our biological brains for new inspirations. Could the
active dendrite structure be part of the inductive bias that gives our brains superior learning ability?
Here, we introduce a neural network structure that aims to model the localized nonlinearity and

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

