Causal Inference and Mechanism Clustering of A
Mixture of Additive Noise Models
Shoubo Hu∗ , Zhitang Chen† , Vahid Partovi Nia† , Laiwan Chan∗ , Yanhui Geng‡
∗
The Chinese University of Hong Kong; † Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab;
‡
Huawei Montréal Research Center
∗
{sbhu, lwchan}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
†‡
{chenzhitang2, vahid.partovinia, geng.yanhui}@huawei.com

Abstract
The inference of the causal relationship between a pair of observed variables is a
fundamental problem in science, and most existing approaches are based on one
single causal model. In practice, however, observations are often collected from
multiple sources with heterogeneous causal models due to certain uncontrollable
factors, which renders causal analysis results obtained by a single model skeptical.
In this paper, we generalize the Additive Noise Model (ANM) to a mixture model,
which consists of a finite number of ANMs, and provide the condition of its causal
identifiability. To conduct model estimation, we propose Gaussian Process Partially
Observable Model (GPPOM), and incorporate independence enforcement into it
to learn latent parameter associated with each observation. Causal inference and
clustering according to the underlying generating mechanisms of the mixture model
are addressed in this work. Experiments on synthetic and real data demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Understanding the data-generating mechanism (g.m.) has been a main theme of causal inference. To
infer the causal direction between two random variables (r.v.s) X and Y using passive observations,
most existing approaches first model the relation between them using a functional model with
certain assumptions [18, 6, 21, 8]. Then a certain asymmetric property (usually termed cause-effect
asymmetry), which only holds in the causal direction, is derived to conduct inference. For example,
the additive noise model (ANM) [6] represents the effect as a function of the cause with an additive
independent noise: Y = f (X) + . It is shown in [6] that there is no model of the form X = g(Y ) + ˜
that admits an ANM in the anticausal direction for most combinations (f, p(X), p()).
Similar to ANM, most causal inference approaches based on functional models, such as LiNGAM
[18], PNL [21], and IGCI [9], assume a single causal model for all observations. However, there is
no such a guarantee in practice, and it could be very common that the observations are generated by a
mixture of causal models due to different data sources or data collection under different conditions,
rendering existing single-causal-model based approaches inapplicable in many problems (e.g. Fig.
1). Recently, an approach was proposed for inferring the causal direction of mixtures of ANMs with
discrete variables [12]. However, the inference of such mixture models with continuous variables
remains a challenging problem and is not yet well studied.
Another question regarding mixture models addressed in this paper is how one could reveal causal
knowledge in clustering tasks. Specifically, we aim at finding clusters consistent with the causal g.m.s
of a mixture model, which is usually vital in the preliminary phase of many research. For example in
the analysis of air data (see section 4.2 for detail), discovering knowledge from air data combined
from several different regions (i.e. mechanisms in causal perspective) is much more difficult than
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

