Co-teaching: Robust Training of Deep Neural
Networks with Extremely Noisy Labels

Bo Han∗1,2 , Quanming Yao∗3 , Xingrui Yu1 , Gang Niu2 ,
Miao Xu2 , Weihua Hu4 , Ivor W. Tsang1 , Masashi Sugiyama2,5
1
2

Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney;
RIKEN; 3 4Paradigm Inc.; 4 Stanford University; 5 University of Tokyo

Abstract
Deep learning with noisy labels is practically challenging, as the capacity of deep
models is so high that they can totally memorize these noisy labels sooner or later
during training. Nonetheless, recent studies on the memorization effects of deep
neural networks show that they would first memorize training data of clean labels
and then those of noisy labels. Therefore in this paper, we propose a new deep
learning paradigm called “Co-teaching” for combating with noisy labels. Namely,
we train two deep neural networks simultaneously, and let them teach each other
given every mini-batch: firstly, each network feeds forward all data and selects
some data of possibly clean labels; secondly, two networks communicate with each
other what data in this mini-batch should be used for training; finally, each network
back propagates the data selected by its peer network and updates itself. Empirical
results on noisy versions of MNIST, CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 demonstrate that
Co-teaching is much superior to the state-of-the-art methods in the robustness of
trained deep models.

1

Introduction

Learning from noisy labels can date back to three decades ago [1], and still keeps vibrant in recent
years [13, 31]. Essentially, noisy labels are corrupted from ground-truth labels, and thus they
inevitably degenerate the robustness of learned models, especially for deep neural networks [2, 45].
Unfortunately, noisy labels are ubiquitous in the real world. For instance, both online queries [4] and
crowdsourcing [42, 44] yield a large number of noisy labels across the world everyday.
As deep neural networks have the high capacity to fit noisy labels [45], it is challenging to train deep
networks robustly with noisy labels. Current methods focus on estimating the noise transition matrix.
For example, on top of the softmax layer, Goldberger et al. [13] added an additional softmax layer to
model the noise transition matrix. Patrini et al. [31] leveraged a two-step solution to estimating the
noise transition matrix heuristically. However, the noise transition matrix is not easy to be estimated
accurately, especially when the number of classes is large.
To be free of estimating the noise transition matrix, a promising direction focuses on training on
selected samples [17, 26, 34]. These works try to select clean instances out of the noisy ones, and
then use them to update the network. Intuitively, as the training data becomes less noisy, better
performance can be obtained. Among those works, the representative methods are MentorNet [17]
and Decoupling [26]. Specifically, MentorNet pre-trains an extra network, and then uses the extra
network for selecting clean instances to guide the training. When the clean validation data is not
available, MentorNet has to use a predefined curriculum (e.g., self-paced curriculum). Nevertheless,
the idea of self-paced MentorNet is similar to the self-training approach [6], and it inherited the same
inferiority of accumulated error caused by the sample-selection bias. Decoupling trains two networks
∗
The first two authors (Bo Han and Quanming Yao) made equal contributions. The implementation is
available at https://github.com/bhanML/Co-teaching.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

