Designing by Training: Acceleration Neural Network
for Fast High-Dimensional Convolution

Longquan Dai
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
dailongquan@njust.edu.cn
Yuan Xie
Institute of Automation
Chinese Academy of Sciences
yuan.xie@ia.ac.cn

Liang Tang
CASA Environmental Technology Co., Ltd
CASA EM&EW IOT Research Center
tangl@casaet.com

Jinhui Tang∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
jinhuitang@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
The high-dimensional convolution is widely used in various disciplines but has a
serious performance problem due to its high computational complexity. Over the
decades, people took a handmade approach to design fast algorithms for the Gaussian convolution. Recently, requirements for various non-Gaussian convolutions
have emerged and are continuously getting higher. However, the handmade acceleration approach is no longer feasible for so many different convolutions since it is a
time-consuming and painstaking job. Instead, we propose an Acceleration Network
(AccNet) which turns the work of designing new fast algorithms to training the
AccNet. This is done by: 1, interpreting splatting, blurring, slicing operations as
convolutions; 2, turning these convolutions to gCP layers to build AccNet. After
training, the activation function g together with AccNet weights automatically
define the new splatting, blurring and slicing operations. Experiments demonstrate
AccNet is able to design acceleration algorithms for a ton of convolutions including
Gaussian/non-Gaussian convolutions and produce state-of-the-art results.

1

Introduction

The high-dimensional convolution undoubtedly is a common and elementary computation unit in
machine learning, computer vision and computer graphics. Krähenbühl and Koltun [2011] conducted
efficient message passing in the fully connected CRFs inference by the high-dimensional Gaussian
convolution. Elboer et al. [2013] expressed the generalized Laplacian distance for visual matching as
cascaded convolutions. Paris and Durand [2009] converted the bilateral filter [Tomasi and Manduchi,
1998] into convolution in an elevated high-dimensional space. However, the computational complexity
for a d-D convolution (1) is proportional to rd , where r denotes the radius of the box filtering window
Ω, Kpq represents the weight between p and q, I p and I 0p are the values of input I and output I 0
at p. Therefore the running cost will become unacceptable for large r or d.
X
I 0p = (K ∗ I)p =
Kpq I q
(1)
q∈Ωp

A lot of work was devoted to solving the computational shortcoming. But most of them focus on the
Gaussian filtering. This is because not only the Gaussian convolution itself serves as building blocks
∗

Corresponding Author.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

