Dendritic cortical microcircuits
approximate the backpropagation algorithm
João Sacramento⇤
Department of Physiology
University of Bern, Switzerland
sacramento@pyl.unibe.ch

Rui Ponte Costa†
Department of Physiology
University of Bern, Switzerland
costa@pyl.unibe.ch

Yoshua Bengio‡
Mila and Université de Montréal, Canada
yoshua.bengio@mila.quebec

Walter Senn
Department of Physiology
University of Bern, Switzerland
senn@pyl.unibe.ch

Abstract
Deep learning has seen remarkable developments over the last years, many of
them inspired by neuroscience. However, the main learning mechanism behind
these advances – error backpropagation – appears to be at odds with neurobiology.
Here, we introduce a multilayer neuronal network model with simplified dendritic
compartments in which error-driven synaptic plasticity adapts the network towards
a global desired output. In contrast to previous work our model does not require
separate phases and synaptic learning is driven by local dendritic prediction errors
continuously in time. Such errors originate at apical dendrites and occur due to
a mismatch between predictive input from lateral interneurons and activity from
actual top-down feedback. Through the use of simple dendritic compartments
and different cell-types our model can represent both error and normal activity
within a pyramidal neuron. We demonstrate the learning capabilities of the model
in regression and classification tasks, and show analytically that it approximates
the error backpropagation algorithm. Moreover, our framework is consistent
with recent observations of learning between brain areas and the architecture of
cortical microcircuits. Overall, we introduce a novel view of learning on dendritic
cortical circuits and on how the brain may solve the long-standing synaptic credit
assignment problem.

1

Introduction

Machine learning is going through remarkable developments powered by deep neural networks (LeCun et al., 2015). Interestingly, the workhorse of deep learning is still the classical backpropagation
of errors algorithm (backprop; Rumelhart et al., 1986), which has been long dismissed in neuroscience on the grounds of biologically implausibility (Grossberg, 1987; Crick, 1989). Irrespective
of such concerns, growing evidence demonstrates that deep neural networks outperform alternative
frameworks in accurately reproducing activity patterns observed in the cortex (Lillicrap and Scott,
2013; Yamins et al., 2014; Khaligh-Razavi and Kriegeskorte, 2014; Yamins and DiCarlo, 2016; Kell
et al., 2018). Although recent developments have started to bridge the gap between neuroscience
⇤

Present address: Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zürich and ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
Present address: Computational Neuroscience Unit, Department of Computer Science, SCEEM, Faculty of
Engineering, University of Bristol, United Kingdom
‡
CIFAR Senior Fellow
†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

