Non-Local Recurrent Network for Image Restoration

Ding Liu1 , Bihan Wen1 , Yuchen Fan1 , Chen Change Loy2 , Thomas S. Huang1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Nanyang Technological University
{dingliu2, bwen3, yuchenf4, t-huang1}@illinois.edu ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Many classic methods have shown non-local self-similarity in natural images
to be an effective prior for image restoration. However, it remains unclear and
challenging to make use of this intrinsic property via deep networks. In this
paper, we propose a non-local recurrent network (NLRN) as the first attempt to
incorporate non-local operations into a recurrent neural network (RNN) for image
restoration. The main contributions of this work are: (1) Unlike existing methods
that measure self-similarity in an isolated manner, the proposed non-local module
can be flexibly integrated into existing deep networks for end-to-end training to
capture deep feature correlation between each location and its neighborhood. (2)
We fully employ the RNN structure for its parameter efficiency and allow deep
feature correlation to be propagated along adjacent recurrent states. This new design
boosts robustness against inaccurate correlation estimation due to severely degraded
images. (3) We show that it is essential to maintain a confined neighborhood for
computing deep feature correlation given degraded images. This is in contrast to
existing practice [41] that deploys the whole image. Extensive experiments on both
image denoising and super-resolution tasks are conducted. Thanks to the recurrent
non-local operations and correlation propagation, the proposed NLRN achieves
superior results to state-of-the-art methods with many fewer parameters. The code
is available at https://github.com/Ding-Liu/NLRN.

1

Introduction

Image restoration is an ill-posed inverse problem that aims at estimating the underlying image from its
degraded measurements. Depending on the type of degradation, image restoration can be categorized
into different sub-problems, e.g., image denoising and image super-resolution (SR). The key to
successful restoration typically relies on the design of an effective regularizer based on image priors.
Both local and non-local image priors have been extensively exploited in the past. Considering
image denoising as an example, local image properties such as Gaussian filtering and total variation
based methods [31] are widely used in early studies. Later on, the notion of self-similarity in natural
images draws more attention and it has been exploited by non-local-based methods, e.g., non-local
means [2], collaborative filtering [8], joint sparsity [27], and low-rank modeling [15]. These non-local
methods are shown to be effective in capturing the correlation among non-local patches to improve
the restoration quality.
While non-local self-similarity has been extensively studied in the literature, approaches for capturing
this intrinsic property with deep networks are little explored. Recent convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) for image restoration [10, 20, 28, 49] achieve impressive performance over conventional
approaches but do not explicitly use self-similarity properties in images. To rectify this weakness, a
few studies [23, 30] apply block matching to patches before feeding them into CNNs. Nevertheless,
the block matching step is isolated and thus not jointly trained with image restoration networks.
In this paper, we present the first attempt to incorporate non-local operations in CNN for image
restoration, and propose a non-local recurrent network (NLRN) as an efficient yet effective network
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

