Multi-value Rule Sets for Interpretable Classification
with Feature-Efficient Representations

Tong Wang
Tippie School of Business
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
tong-wang@uiowa.edu

Abstract
We present the Multi-value Rule Set (MRS) for interpretable classification with
feature efficient presentations. Compared to rule sets built from single-value rules,
MRS adopts a more generalized form of association rules that allows multiple
values in a condition. Rules of this form are more concise than classical singlevalue rules in capturing and describing patterns in data. Our formulation also
pursues a higher efficiency of feature utilization, which reduces possible cost in
data collection and storage. We propose a Bayesian framework for formulating an
MRS model and develop an efficient inference method for learning a maximum
a posteriori, incorporating theoretically grounded bounds to iteratively reduce the
search space and improve the search efficiency. Experiments on synthetic and realworld data demonstrate that MRS models have significantly smaller complexity
and fewer features than baseline models while being competitive in predictive
accuracy. Human evaluations show that MRS is easier to understand and use
compared to other rule-based models.

1

Introduction

In many real-world applications of machine learning, human experts desire the interpretability of a
model as much as the predictive accuracy. As opposed to “black box” models, interpretable models
are easy for humans to understand and extract insights, which is imperative in domains such as
healthcare, law enforcement, etc. In some occasions, the need for interpretability even outweighs
that for accuracy due to legal or ethnic concerns. Among different forms of interpretable models, we
are particularly interested in rule-based models in this paper. This type of models produce decisions
based on a set of rules following simple “if-else” logic: if a rule (or a set of rules) is satisfied, the
model outputs the corresponding decision. The set of rules can be either ordered [17, 35, 5] or
unordered [15, 30, 19, 24], depending on the specific model structure.
Prior rule-based models in the literature are from built single-value rules [15, 30, 19]. For example,
[State = California] AND [Marital status = married], where a condition (e.g., [state=California]) is
a pair of a feature (e.g., state) and a single value (e.g., California). However, while single-value
rules can express primitive concepts, they are inadequate in capturing more general trends in the
underlying data, especially when working with features with a medium to high cardinality. Rules
built from these features tend to have too small support. They are either less likely to be selected
in the final output, introducing selection bias in the model [7], or induce a large model if selected,
hurting the model interpretability. For example, to capture a set of married or divorced people
who live in California, Texas, Arizona, and Oregon, a model needs to include eight rules, each
rule being a combination of a state and a marital status, yielding an overly complicated model. As
modern machine learning has in part moved on to pursue a better and more concise way of model
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

