Searching for Efficient Multi-Scale
Architectures for Dense Image Prediction

Liang-Chieh Chen
Barret Zoph

Maxwell D. Collins
Yukun Zhu
Florian Schroff
Hartwig Adam
Google Inc.

George Papandreou
Jonathon Shlens

Abstract
The design of neural network architectures is an important component for achieving
state-of-the-art performance with machine learning systems across a broad array of
tasks. Much work has endeavored to design and build architectures automatically
through clever construction of a search space paired with simple learning algorithms. Recent progress has demonstrated that such meta-learning methods may
exceed scalable human-invented architectures on image classification tasks. An
open question is the degree to which such methods may generalize to new domains.
In this work we explore the construction of meta-learning techniques for dense
image prediction focused on the tasks of scene parsing, person-part segmentation,
and semantic image segmentation. Constructing viable search spaces in this domain is challenging because of the multi-scale representation of visual information
and the necessity to operate on high resolution imagery. Based on a survey of
techniques in dense image prediction, we construct a recursive search space and
demonstrate that even with efficient random search, we can identify architectures
that outperform human-invented architectures and achieve state-of-the-art performance on three dense prediction tasks including 82.7% on Cityscapes (street scene
parsing), 71.3% on PASCAL-Person-Part (person-part segmentation), and 87.9%
on PASCAL VOC 2012 (semantic image segmentation). Additionally, the resulting
architecture is more computationally efficient, requiring half the parameters and
half the computational cost as previous state of the art systems.

1

Introduction

The resurgence of neural networks in machine learning has shifted the emphasis for building state-ofthe-art systems in such tasks as image recognition [44, 84, 83, 34], speech recognition [36, 8], and
machine translation [88, 82] towards the design of neural network architectures. Recent work has
demonstrated successes in automatically designing network architectures, largely focused on singlelabel image classification tasks [100, 101, 52] (but see [100, 65] for language tasks). Importantly,
in just the last year such meta-learning techniques have identified architectures that exceed the
performance of human-invented architectures for large-scale image classification problems [101, 52,
68].
Image classification has provided a great starting point because much research effort has identified
successful network motifs and operators that may be employed to construct search spaces for
architectures [52, 68, 101]. Additionally, image classification is inherently multi-resolution whereby
fully convolutional architectures [77, 58] may be trained on low resolution images (with minimal
computational demand) and be transferred to high resolution images [101].
Although these results suggest opportunity, the real promise depends on the degree to which metalearning may extend into domains beyond image classification. In particular, in the image domain,
many important tasks such as semantic image segmentation [58, 11, 97], object detection [71, 21],
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

