Simple random search of static linear policies is
competitive for reinforcement learning
Horia Mania
hmania@berkeley.edu

Aurelia Guy
lia@berkeley.edu

Benjamin Recht
brecht@berkeley.edu

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Model-free reinforcement learning aims to offer off-the-shelf solutions for controlling dynamical systems without requiring models of the system dynamics. We
introduce a model-free random search algorithm for training static, linear policies
for continuous control problems. Common evaluation methodology shows that our
method matches state-of-the-art sample efficiency on the benchmark MuJoCo locomotion tasks. Nonetheless, more rigorous evaluation reveals that the assessment
of performance on these benchmarks is optimistic. We evaluate the performance
of our method over hundreds of random seeds and many different hyperparameter
configurations for each benchmark task. This extensive evaluation is possible
because of the small computational footprint of our method. Our simulations
highlight a high variability in performance in these benchmark tasks, indicating
that commonly used estimations of sample efficiency do not adequately evaluate
the performance of RL algorithms. Our results stress the need for new baselines,
benchmarks and evaluation methodology for RL algorithms.

1

Introduction

Model-free reinforcement learning (RL) aims to offer off-the-shelf solutions for controlling dynamical
systems without requiring models of the system dynamics. Such methods have successfully produced
RL agents that surpass human players in video games and games such as Go [16, 28]. Although
these results are impressive, model-free methods have not yet been successfully deployed to control
physical systems, outside of research demos. There are several factors prohibiting the adoption of
model-free RL methods for controlling physical systems: the methods require too much data to
achieve reasonable performance, the ever-increasing assortment of RL methods makes it difficult to
choose what is the best method for a specific task, and many candidate algorithms are difficult to
implement and deploy [11].
Unfortunately, the current trend in RL research has put these impediments at odds with each other.
In the quest to find methods that are sample efficient (i.e. methods that need little data) the general
trend has been to develop increasingly complicated methods. This increasing complexity has led to a
reproducibility crisis. Recent studies demonstrate that many RL methods are not robust to changes in
hyperparameters, random seeds, or even different implementations of the same algorithm [11, 12].
Algorithms with such fragilities cannot be integrated into mission critical control systems without
significant simplification and robustification.
Furthermore, it is common practice to evaluate and compare new RL methods by applying them to
video games or simulated continuous control problems and measure their performance over a small
number of independent trials (i.e., fewer than ten random seeds) [8–10, 14, 17, 19, 21–27, 31, 32].
The most popular continuous control benchmarks are the MuJoCo locomotion tasks [3, 29], with
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

