Memory Augmented Policy Optimization for
Program Synthesis and Semantic Parsing
Chen Liang
Google Brain
crazydonkey200@gmail.com
Jonathan Berant
Tel-Aviv University, AI2
joberant@cs.tau.ac.il

Mohammad Norouzi
Google Brain
mnorouzi@google.com

Quoc Le
Google Brain
qvl@google.com

Ni Lao
SayMosaic Inc.
ni.lao@mosaix.ai

Abstract
We present Memory Augmented Policy Optimization (MAPO), a simple and novel
way to leverage a memory buffer of promising trajectories to reduce the variance
of policy gradient estimates. MAPO is applicable to deterministic environments
with discrete actions, such as structured prediction and combinatorial optimization.
Our key idea is to express the expected return objective as a weighted sum of two
terms: an expectation over the high-reward trajectories inside a memory buffer,
and a separate expectation over trajectories outside of the buffer. To design an
efficient algorithm based on this idea, we propose: (1) memory weight clipping to
accelerate and stabilize training; (2) systematic exploration to discover high-reward
trajectories; (3) distributed sampling from inside and outside of the memory buffer
to speed up training. MAPO improves the sample efficiency and robustness of
policy gradient, especially on tasks with sparse rewards. We evaluate MAPO on
weakly supervised program synthesis from natural language (semantic parsing). On
the W IKI TABLE Q UESTIONS benchmark, we improve the state-of-the-art by 2.6%,
achieving an accuracy of 46.3%. On the W IKI SQL benchmark, MAPO achieves
an accuracy of 74.9% with only weak supervision, outperforming several strong
baselines with full supervision. Our source code is available at goo.gl/TXBp4e.

1

Introduction

There has been a recent surge of interest in applying policy gradient methods to various application
domains including program synthesis [26, 17, 68, 10], dialogue generation [25, 11], architecture
search [69, 71], game [53, 31] and continuous control [44, 50]. Simple policy gradient methods
like REINFORCE [58] use Monte Carlo samples from the current policy to perform an on-policy
optimization of the expected return objective. This often leads to unstable learning dynamics and
poor sample efficiency, sometimes even underperforming random search [30].
The difficulty of gradient based policy optimization stems from a few sources: (1) policy gradient
estimates have a large variance; (2) samples from a randomly initialized policy often attain small
rewards, resulting in a slow training progress in the initial phase (cold start); (3) random policy
samples do not explore the search space efficiently and systematically. These issues can be especially
prohibitive in applications such as program synthesis and robotics [4] where the search space is large
and the rewards are delayed and sparse. In such domains, a high reward is only achieved after a long
sequence of correct actions. For instance, in program synthesis, only a few programs in the large
combinatorial space of programs may correspond to the correct functional form. Unfortunately,
relying on policy samples to explore the space often leads to forgetting a high reward trajectory unless
it is re-sampled frequently [26, 3].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

