Learning convex polytopes with margin

Lee-Ad Gottlieb
Ariel University
leead@ariel.ac.il

Eran Kaufman
Ariel University
erankfmn@gmail.com

Aryeh Kontorovich
Ben-Gurion University
karyeh@bgu.sc.il

Gabriel Nivasch
Ariel University
gabrieln@ariel.ac.il

Abstract
We present an improved algorithm for properly learning convex polytopes in the
realizable PAC setting from data with a margin. Our learning algorithm constructs
a consistent polytope as an intersection of about t log t halfspaces with margins
in time polynomial in t (where t is the number of halfspaces forming an optimal
polytope).
We also identify distinct generalizations of the notion of margin from hyperplanes
to polytopes and investigate how they relate geometrically; this result may be of
interest beyond the learning setting.

1

Introduction

In the theoretical PAC learning setting [Valiant, 1984], one considers an abstract instance space X —
d
which, most commonly, is either the Boolean cube {0, 1} or the Euclidean space Rd . For the former
setting, an extensive literature has explored the statistical and computational aspects of learning
Boolean functions [Angluin, 1992, Hellerstein and Servedio, 2007]. Yet for the Euclidean setting, a
corresponding theory of learning geometric concepts is still being actively developed [Kwek and Pitt,
1998, Jain and Kinber, 2003, Anderson et al., 2013, Kane et al., 2013]. The focus of this paper is the
latter setting.
The simplest nontrivial geometric concept is perhaps the halfspace. These concepts are well-known
to be hard to agnostically learn [Höffgen et al., 1995] or even approximate [Amaldi and Kann, 1995,
1998, Ben-David et al., 2003]. Even the realizable case, while commonly described as “solved”
via the Perceptron algorithm or linear programming (LP), is not straightforward: The Perceptron’s
runtime is quadratic in the inverse-margin, while solving the consistent hyperplane problem in
strongly polynomial time is equivalent to solving the general LP problem in strongly polynomial
time [Nikolov, 2018, Chvátal], a question that has been open for decades [Bárász and Vempala,
2010]. Thus, an unconditional (i.e., infinite-precision and independent of data configuration in space)
polynomial-time solution for the consistent hyperplane problem hinges on the strongly polynomial
LP conjecture.
If we consider not a single halfspace, but polytopes defined by the intersection of multiple halfspaces,
the computational and generalization bounds rapidly become more pessimistic. Megiddo [1988]
showed that the problem of deciding whether two sets of points in general space can be separated
by the intersection of two hyperplanes is NP-complete, and Khot and Saket [2011] showed that
“unless NP = RP, it is hard to (even) weakly PAC-learn intersection of two halfspaces”, even when
allowed the richer class of O(1) intersecting halfspaces. Under cryptographic assumptions, Klivans
and Sherstov [2009] showed that learning an intersection of nε halfspaces is intractable regardless of
hypothesis representation.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

