PAC-Bayes Tree: weighted subtrees with guarantees

Tin Nguyen∗
MIT EECS
tdn@mit.edu

Samory Kpotufe
Princeton University ORFE
samory@princeton.edu

Abstract
We present a weighted-majority classification approach over subtrees of a fixed
tree, which provably achieves excess-risk of the same order as the best tree-pruning.
Furthermore, the computational efficiency of pruning is maintained at both training
and testing time despite having to aggregate over an exponential number of subtrees.
We believe this is the first subtree aggregation approach with such guarantees.
The guarantees are obtained via a simple combination of insights from PAC-Bayes
theory, which we believe should be of independent interest, as it generically implies
consistency for weighted-voting classifiers w.r.t. Bayes – while, in contrast, usual
PAC-bayes approaches only establish consistency of Gibbs classifiers.

1

Introduction

Classification trees endure as popular tools in data analysis, offering both efficient prediction and
interpretability – yet they remain hard to analyze in general. So far there are two main approaches
with generalization guarantees: in both approaches, a large tree (possibly overfitting the data) is first
obtained; one approach is then to prune back this tree down to a subtree2 that generalizes better;
the alternative approach is to combine all possible subtrees of the tree by weighted majority vote.
Interestingly, while both approaches are competitive with other practical heuristics, it remains unclear
whether the alternative of weighting subtrees enjoys the same strong generalization guarantees as
pruning; in particular, no weighting scheme to date has been shown to be statistically consistent, let
alone attain the same tight generalization rates (in terms of excess risk) as pruning approaches.
In this work, we consider a new weighting scheme based on PAC-Bayesian insights [1], that (a) is
consistent and attains the same generalization rates as the best pruning of a tree, (b) is efficiently
computable at both training and testing time, and (c) competes against pruning approaches on
real-world data. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first practical scheme with such guarantees.
The main technical hurdle has to do with a subtle tension between goals (a) and (b) above. Namely,
let T0 denote a large tree built on n datapoints, usually a binary tree with O(n) nodes; the family
of subtrees T of T0 is typically of exponential size in n [2], so a naive voting scheme that requires
visiting all subtrees is impractical; on the other hand it is known that if the weights decompose
favorably over the leaves of T (e.g., multiplicative over leaves) then efficient classification is possible.
Unfortunately, while various such multiplicative weights have been designed for voting with subtrees
[3, 4, 5], they are not known to yield statistically consistent prediction. In fact, the best known result
to date [5] presents a weighting scheme which can provably achieve an excess risk3 (over the Bayes
classifier) of the form oP (1) + C · minT R(hT ), where R(hT ) denotes the misclassification rate of
a classifier hT based on subtree T . In other words, the excess risk might never go to 0 as sample size
increases, which in contrast is a basic property of the pruning alternative. Furthermore, the approach
∗

The majority of the research was done when the author was an undergraduate student at Princeton University
ORFE.
2
Considering only subtrees that partition the data space.
3
The excess risk of a classifier h over the Bayes hB (which minimizes R(h) over any h) is R(h) − R(hB ).
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

