Dirichlet-based Gaussian Processes
for Large-scale Calibrated Classification

Dimitrios Milios
EURECOM
Sophia Antipolis, France
dimitrios.milios@eurecom.fr
Pietro Michiardi
EURECOM
Sophia Antipolis, France
pietro.michiardi@eurecom.fr

Raffaello Camoriano
LCSL
IIT (Italy) & MIT (USA)
raffaello.camoriano@iit.it
Lorenzo Rosasco
DIBRIS - Università degli Studi di Genova, Italy
LCSL - IIT (Italy) & MIT (USA)
lrosasco@mit.edu

Maurizio Filippone
EURECOM
Sophia Antipolis, France
maurizio.filippone@eurecom.fr

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of deriving fast and accurate classification algorithms with uncertainty quantification. Gaussian process classification provides a
principled approach, but the corresponding computational burden is hardly sustainable in large-scale problems and devising efficient alternatives is a challenge. In
this work, we investigate if and how Gaussian process regression directly applied
to classification labels can be used to tackle this question. While in this case
training is remarkably faster, predictions need to be calibrated for classification
and uncertainty estimation. To this aim, we propose a novel regression approach
where the labels are obtained through the interpretation of classification labels
as the coefficients of a degenerate Dirichlet distribution. Extensive experimental
results show that the proposed approach provides essentially the same accuracy
and uncertainty quantification as Gaussian process classification while requiring
only a fraction of computational resources.

1

Introduction

Classification is a classic machine learning task. While the most basic performance measure is
classification accuracy, in practice assigning a calibrated confidence to the predictions is often crucial
[5]. For example in image classification, providing class predictions with a calibrated score is
important to avoid making over-confident decisions [6, 12, 15]. Several classification algorithms that
output a continuous score are not necessarily calibrated (e.g., support vector machines (SVMs) [24]).
Popular ways to calibrate classifiers use a validation set to learn a transformation of their output score
that recovers calibration; these include Platt scaling [24] and isotonic regression [39]. Calibration can
also be achieved if a sensible loss function is employed [13], for example the logistic/cross-entropy
loss, and it is known to be positively impacted if the classifier is well regularized [6].
Bayesian approaches provide a natural framework to tackle these kinds of questions, since quantification of uncertainty is of primary interest. In particular, Gaussian Processes Classification (GPC)
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

