Contamination Attacks and Mitigation in
Multi-Party Machine Learning

Jamie Hayes∗
Univeristy College London
❥✳❤❛②❡s❅❝s✳✉❝❧✳❛❝✳✉❦

Olga Ohrimenko
Microsoft Research
♦♦❤r✐♠❅♠✐❝r♦s♦❢t✳❝♦♠

Abstract
Machine learning is data hungry; the more data a model has access to in training,
the more likely it is to perform well at inference time. Distinct parties may want to
combine their local data to gain the benefits of a model trained on a large corpus of
data. We consider such a case: parties get access to the model trained on their joint
data but do not see each others individual datasets. We show that one needs to be
careful when using this multi-party model since a potentially malicious party can
taint the model by providing contaminated data. We then show how adversarial
training can defend against such attacks by preventing the model from learning
trends specific to individual parties data, thereby also guaranteeing party-level
membership privacy.

1

Introduction

Multi-party machine learning allows several parties (e.g., hospitals, banks, government agencies) to
combine their datasets and run algorithms on their joint data in order to get insights that may not
be present in their individual datasets. As there could be competitive and regulatory restrictions as
well as privacy concerns about sharing datasets, there has been extensive research on developing
techniques to perform secure multi-party machine learning. The main guarantee of secure multi-party
computation (MPC) is to allow each party to obtain only the output of their mutually agreed-upon
computation without seeing each others data nor trusting a third-party to combine their data for them.
Secure MPC can be enabled with cryptographic techniques [6, 11, 18, 29, 32], and systems based
on trusted processors such as Intel SGX [3, 5, 33]. In the latter, a (untrusted) cloud service collects
encrypted data from multiple parties who decide on an algorithm and access control policies of
the final model, and runs the code inside of a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) protected
by hardware guarantees of the trusted processor. The data is decrypted only when it is loaded in
TEE but stays encrypted in memory. This ensures that nothing except the output is revealed to the
parties, while no one else (including the cloud provider) learns neither the data nor the output, and
any tampering with the data during the computation is detected. Additionally, it allows parties to
outsource potentially heavy computation and guarantees that they do not see model parameters during
training that have to be shared, for example, in distributed settings [16, 27, 35, 36, 39].
Multi-party machine learning raises concerns regarding what parties can learn about each others data
through model outputs as well as how much a malicious party can influence training. The number
of parties and how much data each one of them contributes influences the extent of their malicious
behavior. For example, the influence of each party is limited in the case where a model is trained
from hundreds or thousands of parties (e.g., users of an email service) where each party owns a small
portion of training data. As a result, differential privacy guarantees at a per-party level have shown to
∗

Work done during internship at Microsoft Research.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

