Objective and efficient inference for couplings in
neuronal networks
Yu Terada1,2 , Tomoyuki Obuchi2 , Takuya Isomura1 , Yoshiyuki Kabashima2
1
Laboratory for Neural Computation and Adaptation,
RIKEN Center for Brain Science,
2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan
2
Department of Mathematical and Computer Science
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Tokyo 152-8550, Japan
yu.terada@riken.jp, obuchi@c.titech.ac.jp,
takuya.isomura@riken.jp, kaba@c.titech.ac.jp

Abstract
Inferring directional couplings from the spike data of networks is desired in various scientific fields such as neuroscience. Here, we apply a recently proposed
objective procedure to the spike data obtained from the Hodgkin–Huxley type
models and in vitro neuronal networks cultured in a circular structure. As a result,
we succeed in reconstructing synaptic connections accurately from the evoked activity as well as the spontaneous one. To obtain the results, we invent an analytic
formula approximately implementing a method of screening relevant couplings.
This significantly reduces the computational cost of the screening method employed in the proposed objective procedure, making it possible to treat large-size
systems as in this study.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in experimental techniques make it possible to simultaneously record the activity
of multiple units. In neuroscience, multi-electrodes and optical imaging techniques capture largescale behaviors of neuronal networks, which facilitate a deeper understanding of the information
processing mechanism of nervous systems beyond the single neuron level [1-6]. This preferable
situation, however, involves technical issues in dealing with such datasets because they usually consist of a large amount of high-dimensional data which are difficult to be handled by naive usages of
conventional statistical methods.
A statistical-physics-based approach for tackling these issues was presented using the Ising model
[7]. Although the justification to use the Ising model for analyzing neuronal systems is not completely clear [8,9,10], its performance was empirically demonstrated [7], which triggered further
applications [11-22]. An advantage of using the Ising model is that several analytical techniques for
inverse problems are available [23-29], which allows us to infer couplings between neurons with a
feasible computational cost. Another advantage is that it is straightforward to introduce variants of
the model. Beyond the conventional data analysis, an important variant is the kinetic Ising model,
which is more suitable to take into account the correlations in time, since this extended model removes the symmetric-coupling constraint of the Ising model. A useful mean-field (MF) inverse
formula for the kinetic Ising model has been presented in [25,26].
Two problems arise when treating neuronal systems’ data in the framework of the Ising models.
The first problem is how to determine an appropriate size of time bins when discretizing original
signals in time; the appropriate size differs from the intrinsic time-scale of the original neuronal sys32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

