LinkNet: Relational Embedding for Scene Graph
Dahun Kim*
EE, KAIST
Daejeon, Korea
mcahny@kaist.ac.kr

Sanghyun Woo*∗
EE, KAIST
Daejeon, Korea
shwoo93@kaist.ac.kr

Donghyeon Cho
EE, KAIST
Daejeon, Korea
cdh12242@gmail.com

In So Kweon
EE, KAIST
Daejeon, Korea
iskweon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Objects and their relationships are critical contents for image understanding. A
scene graph provides a structured description that captures these properties of
an image. However, reasoning about the relationships between objects is very
challenging and only a few recent works have attempted to solve the problem of
generating a scene graph from an image. In this paper, we present a method that
improves scene graph generation by explicitly modeling inter-dependency among
the entire object instances. We design a simple and effective relational embedding
module that enables our model to jointly represent connections among all related
objects, rather than focus on an object in isolation. Our method significantly
benefits main part of the scene graph generation task: relationship classification.
Using it on top of a basic Faster R-CNN, our model achieves state-of-the-art
results on the Visual Genome benchmark. We further push the performance by
introducing global context encoding module and geometrical layout encoding
module. We validate our final model, LinkNet, through extensive ablation studies,
demonstrating its efficacy in scene graph generation.

1

Introduction

Current state-of-the-art recognition models have made significant progress in detecting individual
objects in isolation [9, 20]. However, we are still far from reaching the goal of capturing the
interactions and relationships between these objects. While objects are the core elements of an
image, it is often the relationships that determine the global interpretation of the scene. The deeper
understating of visual scene can be realized by building a structured representation which captures
objects and their relationships jointly. Being able to extract such graph representations have been
shown to benefit various high-level vision tasks such as image search [13], question answering [2],
and 3D scene synthesis [29].
In this paper, we address scene graph generation, where the objective is to build a visually-grounded
scene graph of a given image. In a scene graph, objects are represented as nodes and relationships
between them as directed edges. In practice, a node is characterized by an object bounding box
with a category label, and an edge is characterized by a predicate label that connects two nodes as a
subject-predicate-object triplet. As such, a scene graph is able to model not only what objects are in
the scene, but how they relate to each other.
∗

Both authors have equally contributed

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

