Invariant Representations without Adversarial
Training

Daniel Moyer, Shuyang Gao, Rob Brekelmans, Greg Ver Steeg, and Aram Galstyan
Information Sciences Institute
University of Southern California
{moyerd, gaos, brekelma}@usc.edu {gregv, galstyan}@isi.edu

Abstract
Representations of data that are invariant to changes in specified factors are useful
for a wide range of problems: removing potential biases in prediction problems,
controlling the effects of covariates, and disentangling meaningful factors of variation. Unfortunately, learning representations that exhibit invariance to arbitrary nuisance factors yet remain useful for other tasks is challenging. Existing approaches
cast the trade-off between task performance and invariance in an adversarial way,
using an iterative minimax optimization. We show that adversarial training is
unnecessary and sometimes counter-productive; we instead cast invariant representation learning as a single information-theoretic objective that can be directly
optimized. We demonstrate that this approach matches or exceeds performance
of state-of-the-art adversarial approaches for learning fair representations and for
generative modeling with controllable transformations.

1

Introduction

The removal of unwanted information is a surprisingly common task. Transform-invariant features in
computer vision, “fair” encodings from the algorithmic fairness community, and two-stage regressions
often used in scientific studies are all cases of the same general concept: we wish to remove the effect
of some outside variable c on our data x while still relevant to our original task. In the context of
representation learning, we wish to map x into an encoding z that is uninformative of c, yet also
optimal for our task loss L(z, . . . ).
These objectives are often operationalized as an independence constraint z ⊥ c. Encodings satisfying
this condition are invariant under changes in c, thus called “invariant representations”. In practice
these constraints are often relaxed to other measures; in recent works an adversary’s ability to predict
z from c has been used as such a proxy [15, 21], transplanting adversarial losses from generative
literature to encoder/decoder settings.
In the present work we instead relax z ⊥ c to a penalty on the mutual information I(z, c). We provide
an analysis of this loss, showing that:
1. I(z, c) admits a useful variational upper bound. This is in contrast to the usual lower bound
e.g. bounds on I(z, y) for some labels y.
2. When placed alongside the Variational Auto Encoder (VAE) and the Variational Information
Bottleneck (VIB) frameworks, the upper bound on I(z, c) produces a computationally
tractable form for learning c-agnostic encodings and predictors.
3. The adversarial approach can be also derived as a procedure to minimize I(z, c), but does
not provide an upper bound.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

