Learning a latent manifold of odor representations
from neural responses in piriform cortex
Anqi Wu1

Stan L. Pashkovski2

Sandeep Robert Datta2

Jonathan W. Pillow1

Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University,
{anqiw, pillow}@princeton.edu
2
Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School,
{pashkovs, srdatta}@hms.harvard.edu
1

Abstract
A major difficulty in studying the neural mechanisms underlying olfactory perception is the lack of obvious structure in the relationship between odorants and the
neural activity patterns they elicit. Here we use odor-evoked responses in piriform
cortex to identify a latent manifold specifying latent distance relationships between
olfactory stimuli. Our approach is based on the Gaussian process latent variable
model, and seeks to map odorants to points in a low-dimensional embedding space,
where distances between points in the embedding space relate to the similarity of
population responses they elicit. The model is specified by an explicit continuous
mapping from a latent embedding space to the space of high-dimensional neural
population firing rates via nonlinear tuning curves, each parametrized by a Gaussian process. Population responses are then generated by the addition of correlated,
odor-dependent Gaussian noise. We fit this model to large-scale calcium fluorescence imaging measurements of population activity in layers 2 and 3 of mouse
piriform cortex following the presentation of a diverse set of odorants. The model
identifies a low-dimensional embedding of each odor, and a smooth tuning curve
over the latent embedding space that accurately captures each neuron’s response to
different odorants. The model captures both signal and noise correlations across
more than 500 neurons. We validate the model using a cross-validation analysis
known as co-smoothing to show that the model can accurately predict the responses
of a population of held-out neurons to test odorants.

1

Introduction

Odorants are physically described by thousands of features in a high-dimensional chemical feature
space. Previous studies have focused on reducing the dimensionality of this chemical feature space
[1], or on identifying dimensions of olfactory perceptual space using psychophysical measurements
in humans [2, 3]. However, the dimensions of olfactory space underlying neural representations in
the brain remain largely unknown. Here we take a latent variable modeling approach to the problem
of identifying a low-dimensional manifold of olfactory stimuli. Our approach is unsupervised in
that it makes no use of chemical features, but seeks to identify a latent embedding of odorants from
measurements of odor-evoked neural population activity in mouse piriform cortex. This approach
aims to provide insight into odor encoding in the brain by identifying an olfactory space that relates
smoothly to changes in large-scale neural firing patterns.
Recent work in computational neuroscience has focused on the development of sophisticated modelbased methods for identifying low-dimensional latent manifolds underlying neural population activity
[4–12]. Here we extend such methods to the problem of neural coding in the olfactory system.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

