Robot Learning in Homes:
Improving Generalization and Reducing Dataset Bias

Abhinav Gupta∗

Adithyavairavan Murali∗

Dhiraj Gandhi∗

Lerrel Pinto∗

The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Data-driven approaches to solving robotic tasks have gained a lot of traction in
recent years. However, most existing policies are trained on large-scale datasets
collected in curated lab settings. If we aim to deploy these models in unstructured
visual environments like people’s homes, they will be unable to cope with the
mismatch in data distribution. In such light, we present the first systematic effort
in collecting a large dataset for robotic grasping in homes. First, to scale and
parallelize data collection, we built a low cost mobile manipulator assembled for
under 3K USD. Second, data collected using low cost robots suffer from noisy
labels due to imperfect execution and calibration errors. To handle this, we develop
a framework which factors out the noise as a latent variable. Our model is trained
on 28K grasps collected in several houses under an array of different environmental
conditions. We evaluate our models by physically executing grasps on a collection
of novel objects in multiple unseen homes. The models trained with our home
dataset showed a marked improvement of 43.7% over a baseline model trained
with data collected in lab. Our architecture which explicitly models the latent noise
in the dataset also performed 10% better than one that did not factor out the noise.
We hope this effort inspires the robotics community to look outside the lab and
embrace learning based approaches to handle inaccurate cheap robots.

1

Introduction

Powered by the availability of cheaper robots, robust simulators and greater processing speeds, the last
decade has witnessed the rise of data-driven approaches in robotics. Instead of using hand-designed
models, these approaches focus on the collection of large-scale datasets to learn policies that map
from high-dimensional observations to actions. Current data-driven approaches mostly focus on using
simulators since it is considerably less expensive to collect simulated data than on an actual robot in
real-time. The hope is that these approaches will either be robust enough to domain shifts or that
the models can be adapted using a small amount of real world data via transfer learning. However,
beyond simple robotic picking tasks [1, 2, 3], there exist little support to this level of optimism. One
major reason for this is the wide “reality gap” between simulators and the real world.
Therefore, there has concurrently been a push in the robotics community to collect real-world physical
interaction data [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] in multiple robotics labs. A major driving force behind this
effort is the declining costs of hardware which allows scaling up data collection efforts for a variety
of robotic tasks. This approach has indeed been quite successful at tasks such as grasping, pushing,
poking and imitation learning. However, these learned models have often been shown to overfit (even
after increasing the number of datapoints) and the performance of these robot learning methods tends
∗

Equal contribution. Direct correspondence to: {abhinavg,amurali,dgandhi,lerrelp}@cs.cmu.edu

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

