Sequential Context Encoding for Duplicate Removal

1

Lu Qi1 Shu Liu1,3 Jianping Shi2 Jiaya Jia1,3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Research 3 YouTu Lab, Tencent
{luqi, sliu, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
shijianping@sensetime.com

Abstract
Duplicate removal is a critical step to accomplish a reasonable amount of predictions in prevalent proposal-based object detection frameworks. Albeit simple
and effective, most previous algorithms utilize a greedy process without making
sufficient use of properties of input data. In this work, we design a new two-stage
framework to effectively select the appropriate proposal candidate for each object.
The first stage suppresses most of easy negative object proposals, while the second
stage selects true positives in the reduced proposal set. These two stages share the
same network structure, i.e., an encoder and a decoder formed as recurrent neural
networks (RNN) with global attention and context gate. The encoder scans proposal candidates in a sequential manner to capture the global context information,
which is then fed to the decoder to extract optimal proposals. In our extensive
experiments, the proposed method outperforms other alternatives by a large margin.

1

Introduction

Object detection is a fundamentally important task in computer vision and has been intensively
studied. With convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [15], most high-performing object detection
systems [15, 20, 16, 32, 7, 23, 19, 27] follow the proposal-base object detection framework, which
first gathers a lot of object proposals and then conducts classification and regression to infer the
label and location of objects in the given image. The final inevitable step is duplicate removal that
eliminates highly overlapped detection results and only retains the most accurate bounding box for
each object.
State-of-the-Art: Most research on object detection focuses on the first two steps to generate
accurate object proposals and corresponding class labels. In contrast, research of duplicate removal
is left far behind. NMS [12], which iteratively selects proposals according to the prediction score
and suppresses overlapped proposals, is still a popular and default solution. Soft-NMS [3] extends it
by decreasing scores of highly-overlapped proposals instead of deleting them. Box voting [14, 26]
improves NMS by grouping highly-overlapped proposals for generating new prediction. In [4], it
shows that to learn the functionality of NMS automatically with a spatial memory is possible. Most
recently, relation network [22] models the relation between object proposals with the same prediction
class label.
Motivation: Optimal duplicate removal is to choose the only correct proposal for each object. The
difficulty is that during inference we actually do not know what is the object. In the detection network,
we already obtain the feature of region of interest (RoI) for classification and regression. But this
piece of information is seldom considered in the final duplicate removal when the score and location
of each proposal candidate are available. It may be because the feature data is relatively heavy and
people think it is already abstracted in the candidate scores. If this is true, using it again in the final
step may cause information redundancy and waste computation.
So the first contribution of our method is to better utilize different kinds of information into duplicate
estimation. We surprisingly found that it is very useful to improve candidate selection. The features
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

