Large-Scale Stochastic Sampling from the Probability
Simplex

Jack Baker
STOR-i CDT, Mathematics and Statistics
Lancaster University
j.baker1@lancaster.ac.uk
Emily B. Fox
Computer Science & Engineering and Statistics
University of Washington
ebfox@uw.edu

Paul Fearnhead
Mathematics and Statistics
Lancaster University
p.fearnhead@lancaster.ac.uk
Christopher Nemeth
Mathematics and Statistics
Lancaster University
c.nemeth@lancaster.ac.uk

Abstract
Stochastic gradient Markov chain Monte Carlo (SGMCMC) has become a popular
method for scalable Bayesian inference. These methods are based on sampling a
discrete-time approximation to a continuous time process, such as the Langevin
diffusion. When applied to distributions defined on a constrained space the timediscretization error can dominate when we are near the boundary of the space.
We demonstrate that because of this, current SGMCMC methods for the simplex
struggle with sparse simplex spaces; when many of the components are close to
zero. Unfortunately, many popular large-scale Bayesian models, such as network
or topic models, require inference on sparse simplex spaces. To avoid the biases
caused by this discretization error, we propose the stochastic Cox-Ingersoll-Ross
process (SCIR), which removes all discretization error and we prove that samples
from the SCIR process are asymptotically unbiased. We discuss how this idea can
be extended to target other constrained spaces. Use of the SCIR process within a
SGMCMC algorithm is shown to give substantially better performance for a topic
model and a Dirichlet process mixture model than existing SGMCMC approaches.
Stochastic gradient Markov chain Monte Carlo (SGMCMC) has become a popular method for
scalable Bayesian inference (Welling and Teh, 2011; Chen et al., 2014; Ding et al., 2014; Ma et al.,
2015). The foundation of SGMCMC methods are a class of continuous processes that explore a target
distribution—e.g., the posterior—using gradient information. These processes converge to a Markov
chain which samples from the posterior distribution exactly. SGMCMC methods replace the costly
full-data gradients with minibatch-based stochastic gradients, which provides one source of error.
Another source of error arises from the fact that the continuous processes are almost never tractable to
simulate; instead, discretizations are relied upon. In the non-SG scenario, the discretization errors are
corrected for using Metropolis-Hastings. However, this is not (generically) feasible in the SG setting.
The result of these two sources of error is that SGMCMC targets an approximate posterior (Welling
and Teh, 2011; Teh et al., 2016; Vollmer et al., 2016).
Another significant limitation of SGMCMC methods is that they struggle to sample from constrained
spaces. Naively applying SGMCMC can lead to invalid, or inaccurate values being proposed. The
result is large errors near the boundary of the space (Patterson and Teh, 2013; Ma et al., 2015; Li
et al., 2016). A particularly important constrained space is the simplex space, which is used to model
discrete probability distributions. A parameter ω of dimension d lies in the simplex if it satisfies
Pd
the following conditions: ωj ≥ 0 for all j = 1, . . . , d and j=1 ωj = 1. Many popular models
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

