G ILBO: One Metric to Measure Them All
Alexander A. Alemi∗, Ian Fischer∗
Google AI
{alemi,iansf}@google.com

Abstract
We propose a simple, tractable lower bound on the mutual information contained
in the joint generative density of any latent variable generative model: the GILBO
(Generative Information Lower BOund). It offers a data-independent measure
of the complexity of the learned latent variable description, giving the log of
the effective description length. It is well-defined for both VAEs and GANs. We
compute the GILBO for 800 GANs and VAEs each trained on four datasets (MNIST,
FashionMNIST, CIFAR-10 and CelebA) and discuss the results.

1

Introduction

G ANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2014) are the most popular latent
variable generative models because of their relative ease of training and high expressivity. However
quantitative comparisons across different algorithms and architectures remains a challenge. VAEs
are generally measured using the ELBO, which measures their fit to data. Many metrics have been
proposed for GANs, including the INCEPTION score (Gao et al., 2017), the FID score (Heusel et al.,
2017), independent Wasserstein critics (Danihelka et al., 2017), birthday paradox testing (Arora &
Zhang, 2017), and using Annealed Importance Sampling to evaluate log-likelihoods (Wu et al., 2017),
among others.
Instead of focusing on metrics tied to the data distribution, we believe a useful additional independent
metric worth consideration is the complexity of the trained generative model. Such a metric would
help answer questions related to overfitting and memorization, and may also correlate well with
sample quality. To work with both GANs and VAEs our metric should not require a tractable joint
density p(x, z). To address these desiderata, we propose the GILBO.

2

G ILBO: Generative Information Lower BOund

A symmetric, non-negative, reparameterization independent measure of the information shared
between two random variables is given by the mutual information:
ZZ
Z
Z
p(x, z)
p(z|x)
I(X; Z) =
dx dz p(x, z) log
= dz p(z) dx p(x|z) log
≥ 0. (1)
p(x)p(z)
p(z)
I(X; Z) measures how much information (in nats) is learned about one variable given the other.
As such it is a measure of the complexity of the generative model. It can be interpreted (when
converted to bits) as the reduction in the number of yes-no questions needed to guess X = x if you
observe Z = z and know p(x), or vice-versa. It gives the log of the effective description length of the
generative model. This is roughly the log of the number of distinct sample pairs (Tishby & Zaslavsky,
2015). I(X; Z) is well-defined even for continuous distributions. This contrasts with the continuous
entropy H(X) of the marginal distribution, which is not reparameterization independent (Marsh,
∗

Authors contributed equally.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

