End-to-end Symmetry Preserving Inter-atomic
Potential Energy Model for Finite and Extended
Systems

Linfeng Zhang1 , Jiequn Han1 , Han Wang2,3,∗ , Wissam A. Saidi4,† ,
Roberto Car1,5,6 , Weinan E1,7,8,‡
1
Program in Applied and Computational Mathematics, Princeton University, USA
2
Institute of Applied Physics and Computational Mathematics, China
3
CAEP Software Center for High Performance Numerical Simulation, China
4
Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, University of Pittsburgh, USA
5
Department of Chemistry and Department of Physics, Princeton University, USA
6
Princeton Institute for the Science and Technology of Materials, Princeton University, USA
7
Department of Mathematics, Princeton University, USA
8
Beijing Institute of Big Data Research, China
∗
wang_han@iapcm.ac.cn, † alsaidi@pitt.edu, ‡ weinan@math.princeton.edu

Abstract
Machine learning models are changing the paradigm of molecular modeling, which
is a fundamental tool for material science, chemistry, and computational biology.
Of particular interest is the inter-atomic potential energy surface (PES). Here we
develop Deep Potential - Smooth Edition (DeepPot-SE), an end-to-end machine
learning-based PES model, which is able to efficiently represent the PES of a
wide variety of systems with the accuracy of ab initio quantum mechanics models.
By construction, DeepPot-SE is extensive and continuously differentiable, scales
linearly with system size, and preserves all the natural symmetries of the system.
Further, we show that DeepPot-SE describes finite and extended systems including
organic molecules, metals, semiconductors, and insulators with high fidelity.

1

Introduction

Representing the inter-atomic potential energy surface (PES), both accurately and efficiently, is
one of the most challenging problems in molecular modeling. Traditional approaches have either
resorted to direct application of quantum mechanics models such as density functional theory (DFT)
models [1, 2], or empirically constructed atomic potential models such as the embedded atomic
method (EAM) [3]. The former approach is severely limited by the size of the system that one can
handle, while as the latter class of methods are limited by the accuracy and the transferability of
the model. This dilemma has confronted the molecular modeling community for several decades.
In recent years, machine learning (ML) methods tackled this classical problem and a large body of
work has been published in this area [4–17]. These studies have clearly demonstrated the potential of
using ML methods and particularly neural network models to represent the PES. Considering the
importance of the PES in molecular modeling, more work is needed to provide a general framework
for an ML-based PES that can equally describe different systems with high fidelity.
Before proceeding further, let us list the requirements of the PES models that we consider to be
fundamental: 1) The model should have the potential to be as accurate as quantum mechanics for both
finite and extended systems. By finite system we mean that the system is isolated and surrounded by
vacuum, e.g., gas-state molecules; by extended system we mean that the system is in a simulation cell
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

