Non-metric Similarity Graphs for
Maximum Inner Product Search
Stanislav Morozov
Yandex,
Lomonosov Moscow State University
stanis-morozov@yandex.ru

Artem Babenko
Yandex,
National Research University
Higher School of Economics
artem.babenko@phystech.edu

Abstract
In this paper we address the problem of Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS)
that is currently the computational bottleneck in a large number of machine learning
applications. While being similar to the nearest neighbor search (NNS), the MIPS
problem was shown to be more challenging, as the inner product is not a proper
metric function. We propose to solve the MIPS problem with the usage of similarity
graphs, i.e., graphs where each vertex is connected to the vertices that are the most
similar in terms of some similarity function. Originally, the framework of similarity
graphs was proposed for metric spaces and in this paper we naturally extend it to
the non-metric MIPS scenario. We demonstrate that, unlike existing approaches,
similarity graphs do not require any data transformation to reduce MIPS to the
NNS problem and should be used for the original data. Moreover, we explain why
such a reduction is detrimental for similarity graphs. By an extensive comparison
to the existing approaches, we show that the proposed method is a game-changer
in terms of the runtime/accuracy trade-off for the MIPS problem.

1

Introduction

The Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) problem has recently received increased attention from
different research communities. The machine learning community has been especially active on this
subject, as MIPS arises in a number of important machine learning tasks such as efficient Bayesian
inference[1, 2], memory networks training[3], dialog agents[4], reinforcement learning[5]. The MIPS
problem formulates as follows. Given the large database of vectors X = {xi ∈ Rd |i = 1, . . . , n}
and a query vector q ∈ Rd , we need to find an index j such that
hxj , qi ≥ hxi , qi = xTi q, i 6= j

(1)

In practice we often need K > 1 vectors that provide the largest inner products and the top-K MIPS
problem is considered.
For large-scale databases the sequential scan with the O(nd) complexity is not feasible, and the
efficient approximate methods are required. The current studies on efficient MIPS can be roughly
divided into two groups. The methods from the first group [6, 7, 8], which are probably the more popular in the machine learning community, reduce MIPS to the NNS problem. They typically transform
the database and query vectors and then search the neighbors via traditional NNS structures, e.g.,
LSH[7] or partition trees[6]. The second group includes the methods that filter out the unpromising
database vectors based on inner product upper bounds, like the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality[9, 10].
In this work we introduce a new research direction for the MIPS problem. We propose to employ
the similarity graphs framework that was recently shown to provide the exceptional performance for
the nearest neighbor search. In this framework the database is represented as a graph, where each
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

