Low-Rank Tucker Decomposition of Large Tensors
Using TensorSketch

Osman Asif Malik
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Colorado Boulder
osman.malik@colorado.edu

Stephen Becker
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Colorado Boulder
stephen.becker@colorado.edu

Abstract
We propose two randomized algorithms for low-rank Tucker decomposition of
tensors. The algorithms, which incorporate sketching, only require a single pass
of the input tensor and can handle tensors whose elements are streamed in any
order. To the best of our knowledge, ours are the only algorithms which can do
this. We test our algorithms on sparse synthetic data and compare them to multiple
other methods. We also apply one of our algorithms to a real dense 38 GB tensor
representing a video and use the resulting decomposition to correctly classify
frames containing disturbances.

1

Introduction

Many real datasets have more than two dimensions and are therefore better represented using tensors,
or multi-way arrays, rather than matrices. In the same way that methods such as the singular value
decomposition (SVD) can help in the analysis of data in matrix form, tensor decompositions are
important tools when working with tensor data. As multidimensional datasets grow larger and larger,
there is an increasing need for methods that can handle them, even on modest hardware. One approach
to the challenge of handling big data, which has proven to be very fruitful in the past, is the use of
randomization. In this paper, we present two algorithms for computing the Tucker decomposition of a
tensor which incorporate random sketching. A key challenge to incorporating sketching in the Tucker
decomposition is that the relevant design matrices are Kronecker products of the factor matrices. This
makes them too large to form and store in RAM, which prohibits the application of standard sketching
techniques. Recent work [26, 27, 2, 10] has led to a new technique called T ENSOR S KETCH which is
ideally suited for sketching Kronecker products. It is based on this technique that we develop our
algorithms. Our algorithms, which are single pass and can handle streamed data, are suitable when
the decomposition we seek is of low-rank. When we say that our algorithms can handle streamed
data, we mean that they can decompose a tensor whose elements are revealed one at a time and then
discarded, no matter which order this is done in. These streaming properties of our methods follow
directly from the streaming properties of T ENSOR S KETCH.
In some applications, such as the compression of scientific data produced by high-fidelity simulations,
the data tensors can be very large (see e.g. the recent work [1]). Since such data frequently is produced
incrementally, e.g. by stepping forward in time, a compression algorithm which is one-pass and can
handle the tensor elements being streamed would make it possible to compress the data without ever
having to store it in full. Our algorithms have these properties.
In summary, our paper makes the following algorithmic contributions:
• We propose two algorithms for Tucker decomposition which incorporate T ENSOR S KETCH.
They are intended to be used for low-rank decompositions.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

