Deep Reinforcement Learning in a Handful of Trials
using Probabilistic Dynamics Models
Kurtland Chua

Roberto Calandra
Rowan McAllister
Sergey Levine
Berkeley Artificial Intelligence Research
University of California, Berkeley
{kchua, roberto.calandra, rmcallister, svlevine}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms can attain excellent sample
efficiency, but often lag behind the best model-free algorithms in terms of asymptotic performance. This is especially true with high-capacity parametric function
approximators, such as deep networks. In this paper, we study how to bridge this
gap, by employing uncertainty-aware dynamics models. We propose a new algorithm called probabilistic ensembles with trajectory sampling (PETS) that combines
uncertainty-aware deep network dynamics models with sampling-based uncertainty
propagation. Our comparison to state-of-the-art model-based and model-free deep
RL algorithms shows that our approach matches the asymptotic performance of
model-free algorithms on several challenging benchmark tasks, while requiring
significantly fewer samples (e.g., 8 and 125 times fewer samples than Soft Actor
Critic and Proximal Policy Optimization respectively on the half-cheetah task).

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms provide for an automated framework for decision making
and control: by specifying a high-level objective function, an RL algorithm can, in principle,
automatically learn a control policy that satisfies this objective. This has the potential to automate a
range of applications, such as autonomous vehicles and interactive conversational agents. However,
current model-free reinforcement learning algorithms are quite data-expensive to train, which often
limits their application to simulated domains [Mnih et al., 2015, Lillicrap et al., 2016, Schulman et al.,
2017], with a few exceptions [Kober and Peters, 2009, Levine et al., 2016]. A promising direction
for reducing sample complexity is to explore model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) methods,
which proceed by first acquiring a predictive model of the world, and then using that model to make
decisions [Atkeson and Santamaría, 1997, Kocijan et al., 2004, Deisenroth et al., 2014]. MBRL is
appealing because the dynamics model is reward-independent and therefore can generalize to new
tasks in the same environment, and it can easily benefit from all of the advances in deep supervised
learning to utilize high-capacity models. However, the asymptotic performance of MBRL methods
on common benchmark tasks generally lags behind model-free methods. That is, although MBRL
methods tend to learn more quickly, they also tend to converge to less optimal solutions.
In this paper, we take a step toward narrowing the gap between model-based and model-free RL
methods. Our approach is based on several observations that, though relatively simple, are critical
for good performance. We first observe that model capacity is a critical ingredient in the success
of MBRL methods: while efficient models such as Gaussian processes can learn extremely quickly,
they struggle to represent very complex and discontinuous dynamical systems [Calandra et al., 2016].
By contrast, neural network (NN) models can scale to large datasets with high-dimensional inputs,
and can represent such systems more effectively. However, NNs struggle with the opposite problem:
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

