Decentralize and Randomize: Faster Algorithm for
Wasserstein Barycenters

Pavel Dvurechensky, Darina Dvinskikh
Weierstrass Institute for Applied Analysis and Stochastics,
Institute for Information Transmission Problems RAS
{pavel.dvurechensky,darina.dvinskikh}@wias-berlin.de
Alexander Gasnikov
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology,
Institute for Information Transmission Problems RAS
gasnikov@yandex.ru

César A. Uribe
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
cauribe@mit.edu

Angelia Nedić
Arizona State University,
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
angelia.nedich@asu.edu

Abstract
We study the decentralized distributed computation of discrete approximations
for the regularized Wasserstein barycenter of a finite set of continuous probability
measures distributedly stored over a network. We assume there is a network of
agents/machines/computers, and each agent holds a private continuous probability
measure and seeks to compute the barycenter of all the measures in the network
by getting samples from its local measure and exchanging information with its
neighbors. Motivated by this problem, we develop, and analyze, a novel accelerated
primal-dual stochastic gradient method for general stochastic convex optimization
problems with linear equality constraints. Then, we apply this method to the decentralized distributed optimization setting to obtain a new algorithm for the distributed
semi-discrete regularized Wasserstein barycenter problem. Moreover, we show
explicit non-asymptotic complexity for the proposed algorithm. Finally, we show
the effectiveness of our method on the distributed computation of the regularized
Wasserstein barycenter of univariate Gaussian and von Mises distributions, as well
as some applications to image aggregation.1

1

Introduction

Optimal transport (OT) [30, 25] has become increasingly popular in the machine learning and
optimization community. Given a basis space (e.g., pixel grid) and a transportation cost function (e.g.,
squared Euclidean distance), the OT approach defines a distance between two objects (e.g., images),
modeled as two probability measures on the basis space, as the minimal cost of transportation of the
first measure to the second. Besides images, these probability measures or histograms can model other
real-world objects like videos, texts, etc. The optimal transport distance leads to outstanding results
in unsupervised learning [4, 7], semi-supervised learning [42], clustering [24], text classification [27],
as well as in image retrieval, clustering and classification [38, 11, 39], statistics [20, 36], economics
1

The full version of this paper can be found in the supplementary material and is also available as [15].

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

