Proximal Graphical Event Models

Debarun Bhattacharjya

Dharmashankar Subramanian
Tian Gao
IBM Research
Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
{debarunb,dharmash,tgao}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Event datasets involve irregular occurrences of events over the timeline and are
prevalent in numerous domains. We introduce proximal graphical event models
(PGEMs) as a representation of such datasets. PGEMs belong to a broader family
of graphical models that characterize relationships between various types of events;
in a PGEM, the rate of occurrence of an event type depends only on whether or
not its parents have occurred in the most recent history. The main advantage over
state-of-the-art models is that learning is entirely data driven and without the need
for additional inputs from the user, which can require knowledge of the domain
such as choice of basis functions and hyper-parameters. We theoretically justify our
learning of parental sets and their optimal windows, proposing sound and complete
algorithms in terms of parent structure learning. We present efficient heuristics for
learning PGEMs from data, demonstrating their effectiveness on synthetic and real
datasets.

1

Introduction and Related Work

Event datasets are sequences of events of various types that typically occur as irregular and asynchronous continuous-time arrivals. This is in contrast to time series data, which are observations of
continuous-valued variables over regular discrete epochs in time. Examples of event datasets include
logs, transactions, notifications and alarms, insurance claims, medical events, political events, and
financial events.
It is well known that a multivariate point process is able to capture the dynamics of events occurring
in continuous time, under reasonable regularity conditions, using conditional intensity functions.
These are akin to hazard rates in survival analysis and represent the rate at which an event type
occurs, conditioned on the history of event occurrences. Learning arbitrary history-dependent
intensity functions can be difficult and impractical, thus the literature makes various simplifying
assumptions. Some examples of such point processes include continuous time noisy-or (CT-NOR)
models [Simma et al., 2008], Poisson cascades [Simma and Jordan, 2010], Poisson networks [Rajaram
et al., 2005], piecewise-constant conditional intensity models [Gunawardana et al., 2011], forest-based
point processes [Weiss and Page, 2013], multivariate Hawkes processes [Zhou et al., 2013], and
non-homogeneous Poisson processes [Goulding et al., 2016].
Graphical event models (GEMs) have been proposed as a graphical representation for multivariate
point processes [Didelez, 2008, Meek, 2014, Gunawardana and Meek, 2016]. Unlike graphical
models for discrete-time dynamic uncertain variables such as dynamic Bayesian networks [Dean
and Kanazawa, 1989, Murphy, 2002] and time series graphs [Eichler, 1999, Dahlhaus, 2000], GEMs
capture continuous-time processes. They also differ from continuous-time Bayesian networks
[Nodelman et al., 2002], which represent homogeneous Markov models of the joint trajectories of
discrete variables rather than models of event streams in continuous time. GEMs provide a framework
that generalizes many of the afore-mentioned history-dependent models for event datasets, many of
which make the assumption of piece-wise constant conditional intensity functions. The literature
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

