Deep Network for the Integrated 3D Sensing of
Multiple People in Natural Images

Andrei Zanfir2 Elisabeta Marinoiu2 Mihai Zanfir2 Alin-Ionut Popa2 Cristian Sminchisescu1,2
{andrei.zanfir, elisabeta.marinoiu, mihai.zanfir, alin.popa}@imar.ro,
cristian.sminchisescu@math.lth.se
1

Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Engineering, Lund University
2
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy

Abstract
We present MubyNet – a feed-forward, multitask, bottom up system for the integrated localization, as well as 3d pose and shape estimation, of multiple people
in monocular images. The challenge is the formal modeling of the problem that
intrinsically requires discrete and continuous computation, e.g. grouping people vs.
predicting 3d pose. The model identifies human body structures (joints and limbs)
in images, groups them based on 2d and 3d information fused using learned scoring
functions, and optimally aggregates such responses into partial or complete 3d
human skeleton hypotheses under kinematic tree constraints, but without knowing
in advance the number of people in the scene and their visibility relations. We
design a multi-task deep neural network with differentiable stages where the person
grouping problem is formulated as an integer program based on learned body part
scores parameterized by both 2d and 3d information. This avoids suboptimality
resulting from separate 2d and 3d reasoning, with grouping performed based on the
combined representation. The final stage of 3d pose and shape prediction is based
on a learned attention process where information from different human body parts
is optimally integrated. State-of-the-art results are obtained in large scale datasets
like Human3.6M and Panoptic, and qualitatively by reconstructing the 3d shape
and pose of multiple people, under occlusion, in difficult monocular images.

1

Introduction

The recent years have witnessed a resurgence of human sensing methods for body keypoint estimation
[1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7] as well as 3d pose and shape reconstruction [8; 9; 10; 11; 12; 13; 14; 15; 16; 17;
18; 19; 20; 21]. Some of the challenges are in the level of modeling – shifting towards accurate 3d
pose and shape, not just 2d keypoints or skeletons –, and the integration of 2d and 3d reasoning with
automatic person localization and grouping. The discrete aspect of grouping and the continuous
nature of pose estimation makes the formal integration of such computations difficult. In this
paper we propose a novel, feedforward deep network, supporting different supervision regimes,
that predicts the 3d pose and shape of multiple people in monocular images. We formulate and
integrate human localization and grouping into the network, as a binary linear integer program with
optimal solution based on learned body part compatibility functions constructed using 2d and 3d
information. State-of-the-art results on Human3.6M and Panoptic illustrate the feasibility of the
proposed approach.
Related Work. Several authors focused on integrating different human sensing tasks into a singleshot end-to-end pipeline[22; 23; 24; 13]. The models are usually designed to handle a single person
and often rely on a prior stage of detection. [13] encode the 3d information of a single person inside
a feature map forcing the network to output 3d joint positions for each semantic body joint at its
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

