Robustness of conditional GANs to noisy labels
Kiran Koshy Thekumparampil† , Ashish Khetan† , Zinan Lin‡ , Sewoong Oh†
†
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, ‡ Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
We study the problem of learning conditional generators from noisy labeled samples, where the labels are corrupted by random noise. A standard training of
conditional GANs will not only produce samples with wrong labels, but also generate poor quality samples. We consider two scenarios, depending on whether the
noise model is known or not. When the distribution of the noise is known, we
introduce a novel architecture which we call Robust Conditional GAN (RCGAN).
The main idea is to corrupt the label of the generated sample before feeding to
the adversarial discriminator, forcing the generator to produce samples with clean
labels. This approach of passing through a matching noisy channel is justified
by accompanying multiplicative approximation bounds between the loss of the
RCGAN and the distance between the clean real distribution and the generator
distribution. This shows that the proposed approach is robust, when used with
a carefully chosen discriminator architecture, known as projection discriminator.
When the distribution of the noise is not known, we provide an extension of our
architecture, which we call RCGAN-U, that learns the noise model simultaneously
while training the generator. We show experimentally on MNIST and CIFAR-10
datasets that both the approaches consistently improve upon baseline approaches,
and RCGAN-U closely matches the performance of RCGAN.

1

Introduction

Conditional generative adversarial networks (GAN) have been widely successful in several applications including improving image quality, semi-supervised learning, reinforcement learning, category
transformation, style transfer, image de-noising, compression, in-painting, and super-resolution
[30, 13, 49, 36, 26, 58]. The goal of training a conditional GAN is to generate samples from distributions satisfying certain conditioning on some correlated features. Concretely, given samples from
joint distribution of a data point x and a label y, we want to learn to generate samples from the true
conditional distribution of the real data PX|Y . A canonical conditional GAN studied in literature is
the case of discrete label y [30, 36, 35, 32]. Significant progresses have been made in this setting,
which are typically evaluated on the quality of the conditional samples. These include measuring
inception scores and intra Fréchet inception distances, visual inspection on downstream tasks such as
category morphing and super resolution [32], and faithfulness of the samples as measured by how
accurately we can infer the class that generated the sample [36].
We study the problem of training conditional GANs with noisy discrete labels. By noisy labels,
we refer to a setting where the label y for each example in the training set is randomly corrupted.
Such noise can result from an adversary deliberately corrupting the data [7] or from human errors in
crowdsourced label collection [12, 18]. This can be modeled as a random process, where a clean data
Author emails are thekump2@illinois.edu, ashish.khetan09@gmail.com, zinanl@andrew.cmu.edu, and
swoh@illinois.edu. This work used the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE),
which is supported by National Science Foundation grant number OCI-1053575. Specifically, it used the Bridges
system, which is supported by NSF award number ACI-1445606, at the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center
(PSC).
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

