Point process latent variable models of
larval zebrafish behavior
Anuj Sharma
Columbia University

Robert E. Johnson
Harvard University

Florian Engert
Harvard University

Scott W. Linderman∗
Columbia University

Abstract
A fundamental goal of systems neuroscience is to understand how neural activity
gives rise to natural behavior. In order to achieve this goal, we must first build
comprehensive models that offer quantitative descriptions of behavior. We develop
a new class of probabilistic models to tackle this challenge in the study of larval zebrafish, an important model organism for neuroscience. Larval zebrafish locomote
via sequences of punctate swim bouts—brief flicks of the tail—which are naturally
modeled as a marked point process. However, these sequences of swim bouts belie
a set of discrete and continuous internal states, latent variables that are not captured
by standard point process models. We incorporate these variables as latent marks of
a point process and explore various models for their dynamics. To infer the latent
variables and fit the parameters of this model, we develop an amortized variational
inference algorithm that targets the collapsed posterior distribution, analytically
marginalizing out the discrete latent variables. With a dataset of over 120,000 swim
bouts, we show that our models reveal interpretable discrete classes of swim bouts
and continuous internal states like hunger that modulate their dynamics. These
models are a major step toward understanding the natural behavioral program of
the larval zebrafish and, ultimately, its neural underpinnings.

1

Introduction

Computational neuroscience—the study of how neural circuits transform sensory inputs into behavioral outputs—is intimately coupled with computational ethology—the quantitative analysis of
behavior [1, 2]. In order to understand the computations of the nervous system, we must first have
a rigorous description of the behavior it produces. To that end, comprehensive, quantitative, and
interpretable models of behavior are of fundamental importance to the study of the brain.
For many organisms, overt behaviors manifest as a sequence of discrete and nearly-instantaneous
events unfolding over time, often with some associated measurements, or marks. Multiple times a
second, our eyes saccade in a quick, jerking motion to fixate on a new point in our field of view [3].
Some electric fish emit pulsatile discharges to navigate, detect objects, and communicate [4]. In this
paper we study larval zebrafish, a model organism for neuroscience. They swim with brief tail flicks,
or bouts, that propel them forward, reorient them, and enable them to pursue and capture prey [5, 6].
Importantly, larval zebrafish offer exciting opportunities: if we can better quantify their behavioral
patterns, we can use whole brain functional imaging technologies to search for correlates of these
patterns in the neural activity dynamics of behaving fish [7–11].
Figure 1 illustrates our experimental setup for collecting behavioral data of freely swimming larval
zebrafish [12]. Each fish swims in a large (30cm) tank for 40 minutes while feeding on paramecia and
is recruited to the center to initiate each observational trial (a.). Each trial consists of a sequence of
up to 350 swim bouts (b.) and we recorded over 120,000 bouts from 130 fish over about 1000 trials.
∗

Corresponding author: scott.linderman@columbia.edu.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

