Power-law efficient neural codes provide general link
between perceptual bias and discriminability
Michael J. Morais & Jonathan W. Pillow
Princeton Neuroscience Institute & Department of Psychology
Princeton University
mjmorais, pillow@princeton.edu

Abstract
Recent work in theoretical neuroscience has shown that efficient neural codes, which
allocate neural resources to maximize the mutual information between stimuli and neural
responses, give rise to a lawful relationship between perceptual bias and discriminability
in psychophysical measurements (Wei & Stocker 2017, [1]). Here we generalize these
results to show that the same law arises under a much larger family of optimal neural codes,
which we call power-law efficient codes. These codes provide a unifying framework for
understanding the relationship between perceptual bias and discriminability, and how it
depends on the allocation of neural resources. Specifically, we show that the same lawful
relationship between bias and discriminability arises whenever Fisher information is allocated proportional to any power of the prior distribution. This family includes neural codes
that are optimal for minimizing Lp error for any p, indicating that the lawful relationship
observed in human psychophysical data does not require information-theoretically optimal
neural codes. Furthermore, we derive the exact constant of proportionality governing the
relationship between bias and discriminability for different choices of power law exponent q, which includes information-theoretic (q = 2) as well as “discrimax” (q = 1/2)
neural codes, and different choices of decoder. As a bonus, our framework provides new
insights into “anti-Bayesian” perceptual biases, in which percepts are biased away from
the center of mass of the prior. We derive an explicit formula that clarifies precisely which
combinations of neural encoder and decoder can give rise to such biases.

1

Introduction

There are relatively few general laws governing perceptual inference, the two most prominent being
the Weber-Fechner law [2] and Stevens’ law [3]. Recently, Wei and Stocker [1] proposed a new
perceptual law governing the relationship between perceptual bias and discriminability, and showed
that it holds across a wide variety of psychophysical tasks in human observers.
Perceptual bias, b(x) = E[x̂|x] x, is the difference between the average stimulus estimate x̂ and
its true value x. Perceptual discriminability D(x) characterizes the sensitivity with which stimuli
close to x can be discriminated, equivalently the just-noticable difference (JND); this is formalized as
the stimulus increment D(x) such that the stimuli x + ⌘D(x) and x (1 ⌘)D(x) (for ⌘ between
0 and 1) can be correctly distinguished with probability
, for some value of . Note that by
this definition, lower discriminability D(x) implies higher sensitivity to small changes in x, that is,
improved ability to discriminate.
The law proposed by Wei and Stocker asserts that bias and discriminability are related according to:
d
b(x) /
D(x)2
(1)
dx
where the right-hand-side is the derivative with respect to x of the discriminability squared. The
relationship is backed by remarkably diverse experimental support, crossing sensory modalities,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

