Reparameterization Gradient
for Non-differentiable Models
Wonyeol Lee
Hangyeol Yu
Hongseok Yang
School of Computing, KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea
{wonyeol, yhk1344, hongseok.yang}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a new algorithm for stochastic variational inference that targets at
models with non-differentiable densities. One of the key challenges in stochastic
variational inference is to come up with a low-variance estimator of the gradient of
a variational objective. We tackle the challenge by generalizing the reparameterization trick, one of the most effective techniques for addressing the variance issue
for differentiable models, so that the trick works for non-differentiable models
as well. Our algorithm splits the space of latent variables into regions where the
density of the variables is differentiable, and their boundaries where the density
may fail to be differentiable. For each differentiable region, the algorithm applies
the standard reparameterization trick and estimates the gradient restricted to the
region. For each potentially non-differentiable boundary, it uses a form of manifold
sampling and computes the direction for variational parameters that, if followed,
would increase the boundary’s contribution to the variational objective. The sum of
all the estimates becomes the gradient estimate of our algorithm. Our estimator
enjoys the reduced variance of the reparameterization gradient while remaining
unbiased even for non-differentiable models. The experiments with our preliminary
implementation confirm the benefit of reduced variance and unbiasedness.

1

Introduction

Stochastic variational inference (SVI) is a popular choice for performing posterior inference in
Bayesian machine learning. It picks a family of variational distributions, and formulates posterior
inference as a problem of finding a member of this family that is closest to the target posterior. SVI,
then, solves this optimization problem approximately using stochastic gradient ascent. One major
challenge in developing an effective SVI algorithm is the difficulty of designing a low-variance
estimator for the gradient of the optimization objective. Addressing this challenge has been the
driver of recent advances for SVI, such as reparameterization trick [13, 30, 31, 26, 15], clever control
variate [28, 7, 8, 34, 6, 23], and continuous relaxation of discrete distributions [20, 10].
Our goal is to tackle the challenge for models with non-differentiable densities. Such a model naturally
arises when one starts to use both discrete and continuous random variables or specifies a model
using programming constructs, such as if statement, as in probabilistic programming [4, 22, 37, 5].
The high variance of a gradient estimate is a more serious issue for these models than for those
with differentiable densities. Key techniques for addressing it simply do not apply in the absence
of differentiability. For instance, a prerequisite for the so called reparameterization trick is the
differentiability of a model’s density function.
In the paper, we present a new gradient estimator for non-differentiable models. Our estimator splits
the space of latent variables into regions where the joint density of the variables is differentiable, and
their boundaries where the density may fail to be differentiable. For each differentiable region, the
estimator applies the standard reparameterization trick and estimates the gradient restricted to the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

