Non-delusional Q-learning and Value Iteration

Tyler Lu
Google AI
tylerlu@google.com

Dale Schuurmans
Google AI
schuurmans@google.com

Craig Boutilier
Google AI
cboutilier@google.com

Abstract
We identify a fundamental source of error in Q-learning and other forms of dynamic programming with function approximation. Delusional bias arises when the
approximation architecture limits the class of expressible greedy policies. Since
standard Q-updates make globally uncoordinated action choices with respect to
the expressible policy class, inconsistent or even conflicting Q-value estimates
can result, leading to pathological behaviour such as over/under-estimation, instability and even divergence. To solve this problem, we introduce a new notion of
policy consistency and define a local backup process that ensures global consistency through the use of information sets—sets that record constraints on policies
consistent with backed-up Q-values. We prove that both the model-based and
model-free algorithms using this backup remove delusional bias, yielding the first
known algorithms that guarantee optimal results under general conditions. These
algorithms furthermore only require polynomially many information sets (from a
potentially exponential support). Finally, we suggest other practical heuristics for
value-iteration and Q-learning that attempt to reduce delusional bias.

1

Introduction

Q-learning is a foundational algorithm in reinforcement learning (RL) [34, 26]. Although Q-learning
is guaranteed to converge to an optimal state-action value function (or Q-function) when stateaction pairs are explicitly enumerated [34], it is potentially unstable when combined with function
approximation (even simple linear approximation) [1, 8, 29, 26]. Numerous modifications of the basic
update, restrictions on approximators, and training regimes have been proposed to ensure convergence
or improve approximation error [12, 13, 27, 18, 17, 21]. Unfortunately, simple modifications are
unlikely to ensure near-optimal performance, since it is NP-complete to determine whether even
a linear approximator can achieve small worst-case Bellman error [23]. Developing variants of Qlearning with good worst-case behaviour for standard function approximators has remained elusive.
Despite these challenges, Q-learning remains a workhorse of applied RL. The recent success of
deep Q-learning, and its role in high-profile achievements [19], seems to obviate concerns about
the algorithm’s performance: the use of deep neural networks (DNNs), together with various augmentations (such as experience replay, hyperparameter tuning, etc.) can reduce instability and poor
approximation. However, deep Q-learning is far from robust, and can rarely be applied successfully
by inexperienced users. Modifications to mitigate systematic risks in Q-learning include double
Q-learning [30], distributional Q-learning [4], and dueling network architectures [32]. A study of
these and other variations reveals surprising results regarding the relative benefits of each under
ablation [14]. Still, the full range of risks of approximation in Q-learning has yet to be delineated.
In this paper, we identify a fundamental problem with Q-learning (and other forms of dynamic
programming) with function approximation, distinct from those previously discussed in the literature.
Specifically, we show that approximate Q-learning suffers from delusional bias, in which updates are
based on mutually inconsistent values. This inconsistency arises because the Q-update for a stateaction pair, (s, a), is based on the maximum value estimate over all actions at the next state, which
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

