Norm matters: efficient and accurate normalization
schemes in deep networks

Elad Hoffer1∗, Ron Banner2∗, Itay Golan1∗, Daniel Soudry1
{elad.hoffer, itaygolan, daniel.soudry}@gmail.com
{ron.banner}@intel.com

(1) Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
(2) Intel - Artificial Intelligence Products Group (AIPG)

Abstract
Over the past few years, Batch-Normalization has been commonly used in deep
networks, allowing faster training and high performance for a wide variety of
applications. However, the reasons behind its merits remained unanswered, with
several shortcomings that hindered its use for certain tasks. In this work, we present
a novel view on the purpose and function of normalization methods and weightdecay, as tools to decouple weights’ norm from the underlying optimized objective.
This property highlights the connection between practices such as normalization,
weight decay and learning-rate adjustments. We suggest several alternatives to the
widely used L2 batch-norm, using normalization in L1 and L∞ spaces that can
substantially improve numerical stability in low-precision implementations as well
as provide computational and memory benefits. We demonstrate that such methods
enable the first batch-norm alternative to work for half-precision implementations.
Finally, we suggest a modification to weight-normalization, which improves its
performance on large-scale tasks. 2

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are known to benefit from normalization between consecutive layers. This
was made noticeable with the introduction of Batch-Normalization (BN) [19], which normalizes
the output of each layer to have zero mean and unit variance for each channel across the training
batch. This idea was later developed to act across channels instead of the batch dimension in Layernormalization [2] and improved in certain tasks with methods such as Batch-Renormalization [18],
Instance-normalization [33] and Group-Normalization [38]. In addition, normalization methods are
also applied to the layer parameters instead of their outputs. Methods such as Weight-Normalization
[27], and Normalization-Propagation [1] targeted the layer weights by normalizing their per-channel
norm to have a fixed value. Instead of explicit normalization, effort was also made to enable selfnormalization by adapting activation function so that intermediate activations will converge towards
zero-mean and unit variance [21].
1.1

Issues with current normalization methods

Batch-normalization, despite its merits, suffers from several issues, as pointed out by previous work
[27, 18, 1]. These issues are not yet solved in current normalization methods.
∗
2

Equal contribution
Source code is available at https://github.com/eladhoffer/norm_matters

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

