Genetic-Gated Networks
for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Simyung Chang
Seoul National University,
Samsung Electronics
Seoul, Korea
timelighter@snu.ac.kr

John Yang
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
yjohn@snu.ac.kr

Jaeseok Choi
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
jaeseok.choi@snu.ac.kr

Nojun Kwak
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
nojunk@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We introduce the Genetic-Gated Networks (G2Ns), simple neural networks that
combine a gate vector composed of binary genetic genes in the hidden layer(s) of
networks. Our method can take both advantages of gradient-free optimization and
gradient-based optimization methods, of which the former is effective for problems
with multiple local minima, while the latter can quickly find local minima. In
addition, multiple chromosomes can define different models, making it easy to
construct multiple models and can be effectively applied to problems that require
multiple models. We show that this G2N can be applied to typical reinforcement
learning algorithms to achieve a large improvement in sample efficiency and
performance.

1

Introduction

Many reinforcement learning algorithms such as policy gradient based methods [14, 17] suffer
from the problem of getting stuck in local extrema. These phenomena are essentially caused by the
updates of a function approximator that depend on the gradients of current policy, which is usual
for on-policy methods. Exploiting the short-sighted gradients should be balanced with adequate
explorations. Explorations thus should be designed irrelevant to policy gradients in order to guide
the policy to unseen states. Heuristic exploration methods such as -greedy action selections and
entropy regularization [20] are widely used, but are incapable of complex action-planning in many
environments [7, 8]. While policy gradient-based methods such as Actor-Critic models [5, 6] explore
a given state space typically by applying a random Gaussian control noise in the action space, the
mean and the standard deviation of the randomness remain as hyper-parameters to heuristically
control the degree of exploration.
While meaningful explorations can also be achieved by applying learned noise in the parameter space
and thus perturbing neural policy models [2, 9, 10], there have been genetic evolution approaches for
the exploration control system of an optimal policy, considering the gradient-free methods are able to
overcome confined local optima [11]. Such et al. [16] vectorize the weights of an elite policy network
and mutate the vector with a Gaussian distribution to generate other candidate policy networks. This
process is iterated until an elite parameter vector which yields the best fitness score is learned. While
their method finds optimal parameters of a policy network purely based on a genetic algorithm, ES
algorithm in [12] is further engaged with zero-order optimization process; the parameter vector is
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

