Unsupervised Learning of Artistic Styles with
Archetypal Style Analysis

Daan Wynen, Cordelia Schmid, Julien Mairal
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP,∗ LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce an unsupervised learning approach to automatically discover, summarize, and manipulate artistic styles from large collections of paintings.
Our method is based on archetypal analysis, which is an unsupervised learning
technique akin to sparse coding with a geometric interpretation. When applied to
neural style representations from a collection of artworks, it learns a dictionary of
archetypal styles, which can be easily visualized. After training the model, the style
of a new image, which is characterized by local statistics of deep visual features,
is approximated by a sparse convex combination of archetypes. This enables us
to interpret which archetypal styles are present in the input image, and in which
proportion. Finally, our approach allows us to manipulate the coefficients of the
latent archetypal decomposition, and achieve various special effects such as style
enhancement, transfer, and interpolation between multiple archetypes.

1

Introduction

Artistic style transfer consists in manipulating the appearance of an input image such that its semantic
content and its scene organization are preserved, but a human may perceive the modified image
as having been painted in a similar fashion as a given target painting. Closely related to previous
approaches to texture synthesis based on modeling statistics of wavelet coefficients [8, 19], the
seminal work of Gatys et al. [5, 6] has recently shown that a deep convolutional neural network
originally trained for classification tasks yields a powerful representation for style and texture
modeling. Specifically, the description of “style” in [5] consists of local statistics obtained from deep
visual features, represented by the covariance matrices of feature responses computed at each network
layer. Then, by using an iterative optimization procedure, the method of Gatys et al. [5] outputs an
image whose deep representation should be as close as possible to that of the input content image,
while matching the statistics of the target painting. This approach, even though relatively simple,
leads to impressive stylization effects that are now widely deployed in consumer applications.
Subsequently, style transfer was improved in many aspects. First, removing the relatively slow
optimization procedure of [5] was shown to be possible by instead training a convolutional neural
network to perform style transfer [10, 22]. Once the model has been learned, stylization of a new
image requires a single forward pass of the network, allowing real-time applications. Whereas these
networks were originally trained to transfer a single style (e.g., a network trained for producing a
“Van Gogh effect” was unable to produce an image resembling Monet’s paintings), recent approaches
have been able to train a convolutional neural network to transfer multiple styles from a collection of
paintings and to interpolate between styles [1, 4, 9].
Then, key to our work, Li et al. [11] recently proposed a simple learning-free and optimization-free
procedure to modify deep features of an input image such that their local statistics approximately
∗

Institute of Engineering Univ. Grenoble Alpes

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

