Stacked Semantics-Guided Attention Model for
Fine-Grained Zero-Shot Learning

Yunlong Yu, Zhong Ji∗
School of Electrical and Information Engineering
Tianjin University
{yuyunlong,jizhong}@tju.edu.cn

Jichang Guo, Yanwei Pang
School of Electrical and Information Engineering
Tianjin University
{jcguo,pyw}@tju.edu.cn

Yanwei Fu
School of Data Science
Fudan University
AITRICS
yanweifu@fudan.edu.cn
Zhongfei (Mark) Zhang
Computer Science Department
Binghamton University
zhongfei@cs.binghamton.edu

Abstract
Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) is generally achieved via aligning the semantic relationships between the visual features and the corresponding class semantic descriptions.
However, using the global features to represent fine-grained images may lead
to sub-optimal results since they neglect the discriminative differences of local
regions. Besides, different regions contain distinct discriminative information.
The important regions should contribute more to the prediction. To this end, we
propose a novel stacked semantics-guided attention (S2 GA) model to obtain semantic relevant features by using individual class semantic features to progressively
guide the visual features to generate an attention map for weighting the importance
of different local regions. Feeding both the integrated visual features and the
class semantic features into a multi-class classification architecture, the proposed
framework can be trained end-to-end. Extensive experimental results on CUB and
NABird datasets show that the proposed approach has a consistent improvement
on both fine-grained zero-shot classification and retrieval tasks.

1

Introduction

Traditional object classification tasks require the test classes to be identical or a subset of the training
classes. However, the categories in the reality have a long-tailed distribution, which means that
no classification model could cover all the categories in the real world. Targeting on extending
conventional classification models to unseen classes, Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) [7, 8, 18, 29, 30] has
attracted a lot of interests in the machine learning and computer vision communities.
The current approaches formulate ZSL as a visual-semantic alignment problem. In these approaches,
an image is represented with its global features. Despite good performances on coarse-grained
datasets (e.g., Animal with Attribute dataset [10]), the global features have limitations on fine-grained
datasets since more local discriminative information is required to distinguish classes. As illustrated in
Fig. 1, the global features only capture some holistic information, on the contrary, the region features
capture more local information that is relevant to the class semantic descriptions. Consequently, the
global image representations may fail in fine-grained ZSL.
∗

The corresponding author.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

