Learning from Group Comparisons: Exploiting
Higher Order Interactions
Yao Li
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
yaoli@ucdavis.edu

Minhao Cheng
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
mhcheng@ucla.edu

Kevin Fujii
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
kmfujii@ucdavis.edu

Fushing Hsieh
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
fhsieh@ucdavis.edu

Cho-Jui Hsieh
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of learning from group comparisons, with applications in
predicting outcomes of sports and online games. Most of the previous works in
this area focus on learning individual effects—they assume each player has an
underlying score, and the “ability” of the team is modeled by the sum of team
members’ scores. Therefore, current approaches cannot model deeper interaction
between team members: some players perform much better if they play together,
while some players perform poorly together. In this paper, we propose a new model
that takes the player-interaction effects into consideration. However, under certain
circumstances, the total number of individuals can be very large, and number
of player interactions grows quadratically, which makes learning intractable. In
this case, we propose a latent factor model, and show that the sample complexity
of our model is bounded under mild assumptions. Finally, we show that our
proposed models have much better prediction power on several E-sports datasets,
and furthermore can be used to reveal interesting patterns that cannot be discovered
by previous methods.

1

Introduction

Nowadays there are a lot of online games in the form of group comparisons, and this e-sports industry
is growing at an unexpected pace. For example, League of Legends (LoL) has attracted more than 11
million active players in each month; Dota 2 had a grand prize of near 25 million dollars last year. A
big crowd of players and matches certainly creates many challenges: for instance, how to design a
good matchmaking system to match two teams with similar strengths, and how to form a better team
composition to win the game. To answer these questions, we consider the core problem of modeling
group comparisons: given the results of previous games (each game is a group comparison between
two teams), how to predict the outcome of an unseen game?
All the previous work in this area focuses on the individual scoring model, that is, assuming each
player has an underlying score, and the "ability" of the team is modeled by the sum of team members’
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

