Structural Causal Bandits: Where to Intervene?
Sanghack Lee
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
lee2995@purdue.edu

Elias Bareinboim
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
eb@purdue.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of identifying the best action in a sequential decisionmaking setting when the reward distributions of the arms exhibit a non-trivial
dependence structure, which is governed by the underlying causal model of the
domain where the agent is deployed. In this setting, playing an arm corresponds to
intervening on a set of variables and setting them to specific values. In this paper,
we show that whenever the underlying causal model is not taken into account
during the decision-making process, the standard strategies of simultaneously
intervening on all variables or on all the subsets of the variables may, in general,
lead to suboptimal policies, regardless of the number of interventions performed
by the agent in the environment. We formally acknowledge this phenomenon and
investigate structural properties implied by the underlying causal model, which lead
to a complete characterization of the relationships between the arms’ distributions.
We leverage this characterization to build a new algorithm that takes as input a
causal structure and finds a minimal, sound, and complete set of qualified arms that
an agent should play to maximize its expected reward. We empirically demonstrate
that the new strategy learns an optimal policy and leads to orders of magnitude
faster convergence rates when compared with its causal-insensitive counterparts.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is one of the prototypical settings studied in the sequential
decision-making literature [Lai and Robbins, 1985, Even-Dar et al., 2006, Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi,
2012]. An agent needs to decide which arm to pull and receives a corresponding reward at each time
step while keeping the goal of maximizing its cumulative reward in the long run. The challenge is the
inherent trade-off between exploiting known arms versus exploring new reward opportunities [Sutton
and Barto, 1998, Szepesvári, 2010]. There is a wide range of assumptions underlying MABs, but
in most of the traditional settings, the arms’ rewards are assumed to be independent, which means
that knowing the reward distribution of one arm has no implication to the reward of the other arms.
Many strategies were developed to solve this problem, including classic algorithms such as ✏-greedy,
variants of UCB (Auer et al., 2002, Cappé et al., 2013), and Thompson sampling [Thompson, 1933].
Recently, the existence of some non-trivial dependencies among arms has been acknowledged in
the literature and studied under the rubric of structured bandits, which include settings such as
linear [Dani et al., 2008], combinatorial [Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2012], unimodal [Combes and
Proutiere, 2014], and Lipschitz [Magureanu et al., 2014], just to name a few. For example, a linear (or
combinatorial) bandit imposes that an action xt 2 Rd (or {0, 1}d ) at a time step t incurs a cost `>
t xt ,
where `t is a loss vector chosen by, e.g., an adversary. In this case, an index-based MAB algorithm,
oblivious to the structural properties, can be suboptimal.
In another line of investigation, rich environments with complex dependency structures are modeled
explicitly through the use of causal graphs, where nodes represent decisions and outcome variables,
and direct edges represent direct influence of one variable on another [Pearl, 2000]. Despite the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

