Data-Driven Clustering via Parameterized Lloyd’s
Families
Travis Dick
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
tdick@cs.cmu.edu

Maria-Florina Balcan
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

Colin White
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
crwhite@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Algorithms for clustering points in metric spaces is a long-studied area of research.
Clustering has seen a multitude of work both theoretically, in understanding the
approximation guarantees possible for many objective functions such as k-median
and k-means clustering, and experimentally, in finding the fastest algorithms and
seeding procedures for Lloyd’s algorithm. The performance of a given clustering
algorithm depends on the specific application at hand, and this may not be known
up front. For example, a “typical instance” may vary depending on the application,
and different clustering heuristics perform differently depending on the instance.
In this paper, we define an infinite family of algorithms generalizing Lloyd’s algorithm, with one parameter controlling the initialization procedure, and another
parameter controlling the local search procedure. This family of algorithms includes the celebrated k-means++ algorithm, as well as the classic farthest-first
traversal algorithm. We design efficient learning algorithms which receive samples
from an application-specific distribution over clustering instances and learn a nearoptimal clustering algorithm from the class. We show the best parameters vary
significantly across datasets such as MNIST, CIFAR, and mixtures of Gaussians.
Our learned algorithms never perform worse than k-means++, and on some datasets
we see significant improvements.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental problem in machine learning with applications in many areas including
text analysis, transportation networks, social networks, and so on. The high-level goal of clustering
is to divide a dataset into natural subgroups. For example, in text analysis we may want to divide
documents based on topic, and in social networks we might want to find communities. A common
approach to clustering is to set up an objective function and then approximately find the optimal
solution according to the objective. There has been a wealth of both theoretical and empirical research
in clustering using this approach Gonzalez [1985], Charikar et al. [1999], Arya et al. [2004], Arthur
and Vassilvitskii [2007], Kaufman and Rousseeuw [2009], Ostrovsky et al. [2012], Byrka et al. [2015],
Ahmadian et al. [2017].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

