Learning to Teach with Dynamic Loss Functions

Lijun Wu†∗, 2 Fei Tian†, 2 Yingce Xia, 3 Yang Fan? ,
2
Tao Qin, 1 Jianhuang Lai, 2 Tie-Yan Liu
1
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China 2 Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
1
wulijun3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2
{fetia, yingce.xia, taoqin, tie-yan.liu}@microsoft.com, 3 fyabc@mail.ustc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Teaching is critical to human society: it is with teaching that prospective students
are educated and human civilization can be inherited and advanced. A good
teacher not only provides his/her students with qualified teaching materials (e.g.,
textbooks), but also sets up appropriate learning objectives (e.g., course projects
and exams) considering different situations of a student. When it comes to artificial
intelligence, treating machine learning models as students, the loss functions that
are optimized act as perfect counterparts of the learning objective set by the teacher.
In this work, we explore the possibility of imitating human teaching behaviors
by dynamically and automatically outputting appropriate loss functions to train
machine learning models. Different from typical learning settings in which the loss
function of a machine learning model is predefined and fixed, in our framework, the
loss function of a machine learning model (we call it student) is defined by another
machine learning model (we call it teacher). The ultimate goal of teacher model
is cultivating the student to have better performance measured on development
dataset. Towards that end, similar to human teaching, the teacher, a parametric
model, dynamically outputs different loss functions that will be used and optimized
by its student model at different training stages. We develop an efficient learning
method for the teacher model that makes gradient based optimization possible,
exempt of the ineffective solutions such as policy optimization. We name our
method as “learning to teach with dynamic loss functions” (L2T-DLF for short).
Extensive experiments on real world tasks including image classification and neural
machine translation demonstrate that our method significantly improves the quality
of various student models.

1

Introduction

Teaching, which aims to help students learn new knowledge or skills effectively and efficiently, is
important to advance modern human civilization. In human society, the rapid growth of qualified
students not only relies on their intrinsic learning capability, but also, even more importantly, relies on
the substantial guidance from their teachers. The duties of teachers cover a wide spectrum: defining
the scope of learning (e.g., the knowledge and skills that we expect students to demonstrate by the end
of a course), choosing appropriate instructional materials (e.g., textbooks), and assessing the progress
of students (e.g., through course projects or exams). Effective teaching involves progressively and
dynamically refining the teaching strategy based on reflection and feedback from students.
Recently, the concept of teaching has been introduced into artificial intelligence (AI), so as to improve
the learning process of a machine learning model. Currently, teaching in AI mainly focuses on
∗
†

The work was done when the first and fourth authors were interns at Microsoft Research Asia.
The first two authors contribute equally to this work.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

