Deep Functional Dictionaries: Learning Consistent
Semantic Structures on 3D Models from Functions
Minhyuk Sung
Stanford University
mhsung@cs.stanford.edu

Hao Su
University of California San Diego
haosu@eng.ucsd.edu

Ronald Yu
University of California San Diego
ronaldyu@ucsd.edu

Leonidas Guibas
Stanford University
guibas@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Various 3D semantic attributes such as segmentation masks, geometric features,
keypoints, and materials can be encoded as per-point probe functions on 3D geometries. Given a collection of related 3D shapes, we consider how to jointly analyze
such probe functions over different shapes, and how to discover common latent
structures using a neural network — even in the absence of any correspondence
information. Our network is trained on point cloud representations of shape geometry and associated semantic functions on that point cloud. These functions express
a shared semantic understanding of the shapes but are not coordinated in any way.
For example, in a segmentation task, the functions can be indicator functions of
arbitrary sets of shape parts, with the particular combination involved not known to
the network. Our network is able to produce a small dictionary of basis functions
for each shape, a dictionary whose span includes the semantic functions provided
for that shape. Even though our shapes have independent discretizations and no
functional correspondences are provided, the network is able to generate latent
bases, in a consistent order, that reflect the shared semantic structure among the
shapes. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our technique in various segmentation
and keypoint selection applications.

1

Introduction

Understanding 3D shape semantics from a large collection of 3D geometries has been a popular
research direction over the past few years in both the graphics and vision communities. Many
applications such as autonomous driving, robotics, and bio-structure analysis depend on the ability to
analyze 3D shape collections and the information associated with them.
Background It is common practice to encode 3D shape information such as segmentation masks,
geometric features, keypoints, reflectance, materials, etc. as per-point functions defined on the shape
surface, known as probe functions. We are interested, in a joint analysis setting, in discovering
common latent structures among such probe functions defined on a collection of related 3D shapes.
With the emergence of large 3D shape databases [7], a variety of data-driven approaches, such as
cycle-consistency-based optimization [17] and spectral convolutional neural networks [6], have been
applied to a range of tasks including semi-supervised part co-segmentation [16, 17] and supervised
keypoint/region correspondence estimation [41].
However, one major obstacle in joint analysis is that each 3D shape has its own individual functional
space, and linking related functions across shapes is challenging. To clarify this point, we contrast
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

