Chaining Mutual Information and Tightening
Generalization Bounds
Amir R. Asadi1∗
1

Emmanuel Abbe1,2

Princeton University

2

Sergio Verdú

EPFL

Abstract
Bounding the generalization error of learning algorithms has a long history, which
yet falls short in explaining various generalization successes including those of deep
learning. Two important difficulties are (i) exploiting the dependencies between the
hypotheses, (ii) exploiting the dependence between the algorithm’s input and output.
Progress on the first point was made with the chaining method, originating from
the work of Kolmogorov, and used in the VC-dimension bound. More recently,
progress on the second point was made with the mutual information method by
Russo and Zou ’15. Yet, these two methods are currently disjoint. In this paper, we
introduce a technique to combine the chaining and mutual information methods, to
obtain a generalization bound that is both algorithm-dependent and that exploits the
dependencies between the hypotheses. We provide an example in which our bound
significantly outperforms both the chaining and the mutual information bounds. As
a corollary, we tighten Dudley’s inequality when the learning algorithm chooses its
output from a small subset of hypotheses with high probability.

1

Introduction

1.1

Motivation

Understanding the generalization phenomenon in machine learning has been a central question for
many years and revived in recent years with the success and mystery of deep learning: why do neural
nets generalize well, although they operate in a classically overparametrized setting? In particular,
classical generalization bounds do not explain this phenomenon (see e.g. [1], [2]). Even simpler
instances of successful machine learning problems and algorithms are not explained satisfactorily
with current generalization bounds, e.g. [2]. This paper aims at deriving tighter generalization bounds
for learning algorithms by combining ideas from information theory and from high dimensional
probability.
Generalization bounds have evolved throughout the years, starting from the basic union bound over
the hypothesis set, the refined union bound, Rademacher complexity, chaining and VC-dimension
[3], [4]; and algorithm-dependent bounds such as PAC-Bayesian bounds [5], uniform stability [6],
compression bounds [7], and recently, the mutual information bound [8].
We highlight two pitfalls among the key limitations of current bounds:
A. Ignoring the dependencies between the hypotheses. Consider the following example (which
we refer to as Example I): an algorithm observes G2 = (G1 , G2 ), where G1 and G2 are two
independent standard normal random variables; the hypothesis set H = {ht : t ∈ T } consists of
functions ht (G2 ) , ht, G2 i, where T , {t ∈ R2 : ktk2 = 1}. Suppose the algorithm is designed
∗

Corresponding author: aasadi@princeton.edu

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

