Breaking the Span Assumption Yields Fast
Finite-Sum Minimization∗
Robert Hannah†1 , Yanli Liu‡1 , Daniel O’Connor§2 , and Wotao Yin1¶
1

Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles
2
Department of Mathematics, University of San Francisco

Abstract
In this paper, we show that SVRG and SARAH can be modified to be
fundamentally faster than all of the other standard algorithms that minimize
the sum of n smooth functions, such as SAGA, SAG, SDCA, and SDCA
without duality. Most finite sum algorithms follow what we call the “span
assumption”: Their updates are in the span of a sequence of component
gradients chosen in a random IID fashion. In the big data regime, where the
condition number κ = O(n), the span assumption prevents algorithms from
converging to an approximate solution of accuracy  in less than n ln(1/)
iterations. SVRG and SARAH do not follow the span assumption since
they are updated with a hybrid of full-gradient and component-gradient
information. We show that because of this, they can be up to Ω(1 +
(ln(n/κ))+ ) times faster. In particular, to obtain an accuracy  = 1/nα for
κ = nβ and α, β ∈ (0, 1), modified SVRG requires O(n) iterations, whereas
algorithms that follow the span assumption require O(n ln(n)) iterations.
Moreover, we present lower bound results that show this speedup is optimal,
and provide analysis to help explain why this speedup exists. With the
understanding that the span assumption is a point of weakness of finite
sum algorithms, future work may purposefully exploit this to yield faster
algorithms in the big data regime.

1

Introduction

Finite sum minimization is an important class of optimization problem that appears in many
applications in machine learning and other areas. We consider the problem of finding an
approximation x̂ to the minimizer x∗ of functions F : Rd → R of the form:
n

1X
F (x) = f (x) + ψ(x) ,
fi (x) + ψ(x).
n i=1

(1.1)

We assume each function fi is smooth6 , and possibly nonconvex; ψ is proper, closed, and
convex; and the sum F is strongly convex and smooth. It has become well-known that under
a variety of assumptions, functions of this form can be minimized much faster with variance
∗

This work was supported in part by grants: AFOSR MURI FA9550-18-1-0502, NSF DMS1720237, and ONR N000141712162.
†
Corresponding author: RobertHannah89@gmail.com
‡
yanli@math.ucla.edu
§
daniel.v.oconnor@gmail.com
¶
WotaoYin@math.ucla.edu
6
A function f is L-smooth if it has an L-Lipschitz gradient ∇f
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

