Improving Explorability in Variational Inference with
Annealed Variational Objectives
Chin-Wei Huang†,?,1 Shawn Tan†,2 Alexandre Lacoste?,3 Aaron Courville†k,4
†
MILA, University of Montreal ? Element AI k CIFAR Fellow
1
chin-wei.huang@umontreal.ca, 2 jing.shan.shawn.tan@umontreal.ca
3
allac@elementai.com, 4 aaron.courville@umontreal.ca

Abstract
Despite the advances in the representational capacity of approximate distributions
for variational inference, the optimization process can still limit the density that is
ultimately learned. We demonstrate the drawbacks of biasing the true posterior to be
unimodal, and introduce Annealed Variational Objectives (AVO) into the training
of hierarchical variational methods. Inspired by Annealed Importance Sampling,
the proposed method facilitates learning by incorporating energy tempering into
the optimization objective. In our experiments, we demonstrate our method’s
robustness to deterministic warm up, and the benefits of encouraging exploration
in the latent space.

1

Introduction

Variational Inference (VI) has played an important role in Bayesian model uncertainty calibration and
in unsupervised representation learning. It is different from Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
methods, which rely on the Markov chain to reach an equilibrium; in VI one can easily draw i.i.d.
samples from the variational distribution, and enjoy lower variance in inference. On the other hand
VI is subject to bias on account of the introduction of the approximating variational distribution.
As pointed out by Turner and Sahani (2011), variational approximations tend not to propagate
uncertainty well. This inaccuracy and overconfidence in inference can result in bias in statistics of
certain features of the unobserved variable, such as marginal likelihood of data or the predictive
posterior in the context of a Bayesian model. We argue that this is especially true in the amortized VI
setups (Kingma and Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014), where one seeks to learn the representations
of the data in an efficient manner. We note that this sacrifices the chance of exploring different
configurations of representation in inference, and can bias and hurt the training of the model.
This bias is believed to be caused by the variational family that is used, such as factorial Gaussian for
computational tractability, which limits the expressiveness of the approximate posterior. In principle,
this can be alleviated by having a more rich family of distributions, but in practice, it remains a
challenging issue for optimization. To see this, we write the training objective of VI as the KL
divergence, also known as the variational free energy F, between the proposal q and the target
distribution f :
F(q) = Eq [log q(z)

log f (z)] = DKL (q||f ).

Due to the KL divergence, q gets penalized for allocating probability mass in regions where f
has low density. This behaviour of the objective can result in a cascade of consequences. The
variational distribution becomes biased towards being excessively confident, which, in turn, can
inhibit the variational approximation from escaping poor local minima, even when it has sufficient
representational capacity to accurately represent the posterior. This usually happens when the target
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

