Neuronal Capacity

Pierre Baldi
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697
pfbaldi@uci.edu

Roman Vershynin
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697
rvershyn@uci.edu

Abstract
We define the capacity of a learning machine to be the logarithm of the number
(or volume) of the functions it can implement. We review known results, and
derive new results, estimating the capacity of several neuronal models: linear and
polynomial threshold gates, linear and polynomial threshold gates with constrained
weights (binary weights, positive weights), and ReLU neurons. We also derive some
capacity estimates and bounds for fully recurrent networks, as well as feedforward
networks.

1

Introduction

A basic framework for the study of learning (Figure 1) consists in having a target function h that one
wishes to learn and a class of functions or hypothesis A that is available to the learner to implement
or approximate h. The class A, for instance, could be all the functions that can be implemented by a
given neural network architecture as the synaptic weights are varied. Obviously how well h can be
learnt critically depends on the class A and thus it is natural to seek to define a notion of “capacity”
for any class A. The goal of this paper is to define a notion of capacity and show how it can be
computed, or approximated, in the case of several neural models. As a first step, in this paper we
define the capacity of the class A to be the logarithm base two of the size or volume of A:
C(A) = log2 |A|

(1)

This is also the number of bits that can be communicated, or stored, by selecting an element of A.
Needless to say this notion of capacity is only a first step towards characterizing the capabilities of
A and which kinds of function it is capable of learning, a problem that has remained largely out of
reach for neural architectures.

Figure 1: Framework.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

