Neural Tangent Kernel:
Convergence and Generalization in Neural Networks

Arthur Jacot
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
arthur.jacot@netopera.net
Franck Gabriel
Imperial College London and École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
franckrgabriel@gmail.com
Clément Hongler
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
clement.hongler@gmail.com

Abstract
At initialization, artificial neural networks (ANNs) are equivalent to Gaussian
processes in the infinite-width limit (12; 9), thus connecting them to kernel methods.
We prove that the evolution of an ANN during training can also be described by a
kernel: during gradient descent on the parameters of an ANN, the network function
fθ (which maps input vectors to output vectors) follows the kernel gradient of the
functional cost (which is convex, in contrast to the parameter cost) w.r.t. a new
kernel: the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK). This kernel is central to describe the
generalization features of ANNs. While the NTK is random at initialization and
varies during training, in the infinite-width limit it converges to an explicit limiting
kernel and it stays constant during training. This makes it possible to study the
training of ANNs in function space instead of parameter space. Convergence of
the training can then be related to the positive-definiteness of the limiting NTK.
We then focus on the setting of least-squares regression and show that in the infinitewidth limit, the network function fθ follows a linear differential equation during
training. The convergence is fastest along the largest kernel principal components
of the input data with respect to the NTK, hence suggesting a theoretical motivation
for early stopping.
Finally we study the NTK numerically, observe its behavior for wide networks,
and compare it to the infinite-width limit.

1

Introduction

Artificial neural networks (ANNs) have achieved impressive results in numerous areas of machine
learning. While it has long been known that ANNs can approximate any function with sufficiently
many hidden neurons (7; 10), it is not known what the optimization of ANNs converges to. Indeed
the loss surface of neural networks optimization problems is highly non-convex: it has a high number
of saddle points which may slow down the convergence (4). A number of results (3; 13; 14) suggest
that for wide enough networks, there are very few “bad” local minima, i.e. local minima with much
higher cost than the global minimum. More recently, the investigation of the geometry of the loss
landscape at initialization has been the subject of a precise study (8). The analysis of the dynamics
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

