Online Robust Policy Learning in the Presence of
Unknown Adversaries
Aaron J. Havens, Zhanhong Jiang, Soumik Sarkar
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011
{ajhavens,zhjiang,soumiks}@iastate.edu

Abstract

The growing prospect of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) being used in cyberphysical systems has raised concerns around safety and robustness of autonomous
agents. Recent work on generating adversarial attacks have shown that it is computationally feasible for a bad actor to fool a DRL policy into behaving sub optimally.
Although certain adversarial attacks with speciﬁc attack models have been addressed, most studies are only interested in off-line optimization in the data space
(e.g., example ﬁtting, distillation). This paper introduces a Meta-Learned Advantage Hierarchy (MLAH) framework that is attack model-agnostic and more
suited to reinforcement learning, via handling the attacks in the decision space
(as opposed to data space) and directly mitigating learned bias introduced by the
adversary. In MLAH, we learn separate sub-policies (nominal and adversarial) in
an online manner, as guided by a supervisory master agent that detects the presence
of the adversary by leveraging the advantage function for the sub-policies. We
demonstrate that the proposed algorithm enables policy learning with signiﬁcantly
lower bias as compared to the state-of-the-art policy learning approaches even in
the presence of heavy state information attacks. We present algorithm analysis and
simulation results using popular OpenAI Gym environments.

1

Introduction

Real applications of cyber-physical systems that utilize learning techniques are already abundant
such as smart buildings [1], intelligent transportation networks [2], and intelligent surveillance and
reconnaissance [3]. In such systems, Reinforcement Learning (RL) [4, 5] is becoming a more
attractive formulation for control of complex and highly non-linear systems. The application of Deep
Learning (DL) has pushed recent advances in RL, namely Deep RL (DRL) [6, 7, 8]. Particularly
in 3D continuous control tasks, DL is an indispensable tool due to its ability to generalize high
dimensional state-action spaces in Policy Optimization algorithms [9], [10]. Notable variance
reduction and trust-region optimization strategies have only furthered the performance and stability
of DRL controllers [11].
Although DL is generally useful for these control problems, DL has inherent vulnerabilities in the
way that even very small perturbations in state inputs can result in signiﬁcant loss in policy learning
performance. This becomes a very reasonable cause for concern when contemplating DRL controllers
in real-world tasks where there exist, not only environmental uncertainty, but perhaps adversarial
actors that aims to fool a DRL agent into making a sub-optimal decision. During policy learning,
information perturbation can be generally thought of as a bias that can prevent the the agent from
effectively learning the desired policy. Previous attempts in mitigating adversarial attacks have
been successful against speciﬁc attack models, however, such robust training strategies are typically
off-line (e.g., using augmented datasets [12]) and may fail to adapt to different attacker strategies in
an online fashion. Recently [13] has taken a model-agnostic approach by predicting future states,
however it may be susceptible to multiple consecutive attacks.
Contributions: In this paper, we consider a policy learning problem where there are periods of
adversarial attacks (via corrupting state inputs) when the agent is continuously learning in its
environment. Our main objective is online mitigation of the bias introduced into the nominal
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

