Wasserstein Distributionally Robust Kalman Filtering

Soroosh Shafieezadeh-Abadeh
Viet Anh Nguyen
Daniel Kuhn
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
{soroosh.shafiee,viet-anh.nguyen,daniel.kuhn} @epfl.ch
Peyman Mohajerin Esfahani
Delft Center for Systems and Control, TU Delft, The Netherlands
P.MohajerinEsfahani@tudelft.nl

Abstract
We study a distributionally robust mean square error estimation problem over a
nonconvex Wasserstein ambiguity set containing only normal distributions. We
show that the optimal estimator and the least favorable distribution form a Nash
equilibrium. Despite the non-convex nature of the ambiguity set, we prove that
the estimation problem is equivalent to a tractable convex program. We further
devise a Frank-Wolfe algorithm for this convex program whose direction-searching
subproblem can be solved in a quasi-closed form. Using these ingredients, we
introduce a distributionally robust Kalman filter that hedges against model risk.

1

Introduction

The Kalman filter is the workhorse for the online tracking and estimation of a dynamical system’s
internal state based on indirect observations [1]. It has been applied with remarkable success in
areas as diverse as automatic control, brain-computer interaction, macroeconomics, robotics, signal
processing, weather forecasting and many more. The classical Kalman filter critically relies on
the availability of an accurate state-space model and is therefore susceptible to model risk. This
observation has led to several attempts to robustify the Kalman filter against modeling errors.
The H∞ -filter targets situations in which the statistics of the noise process is uncertain and where
one aims to minimize the worst case instead of the variance of the estimation error [3, 26]. This filter
bounds the H∞ -norm of the transfer function that maps the disturbances to the estimation errors.
However, in transient operation, the desired H∞ -performance is lost, and the filter may diverge unless
some (typically restrictive) positivity condition holds in each iteration. In set-valued estimation the
disturbance vectors are modeled through bounded sets such as ellipsoids [4, 22]. In this framework,
one attempts to construct the smallest ellipsoids around the state estimates that are consistent with the
observations and the exogenous disturbance ellipsoids. However, the resulting robust filters ignore
any distributional information and thus have a tendency to be over-conservative. A filter that is robust
against more general forms of (set-based) model uncertainty was first studied in [19]. This filter
iteratively minimizes the worst-case mean square error across all models in the vicinity of a nominal
state space model. While performing well in the face of large uncertainties, this filter may be too
conservative under small uncertainties. A generalized Kalman filter that addresses this shortcoming
and strikes the balance between nominal and worst-case performance has been proposed in [25].
A risk-sensitive Kalman filter is obtained by minimizing the moment-generating function instead
of the mean of the squared estimation error [24]. This risk-sensitive Kalman filter is equivalent
to a distributionally robust filter proposed in [12], which minimizes the worst-case mean square
error across all joint state-output distributions in a Kullback-Leibler (KL) ball around a nominal
distribution. Extensions to more general τ -divergence balls are investigated in [27].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

