SimplE Embedding for Link Prediction in Knowledge
Graphs

Seyed Mehran Kazemi
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada
smkazemi@cs.ubc.ca

David Poole
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada
poole@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Knowledge graphs contain knowledge about the world and provide a structured
representation of this knowledge. Current knowledge graphs contain only a small
subset of what is true in the world. Link prediction approaches aim at predicting
new links for a knowledge graph given the existing links among the entities. Tensor
factorization approaches have proved promising for such link prediction problems.
Proposed in 1927, Canonical Polyadic (CP) decomposition is among the first tensor
factorization approaches. CP generally performs poorly for link prediction as it
learns two independent embedding vectors for each entity, whereas they are really
tied. We present a simple enhancement of CP (which we call SimplE) to allow
the two embeddings of each entity to be learned dependently. The complexity
of SimplE grows linearly with the size of embeddings. The embeddings learned
through SimplE are interpretable, and certain types of background knowledge can
be incorporated into these embeddings through weight tying. We prove SimplE
is fully expressive and derive a bound on the size of its embeddings for full
expressivity. We show empirically that, despite its simplicity, SimplE outperforms
several state-of-the-art tensor factorization techniques. SimplE’s code is available
on GitHub at https://github.com/Mehran-k/SimplE.

1

Introduction

During the past two decades, several knowledge graphs (KGs) containing (perhaps probabilistic)
facts about the world have been constructed. These KGs have applications in several fields including
search, question answering, natural language processing, recommendation systems, etc. Due to the
enormous number of facts that could be asserted about our world and the difficulty in accessing and
storing all these facts, KGs are incomplete. However, it is possible to predict new links in a KG
based on the existing ones. Link prediction and several other related problems aiming at reasoning
with entities and relationships are studied under the umbrella of statistical relational learning (SRL)
[12, 31, 7]. The problem of link prediction for KGs is also known as knowledge graph completion. A
KG can be represented as a set of (head , relation, tail ) triples1 . The problem of KG completion can
be viewed as predicting new triples based on the existing ones.
Tensor factorization approaches have proved to be an effective SRL approach for KG completion
[29, 4, 39, 26]. These approaches consider embeddings for each entity and each relation. To predict
whether a triple holds, they use a function which takes the embeddings for the head and tail entities
and the relation as input and outputs a number indicating the predicted probability. Details and
discussions of these approaches can be found in several recent surveys [27, 43].
1
Triples are complete for relations.
(individual , property, value).

They are sometimes written as (subject, verb, object) or

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

