Backpropagation with Continuation Callbacks:
Foundations for Efficient and Expressive
Differentiable Programming

Fei Wang
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906

James Decker
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906

wang603@purdue.edu

decker31@purdue.edu

Xilun Wu
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906

Grégory Essertel
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47906

Tiark Rompf
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47906

wu636@purdue.edu

gesserte@purdue.edu

tiark@purdue.edu

Abstract
Training of deep learning models depends on gradient descent and end-to-end
differentiation. Under the slogan of differentiable programming, there is an increasing demand for efficient automatic gradient computation for emerging network
architectures that incorporate dynamic control flow, especially in NLP.
In this paper we propose an implementation of backpropagation using functions
with callbacks, where the forward pass is executed as a sequence of function
calls, and the backward pass as a corresponding sequence of function returns. A
key realization is that this technique of chaining callbacks is well known in the
programming languages community as continuation-passing style (CPS). Any
program can be converted to this form using standard techniques, and hence, any
program can be mechanically converted to compute gradients.
Our approach achieves the same flexibility as other reverse-mode automatic differentiation (AD) techniques, but it can be implemented without any auxiliary data
structures besides the function call stack, and it can easily be combined with graph
construction and native code generation techniques through forms of multi-stage
programming, leading to a highly efficient implementation that combines the performance benefits of define-then-run software frameworks such as TensorFlow
with the expressiveness of define-by-run frameworks such as PyTorch.

1

Introduction

Differentiable programming (Olah, 2015; LeCun, 2018) refers to a programming model where
neural networks are truly functional blocks with data-dependent branches and recursion, while
at the same time being trainable with backpropagation and gradient descent (Rumelhart et al.,
1986). A programming model of such generality requires both expressivity and efficiency from the
backpropagation framework. However, the current generation of tools such as TensorFlow (Abadi
et al., 2015), and PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017) trade off one for the other.
Inspired by the pattern of forward and backward passes, this paper proposes an implementation of
backpropagation using functions with callbacks. Each elementary operation becomes a function
call. The forward computation for this operation is performed on function entry, and the backward
computation on function exit. In between, the result of the forward computation is passed to a
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

