Almost Optimal Algorithms for Linear Stochastic
Bandits with Heavy-Tailed Payoffs

Han Shao∗
Xiaotian Yu∗
Irwin King
Michael R. Lyu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{hshao,xtyu,king,lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
In linear stochastic bandits, it is commonly assumed that payoffs are with subGaussian noises. In this paper, under a weaker assumption on noises, we study the
problem of linear stochastic bandits with heavy-tailed payoffs (LinBET), where
the distributions have finite moments of order 1 + ϵ, for some ϵ ∈ (0, 1]. We
1
rigorously analyze the regret lower bound of LinBET as Ω(T 1+ϵ ), implying
that
√
finite moments of order 2 (i.e., finite variances) yield the bound of Ω( T ), with T
being the total number of rounds to play bandits. The provided lower bound also
indicates that the state-of-the-art algorithms for LinBET are far from optimal. By
adopting median of means with a well-designed allocation of decisions and truncation based on historical information, we develop two novel bandit algorithms,
where the regret upper bounds match the lower bound up to polylogarithmic factors. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to solve LinBET optimally in
the sense of the polynomial order on T . Our proposed algorithms are evaluated
based on synthetic datasets, and outperform the state-of-the-art results.

1 Introduction
The decision-making model named Multi-Armed Bandits (MAB), where at each time step an algorithm chooses an arm among a given set of arms and then receives a stochastic payoff with respect
to the chosen arm, elegantly characterizes the tradeoff between exploration and exploitation in sequential learning. The algorithm usually aims at maximizing cumulative payoffs over a sequence of
rounds. A natural and important variant of MAB is linear stochastic bandits with the expected payoff
of each arm satisfying a linear mapping from the arm information to a real number. The model of
linear stochastic bandits enjoys some good theoretical properties, e.g., there exists a closed-form solution of the linear mapping at each time step in light of ridge regression. Many practical applications
take advantage of MAB and its variants to control decision performance, e.g., online personalized
recommendations (Li et al., 2010) and resource allocations (Lattimore et al., 2014).
In most previous studies of MAB and linear stochastic bandits, a common assumption is that noises
in observed payoffs are sub-Gaussian conditional on historical information (Abbasi-Yadkori et al.,
2011; Bubeck et al., 2012), which encompasses cases of all bounded payoffs and many unbounded
payoffs, e.g., payoffs of an arm following a Gaussian distribution. However, there do exist practical
scenarios of non-sub-Gaussian noises in observed payoffs for sequential decisions, such as highprobability extreme returns in investments for financial markets (Cont and Bouchaud, 2000) and
fluctuations of neural oscillations (Roberts et al., 2015), which are called heavy-tailed noises. Thus,
it is significant to completely study theoretical behaviours of sequential decisions in the case of
heavy-tailed noises.
∗

The first two authors contributed equally.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

