On GANs and GMMs
Eitan Richardson
School of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem, Israel
eitanrich@cs.huji.ac.il

Yair Weiss
School of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem, Israel
yweiss@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract
A longstanding problem in machine learning is to find unsupervised methods that
can learn the statistical structure of high dimensional signals. In recent years,
GANs have gained much attention as a possible solution to the problem, and in
particular have shown the ability to generate remarkably realistic high resolution
sampled images. At the same time, many authors have pointed out that GANs
may fail to model the full distribution ("mode collapse") and that using the learned
models for anything other than generating samples may be very difficult.
In this paper, we examine the utility of GANs in learning statistical models of
images by comparing them to perhaps the simplest statistical model, the Gaussian
Mixture Model. First, we present a simple method to evaluate generative models
based on relative proportions of samples that fall into predetermined bins. Unlike
previous automatic methods for evaluating models, our method does not rely
on an additional neural network nor does it require approximating intractable
computations. Second, we compare the performance of GANs to GMMs trained
on the same datasets. While GMMs have previously been shown to be successful
in modeling small patches of images, we show how to train them on full sized
images despite the high dimensionality. Our results show that GMMs can generate
realistic samples (although less sharp than those of GANs) but also capture the
full distribution, which GANs fail to do. Furthermore, GMMs allow efficient
inference and explicit representation of the underlying statistical structure. Finally,
we discuss how GMMs can be used to generate sharp images. 1

1

Introduction

Natural images take up only a tiny fraction of the space of possible images. Finding a way to
explicitly model the statistical structure of such images is a longstanding problem with applications
to engineering and to computational neuroscience. Given the abundance of training data, this would
also seem a natural problem for unsupervised learning methods and indeed many papers apply
unsupervised learning to small patches of images [42, 4, 32]. Recent advances in deep learning,
have also enabled unsupervised learning of full sized images using various models: Variational Auto
Encoders [21, 17], PixelCNN [40, 39, 23, 38], Normalizing Flow [9, 8] and Flow GAN [14]. 2
Perhaps the most dramatic success in modeling full images has been achieved by Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [13], which can learn to generate remarkably realistic samples at high
resolution [34, 26], (Fig. 1). A recurring criticism of GANs, at the same time, is that while they are
excellent at generating pretty pictures, they often fail to model the entire data distribution, a phenomenon usually referred to as mode collapse: “Because of the mode collapse problem, applications
1

Code is available at https://github.com/eitanrich/gans-n-gmms
Flow GAN discusses a full-image GMM, but does not actually learn a meaningful model: the authors use a
“GMM consisting of m isotropic Gaussians with equal weights centered at each of the m training points”.
2

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

