Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning via
Double Averaging Primal-Dual Optimization

Hoi-To Wai
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, Hong Kong
htwai@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Zhuoran Yang
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ, USA
zy6@princeton.edu

Zhaoran Wang
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL, USA
zhaoranwang@gmail.com

Mingyi Hong
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN, USA
mhong@umn.edu

Abstract
Despite the success of single-agent reinforcement learning, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) remains challenging due to complex interactions between
agents. Motivated by decentralized applications such as sensor networks, swarm
robotics, and power grids, we study policy evaluation in MARL, where agents with
jointly observed state-action pairs and private local rewards collaborate to learn the
value of a given policy.
In this paper, we propose a double averaging scheme, where each agent iteratively
performs averaging over both space and time to incorporate neighboring gradient
information and local reward information, respectively. We prove that the proposed
algorithm converges to the optimal solution at a global geometric rate. In particular,
such an algorithm is built upon a primal-dual reformulation of the mean squared
projected Bellman error minimization problem, which gives rise to a decentralized
convex-concave saddle-point problem. To the best of our knowledge, the proposed
double averaging primal-dual optimization algorithm is the first to achieve fast
finite-time convergence on decentralized convex-concave saddle-point problems.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning combined with deep neural networks recently achieves superhuman performance on various challenging tasks such as video games and board games [34, 45]. In these tasks,
an agent uses deep neural networks to learn from the environment and adaptively makes optimal
decisions. Despite the success of single-agent reinforcement learning, multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) remains challenging, since each agent interacts with not only the environment but
also other agents. In this paper, we study collaborative MARL with local rewards. In this setting, all
the agents share a joint state whose transition dynamics is determined together by the local actions
of individual agents. However, each agent only observes its own reward, which may differ from
that of other agents. The agents aim to collectively maximize the global sum of local rewards. To
collaboratively make globally optimal decisions, the agents need to exchange local information. Such
a setting of MARL is ubiquitous in large-scale applications such as sensor networks [42, 9], swarm
robotics [23, 8], and power grids [3, 13].
A straightforward idea is to set up a central node that collects and broadcasts the reward information,
and assigns the action of each agent. This reduces the multi-agent problem into a single-agent one.
However, the central node is often unscalable, susceptible to malicious attacks, and even infeasible
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

