Variational Inverse Control with Events: A General
Framework for Data-Driven Reward Definition
Justin Fu∗ Avi Singh∗ Dibya Ghosh Larry Yang Sergey Levine
University of California, Berkeley
{justinfu, avisingh, dibyaghosh, larrywyang, svlevine}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
The design of a reward function often poses a major practical challenge to realworld applications of reinforcement learning. Approaches such as inverse reinforcement learning attempt to overcome this challenge, but require expert demonstrations, which can be difficult or expensive to obtain in practice. We propose
variational inverse control with events (VICE), which generalizes inverse reinforcement learning methods to cases where full demonstrations are not needed, such as
when only samples of desired goal states are available. Our method is grounded in
an alternative perspective on control and reinforcement learning, where an agent’s
goal is to maximize the probability that one or more events will happen at some
point in the future, rather than maximizing cumulative rewards. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our methods on continuous control tasks, with a focus on highdimensional observations like images where rewards are hard or even impossible
to specify.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown remarkable promise in recent years, with results on a range
of complex tasks such as robotic control (Levine et al., 2016) and playing video games (Mnih
et al., 2015) from raw sensory input. RL algorithms solve these problems by learning a policy
that maximizes a reward function that is considered as part of the problem formulation. There is
little practical guidance that is provided in the theory of RL about how these rewards should be
designed. However, the design of the reward function is in practice critical for good results, and
reward misspecification can easily cause unintended behavior (Amodei et al., 2016). For example, a
vacuum cleaner robot rewarded to pick up dirt could exploit the reward by repeatedly dumping dirt on
the ground and picking it up again (Russell & Norvig, 2003). Additionally, it is often difficult to write
down a reward function at all. For example, when learning policies from high-dimensional visual
observations, practitioners often resort to using motion capture (Peng et al., 2017) or specialized
computer vision systems (Rusu et al., 2017) to obtain rewards.
As an alternative to reward specification, imitation learning (Argall et al., 2009) and inverse reinforcement learning (Ng & Russell, 2000) instead seek to mimic expert behavior. However, such
approaches require an expert to show how to solve a task. We instead propose a novel problem
formulation, variational inverse control with events (VICE), which generalizes inverse reinforcement
learning to alternative forms of expert supervision. In particular, we consider cases when we have
examples of a desired final outcome, rather than full demonstrations, so the expert only needs to
show what the desired outcome of a task is (see Figure 1). A straightforward way to make use of
these desired outcomes is to train a classifier (Pinto & Gupta, 2016; Tung et al., 2018) to distinguish
desired and undesired states. However, for these approaches it is unclear how to correctly sample
negatives and whether using this classifier as a reward will result in the intended behavior, since an
∗

equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

