Nonlocal Neural Networks, Nonlocal Diffusion and
Nonlocal Modeling

Yunzhe Tao
School of Engineering and Applied Science
Columbia University, USA
y.tao@columbia.edu

Qi Sun
BCSRC & USTC
Beijing, China
sunqi@csrc.ac.cn

Qiang Du
School of Engineering and Applied Science
Columbia University, USA
qd2125@columbia.edu

Wei Liu
Tencent AI Lab
Shenzhen, China
wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
Nonlocal neural networks [25] have been proposed and shown to be effective in
several computer vision tasks, where the nonlocal operations can directly capture
long-range dependencies in the feature space. In this paper, we study the nature of
diffusion and damping effect of nonlocal networks by doing spectrum analysis on
the weight matrices of the well-trained networks, and then propose a new formulation of the nonlocal block. The new block not only learns the nonlocal interactions
but also has stable dynamics, thus allowing deeper nonlocal structures. Moreover,
we interpret our formulation from the general nonlocal modeling perspective, where
we make connections between the proposed nonlocal network and other nonlocal
models, such as nonlocal diffusion process and Markov jump process.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks, especially convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [15] and recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) [8], have been widely used in a variety of subjects [16]. However, traditional
neural network blocks aim to learn the feature representations in a local sense. For example, both
convolutional and recurrent operations process a local neighborhood (several nearest neighboring
neurons) in either space or time. Therefore, the long-range dependencies can only be captured
when these operations are applied recursively, while those long-range dependencies are sometimes
significant in practical learning problems, such as image or video classification, text summarization,
and financial market analysis [1, 6, 22, 27].
To address the above issue, a nonlocal neural network [25] has been proposed recently, which is able
to improve the performance on a couple of computer vision tasks. In contrast to convolutional or
recurrent blocks, nonlocal operations [25] capture long-range dependencies directly by computing
interactions between each pair of positions in the feature space. Generally speaking, nonlocality is
ubiquitous in nature, and the nonlocal models and algorithms have been studied in various domains
of physical, biological and social sciences [2, 5, 7, 23, 24].
In this work, we aim to study the nature of nonlocal networks, namely, what the nonlocal blocks
have exactly learned through training on a real-world task. By doing spectrum analysis on the
weight matrices of the stacked nonlocal blocks obtained after training, we can largely quantify the
characteristics of the damping effect of nonlocal blocks in a certain network.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

