Learning Sparse Neural Networks
via Sensitivity-Driven Regularization

Enzo Tartaglione
Politecnico di Torino
Torino, Italy
tartaglioneenzo@gmail.com

Skjalg Lepsøy
Nuance Communications
Torino, Italy

Attilio Fiandrotti
Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy
Télécom ParisTech, Paris, France

Gianluca Francini
Telecom Italia
Torino, Italy

Abstract
The ever-increasing number of parameters in deep neural networks poses challenges
for memory-limited applications. Regularize-and-prune methods aim at meeting
these challenges by sparsifying the network weights. In this context we quantify
the output sensitivity to the parameters (i.e. their relevance to the network output)
and introduce a regularization term that gradually lowers the absolute value of
parameters with low sensitivity. Thus, a very large fraction of the parameters
approach zero and are eventually set to zero by simple thresholding. Our method
surpasses most of the recent techniques both in terms of sparsity and error rates. In
some cases, the method reaches twice the sparsity obtained by other techniques at
equal error rates.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks achieve state-of-the-art performance in a number of tasks by means of complex
architectures. Let us define the complexity of a neural network as the number of its learnable
parameters. The complexity of architectures such as VGGNet [1] and the SENet-154 [2] lies in the
order of 108 parameters, hindering their deployability on portable and embedded devices, where
storage, memory and bandwidth resources are limited.
The complexity of a neural network can be reduced by promoting sparse interconnection structures.
Empirical evidence shows that deep architectures often require to be over-parametrized (having
more parameters than training examples) in order to be successfully trained [3, 4, 5]. However, once
input-output relations are properly represented by a complex network, such a network may form a
starting point in order to find a simpler, sparser, but sufficient architecture [4, 5].
Recently, regularization has been proposed as a principle for promoting sparsity during training. In
general, regularization replaces unstable (ill-posed) problems with nearby and stable (well-posed)
ones by introducing additional information about what a solution should be like [6]. This is often
done by adding a term R to the original objective function L. Letting θ denote the network parameters
and λ the regularization factor, the problem
minimize L(θ) with respect to θ

(1)

minimize L(θ) + λR(θ) with respect to θ.

(2)

is recasted as

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

