Synthesized Policies for Transfer and Adaptation
across Tasks and Environments
Hexiang Hu ∗
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
hexiangh@usc.edu

Liyu Chen ∗
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
liyuc@usc.edu

Boqing Gong
Tencent AI Lab
Bellevue, WA 98004
boqinggo@outlook.com

Fei Sha †
Netflix
Los Angeles, CA 90028
fsha@netflix.com

Abstract
The ability to transfer in reinforcement learning is key towards building an agent
of general artificial intelligence. In this paper, we consider the problem of learning
to simultaneously transfer across both environments (ε) and tasks (τ ), probably
more importantly, by learning from only sparse (ε, τ ) pairs out of all the possible
combinations. We propose a novel compositional neural network architecture
which depicts a meta rule for composing policies from environment and task
embeddings. Notably, one of the main challenges is to learn the embeddings jointly
with the meta rule. We further propose new training methods to disentangle the
embeddings, making them both distinctive signatures of the environments and
tasks and effective building blocks for composing the policies. Experiments on
GRIDWORLD and THOR , of which the agent takes as input an egocentric view,
show that our approach gives rise to high success rates on all the (ε, τ ) pairs after
learning from only 40% of them.

1

Introduction

Remarkable progress has been made in reinforcement learning in the last few years [16, 21, 26].
Among these, an agent learns to discover its best policy of actions to accomplish a task, by interacting
with the environment. However, the skills the agent learns are often tied for a specific pair of
the environment (ε) and the task (τ ). Consequently, when the environment changes even slightly,
the agent’s performance deteriorates drastically [11, 28]. Thus, being able to swiftly adapt to new
environments and transfer skills to new tasks is crucial for the agents to act in real-world settings.
How can we achieve swift adaptation and transfer? In this paper, we consider several progressively
difficult settings. In the first setting, the agent needs to adapt and transfer to a new pair of environment and task, when the agent has been exposed to the environment and the task before (but not
simultaneously). Our goal is to use as few as possible seen pairs (i.e., a subset out of all possible (ε,
τ ) combinations, as sparse as possible) to train the agent.
In the second setting, the agent needs to adapt and transfer across either environments or tasks, to
those previously unseen by the agent. For instance, a home service robot needs to adapt from one
home to another one but essentially accomplish the same sets of tasks, or the robot learns new tasks
in the same home. In the third setting, the agent has encountered neither the environment nor the task
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
On leave from University of Southern California (feisha@usc.edu).

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

