Learning Plannable Representations with Causal
InfoGAN
Thanard Kurutach∗1

Aviv Tamar∗1

Ge Yang2

Stuart Russell1

Pieter Abbeel1

Abstract
In recent years, deep generative models have been shown to ‘imagine’ convincing
high-dimensional observations such as images, audio, and even video, learning
directly from raw data. In this work, we ask how to imagine goal-directed visual
plans – a plausible sequence of observations that transition a dynamical system
from its current configuration to a desired goal state, which can later be used as
a reference trajectory for control. We focus on systems with high-dimensional
observations, such as images, and propose an approach that naturally combines
representation learning and planning. Our framework learns a generative model of
sequential observations, where the generative process is induced by a transition
in a low-dimensional planning model, and an additional noise. By maximizing
the mutual information between the generated observations and the transition in
the planning model, we obtain a low-dimensional representation that best explains
the causal nature of the data. We structure the planning model to be compatible
with efficient planning algorithms, and we propose several such models based on
either discrete or continuous states. Finally, to generate a visual plan, we project
the current and goal observations onto their respective states in the planning model,
plan a trajectory, and then use the generative model to transform the trajectory to
a sequence of observations. We demonstrate our method on imagining plausible
visual plans of rope manipulation3 .

1

Introduction

For future robots to perform general tasks in unstructured environments such as homes or hospitals,
they must be able to reason about their domain and plan their actions accordingly. In AI literature,
this general problem has been investigated under two main paradigms – automated planning and
scheduling [34] (henceforth, AI planning) and reinforcement learning [41] (RL).
Classical work in AI planning has drawn on the remarkable capability of humans to perform long-term
reasoning and planning by using abstract representations of the world. For example, humans might
think of "cup on table" as a state rather than detailed coordinates or a precise image of such a scene.
Interestingly, powerful classical planners exist that can reason very effectively with these kinds of
representations, as demonstrated by results in the International Planning Competition [44]. However,
such logical representations of the world can be difficult to specify correctly. As an example, consider
designing a logical representation for the state of a deformable object such as a rope. Moreover,
logical representations that are not grounded a priori in real-world observation require a perception
module that can identify, for example, exactly when the cup is considered "on the table".
In RL, on the other hand, a task is solved directly through trial and error, guided by a manually
provided reward signal. Recent advances in model-free RL (e.g., [28, 23]) have shown remarkable
success in learning policies that act directly on high-dimensional observations, such as raw images.
Designing a reward function that depends on such observations can be challenging, however, and
most recent studies either relied on domains where the reward can be instrumented [28, 23, 33], or
1

Berkeley AI Research, University of California, Berkeley
Department of Physics, University of Chicago
3
Code is available online at http://github.com/thanard/causal-infogan.

2

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

