Generating Informative and Diverse Conversational
Responses via Adversarial Information Maximization

Yizhe Zhang
Michel Galley
Jianfeng Gao
Zhe Gan
Xiujun Li
Chris Brockett
Bill Dolan
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA
{yizzhang,mgalley,jfgao,zhgan,xiul,chrisbkt,billdol}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Responses generated by neural conversational models tend to lack informativeness
and diversity. We present a novel adversarial learning method, called Adversarial
Information Maximization (AIM) model, to address these two related but distinct problems. To foster response diversity, we leverage adversarial training that
allows distributional matching of synthetic and real responses. To improve informativeness, we explicitly optimize a variational lower bound on pairwise mutual
information between query and response. Empirical results from automatic and human evaluations demonstrate that our methods significantly boost informativeness
and diversity.

1

Introduction

Neural conversational models are effective in generating coherent and relevant responses [1, 2, 3, 4,
etc.]. However, the maximum-likelihood objective commonly used in these neural models fosters
generation of responses that average out the responses in the training data, resulting in the production
of safe but bland responses [5].
We argue that this problem is in fact twofold. The responses of a system may be diverse but
uninformative (e.g.,“I don’t know”, “I haven’t a clue”, “I haven’t the foggiest”, “I couldn’t tell you”),
and conversely informative but not diverse (e.g., always giving the same generic responses such as “I
like music”, but never “I like jazz”). A major challenge, then, is to strike the right balance between
informativeness and diversity. On the one hand, we seek informative responses that are relevant and
fully address the input query. Mathematically, this can be measured via Mutual Information (MI) [5],
by computing the reduction in uncertainty about the query given the response. On the other hand,
diversity can help produce responses that are more varied and unpredictable, which contributes to
making conversations seem more natural and human-like.
The MI approach of [5] conflated the problems of producing responses that are informative and
diverse, and subsequent work has not attempted to address the distinction explicitly. Researchers
have applied Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [6] to neural response generation [7, 8].
The equilibrium for the GAN objective is achieved when the synthetic data distribution matches
the real data distribution. Consequently, the adversarial objective discourages generating responses
that demonstrate less variation than human responses. However, while GANs help reduce the
level of blandness, the technique was not developed for the purpose of explicitly improving either
informativeness or diversity.
We propose a new adversarial learning method, Adversarial Information Maximization (AIM),
for training end-to-end neural response generation models that produce informative and diverse
conversational responses. Our approach exploits adversarial training to encourage diversity, and
explicitly maximizes a Variational Information Maximization Objective (VIMO) [9, 10] to produce
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

