Communication Efficient Parallel Algorithms for
Optimization on Manifolds

Bayan Saparbayeva
Department of Applied and
Computational Mathematics and Statistics
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, Indiana 46556, USA
bsaparba@nd.edu

Michael Minyi Zhang
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA
mz8@cs.princeton.edu

Lizhen Lin
Department of Applied and
Computational Mathematics and Statistics
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, Indiana 46556, USA
lizhen.lin@nd.edu

Abstract
The last decade has witnessed an explosion in the development of models, theory
and computational algorithms for “big data” analysis. In particular, distributed
computing has served as a natural and dominating paradigm for statistical inference.
However, the existing literature on parallel inference almost exclusively focuses
on Euclidean data and parameters. While this assumption is valid for many applications, it is increasingly more common to encounter problems where the data
or the parameters lie on a non-Euclidean space, like a manifold for example. Our
work aims to fill a critical gap in the literature by generalizing parallel inference
algorithms to optimization on manifolds. We show that our proposed algorithm is
both communication efficient and carries theoretical convergence guarantees. In
addition, we demonstrate the performance of our algorithm to the estimation of
Fréchet means on simulated spherical data and the low-rank matrix completion
problem over Grassmann manifolds applied to the Netflix prize data set.

1

Introduction

A natural representation for many statistical and machine learning problems is to assume the parameter
of interest lies on a more general space than the Euclidean space. Typical examples of this situation
include diffusion matrices in large scale diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) which are 3 × 3 positive
definite matrices, now commonly used in neuroimaging for clinical trials [1]. In computer vision,
images are often preprocessed or reduced to a collection of subspaces [11, 27] or, a digital image
can also be represented by a set of k -landmarks, forming landmark based shapes [13]. One may also
encounter data that are stored as orthonormal frames [8], surfaces[15], curves[16], and networks [14].
In addition, parallel inference has become popular in overcoming the computational burden arising
from the storage, processing and computation of big data, resulting in a vast literature in statistics and
machine learning dedicated to this topic. The general scheme in the frequentist setting is to divide the
data into subsets, obtain estimates from each subset which are combined to form an ultimate estimate
for inference [9, 30, 17]. In the Bayesian setting, the subset posterior distributions are first obtained
in the dividing step, and these subset posterior measures or the MCMC samples from each subset
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

