Unsupervised Text Style Transfer using Language
Models as Discriminators
Zichao Yang1 , Zhiting Hu1 , Chris Dyer2 , Eric P. Xing1 , Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 DeepMind
{zichaoy, zhitingh, epxing, tberg}@cs.cmu.edu
cdyer@google.com

Abstract
Binary classifiers are often employed as discriminators in GAN-based unsupervised
style transfer systems to ensure that transferred sentences are similar to sentences
in the target domain. One difficulty with this approach is that the error signal
provided by the discriminator can be unstable and is sometimes insufficient to train
the generator to produce fluent language. In this paper, we propose a new technique
that uses a target domain language model as the discriminator, providing richer
and more stable token-level feedback during the learning process. We train the
generator to minimize the negative log likelihood (NLL) of generated sentences,
evaluated by the language model. By using a continuous approximation of discrete
sampling under the generator, our model can be trained using back-propagation
in an end-to-end fashion. Moreover, our empirical results show that when using
a language model as a structured discriminator, it is possible to forgo adversarial
steps during training, making the process more stable. We compare our model
with previous work that uses convolutional networks (CNNs) as discriminators, as
well as a broad set of other approaches. Results show that the proposed method
achieves improved performance on three tasks: word substitution decipherment,
sentiment modification, and related language translation.

1

Introduction

Recently there has been growing interest in designing natural language generation (NLG) systems
that allow for control over various attributes of generated text – for example, sentiment and other
stylistic properties. Such controllable NLG models have wide applications in dialogues systems (Wen
et al., 2016) and other natural language interfaces. Recent successes for neural text generation
models in machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2014), image captioning (Vinyals et al., 2015) and
dialogue (Vinyals and Le, 2015; Wen et al., 2016) have relied on massive parallel data. However,
for many other domains, only non-parallel data – which includes collections of sentences from each
domain without explicit correspondence – is available. Many text style transfer problems fall into this
category. The goal for these tasks is to transfer a sentence with one attribute to a sentence with an
another attribute, but with the same style-independent content, trained using only non-parallel data.
Unsupervised text style transfer requires learning disentangled representations of attributes (e.g., negative/positive sentiment, plaintext/ciphertext orthography) and underlying content. This is challenging
because the two interact in subtle ways in natural language and it can even be hard to disentangle them
with parallel data. The recent development of deep generative models like variational auto-encoders
(VAEs) (Kingma and Welling, 2013) and generative adversarial networks(GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) have made learning disentangled representations from non-parallel data possible. However,
despite their rapid progress in computer vision—for example, generating photo-realistic images (Radford et al., 2015), learning interpretable representations (Chen et al., 2016b), and translating im32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

