Breaking the Activation Function Bottleneck
through Adaptive Parameterization

Sebastian Flennerhag1, 2
Hujun Yin1, 2
John Keane1
Mark Elliot1
1
2
University of Manchester
The Alan Turing Institute
sflennerhag@turing.ac.uk {hujun.yin, john.keane, mark.elliot}@manchester.ac.uk

Abstract
Standard neural network architectures are non-linear only by virtue of a simple
element-wise activation function, making them both brittle and excessively large.
In this paper, we consider methods for making the feed-forward layer more flexible
while preserving its basic structure. We develop simple drop-in replacements that
learn to adapt their parameterization conditional on the input, thereby increasing
statistical efficiency significantly. We present an adaptive LSTM that advances the
state of the art for the Penn Treebank and WikiText-2 word-modeling tasks while
using fewer parameters and converging in less than half the number of iterations.

1

Introduction

While a two-layer feed-forward neural network is sufficient to approximate any function (Cybenko,
1989; Hornik, 1991), in practice much deeper networks are necessary to learn a good approximation
to a complex function. In fact, a network tends to generalize better the larger it is, often to the point
of having more parameters than there are data points in the training set (Canziani et al., 2016; Novak
et al., 2018; Frankle & Carbin, 2018).
One reason why neural networks are so large is that they bias towards linear behavior: if the activation
function is largely linear, so will the hidden layer be. Common activation functions, such as the
Sigmoid, Tanh, and ReLU all behave close to linear over large ranges of their domain. Consequently,
for a randomly sampled input to break linearity, layers must be wide and the network deep to ensure
some elements lie in non-linear regions of the activation function. To overcome the bias towards
linear behavior, more sophisticated activation functions have been designed (Clevert et al., 2015; He
et al., 2015; Klambauer et al., 2017; Dauphin et al., 2017). However, these still limit all non-linearity
to sit in the activation function.
We instead propose adaptive parameterization, a method for learning to adapt the parameters of the
affine transformation to a given input. In particular, we present a generic adaptive feed-forward layer
that retains the basic structure of the standard feed-forward layer while significantly increasing the
capacity to model non-linear patterns. We develop specific instances of adaptive parameterization
that can be trained end-to-end jointly with the network using standard backpropagation, are simple to
implement, and run at minimal additional cost.
Empirically, we find that adaptive parameterization can learn non-linear patterns where a non-adaptive
baseline fails, or outperform the baseline using 30–50% fewer parameters. In particular, we develop
an adaptive version of the Long Short-Term Memory model (LSTM; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997; Gers et al., 2000) that enjoys both faster convergence and greater statistical efficiency.
The adaptive LSTM advances the state of the art for the Penn Treebank and WikiText-2 word modeling
tasks using ~20–30% fewer parameters and converging in less than half as many iterations.1 We
1

Code available at https://github.com/flennerhag/alstm.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

