Post: Device Placement with Cross-Entropy
Minimization and Proximal Policy Optimization

Yuanxiang Gao1,2
Li Chen 3
Baochun Li 1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto
2
School of Information and Communication Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
School of Computing and Informatics, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
yuanxiang@ece.utoronto.ca, li.chen@louisiana.edu, bli@ece.toronto.edu

1

Abstract
Training deep neural networks requires an exorbitant amount of computation resources, including a heterogeneous mix of GPU and CPU devices. It is critical
to place operations in a neural network on these devices in an optimal way, so
that the training process can complete within the shortest amount of time. The
state-of-the-art uses reinforcement learning to learn placement skills by repeatedly performing Monte-Carlo experiments. However, due to its equal treatment
of placement samples, we argue that there remains ample room for significant
improvements. In this paper, we propose a new joint learning algorithm, called
Post, that integrates cross-entropy minimization and proximal policy optimization
to achieve theoretically guaranteed optimal efficiency. In order to incorporate the
cross-entropy method as a sampling technique, we propose to represent placements
using discrete probability distributions, which allows us to estimate an optimal
probability mass by maximal likelihood estimation, a powerful tool with the best
possible efficiency. We have implemented Post in the Google Cloud platform, and
our extensive experiments with several popular neural network training benchmarks
have demonstrated clear evidence of superior performance: with the same amount
of learning time, it leads to placements that have training times up to 63.7% shorter
over the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

With an increasing demand of computing resources to train today’s deep neural networks (DNNs), it
becomes typical to leverage a heterogeneous mix of both CPU and GPU devices [1, 2]. In such a
distributed training environment, it is important to specify how each operation in a neural network
should be placed on each of these CPU and GPU devices, referred to as the device placement problem.
The objective is to find a placement of operations on devices, so that the time required to train the
neural network can be minimized.
In the recent literature, Mirhoseini et al. [3, 4] proposed to solve the device placement problem with
a reinforcement learning approach, based on the policy gradient method [5]. Unfortunately, this
method is inefficient because it relies on the Monte Carlo method to generate samples, which treats
each data sample equally without emphasizing important ones. To improve the learning efficiency, an
importance sampling technique, called the cross-entropy method [6, 7, 8], becomes promising, due to
its theoretical guarantee on the optimal efficiency when generating samples [9].
In this paper, our first contribution is to apply the importance sampling technique in device placement
and model the problem as a cross-entropy minimization problem. An example of the placement
probability distribution for a DNN with two operations is shown in Fig. 1. Each possible placement is
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

