Online Learning with an Unknown Fairness Metric

Stephen Gillen
University of Pennsylvania
stepe@math.upenn.edu

Christopher Jung Michael Kearns Aaron Roth
University of Pennsylvania
{chrjung, mkearns, aaroth}@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of online learning in the linear contextual bandits setting,
but in which there are also strong individual fairness constraints governed by an
unknown similarity metric. These constraints demand that we select similar actions
or individuals with approximately equal probability [?], which may be at odds with
optimizing reward, thus modeling settings where profit and social policy are in
tension. We assume we learn about an unknown Mahalanobis similarity metric from
only weak feedback that identifies fairness violations, but does not quantify their
extent. This is intended to represent the interventions of a regulator who “knows
unfairness when he sees it” but nevertheless cannot enunciate a quantitative fairness
metric over individuals. Our main result is an algorithm in the adversarial context
setting that has a number of fairness √
violations that depends only logarithmically
on T , while obtaining an optimal O( T ) regret bound to the best fair policy.

1

Introduction

The last several years have seen an explosion of work studying the problem of fairness in machine
learning. Yet there remains little agreement about what “fairness” should mean in different contexts.
In broad strokes, the literature can be divided into two families of fairness definitions: those aiming
at group fairness, and those aiming at individual fairness.
Group fairness definitions are aggegrate in nature: they partition individuals into some collection of
protected groups (say by race or gender), specify some statistic of interest (say, positive classification
rate or false positive rate), and then require that a learning algorithm equalize this quantity across the
protected groups. On the other hand, individual fairness definitions ask for some constraint that binds
on the individual level, rather than only over averages of people. Often, these constraints have the
semantics that “similar people should be treated similarly” ?.
Individual fairness definitions have substantially stronger semantics and demands than group definitions of fairness. For example, ? lay out a compendium of ways in which group fairness definitions are
unsatisfying. Yet despite these weaknesses, group fairness definitions are by far the most prevalent in
the literature (see e.g. ??????? and ? for a survey). This is in large part because notions of individual
fairness require making stronger assumptions on the setting under consideration. In particular, the
definition from ? requires that the algorithm designer know a “task-specific fairness metric.”
Learning problems over individuals are also often implicitly accompanied by some notion of merit,
embedded in the objective function of the learning problem. For example, in a lending setting
we might posit that each loan applicant is either “creditworthy” and will repay a loan, or is not
creditworthy and will default — which is what we are trying to predict. ? take the approach that
this measure of merit — already present in the model, although initially unknown to the learner —
can be taken to be the similarity metric in the definition of ?, requiring informally that creditworthy
individuals have at least the same probability of being accepted for loans as defaulting individuals.
(The implicit and coarse fairness metric here assigns distance zero between pairs of creditworthy
individuals and pairs of defaulting individuals, and some non-zero distance between a creditworthy
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

