Dialog-based Interactive Image Retrieval

Xiaoxiao Guo†
IBM Research AI
xiaoxiao.guo@ibm.com
Steven Rennie
Fusemachines Inc.
srennie@gmail.com

Hui Wu†
IBM Research AI
wuhu@us.ibm.com

Yu Cheng
IBM Research AI
chengyu@us.ibm.com

Gerald Tesauro
IBM Research AI
gtesauro@us.ibm.com

Rogerio Schmidt Feris
IBM Research AI
rsferis@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Existing methods for interactive image retrieval have demonstrated the merit of integrating user feedback, improving retrieval results. However, most current systems
rely on restricted forms of user feedback, such as binary relevance responses, or
feedback based on a fixed set of relative attributes, which limits their impact. In this
paper, we introduce a new approach to interactive image search that enables users
to provide feedback via natural language, allowing for more natural and effective
interaction. We formulate the task of dialog-based interactive image retrieval as a
reinforcement learning problem, and reward the dialog system for improving the
rank of the target image during each dialog turn. To mitigate the cumbersome and
costly process of collecting human-machine conversations as the dialog system
learns, we train our system with a user simulator, which is itself trained to describe
the differences between target and candidate images. The efficacy of our approach
is demonstrated in a footwear retrieval application. Experiments on both simulated
and real-world data show that 1) our proposed learning framework achieves better
accuracy than other supervised and reinforcement learning baselines and 2) user
feedback based on natural language rather than pre-specified attributes leads to
more effective retrieval results, and a more natural and expressive communication
interface.

1

Introduction

The volume of searchable visual media has grown tremendously in recent years, and has intensified the
need for retrieval systems that can more effectively identify relevant information, with applications in
domains such as e-commerce [1, 2], surveillance [3, 4], and Internet search [5, 6]. Despite significant
progress made with deep learning based methods [7, 8], achieving high performance in such retrieval
systems remains a challenge, due to the well-known semantic gap between feature representations
and high-level semantic concepts, as well as the difficulty of fully understanding the user’s search
intent.
A typical approach to improve search efficacy is to allow the user a constrained set of possible
interactions with the system [9, 10]. In particular, the user provides iterative feedback about retrieved
objects, so that the system can refine the results, allowing the user and system to engage in a
“conversation” to resolve what the user wants to retrieve. For example, as shown in Figure 1, feedback
about relevance [11] allows users to indicate which images are “similar” or “dissimilar” to the desired
image, and relative attribute feedback [12] allows the comparison of the desired image with candidate
images based on a fixed set of attributes. While these feedback paradigms are effective, the restrictions
†

These two authors contributed equally to this work.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

