Analytic solution and stationary phase approximation
for the Bayesian lasso and elastic net

Tom Michoel
The Roslin Institute, The University of Edinburgh, UK
Computational Biology Unit, Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Norway
tom.michoel@uib.no

Abstract
The lasso and elastic net linear regression models impose a double-exponential
prior distribution on the model parameters to achieve regression shrinkage and
variable selection, allowing the inference of robust models from large data sets.
However, there has been limited success in deriving estimates for the full posterior
distribution of regression coefficients in these models, due to a need to evaluate
analytically intractable partition function integrals. Here, the Fourier transform
is used to express these integrals as complex-valued oscillatory integrals over
“regression frequencies”. This results in an analytic expansion and stationary
phase approximation for the partition functions of the Bayesian lasso and elastic
net, where the non-differentiability of the double-exponential prior has so far
eluded such an approach. Use of this approximation leads to highly accurate
numerical estimates for the expectation values and marginal posterior distributions
of the regression coefficients, and allows for Bayesian inference of much higher
dimensional models than previously possible.

1

Introduction

Statistical modelling of high-dimensional data sets where the number of variables exceeds the
number of experimental samples may result in over-fitted models that do not generalize well to
unseen data. Prediction accuracy in these situations can often be improved by shrinking regression
coefficients towards zero [1]. Bayesian methods achieve this by imposing a prior distribution on
the regression coefficients whose mass is concentrated around zero. For linear regression, the most
popular methods are ridge regression [2], which has a normally distributed prior; lasso regression [3],
which has a double-exponential or Laplace distribution prior; and elastic net regression [4], whose
prior interpolates between the lasso and ridge priors. The lasso and elastic net are of particular interest,
because in their maximum-likelihood solutions, a subset of regression coefficients are exactly zero.
However, maximum-likelihood solutions only provide a point estimate for the regression coefficients.
A fully Bayesian treatment that takes into account uncertainty due to data noise and limited sample
size, and provides posterior distributions and confidence intervals, is therefore of great interest.
Unsurprisingly, Bayesian inference for the lasso and elastic net involves analytically intractable
partition function integrals and requires the use of numerical Gibbs sampling techniques [5–8].
However, Gibbs sampling is computationally expensive and, particularly in high-dimensional settings,
convergence may be slow and difficult to assess or remedy [9–12]. An alternative to Gibbs sampling
for Bayesian inference is to use asymptotic approximations to the intractable integrals based on
Laplace’s method [13, 14]. However, the Laplace approximation requires twice differentiable loglikelihood functions, and cannot be applied to the lasso and elastic net models as they contain a
non-differentiable term proportional to the sum of absolute values (i.e. `1 -norm) of the regression
coefficients.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

