Efficient Anomaly Detection via Matrix Sketching

Vatsal Sharan
Stanford University∗
vsharan@stanford.edu

Parikshit Gopalan
VMware Research
pgopalan@vmware.com

Udi Wieder
VMware Research
uwieder@vmware.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of finding anomalies in high-dimensional data using
popular PCA based anomaly scores. The naive algorithms for computing these
scores explicitly compute the PCA of the covariance matrix which uses space
quadratic in the dimensionality of the data. We give the first streaming algorithms
that use space that is linear or sublinear in the dimension. We prove general results
showing that any sketch of a matrix that satisfies a certain operator norm guarantee
can be used to approximate these scores. We instantiate these results with powerful
matrix sketching techniques such as Frequent Directions and random projections to
derive efficient and practical algorithms for these problems, which we validate over
real-world data sets. Our main technical contribution is to prove matrix perturbation
inequalities for operators arising in the computation of these measures.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection in high-dimensional numeric data is a ubiquitous problem in machine learning
[1, 2]. A typical scenario is where we have a constant stream of measurements (say parameters
regarding the health of machines in a data-center), and our goal is to detect any unusual behavior. An
algorithm to detect anomalies in such high dimensional settings faces computational challenges: the
dimension of the data matrix A ∈ Rn×d may be very large both in terms of the number of data points
n and their dimensionality d (in the datacenter example, d could be 106 and n  d). The desiderata
for an algorithm to be efficient in such settings are—
1. As n is too large for the data to be stored in memory, the algorithm must work in a streaming
fashion where it only gets a constant number of passes over the dataset.
2. As d is also very large, the algorithm should ideally use memory linear or even sublinear in d.
In this work we focus on two popular subspace based anomaly scores: rank-k leverage scores and
rank-k projection distance. The key idea behind subspace based anomaly scores is that real-world
data often has most of its variance in a low-dimensional rank k subspace, where k is usually much
smaller than d. In this section, we assume k = O(1) for simplicity. These scores are based on
identifying this principal k subspace using Principal Component Analyis (PCA) and then computing
how “normal” the projection of a point on the principal k subspace looks. Rank-k leverage scores
compute the normality of the projection of the point onto the principal k subspace using Mahalanobis
distance, and rank-k projection distance compute the `2 distance of the point from the principal k
subspace (see Fig. 1 for an illustration). These scores have found widespread use for detection of
anomalies in many applications such as finding outliers in network traffic data [3, 4, 5, 6], detecting
anomalous behavior in social networks [7, 8], intrusion detection in computer security [9, 10, 11], in
industrial systems for fault detection [12, 13, 14] and for monitoring data-centers [15, 16].
The standard approach to compute principal k subspace based anomaly scores in a streaming setting
is by computing AT A, the (d × d) covariance matrix of the data, and then computing the top k
∗

Part of the work was done while the author was an intern at VMware Research.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

