LF-Net: Learning Local Features from Images
Yuki Ono
Sony Imaging Products & Solutions Inc.
yuki.ono@sony.com

Eduard Trulls
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
eduard.trulls@epfl.ch

Pascal Fua
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
pascal.fua@epfl.ch

Kwang Moo Yi
Visual Computing Group, University of Victoria
kyi@uvic.ca

Abstract
We present a novel deep architecture and a training strategy to learn a local feature
pipeline from scratch, using collections of images without the need for human
supervision. To do so we exploit depth and relative camera pose cues to create a
virtual target that the network should achieve on one image, provided the outputs of
the network for the other image. While this process is inherently non-differentiable,
we show that we can optimize the network in a two-branch setup by confining it to
one branch, while preserving differentiability in the other. We train our method on
both indoor and outdoor datasets, with depth data from 3D sensors for the former,
and depth estimates from an off-the-shelf Structure-from-Motion solution for the
latter. Our models outperform the state of the art on sparse feature matching on
both datasets, while running at 60+ fps for QVGA images.

1

Introduction

Establishing correspondences across images is at the heart of many Computer Vision algorithms,
such as those for wide-baseline stereo, object detection, and image retrieval. With the emergence
of SIFT [23], sparse methods that find interest points and then match them across images became
the de facto standard. In recent years, many of these approaches have been revisited using deep
nets [11, 33, 48, 49], which has also sparked a revival for dense matching [9, 43, 45, 52, 53].
However, dense methods tend to fail in complex scenes with occlusions [49], while sparse methods
still suffer from severe limitations. Some can only train individual parts of the feature extraction
pipeline [33] while others can be trained end-to-end but still require the output of hand-crafted
detectors to initialize the training process [11, 48, 49]. For the former, reported gains in performance
may fade away when they are integrated into the full pipeline. For the latter, parts of the image which
hand-crafted detectors miss are simply discarded for training.
In this paper, we propose a sparse-matching method with a novel deep architecture, which we
name LF-Net, for Local Feature Network, that is trainable end-to-end and does not require using
a hand-crafted detector to generate training data. Instead, we use image pairs for which we know
the relative pose and corresponding depth maps, which can be obtained either with laser scanners or
shape-from-structure algorithms [34], without any further annotation.
Being thus given dense correspondence data, we could train a feature extraction pipeline by selecting
a number of keypoints over two images, computing descriptors for each keypoint, using the ground
truth to determine which ones match correctly across images, and use those to learn good descriptors.
This is, however, not feasible in practice. First, extracting multiple maxima from a score map is
inherently not differentiable. Second, performing this operation over each image produces two
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

