Watch Your Step:
Learning Node Embeddings via Graph Attention

Sami Abu-El-Haija∗
Information Sciences Institute,
University of Southern California
haija@isi.edu

Bryan Perozzi
Google AI
New York City, NY
bperozzi@acm.org

Rami Al-Rfou
Google AI
Mountain View, CA
rmyeid@google.com

Alex Alemi
Google AI
Mountain View, CA
alemi@google.com

Abstract
Graph embedding methods represent nodes in a continuous vector space, preserving
different types of relational information from the graph. There are many hyperparameters to these methods (e.g. the length of a random walk) which have to be
manually tuned for every graph. In this paper, we replace previously fixed hyperparameters with trainable ones that we automatically learn via backpropagation. In
particular, we propose a novel attention model on the power series of the transition
matrix, which guides the random walk to optimize an upstream objective. Unlike
previous approaches to attention models, the method that we propose utilizes
attention parameters exclusively on the data itself (e.g. on the random walk), and
are not used by the model for inference. We experiment on link prediction tasks, as
we aim to produce embeddings that best-preserve the graph structure, generalizing
to unseen information. We improve state-of-the-art results on a comprehensive
suite of real-world graph datasets including social, collaboration, and biological
networks, where we observe that our graph attention model can reduce the error
by up to 20%-40%. We show that our automatically-learned attention parameters
can vary significantly per graph, and correspond to the optimal choice of hyperparameter if we manually tune existing methods.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised graph embedding methods seek to learn representations that encode the graph structure.
These embeddings have demonstrated outstanding performance on a number of tasks including node
classification [29, 15], knowledge-base completion [24], semi-supervised learning [37], and link
prediction [2]. In general, as introduced by Perozzi et al [29], these methods operate in two discrete
steps: First, they sample pair-wise relationships from the graph through random walks and counting
node co-occurances. Second, they train an embedding model e.g. using Skipgram of word2vec [25],
to learn representations that encode pairwise node similarities.
While such methods have demonstrated positive results on a number of tasks, their performance
can significantly vary based on the setting of their hyper-parameters. For example, [29] observed
that the quality of learned representations is dependent on the length of the random walk (C). In
practice, DeepWalk [29] and many of its extensions [e.g. 15] use word2vec implementations [25].
∗

Work done while at Google AI.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

