Combinatorial Optimization with Graph
Convolutional Networks and Guided Tree Search
Zhuwen Li
Intel Labs

Qifeng Chen
HKUST

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Abstract
We present a learning-based approach to computing solutions for certain NPhard problems. Our approach combines deep learning techniques with useful
algorithmic elements from classic heuristics. The central component is a graph
convolutional network that is trained to estimate the likelihood, for each vertex
in a graph, of whether this vertex is part of the optimal solution. The network
is designed and trained to synthesize a diverse set of solutions, which enables
rapid exploration of the solution space via tree search. The presented approach is
evaluated on four canonical NP-hard problems and five datasets, which include
benchmark satisfiability problems and real social network graphs with up to a
hundred thousand nodes. Experimental results demonstrate that the presented
approach substantially outperforms recent deep learning work, and performs on par
with highly optimized state-of-the-art heuristic solvers for some NP-hard problems.
Experiments indicate that our approach generalizes across datasets, and scales to
graphs that are orders of magnitude larger than those used during training.

1

Introduction

Many of the most important algorithmic problems in computer science are NP-hard. But their
worst-case complexity does not diminish their practical role in computing. NP-hard problems arise as
a matter of course in computational social science, operations research, electrical engineering, and
bioinformatics, and must be solved as well as possible, their worst-case complexity notwithstanding.
This motivates vigorous research into the design of approximation algorithms and heuristic solvers.
Approximation algorithms provide theoretical guarantees, but their scalability may be limited and
algorithms with satisfactory bounds may not exist [3, 38]. In practice, NP-hard problems are often
solved using heuristics that are evaluated in terms of their empirical performance on problems of
various sizes and difficulty levels [15].
Recent progress in deep learning has stimulated increased interest in learning algorithms for NP-hard
problems. Convolutional networks and reinforcement learning have been applied with inspiring
results to the game Go, which is theoretically intractable [34, 35]. Recent work has also considered
classic NP-hard problems, such as Satisfiability, Travelling Salesman, Knapsack, Minimum Vertex
Cover, and Maximum Cut [37, 6, 10, 32, 25]. The appeal of learning-based approaches is that they
may discover useful patterns in the data that may be hard to specify by hand, such as graph motifs
that can indicate a set of vertices that belong to an optimal solution.
In this paper, we present a new approach to solving NP-hard problems that can be expressed in
terms of graphs. Our approach combines deep learning techniques with useful algorithmic elements
from classic heuristics. The central component is a graph convolutional network (GCN) [12, 24]
that is trained to predict the likelihood, for each vertex, of whether this vertex is part of the optimal
solution. A naive implementation of this idea does not yield good results, because there may be many
optimal solutions, and each vertex could participate in some of them. A network trained without
provisions that address this can generate a diffuse and uninformative likelihood map. To overcome
this problem, we use a network structure and loss that allows the network to synthesize a diverse set
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

