Learning Others’ Intentional Models in Multi-Agent
Settings Using Interactive POMDPs

Yanlin Han Piotr Gmytrasiewicz
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
{yhan37,piotr}@uic.edu

Abstract
Interactive partially observable Markov decision processes (I-POMDPs) provide a
principled framework for planning and acting in a partially observable, stochastic
and multi-agent environment. It extends POMDPs to multi-agent settings by
including models of other agents in the state space and forming a hierarchical
belief structure. In order to predict other agents’ actions using I-POMDPs, we
propose an approach that effectively uses Bayesian inference and sequential Monte
Carlo sampling to learn others’ intentional models which ascribe to them beliefs,
preferences and rationality in action selection. Empirical results show that our
algorithm accurately learns models of the other agent and has superior performance
than methods that use subintentional models. Our approach serves as a generalized
Bayesian learning algorithm that learns other agents’ beliefs, strategy levels, and
transition, observation and reward functions. It also effectively mitigates the belief
space complexity due to the nested belief hierarchy.

1

Introduction

Partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) [11] is a general decision-theoretic
framework for planning under uncertainty in a partially observable, stochastic environment. An
autonomous agent acts rationally in such settings by constantly maintaining beliefs of the physical
state and sequentially choosing the optimal actions that maximize the expected value of future rewards.
Thus, solutions of POMDPs map an agent’s beliefs to actions. Although POMDPs can be used in
multi-agent settings, it usually treats the impacts of other agents’ actions as noise and embeds them
into the state transition function. Examples of such POMDPs are Utile Suffix Memory [14], infinite
generalized policy representation [13], and infinite POMDPs [3]. Therefore, an agent’s beliefs about
other agents are not part of the solutions of POMDPs.
Interactive POMDPs (I-POMDPs) [7] generalize POMDPs to multi-agent settings by replacing
POMDP belief spaces with interactive belief systems. Specifically, an I-POMDP augments the plain
beliefs about the physical states in POMDP by including models of other agents. The models of
other agents included in the new augmented belief space consist of two types: intentional models and
subintentional models. An intentional model ascribes beliefs, preferences, and rationality to other
agents [7], while a simpler subintentional model, such as finite state controllers [15], does not. The
augmentation of intentional models forms a hierarchical belief structure that represents an agent’s
belief about the physical state, belief about the other agents and their beliefs about others’ beliefs,
and so on. Solutions of I-POMDPs map an agent’s belief about the environment and other agents’
models to actions. It has been shown [7] that the added sophistication of modeling others as rational
agents results in a higher value function compared to one obtained from treating others as noise,
which implies the modeling superiority of I-POMDPs over other approaches.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

