A Simple Unified Framework for Detecting
Out-of-Distribution Samples and Adversarial Attacks

1

Kimin Lee1 , Kibok Lee2 , Honglak Lee3,2 , Jinwoo Shin1,4
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
University of Michigan
3
Google Brain
4
AItrics

Abstract
Detecting test samples drawn sufficiently far away from the training distribution
statistically or adversarially is a fundamental requirement for deploying a good
classifier in many real-world machine learning applications. However, deep neural networks with the softmax classifier are known to produce highly overconfident
posterior distributions even for such abnormal samples. In this paper, we propose
a simple yet effective method for detecting any abnormal samples, which is applicable to any pre-trained softmax neural classifier. We obtain the class conditional
Gaussian distributions with respect to (low- and upper-level) features of the deep
models under Gaussian discriminant analysis, which result in a confidence score
based on the Mahalanobis distance. While most prior methods have been evaluated for detecting either out-of-distribution or adversarial samples, but not both,
the proposed method achieves the state-of-the-art performances for both cases in
our experiments. Moreover, we found that our proposed method is more robust
in harsh cases, e.g., when the training dataset has noisy labels or small number of
samples. Finally, we show that the proposed method enjoys broader usage by applying it to class-incremental learning: whenever out-of-distribution samples are
detected, our classification rule can incorporate new classes well without further
training deep models.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved high accuracy on many classification tasks, e.g.,
speech recognition [1], object detection [9] and image classification [12]. However, measuring the
predictive uncertainty still remains a challenging problem [20, 21]. Obtaining well-calibrated predictive uncertainty is indispensable since it could be useful in many machine learning applications
(e.g., active learning [8] and novelty detection [18]) as well as when deploying DNNs in real-world
systems [2], e.g., self-driving cars and secure authentication system [6, 30].
The predictive uncertainty of DNNs is closely related to the problem of detecting abnormal samples that are drawn far away from in-distribution (i.e., distribution of training samples) statistically
or adversarially. For detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) samples, recent works have utilized the
confidence from the posterior distribution [13, 21]. For example, Hendrycks & Gimpel [13] proposed the maximum value of posterior distribution from the classifier as a baseline method, and it
is improved by processing the input and output of DNNs [21]. For detecting adversarial samples,
confidence scores were proposed based on density estimators to characterize them in feature spaces
of DNNs [7]. More recently, Ma et al. [22] proposed the local intrinsic dimensionality (LID) and
empirically showed that the characteristics of test samples can be estimated effectively using the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

