A Reduction for Efficient LDA Topic Reconstruction

Matteo Almanza∗
Sapienza University
Rome, Italy
almanza@di.uniroma1.it

Flavio Chierichetti†
Sapienza University
Rome, Italy
flavio@di.uniroma1.it

Alessandro Panconesi‡
Sapienza University
Rome, Italy
ale@di.uniroma1.it

Andrea Vattani
Spiketrap
San Francisco, CA, USA
avattani@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
We present a novel approach for LDA (Latent Dirichlet Allocation) topic reconstruction. The main technical idea is to show that the distribution over the documents
generated by LDA can be transformed into a distribution for a much simpler generative model in which documents are generated from the same set of topics but have a
much simpler structure: documents are single topic and topics are chosen uniformly
at random. Furthermore, this reduction is approximation preserving, in the sense
that approximate distributions — the only ones we can hope to compute in practice
— are mapped into approximate distribution in the simplified world. This opens
up the possibility of efficiently reconstructing LDA topics in a roundabout way.
Compute an approximate document distribution from the given corpus, transform it
into an approximate distribution for the single-topic world, and run a reconstruction
algorithm in the uniform, single-topic world — a much simpler task than direct
LDA reconstruction. We show the viability of the approach by giving very simple
algorithms for a generalization of two notable cases that have been studied in the
literature, p-separability and matrix-like topics.

1

Introduction

Latent Dirichlet Allocation (henceforth LDA) is a well-known paradigm for topic reconstruction (Blei
et al. , 2003). The general goal of topic reconstruction is, given a corpus of documents, to reconstruct
the topics. LDA is a generative model according to which documents are generated from a given set
of unknown topics, where each topic is modelled as a probability distribution over the words. One of
the main motivations behind LDA is to allow documents to be able to talk about about multiple topics,
a goal achieved by the following mechanism. To generate a document containing ` words we first
select a probability distribution, the so-called admixture, over the topics. The admixture is randomly
drawn from a Dirichlet distribution, hence the name. Then, the words of the document are selected
one after the other in sequence by first selecting a topic at random according to the admixture, and
then by randomly selecting a word according to the selected topic (which, as remarked, is just a
∗

Supported in part by the ERC Starting Grant DMAP 680153, and by the “Dipartimenti di Eccellenza
2018-2022” grant awarded to the Dipartimento di Informatica at Sapienza.
†
Supported in part by the ERC Starting Grant DMAP 680153, by a Google Focused Research Award, and by
the “Dipartimenti di Eccellenza 2018-2022” grant awarded to the Dipartimento di Informatica at Sapienza.
‡
Supported in part by the ERC Starting Grant DMAP 680153, by a Google Focused Research Award, by the
“Dipartimenti di Eccellenza 2018-2022” grant awarded to the Dipartimento di Informatica at Sapienza, and by
BiCi – Bertinoro international Center for informatics.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

