Alternating Optimization of Decision Trees,
with Application to Learning Sparse Oblique Trees

Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán
Dept. EECS, University of California, Merced
mcarreira-perpinan@ucmerced.edu

Pooya Tavallali
Dept. EECS, University of California, Merced
ptavallali@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Learning a decision tree from data is a difficult optimization problem. The most
widespread algorithm in practice, dating to the 1980s, is based on a greedy growth
of the tree structure by recursively splitting nodes, and possibly pruning back the
final tree. The parameters (decision function) of an internal node are approximately estimated by minimizing an impurity measure. We give an algorithm that,
given an input tree (its structure and the parameter values at its nodes), produces
a new tree with the same or smaller structure but new parameter values that provably lower or leave unchanged the misclassification error. This can be applied
to both axis-aligned and oblique trees and our experiments show it consistently
outperforms various other algorithms while being highly scalable to large datasets
and trees. Further, the same algorithm can handle a sparsity penalty, so it can
learn sparse oblique trees, having a structure that is a subset of the original tree
and few nonzero parameters. This combines the best of axis-aligned and oblique
trees: flexibility to model correlated data, low generalization error, fast inference
and interpretable nodes that involve only a few features in their decision.

1 Introduction
Decision trees are among the most widely used statistical models in practice. They are routinely at
the top of the list in the KDnuggets.com annual polls of top machine learning algorithms and other
top-10 lists [36]. Many statistical or mathematical packages such as SAS or Matlab implement them.
Apart from being able to model nonlinear data well in the first place, they enjoy several unique advantages. The prediction made by the tree is a path from the root to a leaf consisting of a sequence
of decisions, each involving a question of the type “xj > bi ” (is feature j bigger than threshold bi ?)
for axis-aligned trees, or “wiT x > bi ” for oblique trees. This makes inference very fast, and may not
even need to use all input features to make a prediction (with axis-aligned trees). The path can be
understood as a sequence of IF-THEN rules, which is intuitive to humans, and indeed one can equivalently turn the tree into a database of rules. This can make decision trees preferable over more accurate models such as neural nets in some applications, such as medical diagnosis or legal analysis.
However, trees pose one crucial problem that is only partly solved to date: learning the tree from
data is a very difficult optimization problem, involving a search over a complex, large set of tree
structures, and over the parameters at each node. For simplicity, in this paper we focus on classification trees with a binary tree (having a binary split at each node) where the bipartition in each node is
either an axis-aligned hyperplane or an arbitrary hyperplane (oblique trees). However, many of our
arguments carry over beyond this case.
Ideally, the objective function we would like to optimize has the usual form of a regularized loss:
E(T ) = L(T ) + α C(T )
α>0
(1)
where L is the misclassification error on the training set, given below in eq. (2), and C is the complexity of the tree, e.g. its depth or number of nodes. This is necessary to avoid large trees that finely
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

