Multiple-Step Greedy Policies in Online and
Approximate Reinforcement Learning

Yonathan Efroni∗
jonathan.efroni@gmail.com

Gal Dalal∗
gald@campus.technion.ac.il

Bruno Scherrer†
bruno.scherrer@inria.fr

Shie Mannor∗
shie@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Multiple-step lookahead policies have demonstrated high empirical competence
in Reinforcement Learning, via the use of Monte Carlo Tree Search or Model
Predictive Control. In a recent work [5], multiple-step greedy policies and their use
in vanilla Policy Iteration algorithms were proposed and analyzed. In this work,
we study multiple-step greedy algorithms in more practical setups. We begin by
highlighting a counter-intuitive difficulty, arising with soft-policy updates: even in
the absence of approximations, and contrary to the 1-step-greedy case, monotonic
policy improvement is not guaranteed unless the update stepsize is sufficiently
large. Taking particular care about this difficulty, we formulate and analyze online
and approximate algorithms that use such a multi-step greedy operator.

1

Introduction

The use of the 1-step policy improvement in Reinforcement Learning (RL) was theoretically investigated under several frameworks, e.g., Policy Iteration (PI) [18], approximate PI [2, 9, 13], and
Actor-Critic [10]; its practical uses are abundant [22, 12, 25]. However, single-step based improvement is not necessarily the optimal choice. It was, in fact, empirically demonstrated that multiple-step
greedy policies can perform conspicuously better. Notable examples arise from the integration of RL
and Monte Carlo Tree Search [4, 28, 23, 3, 25, 24] or Model Predictive Control [15, 6, 27].
Recent work [5] provided guarantees on the performance of the multiple-step greedy policy and
generalizations of it in PI. Here, we establish it in the two practical contexts of online and approximate
PI. With this objective in mind, we begin by highlighting a specific difficulty: softly updating a policy
with respect to (w.r.t.) a multiple-step greedy policy does not necessarily result in improvement of
the policy (Section 4). We find this property intriguing since monotonic improvement is guaranteed
in the case of soft updates w.r.t. the 1-step greedy policy, and is central to the analysis of many
RL algorithms [10, 9, 22]. We thus engineer several algorithms to circumvent this difficulty and
provide some non-trivial performance guarantees, that support the interest of using multi-step greedy
operators. These algorithms assume access to a generative model (Section 5) or to an approximate
multiple-step greedy policy (Section 6).

2

Preliminaries

Our framework is the infinite-horizon discounted Markov Decision Process (MDP). An MDP is
defined as the 5-tuple (S, A, P, R, γ) [18], where S is a finite state space, A is a finite action space,
∗
†

Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
INRIA, Villers les Nancy, France

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

