Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Zero-shot
Generalization with Subtask Dependencies

Sungryull Sohn
University of Michigan
srsohn@umich.edu

Junhyuk Oh∗
University of Michigan
junhyuk@google.com

Honglak Lee
Google Brain
University of Michigan
honglak@google.com

Abstract
We introduce a new RL problem where the agent is required to generalize to a
previously-unseen environment characterized by a subtask graph which describes a
set of subtasks and their dependencies. Unlike existing hierarchical multitask RL
approaches that explicitly describe what the agent should do at a high level, our
problem only describes properties of subtasks and relationships among them, which
requires the agent to perform complex reasoning to find the optimal subtask to
execute. To solve this problem, we propose a neural subtask graph solver (NSGS)
which encodes the subtask graph using a recursive neural network embedding. To
overcome the difficulty of training, we propose a novel non-parametric gradientbased policy, graph reward propagation, to pre-train our NSGS agent and further
finetune it through actor-critic method. The experimental results on two 2D visual
domains show that our agent can perform complex reasoning to find a near-optimal
way of executing the subtask graph and generalize well to the unseen subtask
graphs. In addition, we compare our agent with a Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS)
method showing that our method is much more efficient than MCTS, and the
performance of NSGS can be further improved by combining it with MCTS.

1

Introduction

Developing the ability to execute many different tasks depending on given task descriptions and
generalize over unseen task descriptions is an important problem for building scalable reinforcement
learning (RL) agents. Recently, there have been a few attempts to define and solve different forms
of task descriptions such as natural language [1, 2] or formal language [3, 4]. However, most of the
prior works have focused on task descriptions which explicitly specify what the agent should do at a
high level, which may not be readily available in real-world applications.
To further motivate the problem, let’s consider a scenario in which an agent needs to generalize
to a complex novel task by performing a composition of subtasks where the task description and
dependencies among subtasks may change depending on the situation. For example, a human user
could ask a physical household robot to make a meal in an hour. A meal may be served with different
combinations of dishes, each of which takes a different amount of cost (e.g., time) and gives a
different amount of reward (e.g., user satisfaction) depending on the user preferences. In addition,
there can be complex dependencies between subtasks. For example, a bread should be sliced before
toasted, or an omelette and an egg sandwich cannot be made together if there is only one egg left.
Due to such complex dependencies as well as different rewards and costs, it is often cumbersome
for human users to manually provide the optimal sequence of subtasks (e.g., “fry an egg and toast
a bread”). Instead, the agent should learn to act in the environment by figuring out the optimal
sequence of subtasks that gives the maximum reward within a time budget just from properties and
dependencies of subtasks.
The goal of this paper is to formulate and solve such a problem, which we call subtask graph execution,
where the agent should execute the given subtask graph in an optimal way as illustrated in Figure 1.
∗

Now at DeepMind.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

