Variational Memory Encoder-Decoder

Hung Le, Truyen Tran, Thin Nguyen and Svetha Venkatesh
Applied AI Institute, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
{lethai,truyen.tran,thin.nguyen,svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
Introducing variability while maintaining coherence is a core task in learning to
generate utterances in conversation. Standard neural encoder-decoder models and
their extensions using conditional variational autoencoder often result in either
trivial or digressive responses. To overcome this, we explore a novel approach that
injects variability into neural encoder-decoder via the use of external memory as
a mixture model, namely Variational Memory Encoder-Decoder (VMED). By associating each memory read with a mode in the latent mixture distribution at each
timestep, our model can capture the variability observed in sequential data such
as natural conversations. We empirically compare the proposed model against
other recent approaches on various conversational datasets. The results show that
VMED consistently achieves significant improvement over others in both metricbased and qualitative evaluations.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in generative modeling have led to exploration of generative tasks. While generative models such as GAN [12] and VAE [19, 29] have been applied successfully for image generation, learning generative models for sequential discrete data is a long-standing problem. Early
attempts to generate sequences using RNNs [13] and neural encoder-decoder models [17, 35] gave
promising results, but the deterministic nature of these models proves to be inadequate in many realistic settings. Tasks such as translation, question-answering and dialog generation would benefit
from stochastic models that can produce a variety of outputs for an input. For example, there are
several ways to translate a sentence from one language to another, multiple answers to a question
and multiple responses for an utterance in conversation.
Another line of research that has captured attention recently is memory augmented neural networks
(MANNs). Such models have larger memory capacity and thus “remember” temporally distant
information in the input sequence and provide a RAM-like mechanism to support model execution.
MANNs have been successfully applied to long sequence prediction tasks [14, 33] demonstrating
great improvement when compared to other recurrent models. However, the role of memory in
sequence generation has not been well understood.
For tasks involving language understanding and production, handling intrinsic uncertainty and latent
variations is necessary. The choice of words and grammars may change erratically depending on
speaker intentions, moods and previous languages used. The underlying RNN in neural sequential
models finds it hard to capture the dynamics and their outputs are often trivial or too generic [23].
One way to overcome these problems is to introduce variability into these models. Unfortunately,
sequential data such as speech and natural language is a hard place to inject variability [30] since
they require a coherence of grammars and semantics yet allow freedom of word choice.
We propose a novel hybrid approach that integrates MANN and VAE, called Variational Memory
Encoder-Decoder (VMED), to model the sequential properties and inject variability in sequence
generation tasks. We introduce latent random variables to model the variability observed in the data
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

