Reducing Network Agnostophobia

Akshay Raj Dhamija, Manuel Günther, and Terrance E. Boult
Vision and Security Technology Lab, University of Colorado Colorado Springs
{adhamija | mgunther | tboult} @ vast.uccs.edu

Abstract
Agnostophobia, the fear of the unknown, can be experienced by deep learning
engineers while applying their networks to real-world applications. Unfortunately,
network behavior is not well defined for inputs far from a networks training set. In
an uncontrolled environment, networks face many instances that are not of interest
to them and have to be rejected in order to avoid a false positive. This problem
has previously been tackled by researchers by either a) thresholding softmax,
which by construction cannot return none of the known classes, or b) using an
additional background or garbage class. In this paper, we show that both of these
approaches help, but are generally insufficient when previously unseen classes are
encountered. We also introduce a new evaluation metric that focuses on comparing
the performance of multiple approaches in scenarios where such unseen classes
or unknowns are encountered. Our major contributions are simple yet effective
Entropic Open-Set and Objectosphere losses that train networks using negative
samples from some classes. These novel losses are designed to maximize entropy
for unknown inputs while increasing separation in deep feature space by modifying
magnitudes of known and unknown samples. Experiments on networks trained to
classify classes from MNIST and CIFAR-10 show that our novel loss functions
are significantly better at dealing with unknown inputs from datasets such as
Devanagari, NotMNIST, CIFAR-100, and SVHN.

1

Introduction and Problem Formulation

Ever since a convolutional neural network (CNN) [19] won the ImageNet Large Scale Visual
Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) in 2012 [33], the extraordinary increase in the performance of
deep learning architectures has contributed to the growing application of computer vision algorithms.
Many of these algorithms presume detection before classification or directly belong to the category
of detection algorithms, ranging from object detection [13, 12, 32, 23, 31], face detection [17],
pedestrian detection [42] etc. Interestingly, though each year new state-of-the-art-algorithms emerge
from each of these domains, a crucial component of their architecture remains unchanged – handling
unwanted or unknown inputs.
Object detectors have evolved over time from using feature-based detectors to sliding windows [34],
region proposals [32], and, finally, to anchor boxes [31]. The majority of these approaches can be
seen as having two parts, the proposal network and the classification network. During training, the
classification network includes a background class to identify a proposal as not having an object of
interest. However, even for the state-of-the-art systems it has been reported that the object proposals
to the classifier “still contain a large proportion of background regions” and “the existence of many
background samples makes the feature representation capture less intra-category variance and more
inter-category variance (...) causing many false positives between ambiguous object categories” [41].
In a system that both detects and recognizes objects, the ability to handle unknown samples is crucial.
Our goal is to improve the ability to classify correct classes while reducing the impact of unknown
inputs. In order to better understand the problem, let us assume Y ⊂ N be the infinite label space of
all classes, which can be broadly categorized into:
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

