Breaking the Curse of Horizon:
Infinite-Horizon Off-Policy Estimation
Qiang Liu
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX, 78712
lqiang@cs.utexas.edu
Ziyang Tang
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX, 78712
ztang@cs.utexas.edu

Lihong Li
Google Brain
Kirkland, WA, 98033
lihong@google.com
Dengyong Zhou
Google Brain
Kirkland, WA, 98033
dennyzhou@google.com

Abstract
We consider off-policy estimation of the expected reward of a target policy using
samples collected by a different behavior policy. Importance sampling (IS) has
been a key technique for deriving (nearly) unbiased estimators, but is known to
suffer from an excessively high variance in long-horizon problems. In the extreme
case of infinite-horizon problems, the variance of an IS-based estimator may even
be unbounded. In this paper, we propose a new off-policy estimator that applies
IS directly on the stationary state-visitation distributions to avoid the exploding
variance faced by existing methods. Our key contribution is a novel approach to
estimating the density ratio of two stationary state distributions, with trajectories
sampled from only the behavior distribution. We develop a mini-max loss function
for the estimation problem, and derive a closed-form solution for the case of RKHS.
We support our method with both theoretical and empirical analyses.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [36] is one of the most successful approaches to artificial intelligence,
and has found successful applications in robotics, games, dialogue systems, and recommendation
systems, among others. One of the key problems in RL is policy evaluation: given a fixed policy,
estimate the average reward garnered by an agent that runs this policy in the environment. In this
paper, we consider the off-policy estimation problem, in which we want to estimate the expected
reward of a given target policy with samples collected by a different behavior policy. This problem
is of great practical importance in many application domains where deploying a new policy can
be costly or risky, such as medical treatments [26], econometrics [13], recommender systems [19],
education [23], Web search [18], advertising and marketing [4, 5, 38, 40]. It can also be used as a key
component for developing efficient off-policy policy optimization algorithms [7, 14, 18, 39].
Most state-of-the-art off-policy estimation methods are based on importance sampling (IS) [e.g., 22].
A major limitation, however, is that this approach can become inaccurate due to the high variance
introduced by the importance weights, especially when the trajectory is long. Indeed, most existing
IS-based estimators compute the weight as the product of the importance ratios of many steps in the
trajectory. Variances in individual steps accumulate multiplicatively, so that the overall IS weight of a
random trajectory can have an exponentially high variance to result in an unreliable estimator. In the
extreme case when the trajectory length is infinite, as in infinite-horizon average-reward problems,
some of these estimators are not even well-defined. Ad hoc approaches can be used, such as truncating
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

