Overlapping Clustering Models, and One (class) SVM
to Bind Them All
Xueyu Mao, Purnamrita Sarkar, Deepayan Chakrabarti
The University of Texas at Austin
xmao@cs.utexas.edu, purna.sarkar@austin.utexas.edu, deepay@utexas.edu

Abstract
People belong to multiple communities, words belong to multiple topics, and books
cover multiple genres; overlapping clusters are commonplace. Many existing overlapping clustering methods model each person (or word, or book) as a non-negative
weighted combination of “exemplars” who belong solely to one community, with
some small noise. Geometrically, each person is a point on a cone whose corners
are these exemplars. This basic form encompasses the widely used Mixed Membership Stochastic Blockmodel of networks [1] and its degree-corrected variants [16],
as well as topic models such as LDA [9]. We show that a simple one-class SVM
yields provably consistent parameter inference for all such models, and scales to
large datasets. Experimental results on several simulated and real datasets show
our algorithm (called SVM-cone) is both accurate and scalable.

1

Introduction

Clustering has many real-world applications: market segmentation, product recommendation, document clustering, finding protein complexes in gene networks, among others. The simplest form
of a clustering model assumes that every record or entity belongs to exactly one cluster. More
general forms allow for overlapping clusters, where each entity may belong to different clusters or
communities to different degrees. For example, George Orwell’s 1984 belongs to both the dystopian
fiction and political fiction genres, and Pink Floyd’s music is both progressive and psychedelic. In
this paper, we show that many existing overlapping clustering models can be written in a general
form, whose parameters can then be inferred using a one-class SVM.
In many clustering problems, overlapping or otherwise, we have access to a data matrix Ẑ ∈ Rn×m ,
which is a noisy version of an ideal matrix Z, i.e. Ẑ = Z + R where the norm of the rows of
R is small. Also, Z = GZP , where ZP are ideal “exemplars” of the various communities, and
G ∈ Rn×K
gives the community memberships of each entity. We will now give some examples.
≥0
Consider the Stochastic Blockmodel (SBM) [13] for networks. In this model, each node belongs to
one of K communities, and the probability Pij of an edge between nodes i and j is a function of their
respective communities. Recent results [21] show that the eigenvectors V̂ of the adjacency matrix
concentrate row-wise around the eigenvectors V of P. The matrix V is also blockwise constant,
mapping all nodes in one cluster to one point [27]. Hence, V̂ = GVP + R, where G ∈ {0, 1}n×K
is a binary membership matrix where each row sums to one. The Mixed Membership Stochastic
Blockmodel (MMSB) [1] relaxes this by allowing the entries of G to be in [0, 1]. Since the rows of G
sum to one, the ideal matrix Z arranges points in a simplex. The corners of this simplex represent the
“pure” nodes, i.e. nodes belonging to exactly one community. Most algorithms first find the corners,
and then estimate model parameters via regression [20, 21, 16, 23, 28]. Other notable methods
include tensor based approaches [14, 2], Bayesian inference [12], etc. Related models and inference
methods for overlapping networks have been presented in [24, 17, 26, 19], etc.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

