Near Optimal Exploration-Exploitation in
Non-Communicating Markov Decision Processes

Ronan Fruit
Sequel Team - Inria Lille
ronan.fruit@inria.fr

Matteo Pirotta
Sequel Team - Inria Lille
matteo.pirotta@inria.fr

Alessandro Lazaric
Facebook AI Research
lazaric@fb.com

Abstract
While designing the state space of an MDP, it is common to include states that are
transient or not reachable by any policy (e.g., in mountain car, the product space of
speed and position contains configurations that are not physically reachable). This
results in weakly-communicating or multi-chain MDPs. In this paper, we introduce
TUCRL, the first algorithm able to perform efficient exploration-exploitation in
any finite Markov Decision Process (MDP) without requiring any form of prior
knowledge. In particular, for any MDP with S C communicating states,
√A actions
e C ΓC S C AT )
and ΓC ≤ S C possible communicating next states, we derive a O(D
regret bound, where DC is the diameter (i.e., the length of the longest shortest
path between any two states) of the communicating part of the MDP. This is in
contrast with existing optimistic algorithms (e.g., UCRL, Optimistic PSRL) that
suffer linear regret in weakly-communicating MDPs, as well as posterior sampling
or regularised algorithms (e.g., R EGAL), which require prior knowledge on the bias
span of the optimal policy to achieve sub-linear regret. We also prove that in weaklycommunicating MDPs, no algorithm can ever achieve a logarithmic growth of the
regret without first suffering a linear regret for a number of steps that is exponential
in the parameters of the MDP. Finally, we report numerical simulations supporting
our theoretical findings and showing how TUCRL overcomes the limitations of the
state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [1] studies the problem of learning in sequential decision-making
problems where the dynamics of the environment is unknown, but can be learnt by performing
actions and observing their outcome in an online fashion. A sample-efficient RL agent must trade
off the exploration needed to collect information about the environment, and the exploitation of
the experience gathered so far to gain as much reward as possible. In this paper, we focus on the
regret framework in infinite-horizon average-reward problems [2], where the exploration-exploitation
performance is evaluated by comparing the rewards accumulated by the learning agent and an optimal
policy. Jaksch et al. [2] showed that it is possible to efficiently solve the exploration-exploitation
dilemma using the optimism in face of uncertainty (OFU) principle. OFU methods build confidence
intervals on the dynamics and reward (i.e., construct a set of plausible MDPs), and execute the optimal
policy of the “best” MDP in the confidence region [e.g., 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. An alternative approach is
posterior sampling (PS) [7], which maintains a posterior distribution over MDPs and, at each step,
samples an MDP and executes the corresponding optimal policy [e.g., 8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
Weakly-communicating MDPs and misspecified states. One of the main limitations of UCRL [2]
and optimistic PSRL [12] is that they require the MDP to be communicating so that its diameter
D (i.e., the length of the longest path among all shortest paths between any pair of states) is finite.
While assuming that all states are reachable may seem a reasonable assumption, it is rarely verified in
practice. In fact, it requires a designer to carefully define a state space S that contains all reachable
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

