Beyond Log-concavity: Provable Guarantees for
Sampling Multi-modal Distributions using Simulated
Tempering Langevin Monte Carlo

Rong Ge
Duke University, Computer Science Department
rongge@cs.duke.edu
Holden Lee
Princeton University, Mathematics Department
holdenl@princeton.edu
Andrej Risteski
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Applied Mathematics and IDSS
risteski@mit.edu

Abstract
A key task in Bayesian machine learning is sampling from distributions that are
only specified up to a partition function (i.e., constant of proportionality). One
prevalent example of this is sampling posteriors in parametric distributions, such
as latent-variable generative models. However sampling (even very approximately)
can be #P-hard.
Classical results (going back to [BÉ85]) on sampling focus on log-concave distributions, and show a natural Markov chain called Langevin diffusion mixes in
polynomial time. However, all log-concave distributions are uni-modal, while in
practice it is very common for the distribution of interest to have multiple modes.
In this case, Langevin diffusion suffers from torpid mixing.
We address this problem by combining Langevin diffusion with simulated tempering. The result is a Markov chain that mixes more rapidly by transitioning between
different temperatures of the distribution. We analyze this Markov chain for a
mixture of (strongly) log-concave distributions of the same shape. In particular, our
technique applies to the canonical multi-modal distribution: a mixture of gaussians
(of equal variance). Our algorithm efficiently samples from these distributions
given only access to the gradient of the log-pdf. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first result that proves fast mixing for multimodal distributions in this setting.
For the analysis, we introduce novel techniques for proving spectral gaps based on
decomposing the action of the generator of the diffusion. Previous approaches rely
on decomposing the state space as a partition of sets, while our approach can be
thought of as decomposing the stationary measure as a mixture of distributions (a
“soft partition”).
Additional materials for the paper can be found at http://tiny.cc/glr17. Note
that the proof and results have been improved and generalized from the precursor
at http://www.arxiv.org/abs/1710.02736. See Section ?? for a comparison.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

