Variance-Reduced Stochastic Gradient Descent
on Streaming Data

Ellango Jothimurugesan∗ †
Carnegie Mellon University
ejothimu@cs.cmu.edu

Ashraf Tahmasbi∗ ‡
Iowa State University
tahmasbi@iastate.edu

Phillip B. Gibbons†
Carnegie Mellon University
gibbons@cs.cmu.edu

Srikanta Tirthapura‡
Iowa State University
snt@iastate.edu

Abstract
We present an algorithm STRSAGA that can efficiently maintain a machine learning
model over data points that arrive over time, and quickly update the model as new
training data are observed. We present a competitive analysis that compares the suboptimality of the model maintained by STRSAGA with that of an offline algorithm
that is given the entire data beforehand. Our theoretical and experimental results
show that the risk of STRSAGA is comparable to that of an offline algorithm on a
variety of input arrival patterns, and its experimental performance is significantly
better than prior algorithms suited for streaming data, such as SGD and SSVRG.

1

Introduction

We consider the maintenance of a model over streaming data that are arriving as an endless sequence
of data points. At any point in time, the goal is to fit the model to the training data points observed
so far, in order to accurately predict/label unobserved test data. Such a model is never “complete”
but instead needs to be continuously updated as newer training data points arrive. Methods that
recompute the model from scratch upon the arrival of new data points are infeasible due to their high
computational costs, and hence we need methods that efficiently update the model as more data arrive.
Such efficiency should not come at the expense of accuracy—the accuracy of the model maintained
through such updates should be close to that obtained if we were to build a model from scratch, using
all the training data points seen so far.
Fitting a model is usually cast as an optimization problem, where the model parameters are those that
optimize an objective function. In typical cases, the objective function is the empirical or regularized
risk, usually the sum of a finite number of terms, and often assumed to be convex. Consider a stream
of training data points Si arriving before or at time i consisting of ni data points. Let w denote the
set of parameters characterizing the learned
The empirical risk function RSi measures the
Pnfunction.
i
average loss of w over Si : RSi (w) = n1i j=1
fj (w), where fj (w) is the loss of w on data point j.
The goal is to find the empirical risk minimizer (ERM), i.e., the parameters w∗ that minimize the
empirical risk over all data points observed so far. Typically, some form of gradient descent is used in
pursuit of w∗ .
There are two common approaches: batch learning and incremental learning (sometimes called
“online learning”) [BL03, Ber16]. Batch learning uses all available data points in the training set to
∗

EJ and AT contributed equally to this work.
Supported in part by NSF grant 1725663
‡
Supported in part by NSF grants 1527541 and 1725702
†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

