Distributed Stochastic Optimization via Adaptive
SGD
Ashok Cutkosky
Stanford University, USA⇤
cutkosky@google.com

Róbert Busa-Fekete
Yahoo! Research, New York, USA
busafekete@oath.com

Abstract
Stochastic convex optimization algorithms are the most popular way to train machine learning models on large-scale data. Scaling up the training process of these
models is crucial, but the most popular algorithm, Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD), is a serial method that is surprisingly hard to parallelize. In this paper,
we propose an efficient distributed stochastic optimization method by combining
adaptivity with variance reduction techniques. Our analysis yields a linear speedup
in the number of machines, constant memory footprint, and only a logarithmic
number of communication rounds. Critically, our approach is a black-box reduction
that parallelizes any serial online learning algorithm, streamlining prior analysis
and allowing us to leverage the significant progress that has been made in designing
adaptive algorithms. In particular, we achieve optimal convergence rates without
any prior knowledge of smoothness parameters, yielding a more robust algorithm
that reduces the need for hyperparameter tuning. We implement our algorithm
in the Spark distributed framework and exhibit dramatic performance gains on
large-scale logistic regression problems.

1

Setup

We consider a fundamental problem in machine learning, stochastic convex optimization:
min F (w) := E [f (w)]

w2W

f ⇠D

(1)

Here, W is a convex subset of Rd and D is a distribution over L-smooth convex functions W ! R.
We do not have direct access to F , and the distribution D is unknown, but we do have the ability
to generate i.i.d. samples f ⇠ D through some kind of stream or oracle. In practice, each function
f ⇠ D corresponds to a new datapoint in some learning problem. Algorithms for this problem are
widely applicable: for example, in logistic regression the goal is to optimize F (w) = E[f (w)] =
E[log(1 + exp( ywT x))] when the (x, y) pairs are the (feature vector, label) pairs coming from a
fixed data distribution. Given a budget of N oracle calls (e.g. a dataset of size N ), we wish to find a
ŵ such that F (ŵ) F (w? ) (called the suboptimality) is as small as possible as fast as possible using
as little memory as possible, where w? 2 argmin F .
The most popular algorithm
p for solving (1) is Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), which achieves
statistically optimal O(1/ N ) suboptimality in O(N ) time and constant memory. However, in
modern large-scale machine learning problems the number of data points N is often gigantic, and so
even the linear time-complexity of SGD becomes onerous. We need a parallel algorithm that runs in
only O(N/m) time using m machines. We address this problem in this paper, evaluating solutions on
three metrics: time complexity, space complexity, and communication complexity. Time complexity
is the total time taken to process the data points. Space complexity is the amount of space required per
⇤

now at Google

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

