Demystifying excessively volatile human learning: A
Bayesian persistent prior and a neural approximation

Chaitanya K. Ryali
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive La Jolla, CA 92093
rckrishn@eng.ucsd.edu

Gautam Reddy
Department of Physics
University of California San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive La Jolla, CA 92093
gnallama@physics.ucsd.edu

Angela J. Yu
Department of Cognitive Science
University of California San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive La Jolla, CA 92093
ajyu@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Understanding how humans and animals learn about statistical regularities in stable and volatile environments, and utilize these regularities to make predictions
and decisions, is an important problem in neuroscience and psychology. Using a
Bayesian modeling framework, specifically the Dynamic Belief Model (DBM),
it has previously been shown that humans tend to make the default assumption
that environmental statistics undergo abrupt, unsignaled changes, even when environmental statistics are actually stable. Because exact Bayesian inference in this
setting, an example of switching state space models, is computationally intensive, a
number of approximately Bayesian and heuristic algorithms have been proposed to
account for learning/prediction in the brain. Here, we examine a neurally plausible
algorithm, a special case of leaky integration dynamics we denote as EXP (for
exponential filtering), that is significantly simpler than all previously suggested
algorithms except for the delta-learning rule, and which far outperforms the delta
rule in approximating Bayesian prediction performance. We derive the theoretical
relationship between DBM and EXP, and show that EXP gains computational
efficiency by foregoing the representation of inferential uncertainty (as does the
delta rule), but that it nevertheless achieves near-Bayesian performance due to its
ability to incorporate a "persistent prior" influence unique to DBM and absent from
the other algorithms. Furthermore, we show that EXP is comparable to DBM but
better than all other models in reproducing human behavior in a visual search task,
suggesting that human learning and prediction also incorporates an element of
persistent prior. More broadly, our work demonstrates that when observations are
information-poor, detecting changes or modulating the learning rate is both difficult
and thus unnecessary for making Bayes-optimal predictions.

Introduction
Understanding how humans and animals make future predictions based on changing environmental
statistics is an important problem in both neuroscience and psychology [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Intriguingly,
even when environmental statistics are stable, Bayesian models of human learning and prediction
suggest a default human tendency to assume that statistical contingencies undergo abrupt, unsignaled
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

