Diverse Ensemble Evolution:
Curriculum Data-Model Marriage
Tianyi Zhou, Shengjie Wang, Jeff A. Bilmes
Depts. of Computer Science and Engineering, and Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Washington, Seattle
{tianyizh, wangsj, bilmes}@uw.edu

Abstract
We study a new method “Diverse Ensemble Evolution (DivE2 )” to train an ensemble of machine learning models that assigns data to models at each training
epoch based on each model’s current expertise and an intra- and inter-model diversity reward. DivE2 schedules, over the course of training epochs, the relative
importance of these characteristics; it starts by selecting easy samples for each
model, and then gradually adjusts towards the models having specialized and
complementary expertise on subsets of the training data, thereby encouraging
high accuracy of the ensemble. We utilize an intra-model diversity term on data
assigned to each model, and an inter-model diversity term on data assigned to
pairs of models, to penalize both within-model and cross-model redundancy. We
formulate the data-model marriage problem as a generalized bipartite matching,
represented as submodular maximization subject to two matroid constraints. DivE2
solves a sequence of continuous-combinatorial optimizations with slowly varying
objectives and constraints. The combinatorial part handles the data-model marriage
while the continuous part updates model parameters based on the assignments. In
experiments, DivE2 outperforms other ensemble training methods under a variety
of model aggregation techniques, while also maintaining competitive efficiency.

1

Introduction

Ensemble methods [7, 57, 31, 8] are simple and powerful machine learning approaches to obtain
improved performance by aggregating predictions (e.g., majority voting or weighted averaging) over
multiple models. Over the past few decades, they have been widely applied, consistently yielding
good results. For neural networks (NN) in particular, ensemble methods have shown their utility
from the early 1980s [72, 28, 39, 10] to recent times [50, 27, 66, 20]. State-of-the-art results on many
contemporary competitions/benchmarks are achieved via ensembles of deep neural networks (DNNs),
e.g., ImageNet [17], SQuAD [55], and the Kaggle competitions (https://www.kaggle.com/).
In addition to boosting state-of-the-art performance of collections of large models, ensembles of
small and weak models can achieve performance comparable to much larger individual models,
and this can be useful when machine resources are limited. Inference over an ensemble of models,
moreover, can be easily parallelized even on a distributed machine.
A key reason for the success of ensemble methods is that the diversity among different models can
reduce the variance of the combined predictions and improve generalization. Intuitively, diverse
models tend to make mistakes on different samples in different ways (e.g., assigning largest probability
to different wrong classes), so during majority voting or averaging, those different mistakes cancel
each other out and the correct predictions can prevail. As neural networks grow larger in size and
intricacy, their variance correspondingly increases, offering opportunity for reduction by a diverse
ensemble of such networks.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

