Provable Variational Inference for
Constrained Log-Submodular Models

Josip Djolonga
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
josipd@inf.ethz.ch

Stefanie Jegelka
CSAIL
MIT
stefje@csail.mit.edu

Andreas Krause
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
Submodular maximization problems appear in several areas of machine learning
and data science, as many useful modelling concepts such as diversity and coverage
satisfy this natural diminishing returns property. Because the data defining these
functions, as well as the decisions made with the computed solutions, are subject to
statistical noise and randomness, it is arguably necessary to go beyond computing a
single approximate optimum and quantify its inherent uncertainty. To this end, we
define a rich class of probabilistic models associated with constrained submodular
maximization problems. These capture log-submodular dependencies of arbitrary
order between the variables, but also satisfy hard combinatorial constraints. Namely,
the variables are assumed to take on one of — possibly exponentially many — set
of states, which form the bases of a matroid. To perform inference in these models
we design novel variational inference algorithms, which carefully leverage the
combinatorial and probabilistic properties of these objects. In addition to providing
completely tractable and well-understood variational approximations, our approach
results in the minimization of a convex upper bound on the log-partition function.
The bound can be efficiently evaluated using greedy algorithms and optimized using
any first-order method. Moreover, for the case of facility location and weighted
coverage functions, we prove the first constant factor guarantee in this setting — an
efficiently certifiable e/(e − 1) approximation of the log-partition function. Finally,
we empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on several instances.

1

Introduction

Many real-world tasks can be modeled as distributions over combinatorial objects such as trees,
assignments or selections. As an illustrative example, let us consider the following scenario inspired
by the recent work of Celis et al. [1]. Assume that we are building a news aggregator and are faced
with the task of populating the limited number of slots on the front page with articles originating from
various news outlets. We furthermore assume that we have a function that, given a news article and a
slot, estimates how good of a match they are. Hence, if we decide that a certain subset of the articles
should be shown, we can compute their optimal assignment using a maximal bipartite matching.
Furthermore, to make sure that a diverse set of points of views are represented, we want the chosen
articles to not only have a high matching value, but to also come from different sources. This can
be enforced using a hard selection constraint — for example, we can require that each source j has
exactly kj articles on the front page. While the optimization problem has been well-studied as it is
that of submodular maximization, taking a probabilistic approach seems very challenging. Not only
the random variables have to satisfy complicated combinatorial requirements, but the utility function
is only implicitly defined via optimal matchings and is very challenging for many approximate
inference techniques. Nevertheless, by exploiting the submodular properties of the objective and
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

