Active Learning for Non-Parametric Regression
Using Purely Random Trees

Jack Goetz

Ambuj Tewari
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
{jrgoetz, tewaria, paulzim}@umich.edu

Paul Zimmerman

Abstract
Active learning is the task of using labelled data to select additional points to
label, with the goal of fitting the most accurate model with a fixed budget of labelled points. In binary classification active learning is known to produce faster
rates than passive learning for a broad range of settings. However in regression
restrictive structure and tailored methods were previously needed to obtain theoretically superior performance. In this paper we propose an intuitive tree based active learning algorithm for non-parametric regression with provable improvement
over random sampling. When implemented with Mondrian Trees our algorithm is
tuning parameter free, consistent and minimax optimal for Lipschitz functions.

1

Introduction

In this paper we study active learning for regression in the pool setting. In our setup we are given
a pool of unlabelled data points and want to build the best model with a fixed number of samples,
allowing selection of new points to use labels already obtained. Active learning is motivated by
scenarios where the experimenter has control over the data labelling process and where unlabelled
points are cheap but labels are expensive.
Our primary motivation comes from computational chemistry, where chemical properties of interest can be computed by solving approximations to the Schrödinger equation. One key property to
chemists, the rate of chemical reaction, can be quantified via the activation energy, which controls
the rate of reaction as a function of temperature [9]. While calculating the activation energy is
expensive, there are a small number of readily available features of the reaction that influence the
activation energy. This incentivizes building a metamodel for the activation energy to avoid excessive analysis of undesirable (high activation energy) reactions. Since we are restricted in the number
of simulations used to build our metamodel, we want to use the most informative data points. Because chemical reactions are discrete entities, we are restricted to a finite (but often large) pool of
reactions, thus requiring pool setting active learning even though we are selecting simulations.
Active learning methods are usually built on top of existing prediction algorithms. Decision trees
and forests are a popular class of such predictors due to their simplicity, expressiveness, state-ofthe-art performance and tuning parameter free nature. In this paper we focus our attention on purely
random trees [4], decision trees built independently of any data, due to their amenability to theoretical analysis. We use a recently proposed version called Mondrian Trees [17], which have been
shown to produce trees with many attractive properties such as consistency and minimax optimal
rate of convergence for Lipschitz functions [19].
As in some previous work [7], our active learning algorithm will be developed in two stages. First
we introduce a simple and intuitive oracle querying algorithm for purely random trees which is
optimal among a natural class of sampling schemes which includes random sampling (Theorem
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

