Spectral Signatures in Backdoor Attacks

Jerry Li
Simons Institute
Berkeley, CA 94709
jerryzli@berkeley.edu

Brandon Tran
EECS
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
btran@mit.edu

Aleksander M ˛
adry
EECS
MIT
madry@mit.edu

Abstract
A recent line of work has uncovered a new form of data poisoning: so-called
backdoor attacks. These attacks are particularly dangerous because they do not
affect a network’s behavior on typical, benign data. Rather, the network only
deviates from its expected output when triggered by a perturbation planted by an
adversary.
In this paper, we identify a new property of all known backdoor attacks, which
we call spectral signatures. This property allows us to utilize tools from robust
statistics to thwart the attacks. We demonstrate the efficacy of these signatures in
detecting and removing poisoned examples on real image sets and state of the art
neural network architectures. We believe that understanding spectral signatures is
a crucial first step towards designing ML systems secure against such backdoor
attacks.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved widespread success in a variety of settings, such as computer vision [20,
16], speech recognition [14], and text analysis [7]. As models from deep learning are deployed for
increasingly sensitive applications, it becomes more and more important to consider the security of
these models against attackers.
Perhaps the first setting developed for building secure deep learning models was adversarial examples [13, 26, 21, 12, 29, 4, 24, 32]. Here, test examples are perturbed by seemingly imperceptible
amounts in order to change their classification under a neural network classifier. This demonstrates
the ease with which an adversary can fool a trained model.
An orthogonal, yet also important, concern in the context the security of neural nets is their vulnerability to manipulation of their training sets. Such networks are often fairly data hungry, resulting in
training on data that could not be properly vetted. Consequently, any gathered data might have been
manipulated by a malicious adversary and cannot necessarily be trusted. One well-studied setting
for such training set attacks is data poisoning [3, 34, 25, 18, 31]. Here, the adversary injects a small
number of corrupted training examples, with a goal of degrading the model’s generalization accuracy.
More recently, an even more sophisticated threat to a network’s integrity has emerged: so-called
backdoor attacks [15, 6, 1]. Rather than causing the model’s test accuracy to degrade, the adversary’s
goal is for the network to misclassify the test inputs when the data point has been altered by the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

