Unorganized Malicious Attacks Detection

Ming Pang
Wei Gao
Min Tao
Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
{pangm, gaow, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn taom@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recommender systems have attracted much attention during the past decade. Many
attack detection algorithms have been developed for better recommendations,
mostly focusing on shilling attacks, where an attack organizer produces a large
number of user profiles by the same strategy to promote or demote an item. This
work considers another different attack style: unorganized malicious attacks, where
attackers individually utilize a small number of user profiles to attack different
items without organizer. This attack style occurs in many real applications, yet
relevant study remains open. We formulate the unorganized malicious attacks
detection as a matrix completion problem, and propose the Unorganized Malicious
Attacks detection (UMA) algorithm, based on the alternating splitting augmented
Lagrangian method. We verify, both theoretically and empirically, the effectiveness
of the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Online activities have been an essential part in our daily life as the flourish of Internet, and it is
important to recommend suitable products effectively as the number of users and items increases
drastically. Various collaborative filtering techniques have been developed in diverse systems to help
customers choose their favorite products in a set of items [5, 18, 28]. However, most collaborative
filtering approaches are vulnerable to spammers and manipulations of ratings [13, 19], and attackers
could bias systems by inserting fake rating scores into the user-item rating matrix. Some attackers try
to increase the popularity of their own items (push attack) while the others intend to decrease the
popularity of their competitors’ items (nuke attack).
Detecting attacks from online rating systems is crucial to recommendations. Most attack detection
studies focus on shilling attacks [13], where all the attack profiles are produced by the same strategy
to promote or demote a particular item. For example, an attack organizer may produce hundreds of
fake user profiles with one strategy where each fake user profile gives high scores to the most popular
movies and low scores to the target movie. Relevant studies have shown good detection performance
on diverse shilling attack strategies [16, 19, 23].
Practical mechanisms have been developed to prevent shilling attacks. For example, lots of online
sites require real names and phone numbers for user registration; CAPTCHA is used to determine
whether the response is generated by a robot; customers are allowed to rate a product after purchasing
this product on the shopping website. These mechanisms produce high cost for conducting traditional
shilling attacks; for example, small online sellers in e-commerce like Amazon have insufficient
capacity to produce hundreds of fake rating profiles to conduct a shilling attack.
In this paper, we introduce another different attack model named unorganized malicious attacks,
where attackers individually use a small number of user profiles to attack their own targets without
organizer. This attack happens in many real applications: online sellers on Amazon may produce
a few fake customer profiles to demote their competitors’ high-quality products; writers may hire
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

