Realistic Evaluation of Deep Semi-Supervised
Learning Algorithms
Avital Oliver⇤, Augustus Odena⇤, Colin Raffel⇤, Ekin D. Cubuk & Ian J. Goodfellow
Google Brain
{avitalo,augustusodena,craffel,cubuk,goodfellow}@google.com

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) provides a powerful framework for leveraging
unlabeled data when labels are limited or expensive to obtain. SSL algorithms based
on deep neural networks have recently proven successful on standard benchmark
tasks. However, we argue that these benchmarks fail to address many issues that
SSL algorithms would face in real-world applications. After creating a unified
reimplementation of various widely-used SSL techniques, we test them in a suite
of experiments designed to address these issues. We find that the performance
of simple baselines which do not use unlabeled data is often underreported, SSL
methods differ in sensitivity to the amount of labeled and unlabeled data, and
performance can degrade substantially when the unlabeled dataset contains out-ofdistribution examples. To help guide SSL research towards real-world applicability,
we make our unified reimplemention and evaluation platform publicly available.2

1

Introduction

It has repeatedly been shown that deep neural networks can achieve human- or super-human-level
performance on certain supervised learning problems by leveraging large collections of labeled data.
However, these successes come at a cost: Creating these large datasets typically requires a great deal
of human effort (to manually label examples), pain and/or risk (for medical datasets involving invasive
tests) or financial expense (to hire labelers or build the infrastructure needed for domain-specific
data collection). For many practical problems and applications, we lack the resources to create a
sufficiently large labeled dataset, which limits the wide-spread adoption of deep learning techniques.
An attractive approach towards addressing the lack of data is semi-supervised learning (SSL) [6]. In
contrast with supervised learning algorithms, which require labels for all examples, SSL algorithms
can improve their performance by also using unlabeled examples. SSL algorithms generally provide
a way of learning about the structure of the data from the unlabeled examples, alleviating the need
for labels. Some recent results [32, 50, 39] have shown that in certain cases, SSL approaches the
performance of purely supervised learning, even when a substantial portion of the labels in a given
dataset has been discarded. These results are demonstrated by taking an existing classification dataset
(typically CIFAR-10 [31] or SVHN [40]) and only using a small portion of it as labeled data with the
rest treated as unlabeled. The accuracy of a model trained with SSL with labeled and unlabeled data
is then compared to that of a model trained on only the small labeled portion.
These recent successes raise a natural question: Are SSL approaches applicable in “real-world”
settings? In this paper, we argue that this de facto way of evaluating SSL techniques does not address
this question in a satisfying way. Our goal is to more directly answer this question by proposing a new
⇤

2

Equal contribution
https://github.com/brain-research/realistic-ssl-evaluation

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

