The Sparse Manifold Transform
Yubei Chen1,2
Dylan M Paiton1,3
Bruno A Olshausen1,3,4
1
Redwood Center for Theoretical Neuroscience
2
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
3
Vision Science Graduate Group
4
Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute & School of Optometry
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
yubeic@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We present a signal representation framework called the sparse manifold transform
that combines key ideas from sparse coding, manifold learning, and slow feature
analysis. It turns non-linear transformations in the primary sensory signal space
into linear interpolations in a representational embedding space while maintaining
approximate invertibility. The sparse manifold transform is an unsupervised and
generative framework that explicitly and simultaneously models the sparse discreteness and low-dimensional manifold structure found in natural scenes. When
stacked, it also models hierarchical composition. We provide a theoretical description of the transform and demonstrate properties of the learned representation on
both synthetic data and natural videos.

1

Introduction

Inspired by Pattern Theory [40], we attempt to model three important and pervasive patterns in natural
signals: sparse discreteness, low dimensional manifold structure and hierarchical composition.
Each of these concepts have been individually explored in previous studies. For example, sparse
coding [43, 44] and ICA [5, 28] can learn sparse and discrete elements that make up natural signals.
Manifold learning [56, 48, 38, 4] was proposed to model and visualize low-dimensional continuous
transforms such as smooth 3D rotations or translations of a single discrete element. Deformable,
compositional models [60, 18] allow for a hierarchical composition of components into a more
abstract representation. We seek to model these three patterns jointly as they are almost always
entangled in real-world signals and their disentangling poses an unsolved challenge.
In this paper, we introduce an interpretable, generative and unsupervised learning model, the sparse
manifold transform (SMT), which has the potential to untangle all three patterns simultaneously and
explicitly. The SMT consists of two stages: dimensionality expansion using sparse coding followed
by contraction using manifold embedding. Our SMT implementation is to our knowledge, the first
model to bridge sparse coding and manifold learning. Furthermore, an SMT layer can be stacked to
produce an unsupervised hierarchical learning network.
The primary contribution of this paper is to establish a theoretical framework for the SMT by
reconciling and combining the formulations and concepts from sparse coding and manifold learning.
In the following sections we point out connections between three important unsupervised learning
methods: sparse coding, local linear embedding and slow feature analysis. We then develop a single
framework that utilizes insights from each method to describe our model. Although we focus here
on the application to image data, the concepts are general and may be applied to other types of data
such as audio signals and text. All experiments performed on natural scenes used the same dataset,
described in Supplement D.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

