Scaling provable adversarial defenses

Frank R. Schmidt
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
Renningen, Germany
frank.r.schmidt@de.bosch.com

Eric Wong
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ericwong@cs.cmu.edu
Jan Hendrik Metzen
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
Renningen, Germany
janhendrik.metzen@de.bosch.com

J. Zico Kolter
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University and
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recent work has developed methods for learning deep network classifiers that are
provably robust to norm-bounded adversarial perturbation; however, these methods
are currently only possible for relatively small feedforward networks. In this paper,
in an effort to scale these approaches to substantially larger models, we extend
previous work in three main directions. First, we present a technique for extending
these training procedures to much more general networks, with skip connections
(such as ResNets) and general nonlinearities; the approach is fully modular, and can
be implemented automatically (analogous to automatic differentiation). Second,
in the specific case of `∞ adversarial perturbations and networks with ReLU
nonlinearities, we adopt a nonlinear random projection for training, which scales
linearly in the number of hidden units (previous approaches scaled quadratically).
Third, we show how to further improve robust error through cascade models. On
both MNIST and CIFAR data sets, we train classifiers that improve substantially on
the state of the art in provable robust adversarial error bounds: from 5.8% to 3.1%
on MNIST (with `∞ perturbations of  = 0.1), and from 80% to 36.4% on CIFAR
(with `∞ perturbations of  = 2/255). Code for all experiments in the paper is
available at https://github.com/locuslab/convex_adversarial/.

1

Introduction

A body of recent work in adversarial machine learning has shown that it is possible to learn provably
robust deep classifiers [Wong and Kolter, 2017, Raghunathan et al., 2018, Dvijotham et al., 2018].
These are deep networks that are verifiably guaranteed to be robust to adversarial perturbations under
some specified attack model; for example, a certain robustness certificate may guarantee that for a
given example x, no perturbation ∆ with `∞ norm less than some specified  could change the class
label that the network predicts for the perturbed example x + ∆. However, up until this point, such
provable guarantees have only been possible for reasonably small-sized networks. It has remained
unclear whether these methods could extend to larger, more representionally complex networks.
In this paper, we make substantial progress towards the goal of scaling these provably robust networks
to realistic sizes. Specifically, we extend the techniques of Wong and Kolter [2017] in three key ways.
First, while past work has only applied to pure feedforward networks, we extend the framework to
deal with arbitrary residual/skip connections (a hallmark of modern deep network architectures),
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

