Improving Exploration in Evolution Strategies for
Deep Reinforcement Learning via a Population of
Novelty-Seeking Agents
Edoardo Conti⇤
Vashisht Madhavan⇤
Felipe Petroski Such
Joel Lehman
Kenneth O. Stanley
Jeff Clune
Uber AI Labs

Abstract
Evolution strategies (ES) are a family of black-box optimization algorithms able
to train deep neural networks roughly as well as Q-learning and policy gradient
methods on challenging deep reinforcement learning (RL) problems, but are much
faster (e.g. hours vs. days) because they parallelize better. However, many RL
problems require directed exploration because they have reward functions that are
sparse or deceptive (i.e. contain local optima), and it is unknown how to encourage
such exploration with ES. Here we show that algorithms that have been invented
to promote directed exploration in small-scale evolved neural networks via populations of exploring agents, specifically novelty search (NS) and quality diversity
(QD) algorithms, can be hybridized with ES to improve its performance on sparse
or deceptive deep RL tasks, while retaining scalability. Our experiments confirm
that the resultant new algorithms, NS-ES and two QD algorithms, NSR-ES and
NSRA-ES, avoid local optima encountered by ES to achieve higher performance
on Atari and simulated robots learning to walk around a deceptive trap. This paper
thus introduces a family of fast, scalable algorithms for reinforcement learning that
are capable of directed exploration. It also adds this new family of exploration
algorithms to the RL toolbox and raises the interesting possibility that analogous
algorithms with multiple simultaneous paths of exploration might also combine
well with existing RL algorithms outside ES.

1

Introduction

In RL, an agent tries to learn to perform a sequence of actions in an environment that maximizes
some notion of cumulative reward [1]. However, reward functions are often deceptive, and solely
optimizing for reward without some mechanism to encourage intelligent exploration can lead to
getting stuck in local optima and the agent failing to properly learn [1–3]. Unlike in supervised
learning with deep neural networks (DNNs), wherein local optima are not thought to be a problem
[4, 5], the training data in RL is determined by the actions an agent takes. If the agent greedily
takes actions that maximize reward, the training data for the algorithm will be limited and it may not
discover alternate strategies with larger payoffs (i.e. it can get stuck in local optima) [1–3]. Sparse
reward signals can also be a problem for algorithms that only maximize reward, because at times there
may be no reward gradient to follow. The possibility of deceptiveness and/or sparsity in the reward
signal motivates the need for efficient and directed exploration, in which an agent is motivated to visit
unexplored states in order to learn to accumulate higher rewards. Although deep RL algorithms have
performed amazing feats in recent years [6–8], they have mostly done so despite relying on simple,
undirected (aka dithering) exploration strategies, in which an agent hopes to explore new areas of its
environment by taking random actions (e.g. epsilon-greedy exploration) [1].
A number of methods have been proposed to promote directed exploration in RL [9, 10], including
recent methods that handle high-dimensional state spaces with DNNs. A common idea is to encourage
⇤

Equal contribution, corresponding authors: vashisht@uber.com, edoardo.conti@gmail.com.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

