Generalisation in humans and deep neural networks

Robert Geirhos1-3∗§

Carlos R. Medina Temme1∗

Jonas Rauber2,3∗

Heiko H. Schütt1,4,5

Matthias Bethge2,6,7∗

Felix A. Wichmann1,2,6,8∗

1

Neural Information Processing Group, University of Tübingen
2
Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen
3
International Max Planck Research School for Intelligent Systems
4
Graduate School of Neural and Behavioural Sciences, University of Tübingen
5
Department of Psychology, University of Potsdam
6
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Tübingen
7
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics
8
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
∗
Joint first / joint senior authors
§
To whom correspondence should be addressed: robert.geirhos@bethgelab.org

Abstract
We compare the robustness of humans and current convolutional deep neural networks (DNNs) on object recognition under twelve different types of image degradations. First, using three well known DNNs (ResNet-152, VGG-19, GoogLeNet)
we find the human visual system to be more robust to nearly all of the tested image
manipulations, and we observe progressively diverging classification error-patterns
between humans and DNNs when the signal gets weaker. Secondly, we show that
DNNs trained directly on distorted images consistently surpass human performance
on the exact distortion types they were trained on, yet they display extremely poor
generalisation abilities when tested on other distortion types. For example, training
on salt-and-pepper noise does not imply robustness on uniform white noise and
vice versa. Thus, changes in the noise distribution between training and testing
constitutes a crucial challenge to deep learning vision systems that can be systematically addressed in a lifelong machine learning approach. Our new dataset
consisting of 83K carefully measured human psychophysical trials provide a useful
reference for lifelong robustness against image degradations set by the human
visual system.

1

Introduction

1.1

Deep neural networks as models of human object recognition

The visual recognition of objects by humans in everyday life is rapid and seemingly effortless, as
well as largely independent of viewpoint and object orientation [1]. The rapid and primarily foveal
recognition during a single fixation has been termed core object recognition (see [2] for a review).
We know, for example, that it is possible to reliably identify objects in the central visual field within a
single fixation in less than 200 ms when viewing “standard” images [2–4]. Based on the rapidness of
object recognition, core object recognition is often thought to be achieved with mainly feedforward
processing although feedback connections are ubiquitous in the primate brain. Object recognition
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

