Gradient Sparsification for Communication-Efficient
Distributed Optimization

Jianqiao Wangni
University of Pennsylvania
Tencent AI Lab
wnjq@seas.upenn.edu

Jialei Wang
Two Sigma Investments
jialei.wang@twosigma.com

Ji Liu
University of Rochester
Tencent AI Lab
ji.liu.uwisc@gmail.com

Tong Zhang
Tencent AI Lab
tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
Modern large-scale machine learning applications require stochastic optimization
algorithms to be implemented on distributed computational architectures. A key
bottleneck is the communication overhead for exchanging information such as
stochastic gradients among different workers. In this paper, to reduce the communication cost, we propose a convex optimization formulation to minimize the coding
length of stochastic gradients. The key idea is to randomly drop out coordinates of
the stochastic gradient vectors and amplify the remaining coordinates appropriately
to ensure the sparsified gradient to be unbiased. To solve the optimal sparsification
efficiently, a simple and fast algorithm is proposed for an approximate solution,
with a theoretical guarantee for sparseness. Experiments on `2 -regularized logistic
regression, support vector machines and convolutional neural networks validate
our sparsification approaches.

1

Introduction

Scaling stochastic optimization algorithms [26, 24, 14, 11] to distributed computational architectures
[10, 17, 33] or multicore systems [23, 9, 19, 22] is a crucial problem for large-scale machine learning.
In the synchronous stochastic gradient method, each worker processes a random minibatch of its
training data, and then the local updates are synchronized by making an All-Reduce step, which
aggregates stochastic gradients from all workers, and taking a Broadcast step that transmits the
updated parameter vector back to all workers. The process is repeated until a certain convergence
criterion is met. An important factor that may significantly slow down any optimization algorithm is
the communication cost among workers. Even for the single machine multi-core setting, where the
cores communicate with each other by reading and writing to a chunk of shared memory, conflicts of
(memory access) resources may significantly degrade the efficiency. There are solutions to specific
problems like mean estimation [29, 28], component analysis [20], clustering [6], sparse regression
[16] and boosting [7]. Other existing works on distributed machine learning include two directions:
1) how to design communication efficient algorithms to reduce the round of communications among
workers [37, 27, 12, 36], and 2) how to use large mini-batches without compromising the convergence
speed [18, 31]. Several papers considered the problem of reducing the precision of gradient by using
fewer bits to represent floating-point numbers [25, 2, 34, 8, 32] or only transmitting coordinates
of large magnitudes[1, 21]. This problem has also drawn significant attention from theoretical
perspectives about its communication complexity [30, 37, 3].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

