How SGD Selects the Global Minima in
Over-parameterized Learning: A Dynamical Stability
Perspective
Lei Wu
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
Beijing, 100081, P.R. China
leiwu@pku.edu.cn

Chao Ma
Program in Applied and Computational Mathematics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
chaom@princeton.edu

Weinan E
Department of Mathematics and Program in Applied and Computational Mathematics
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA and
Beijing Institute of Big Data Research, Beijing, 100081, P.R. China
weinan@math.princeton.edu

Abstract
The question of which global minima are accessible by a stochastic gradient decent
(SGD) algorithm with specific learning rate and batch size is studied from the
perspective of dynamical stability. The concept of non-uniformity is introduced,
which, together with sharpness, characterizes the stability property of a global
minimum and hence the accessibility of a particular SGD algorithm to that global
minimum. In particular, this analysis shows that learning rate and batch size play
different roles in minima selection. Extensive empirical results seem to correlate
well with the theoretical findings and provide further support to these claims.

1

Introduction

In machine learning we have always faced with the following dilemma: The function that we minimize
is the empirical risk but the one that we are really interested in is the population risk. In the old days
when typical models have only few isolated minima, this issue was not so pressing. But now in the
setting of over-parametrized learning, e.g. deep learning, when there is a large set of global minima,
all of which have zero training error but the test error can be very different, this issue becomes highly
relevant. In fact one might say that the task of optimization algorithms has become: Find the set of
parameters with the smallest test error among all the ones with zero training error.
At the moment, this is clearly an impossible task since we do not have much explicit information
about the population risk. Therefore in this paper, we take a limited view and ask the question: Which
global minima (of the empirical risk, of course) are accessible to a particular optimization algorithm
with a particular set of hyper-parameters? In other words, how the different optimization algorithms
with different hyper-parameters pick out the different set of global minima?
Specifically, in deep learning one of the most puzzling issues is the recent observation that SGD tends
to select the so-called flat minima, and flatter minima seem to generalize better [3, 13, 7]. Several
very interesting attempts have been made to understand this issue. Goyal et al. [2] and Hoffer et al.
[4] numerically studied how the learning rate and batch size impact test accuracy of the solutions
found by SGD. Jastrz˛ebski et al. [6] suggested that the ratio between the learning rate and the batch
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

