Zero-Shot Transfer with Deictic Object-Oriented
Representation in Reinforcement Learning

Ofir Marom1 , Benjamin Rosman 1,2
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa
2
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, Pretoria, South Africa
1

Abstract
Object-oriented representations in reinforcement learning have shown promise
in transfer learning, with previous research introducing a propositional objectoriented framework that has provably efficient learning bounds with respect to
sample complexity. However, this framework has limitations in terms of the classes
of tasks it can efficiently learn. In this paper we introduce a novel deictic objectoriented framework that has provably efficient learning bounds and can solve a
broader range of tasks. Additionally, we show that this framework is capable
of zero-shot transfer of transition dynamics across tasks and demonstrate this
empirically for the Taxi and Sokoban domains.

1

Introduction

A longstanding objective in reinforcement learning (RL) is transfer learning, where the aim is to
accelerate learning in an unseen task using knowledge gained in previously learned tasks [14]. Various
Markov decision process (MDP) representations have shown promise in this regard [5, 6, 7, 11, 9]. A
common choice among such representations is one where components of an MDP are described with
objects [7, 4, 12, 8]. In particular, Propositional Object-Oriented MDPs (Propositional OO-MDPs)
[4] introduce a framework to represent the state-space of an MDP in terms of objects while the
transition dynamics are represented in terms of propositional preconditions over object classes that
map to effects over attributes of the object classes. An appealing property of Propositional OO-MDPs
is that the transition dynamics have provably efficient learning bounds for deterministic environments
that have been shown to outperform competing model-based approaches for certain domains [3].
Unfortunately, the core restriction of Propositional OO-MDPs that the preconditions be described
only in terms of propositions tends to be a strong one and, as even the original authors point out,
precludes efficient learning of certain classes of tasks [3]. Such tasks include those where it is
required to distinguish between different objects of the same object class. As a specific example of
this, and further elaborated in subsection 2.3, consider the Sokoban domain where a person attempts
to push a box but cannot do so if that box is adjacent to a wall. In this case, there is no way of tying
the box that is adjacent to the person with the box that is adjacent to the wall with propositions. To
accommodate such tasks, the transition dynamics for Propositional OO-MDPs must be appended
with first-order predicates 1 . However, this impacts the learning efficiency as well as the ability to
transfer between tasks since adding more objects now increases the number of preconditions that the
transition dynamics depend on.
In this paper we propose to overcome this limitation of Propositional OO-MDPs with a novel deictic
object-oriented representation, Deictic OO-MDPs. The key insight behind Deictic OO-MDPs is
the concept of deictic predicates. Deictic predicates are grounded only with respect to a central
1
In this paper we refer to propositions as logic statements over object classes, while we refer to first-order
predicates as logic statements that depend on at least one grounded object.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

