Data-dependent PAC-Bayes priors
via differential privacy
Gintare Karolina Dziugaite
University of Cambridge; Element AI

Daniel M. Roy
University of Toronto; Vector Institute

Abstract
The Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) Bayes framework (McAllester, 1999)
can incorporate knowledge about the learning algorithm and (data) distribution
through the use of distribution-dependent priors, yielding tighter generalization
bounds on data-dependent posteriors. Using this flexibility, however, is difficult,
especially when the data distribution is presumed to be unknown. We show how an
e-differentially private data-dependent prior yields a valid PAC-Bayes bound, and
then show how non-private mechanisms for choosing priors can also yield generalization bounds. As an application of this result, we show that a Gaussian prior
mean chosen via stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD; Welling and Teh,
2011) leads to a valid PAC-Bayes bound given control of the 2-Wasserstein distance to an e-differentially private stationary distribution. We study our datadependent bounds empirically, and show that they can be nonvacuous even when
other distribution-dependent bounds are vacuous.

1

Introduction

There has been a resurgence of interest in PAC-Bayes bounds, especially towards explaining generalization in large-scale neural networks trained by stochastic gradient descent (Dziugaite and Roy,
2017; Neyshabur et al., 2017b; Neyshabur et al., 2017a; London, 2017). See also (Bégin et al.,
2016; Germain et al., 2016; Thiemann et al., 2017; Bartlett, Foster, and Telgarsky, 2017; Raginsky,
Rakhlin, and Telgarsky, 2017; Grünwald and Mehta, 2017; Smith and Le, 2018).
PAC-Bayes bounds control the generalization error of Gibbs classifiers (aka PAC-Bayes “posteriors”) in terms of the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence to a fixed probability measure (aka PACBayes “prior”) on the space of classifiers. PAC-Bayes bounds depend on a tradeoff between the
empirical risk of the posterior Q and a penalty m1 KL(Q||P), where P is the prior, fixed independently
of the sample S 2 Z m from some space Z of labelled examples. The KL penalty is typically the
largest contribution to the bound and so finding the tightest possible bound generally depends on
minimizing the KL term.
The KL penalty vanishes for Q = P, but typically P, viewed as a randomized (Gibbs) classifier, has
poor performance since it has been chosen independently of the data. On the other hand, since P is
chosen independently of the data, posteriors Q tuned to the data to achieve minimal empirical risk
often bear little resemblance to the data-independent prior P, causing KL(Q||P) to be large. As a
result, PAC-Bayes bounds can be loose or even vacuous.
The problem of excessive KL penalties is not inherent to the PAC-Bayes framework. Indeed, the
PAC-Bayes theorem permits one to choose the prior P based on the distribution D of the data.
However, since D is considered unknown, and our only insight as to D is through the sample S, this
flexibility would seem to be useless, as P must be chosen independently of S in existing bounds.
Nevertheless, it is possible to make progress in this direction, and it is likely the best way towards
tighter bounds and deeper understanding.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

