Metric on Nonlinear Dynamical Systems
with Perron-Frobenius Operators
Isao Ishikawa†‡ , Keisuke Fujii† , Masahiro Ikeda†‡ , Yuka Hashimoto†‡ , Yoshinobu Kawahara†§
†
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
‡
School of Fundamental Science and Technology, Keio University
§
The Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research, Osaka University
{isao.ishikawa, keisuke.fujii.zh, masahiro.ikeda}@riken.jp
yukahashimoto@keio.jp, ykawahara@sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
The development of a metric for structural data is a long-term problem in pattern
recognition and machine learning. In this paper, we develop a general metric for
comparing nonlinear dynamical systems that is defined with Perron-Frobenius
operators in reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces. Our metric includes the existing
fundamental metrics for dynamical systems, which are basically defined with
principal angles between some appropriately-chosen subspaces, as its special cases.
We also describe the estimation of our metric from finite data. We empirically
illustrate our metric with an example of rotation dynamics in a unit disk in a
complex plane, and evaluate the performance with real-world time-series data.

1

Introduction

Classification and recognition has been one of the main focuses of research in machine learning
for the past decades. When dealing with some structural data other than vector-valued ones, the
development of an algorithm for this problem according to the type of the structure is basically
reduced to the design of an appropriate metric or kernel. However, not much of the existing literature
has addressed the design of metrics in the context of dynamical systems. To the best of our knowledge,
the metric for ARMA models based on comparing their cepstrum coefficients [12] is one of the
first papers to address this problem. De Cock and De Moor extended this to linear state-space
models by considering the subspace angles between the observability subspaces [6]. Meanwhile,
Vishwanathan et al. developed a family of kernels for dynamical systems based on the Binet-Cauchy
theorem [25]. Chaudhry and Vidal extended this to incorporate the invariance on initial conditions [4].
As mentioned in some of the above literature, the existing metrics for dynamical systems that
have been developed are defined with principal angles between some appropriate subspaces such
as column subspaces of observability matrices. However, those are basically restricted to linear
dynamical systems although Vishwanathan et al. mentioned an extension with reproducing kernels
for some specific metrics [25]. Recently, Fujii et al. discussed a more general extension of these
metrics to nonlinear systems with Koopman operator [8]. Mezic et al. propose metrics of dynamcal
systems in the context of ergodic theory via Koopman operators on L2 -spaces[14, 15]. The Koopman
operator, also known as the composition operator, is a linear operator on an observable for a nonlinear
dynamical system [10]. Thus, by analyzing the operator in place of directly nonlinear dynamics,
one could extract more easily some properties about the dynamics. In particular, spectral analysis
of Koopman operator has attracted attention with its empirical procedure called dynamic mode
decomposition (DMD) in a variety of fields of science and engineering [18, 2, 17, 3].
In this paper, we develop a general metric for nonlinear dynamical systems, which includes the
existing fundamental metrics for dynamical systems mentioned above as its special cases. This metric
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

