Discretely Relaxing Continuous Variables
for tractable Variational Inference
Trefor W. Evans
University of Toronto
trefor.evans@mail.utoronto.ca

Prasanth B. Nair
University of Toronto
pbn@utias.utoronto.ca

Abstract
We explore a new research direction in Bayesian variational inference with discrete
latent variable priors where we exploit Kronecker matrix algebra for efficient and
exact computations of the evidence lower bound (ELBO). The proposed "DIRECT"
approach has several advantages over its predecessors; (i) it can exactly compute
ELBO gradients (i.e. unbiased, zero-variance gradient estimates), eliminating
the need for high-variance stochastic gradient estimators and enabling the use of
quasi-Newton optimization methods; (ii) its training complexity is independent of
the number of training points, permitting inference on large datasets; and (iii) its
posterior samples consist of sparse and low-precision quantized integers which
permit fast inference on hardware limited devices. In addition, our DIRECT
models can exactly compute statistical moments of the parameterized predictive
posterior without relying on Monte Carlo sampling. The DIRECT approach is not
practical for all likelihoods, however, we identify a popular model structure which
is practical, and demonstrate accurate inference using latent variables discretized as
extremely low-precision 4-bit quantized integers. While the ELBO computations
considered in the numerical studies require over 102352 log-likelihood evaluations,
we train on datasets with over two-million points in just seconds.

1

Introduction

Hardware restrictions posed by mobile devices make Bayesian inference particularly ill-suited for
on-board machine learning. This is unfortunate since the safety afforded by Bayesian statistics is
extremely valuable in many prominent mobile applications. For example, the cost of erroneous
decisions are very high in autonomous driving or mobile robotic control. The robustness and
uncertainty quantification provided by Bayesian inference is therefore extremely valuable for these
applications provided inference can be performed on-board in real-time [1, 2].
Outside of mobile applications, resource efficiency is still an important concern. For example,
deployed models making billions of predictions per day can incur substantial energy costs, making
energy efficiency an important consideration in modern machine learning architectures [3].
We approach the problem of efficient Bayesian inference by considering discrete latent variable
models such that posterior samples of the variables will be quantized and sparse, leading to efficient
inference computations with respect to energy, memory and computational requirements. Training a
model with a discrete prior is typically very slow and expensive, requiring the use of high variance
Monte Carlo gradient estimators to learn the variational distribution. The main contribution of this
work is the development of a method to rapidly learn the variational distribution for such a model
without the use of any stochastic estimators; the objective function will be computed exactly at
each iteration. To our knowledge, such an approach has not been taken for variational inference of
large-scale probabilistic models.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

