Beauty-in-averageness and its contextual
modulations: A Bayesian statistical account

Chaitanya K. Ryali
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive La Jolla, CA 92093
rckrishn@eng.ucsd.edu

Angela J. Yu
Department of Cognitive Science
University of California San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive La Jolla, CA 92093
ajyu@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Understanding how humans perceive the likability of high-dimensional “objects”
such as faces is an important problem in both cognitive science and AI/ML. Existing
models generally assume these preferences to be fixed. However, psychologists
have found human assessment of facial attractiveness to be context-dependent.
Specifically, the classical Beauty-in-Averageness (BiA) effect, whereby a blended
face is judged to be more attractive than the originals, is significantly diminished
or reversed when the original faces are recognizable, or when the blend is mixedrace/mixed-gender and the attractiveness judgment is preceded by a race/gender
categorization, respectively. This "Ugliness-in-Averageness" (UiA) effect has
previously been explained via a qualitative disfluency account, which posits that
the negative affect associated with the difficult race or gender categorization is
inadvertently interpreted by the brain as a dislike for the face itself. In contrast,
we hypothesize that human preference for an object is increased when it incurs
lower encoding cost, in particular when its perceived statistical typicality is high,
in consonance with Barlow’s seminal “efficient coding hypothesis.” This statistical
coding cost account explains both BiA, where facial blends generally have higher
likelihood than “parent faces”, and UiA, when the preceding context or task restricts
face representation to a task-relevant subset of features, thus redefining statistical
typicality and encoding cost within that subspace. We use simulations to show
that our model provides a parsimonious, statistically grounded, and quantitative
account of both BiA and UiA. We validate our model using experimental data from
a gender categorization task. We also propose a novel experiment, based on model
predictions, that will be able to arbitrate between the disfluency account and our
statistical coding cost account of attractiveness.

1

Introduction

Humans readily express liking and disliking for complex, high-dimensional “objects”, be they
faces, movies, houses, technology, books, or life partners, even if they cannot verbalize exactly
why. Understanding how these preferences arise is important for both cognitive science, and for AI
systems that interact with humans. In particular, face processing presents a prime case study for
complex information processing in humans. Human, including very young babies [1], efficiently
perform sophisticated computational tasks based on a brief glimpse of a face, such as recognizing
individuals, identifying emotional states, and assessing social traits such as attractiveness [2]. The
last phenomenon has an obvious impact on real-life decisions such as dating, employment, education,
law enforcement, and criminal justice [3]. Existing models of human preferences, in both machine
learning and cognitive science, have generally assumed social processing of faces (e.g. attractiveness
judgment) to be a fixed function of the underlying face features [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. However, a
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

