An Information-Theoretic Analysis for
Thompson Sampling with Many Actions

Shi Dong
Stanford University
sdong15@stanford.edu

Benjamin Van Roy
Stanford University
bvr@stanford.edu

Abstract
Information-theoretic Bayesian regret bounds of Russo and Van Roy [8] capture
the dependence of regret on prior uncertainty. However, this dependence is through
entropy, which can become arbitrarily large as the number of actions increases. We
establish new bounds that depend instead on a notion of rate-distortion. Among
other things, this allows us to recover through information-theoretic arguments a
near-optimal bound for the linear bandit. We also offer a bound for the logistic
bandit that dramatically improves on the best previously available, though this
bound depends on an information-theoretic statistic that we have only been able to
quantify via computation.

1

Introduction

Thompson sampling [11] has proved to be an effective heuristic across a broad range of online
decision problems [2, 10]. Russo and Van Roy [8] provided an information-theoretic
q analysis that
yields insight into the algorithm’s broad applicability and establishes a bound of ΓH(A∗ )T on
cumulative expected regret over T time periods of any algorithm and online decision problem. The
information ratio Γ is a statistic that captures the manner in which an algorithm trades off between
immediate reward and information acquisition; Russo and Van Roy [8] bound the information ratio
of Thompson sampling for particular classes of problems. The entropy H(A∗ ) of the optimal action
quantifies the agent’s initial uncertainty.

If the priorqdistribution of A∗ is uniform, the entropy H(A∗ ) is the logarithm of the number of actions.

As such, ΓH(A∗ )T grows arbitrarily large with the number of actions. On the other hand, even
for problems with infinite action sets, like the linear bandit with a polytopic action set, Thompson
sampling is known to obey gracious regret bounds [6]. This suggests that the dependence on entropy
leaves room for improvement.

In this paper, we establish bounds that depend on a notion of rate-distortion instead of entropy. Our
new line of analysis is inspired by rate-distortion theory, which is a branch of information theory
that quantifies the amount of information required to learn an approximation [3]. This concept was
also leveraged in recent work of Russo and Van Roy [9], which develops an alternative to Thompson
sampling that aims to learn satisficing actions. An important difference is that the results of this paper
apply to Thompson sampling itself.
We apply our analysis to linear and generalized linear bandits and establish Bayesian regret bounds
that remain
the d-dimensional linear bandit setting, our bound
√ sharp with large action spaces. For √
is O(d T log T ), which
is
tighter
than
the
O(d
T log T ) bound of [7]. Our bound also improves
p
on the previous O( dT H(A∗ )) information-theoretic bound of [8] since it does not depend on
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

