Generalized Inverse Optimization through Online
Learning

Chaosheng Dong
Department of Industrial Engineering
University of Pittsburgh
chaosheng@pitt.edu

Yiran Chen
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University
yiran.chen@duke.edu

Bo Zeng
Department of Industrial Engineering
University of Pittsburgh
bzeng@pitt.edu

Abstract
Inverse optimization is a powerful paradigm for learning preferences and restrictions that explain the behavior of a decision maker, based on a set of external
signal and the corresponding decision pairs. However, most inverse optimization
algorithms are designed specifically in batch setting, where all the data is available in advance. As a consequence, there has been rare use of these methods in
an online setting suitable for real-time applications. In this paper, we propose
a general framework for inverse optimization through online learning. Specifically, we develop an online learning algorithm that uses an implicit update rule
which can handle noisy data. Moreover, under additional regularity assumptions
in terms of the
√ data and the model, we prove that our algorithm converges at a
rate of O(1/ T ) and is statistically consistent. In our experiments, we show the
online learning approach can learn the parameters with great accuracy and is very
robust to noises, and achieves a dramatic improvement in computational efficacy
over the batch learning approach.

1

Introduction

Possessing the ability to elicit customers’ preferences and restrictions (PR) is crucial to the success
for an organization in designing and providing services or products. Nevertheless, as in most scenarios, one can only observe their decisions or behaviors corresponding to external signals, while
cannot directly access their decision making schemes. Indeed, decision makers probably do not have
exact information regarding their own decision making process [1]. To bridge that discrepancy, inverse optimization has been proposed and received significant research attention, which is to infer or
learn the missing information of the underlying decision models from observed data, assuming that
human decision makers are rationally making decisions [2, 3, 4, 5, 1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Nowadays,
extending from its initial form that only considers a single observation [2, 3, 4, 5] with clean data,
inverse optimization has been further developed and applied to handle more realistic cases that have
many observations with noisy data [1, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11].
Despite of these remarkable achievements, traditional inverse optimization (typically in batch setting) has not proven fully applicable for supporting recent attempts in AI to automate the elicitation
of human decision maker’s PR in real time. Consider, for example, recommender systems (RSs)
used by online retailers to increase product sales. The RSs first elicit one customer’s PR from the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

