Multivariate Time Series Imputation with
Generative Adversarial Networks
Yonghong Luo
College of Computer Science
Nankai University
Tianjin, China
luoyonghong@dbis.nankai.edu.cn
Ying Zhang ∗
College of Computer Science
Nankai University
Tianjin, China
yingzhang@nankai.edu.cn

Xiangrui Cai
College of Computer Science
Nankai University
Tianjin, China
caixiangrui@dbis.nankai.edu.cn

Jun Xu
School of Information
Renmin University of China
Beijing, China
junxu@ruc.edu.cn

Xiaojie Yuan
College of Computer Science
Nankai University
Tianjin, China
yuanxj@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Multivariate time series usually contain a large number of missing values, which
hinders the application of advanced analysis methods on multivariate time series
data. Conventional approaches to addressing the challenge of missing values,
including mean/zero imputation, case deletion, and matrix factorization-based imputation, are all incapable of modeling the temporal dependencies and the nature of
complex distribution in multivariate time series. In this paper, we treat the problem
of missing value imputation as data generation. Inspired by the success of Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) in image generation, we propose to learn the
overall distribution of a multivariate time series dataset with GAN, which is further
used to generate the missing values for each sample. Different from the image
data, the time series data are usually incomplete due to the nature of data recording
process. A modified Gate Recurrent Unit is employed in GAN to model the temporal irregularity of the incomplete time series. Experiments on two multivariate
time series datasets show that the proposed model outperformed the baselines in
terms of accuracy of imputation. Experimental results also showed that a simple
model on the imputed data can achieve state-of-the-art results on the prediction
tasks, demonstrating the benefits of our model in downstream applications.

1

Introduction

The real world is filled with multivariate time series data such as network records, medical logs and
meteorologic observations. Time series analysis is useful in many situations such as forecasting the
stock price [22] and indicating fitness and diagnosis category of patients [7]. However, some of these
time series are incomplete due to the broken of collective devices, the collecting errors and willful
damages [15]. Besides, the time intervals of the observations in time series are not always fixed.
Figure 1 and Figure 2 demonstrate the high missing rate of the Physionet [42] dataset. As time goes
by, the maximum missing rate at each timestamp is always higher than 95%. We can also observe
that most variables’ missing rate are above 80% and the mean of the missing rate is 80.67%. The
missing values in time series data make it hard to analyze and mine [14]. Therefore, the processing
of missing values in time series has become a very important problem.
∗

Corresponding author.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

