A dual framework for low-rank tensor completion

Madhav Nimishakavi∗, Pratik Jawanpuria†, Bamdev Mishra†
∗
Indian Institute of Science, India
†
Microsoft, India
madhav@iisc.ac.in, {pratik.jawanpuria,bamdevm}@microsoft.com

Abstract
One of the popular approaches for low-rank tensor completion is to use the latent
trace norm regularization. However, most existing works in this direction learn a
sparse combination of tensors. In this work, we fill this gap by proposing a variant
of the latent trace norm that helps in learning a non-sparse combination of tensors.
We develop a dual framework for solving the low-rank tensor completion problem.
We first show a novel characterization of the dual solution space with an interesting
factorization of the optimal solution. Overall, the optimal solution is shown to lie on
a Cartesian product of Riemannian manifolds. Furthermore, we exploit the versatile
Riemannian optimization framework for proposing computationally efficient trust
region algorithm. The experiments illustrate the efficacy of the proposed algorithm
on several real-world datasets across applications.

1

Introduction

Tensors are multidimensional or K-way arrays, which provide a natural way to represent multi-modal
data [10, 11]. Low-rank tensor completion problem, in particular, aims to recover a low-rank tensor
from partially observed tensor [2]. This problem has numerous applications in image/video inpainting
[27, 26], link-prediction [14], and recommendation systems [39], to name a few.
In this work, we focus on trace norm regularized low-rank tensor completion problem of the form
min

W∈Rn1 ×n2 ×...×nK

kWΩ − YΩ k2F +

1
R(W),
λ

(1)

where YΩ ∈ Rn1 ×...×nK is a partially observed K- mode tensor, whose entries are only known for a
subset of indices Ω. (WΩ )(i1 ,...,iK ) = W(i1 ,...,iK ) , if (i1 , . . . , iK ) ∈ Ω and 0 otherwise, k·kF is the
Frobenius norm , R(·) is a low-rank promoting regularizer, and λ > 0 is the regularization parameter.
Similar to the matrix completion problem, the trace norm regularization has been used to enforce the
low-rank constraint for the tensor completion problem. The works [41, 42] discuss the overlapped
and latent trace norm regularizations for tensors. In particular, [42, 45] show that the latent trace
norm has certain better tensor reconstruction bounds. The latent trace norm regularization learns the
tensor as a sparse combination of different tensors. In our work, we empirically motivate the need
for learning non-sparse combination of tensors and propose a variant of the latent trace norm that
learns a non-sparse combination of tensors. We show a novel characterization of the solution space
that allows for a compact storage of the tensor, thereby allowing to develop scalable optimization
formulations. Concretely, we make the following contributions in this paper.
• We propose a novel trace norm regularizer for low-rank tensor completion problem, which
learns a tensor as a non-sparse combination of tensors. In contrast, the more popular latent
trace norm regularizer [41, 42, 45] learns a highly sparse combination of tensors. Non-sparse
combination helps in capturing information along all the modes.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

