LAG: Lazily Aggregated Gradient for
Communication-Efficient Distributed Learning

Tianyi Chen⋆

Georgios B. Giannakis⋆

Tao Sun†,∗

Wotao Yin∗

⋆

University of Minnesota - Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan 410073, China
∗
University of California - Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
{chen3827,georgios@umn.edu} nudtsuntao@163.com wotaoyin@math.ucla.edu
†

Abstract
This paper presents a new class of gradient methods for distributed machine learning that adaptively skip the gradient calculations to learn with reduced communication and computation. Simple rules are designed to detect slowly-varying
gradients and, therefore, trigger the reuse of outdated gradients. The resultant
gradient-based algorithms are termed Lazily Aggregated Gradient — justifying
our acronym LAG used henceforth. Theoretically, the merits of this contribution
are: i) the convergence rate is the same as batch gradient descent in stronglyconvex, convex, and nonconvex cases; and, ii) if the distributed datasets are heterogeneous (quantified by certain measurable constants), the communication rounds
needed to achieve a targeted accuracy are reduced thanks to the adaptive reuse of
lagged gradients. Numerical experiments on both synthetic and real data corroborate a significant communication reduction compared to alternatives.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we develop communication-efficient algorithms to solve the following problem
∑
min L(θ) with L(θ) :=
Lm (θ)
θ ∈Rd
m∈M

(1)

where θ ∈ Rd is the unknown vector, L and {Lm , m ∈ M} are smooth (but not necessarily convex)
functions with M := {1, . . . , M }. Problem (1) naturally arises in a number of areas, such as
multi-agent optimization [1], distributed signal processing [2], and distributed machine learning [3].
Considering
∑ the distributed machine learning paradigm, each Lm is also a sum of functions, e.g.,
Lm (θ) := n∈Nmℓn (θ), where ℓn is the loss function (e.g., square or the logistic loss) with respect
to the vector θ (describing the model) evaluated at the training sample xn ; that is, ℓn (θ) := ℓ(θ; xn ).
While machine learning tasks are traditionally carried out at a single server, for datasets with massive
samples {xn }, running gradient-based iterative algorithms at a single server can be prohibitively
slow; e.g., the server needs to sequentially compute gradient components given limited processors.
A simple yet popular solution in recent years is to parallelize the training across multiple computing
units (a.k.a. workers) [3]. Specifically, assuming batch samples distributedly stored in a total of
M workers with the worker m ∈ M associated with samples {xn , n ∈ Nm }, a globally shared
model θ will be updated at the central server by aggregating gradients computed by workers. Due
to bandwidth and privacy concerns, each worker m will not upload its data {xn , n ∈ Nm } to the
server, thus the learning task needs to be performed by iteratively communicating with the server.
We are particularly interested in the scenarios where communication between the central server and
the local workers is costly, as is the case with the Federated Learning setting [4, 5], the cloud-edge
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

