Contour location via entropy reduction
leveraging multiple information sources

Alexandre N. Marques
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
noll@mit.edu

Remi R. Lam
Center for Computational Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
rlam@mit.edu

Karen E. Willcox
Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
kwillcox@ices.utexas.edu

Abstract
We introduce an algorithm to locate contours of functions that are expensive to
evaluate. The problem of locating contours arises in many applications, including
classification, constrained optimization, and performance analysis of mechanical
and dynamical systems (reliability, probability of failure, stability, etc.). Our algorithm locates contours using information from multiple sources, which are available
in the form of relatively inexpensive, biased, and possibly noisy approximations
to the original function. Considering multiple information sources can lead to
significant cost savings. We also introduce the concept of contour entropy, a formal
measure of uncertainty about the location of the zero contour of a function approximated by a statistical surrogate model. Our algorithm locates contours efficiently
by maximizing the reduction of contour entropy per unit cost.

1

Introduction

In this paper we address the problem of locating contours of functions that are expensive to evaluate.
This problem arises in several areas of science and engineering. For instance, in classification
problems the contour represents the boundary that divides objects of different classes. Another
example is constrained optimization, where the contour separates feasible and infeasible designs.
This problem also arises when analyzing the performance of mechanical and dynamical systems,
where contours divide different behaviors such as stable/unstable, safe/fail, etc. In many of these
applications, function evaluations involve costly computational simulations, or testing expensive
physical samples. We consider the case when multiple information sources are available, in the form
of relatively inexpensive, biased, and possibly noisy approximations to the original function. Our
goal is to use information from all available sources to produce the best estimate of a contour under a
fixed budget.
We address this problem by introducing the CLoVER (Contour Location Via Entropy Reduction)
algorithm. CLoVER is based on a combination of principles from Bayesian multi-information source
optimization [1–3] and information theory [4]. Our new contributions are:
• The concept of contour entropy, a measure of uncertainty about the location of the zero contour
of a function approximated by a statistical surrogate model.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

