Completing State Representations
using Spectral Learning
Nan Jiang
UIUC
Urbana, IL
nanjiang@illinois.edu

Alex Kulesza
Google Research
New York, NY
kulesza@google.com

Satinder Singh
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI
baveja@umich.edu

Abstract
A central problem in dynamical system modeling is state discovery—that is, finding
a compact summary of the past that captures the information needed to predict the
future. Predictive State Representations (PSRs) enable clever spectral methods
for state discovery; however, while consistent in the limit of infinite data, these
methods often suffer from poor performance in the low data regime. In this
paper we develop a novel algorithm for incorporating domain knowledge, in the
form of an imperfect state representation, as side information to speed spectral
learning for PSRs. We prove theoretical results characterizing the relevance of a
user-provided state representation, and design spectral algorithms that can take
advantage of a relevant representation. Our algorithm utilizes principal angles
to extract the relevant components of the representation, and is robust to misspecification. Empirical evaluation on synthetic HMMs, an aircraft identification
domain, and a gene splice dataset shows that, even with weak domain knowledge,
the algorithm can significantly outperform standard PSR learning.

1

Introduction

When modeling discrete-time, finite-observation dynamical systems from data, a central challenge is
state representation discovery, that is, finding a compact function of the history that forms a sufficient
statistic for the future. Many models and algorithms have been developed for this problem, each
of which represents and discovers state differently. For example, Hidden Markov Models (HMMs)
represent state as the posterior over latent variables, and are learned via Expectation Maximization.
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) do not commit to any pre-determined semantics of state, but
learn a state update function by back-propagation through time. Here, we focus on Predictive State
Representations (PSRs), which represent state as predictions of observable future events [1, 2], and
are unique in that they can be learned by fast, closed-form, and consistent spectral algorithms [3, 4].
Though they have been used successfully, spectral algorithms for PSRs attempt to discover the entire
state representation from raw data, ignoring the possibility that the user has domain knowledge about
what might constitute a good state representation. In many application scenarios, however, users do
have such knowledge and can handcraft a meaningful, albeit incomplete state: for example, in many
domains found in reinforcement learning [5, 6, 7], the last observation is often highly informative,
and only a small amount of additional information needs to be extracted from the history to form a
complete state. While spectral algorithms for PSRs are asymptotically consistent, ignoring domain
knowledge and discovering state from scratch is wasteful and can result in poor sample efficiency.
In this work, we extend PSRs to take advantage of an imperfect, user-provided state function f , and
design spectral algorithms for learning the resulting PSR-f models. We theoretically characterize
the relevance of f to the system of interest, and show that a PSR-f model can have substantially
smaller size—and can thus be learned from less data—than the corresponding PSR. Our algorithm
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

