Model Agnostic Supervised Local Explanations

Gregory Plumb
CMU
gdplumb@andrew.cmu.edu

Denali Molitor
UCLA
dmolitor@math.ucla.edu

Ameet Talwalkar
CMU
talwalkar@cmu.edu

Abstract
Model interpretability is an increasingly important component of practical machine learning. Some of the most common forms of interpretability systems are
example-based, local, and global explanations. One of the main challenges in
interpretability is designing explanation systems that can capture aspects of each
of these explanation types, in order to develop a more thorough understanding
of the model. We address this challenge in a novel model called MAPLE that
uses local linear modeling techniques along with a dual interpretation of random
forests (both as a supervised neighborhood approach and as a feature selection
method). MAPLE has two fundamental advantages over existing interpretability
systems. First, while it is effective as a black-box explanation system, MAPLE
itself is a highly accurate predictive model that provides faithful self explanations,
and thus sidesteps the typical accuracy-interpretability trade-off. Specifically, we
demonstrate, on several UCI datasets, that MAPLE is at least as accurate as random
forests and that it produces more faithful local explanations than LIME, a popular
interpretability system. Second, MAPLE provides both example-based and local
explanations and can detect global patterns, which allows it to diagnose limitations
in its local explanations.

1

Introduction

Leading machine learning models are typically opaque and difficult to interpret, yet they are increasingly being used to make critical decisions: e.g., a doctor’s diagnosis (life or death), a biologist’s
experimental design (time and money), or a lender’s loan decision (legal consequences). As a result,
there is a pressing need to understand these models to ensure that they are correct, fair, unbiased,
and/or ethical. Although there is no precise definition of interpretability and user requirements are
generally application-specific, three of the most common types of model explanations are:
1. Example-based. In the context of an individual prediction, it is natural to ask: Which points in
the training set most closely resemble a test point or influenced the prediction? Nearest neighbors
and influence function based methods are archetypal methods that naturally lead to example-based
explanations [1, 2, 12].
2. Local. Alternatively, we may aim to understand an individual prediction by asking: If the input
is changed slightly, how does the model’s prediction change? Local explanations are typically
derived from a model directly (e.g., sparse linear models), or from a local model that approximates
the predictive model well in a neighborhood around a specific point [1, 17].
3. Global. To gain an understanding of a model’s overall behavior we can ask: What are the
patterns underlying the model’s behavior? Global explanations usually take the form of a series
of rules [13, 18].
Example-based explanations are clearly distinct from the other two explanation types, as the former
relies on sample data points and the latter two on features. Further, local and global explanations
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

