REFUEL: Exploring Sparse Features in Deep
Reinforcement Learning for Fast Disease Diagnosis

Yu-Shao Peng
HTC Research & Healthcare
ys_peng@htc.com

Kai-Fu Tang
HTC Research & Healthcare
kevin_tang@htc.com

Hsuan-Tien Lin
Department of CSIE,
National Taiwan University
htlin@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Edward Y. Chang
HTC Research & Healthcare
edward_chang@htc.com

Abstract
This paper proposes REFUEL, a reinforcement learning method with two techniques: reward shaping and feature rebuilding, to improve the performance of
online symptom checking for disease diagnosis. Reward shaping can guide the
search of policy towards better directions. Feature rebuilding can guide the agent
to learn correlations between features. Together, they can find symptom queries
that can yield positive responses from a patient with high probability. Experimental
results justify that the two techniques in REFUEL allow the symptom checker to
identify the disease more rapidly and accurately.

1

Introduction

One of the rising needs in healthcare is self-diagnosis. About 35% of adults in the U.S. had the
experience of self-diagnosing their discomfort or illness via online services, according to a survey
performed in 2012 [12]. Although online searches are convenient media, search results can often be
inaccurate or irrelevant [12]. The process of disease diagnosis can be considered as a sequence of
queries and answers: a doctor inquires a patient of his/her symptoms to make a disease prediction.
During the Q&A process, the doctor carefully chooses relevant questions to ask the patient with
twin performance aims. First, each symptom probing should obtain maximal information about the
patient’s state. Second, after a series of Q&A, the diagnosis should be accurate.
From the machine learning perspective, the doctor’s iterative decision making process can be viewed
as feature acquisition and classification. The costs for feature aquisition are non-trivial in the decision
making process, because acquiring a large amount of symptoms from a patient is annoying and
impractical. One big family of existing methods that take the feature aquisition costs into account are
tree-based. For instance, cost-sensitive decision trees were studied by Xu et al. [19] and Kusner et
al. [5]; and cost-sensitive random forests by Nan et al. [7, 8] and Nan and Saligrama [6]. Recently,
reinforcement learning (RL) was shown to be a promising approach to address the sequential decision
problem with acquisition costs. Janisch et al. [2] use a double deep Q-network [15] to learn a query
strategy. Their experimental results show that their RL approach outperforms tree-based methods.
Even thought the RL method can reach higher prediction accuracy, applying this method to the disease
diagnosis task encounters two challenges. First, the numbers of possible diseases and symptoms
are several hundreds, which lead to a large search space. Second, the number of symptoms that a
patient actually suffers from is much less than that of possible symptoms, which results in a sparse
feature space. This specialty makes the search more difficult because exploring these few symptoms
in the sparse feature space is time-consuming. To alleviate the first problem, Tang et al. [14] and Kao
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

