Learning Versatile Filters for
Efficient Convolutional Neural Networks
Yunhe Wang1 , Chang Xu2 , Chunjing Xu1 , Chao Xu3 , Dacheng Tao2
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
2
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, SIT, FEIT, University of Sydney, Australia
3
Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center,
School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, China
yunhe.wang@huawei.com, c.xu@sydney.edu.au, xuchunjing@huawei.com
xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
This paper introduces versatile filters to construct efficient convolutional neural
network. Considering the demands of efficient deep learning techniques running
on cost-effective hardware, a number of methods have been developed to learn
compact neural networks. Most of these works aim to slim down filters in different
ways, e.g. investigating small, sparse or binarized filters. In contrast, we treat
filters from an additive perspective. A series of secondary filters can be derived
from a primary filter. These secondary filters all inherit in the primary filter
without occupying more storage, but once been unfolded in computation they could
significantly enhance the capability of the filter by integrating information extracted
from different receptive fields. Besides spatial versatile filters, we additionally
investigate versatile filters from the channel perspective. The new techniques are
general to upgrade filters in existing CNNs. Experimental results on benchmark
datasets and neural networks demonstrate that CNNs constructed with our versatile
filters are able to achieve comparable accuracy as that of original filters, but require
less memory and FLOPs.

1

Introduction

Considerable computer vision applications (e.g. image classification [19], object detection [15],
subspace clustering [27], and image segmentation [13]) have received remarkable progress with
the help of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in last decade. Table 1 summarizes profiles of
benchmark CNNs on the ILSVRC 2012 dataset [17]. From the pioneering AlexNet [11] to the
recent ResNeXt-50 [25], the storage of networks is slightly saved, but the classification accuracy has
been continuously improved. This performance improvement comes from sophisticatedly designed
calculations introduced in these networks, e.g. residual modules in ResNet [7] and versatile modules
in GoogleNet [20]. These networks are widely used in the scenario of abundant computation and
storage resources, but they cannot easily adapt to mobile platforms, such as smartphones and cameras.
Taking ResNet-50 [7] with 54 convolutional layers as an example, about 97MB memory is required
to store all filters and over 4.0 × 109 times of floating number multiplications have to be operated for
an image.
Over the years, different techniques have been proposed to tackle the contradiction between resources
supply of low performance devices and demands of heavy neural networks. One common approach
is to explore and eliminate redundancy in pre-trained CNNs. For example, Han et.al. [6] discarded
subtle weights in convolution filters, Wang et.al. [23] investigated redundancy between weights,
Figurnov et.al. [5] removed redundant connections between input data and filters, Wang et.al. [22]
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

