Optimal Algorithms for Continuous Non-monotone
Submodular and DR-Submodular Maximization
Rad Niazadeh⇤
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 95130

Tim Roughgarden†
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 95130

rad@cs.stanford.edu

tim@cs.stanford.edu

Joshua R. Wang
Google, Mountain View, CA 94043
joshuawang@google.com

Abstract
In this paper we study the fundamental problems of maximizing abcontinuous
non-monotone submodular function over a hypercube, with and without coordinatewise concavity. This family of optimization problems has several applications in
machine learning, economics, and communication systems. Our main result is the
first 12 -approximation algorithm for continuous submodular function maximization;
the approximation factor of 12 is the best possible for algorithms that use only
polynomially many queries. For the special case of DR-submodular maximization,
i.e., when the submodular functions is also coordinate-wise concave along all
coordinates, we provide a faster 12 -approximation algorithm that runs in almost
linear time. Both of these results improve upon prior work [Bian et al., 2017a,b,
Soma and Yoshida, 2017, Buchbinder et al., 2012, 2015].
Our first algorithm is a single-pass algorithm that uses novel ideas such as reducing
the guaranteed approximation problem to analyzing a zero-sum game for each
coordinate, and incorporates the geometry of this zero-sum game to fix the value at
this coordinate. Our second algorithm is a faster single-pass algorithm that exploits
coordinate-wise concavity to identify a monotone equilibrium condition sufficient
for getting the required approximation guarantee, and hunts for the equilibrium
point using binary search. We further run experiments to verify the performance of
our proposed algorithms in related machine learning applications.

1

Introduction

Submodular optimization is a sweet spot between tractability and expressiveness, with numerous
applications in machine learning (e.g., Krause and Golovin [2014], and see below) and with many
algorithms that are both practical and enjoy good rigorous guarantees (e.g., Buchbinder et al. [2012,
2015]). In general, a real-valued function F defined on a lattice L is submodular if and only if
F(x _ y) + F(x ^ y)  F(x) + F(y)

for all x, y 2 L, where x _ y and x ^ y denote the join and meet, respectively, of x and y in the lattice
L. Such functions are generally neither convex nor concave. In one of the most commonly studied
examples, L is the lattice of subsets of a fixed ground set (or a sublattice thereof), with union and
intersection playing the roles of join and meet, respectively.
⇤

Rad Niazadeh was supported by Stanford Computer Science Motwani Fellowship.
Tim Roughgarden was supported in part by Google Faculty Grant, Guggenheim Fellowship, and NSF
Grants CCF-1524062 and CCF-1813188.
†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

