Recurrent World Models Facilitate Policy Evolution

David Ha
Google Brain
Tokyo, Japan
hadavid@google.com

Jürgen Schmidhuber
NNAISENSE
The Swiss AI Lab, IDSIA (USI & SUPSI)
juergen@idsia.ch

Abstract
A generative recurrent neural network is quickly trained in an unsupervised manner
to model popular reinforcement learning environments through compressed spatiotemporal representations. The world model’s extracted features are fed into compact
and simple policies trained by evolution, achieving state of the art results in various
environments. We also train our agent entirely inside of an environment generated
by its own internal world model, and transfer this policy back into the actual
environment. Interactive version of paper: https://worldmodels.github.io

1

Introduction

Humans develop a mental model of the world based on what they are able to perceive with their
limited senses, learning abstract representations of both spatial and temporal aspects of sensory inputs.
For instance, we are able to observe a scene and remember an abstract description thereof [7, 67]. Our
decisions and actions are influenced by our internal predictive model. For example, what we perceive
at any given moment seems to be governed by our predictions of the future [59, 52]. One way of
understanding the predictive model inside our brains is that it might not simply be about predicting
the future in general, but predicting future sensory data given our current motor actions [38, 48]. We
are able to instinctively act on this predictive model and perform fast reflexive behaviours when we
face danger [55], without the need to consciously plan out a course of action [52].
For many reinforcement learning (RL) problems [37, 96, 106], an artificial RL agent may also benefit
from a predictive model (M) of the future [104, 95] (model-based RL). The backpropagation algorithm
[50, 39, 103] can be used to train a large M in form of a neural network (NN). In partially observable
environments, we can implement M through a recurrent neural network (RNN) [74, 75, 78, 49] to
allow for better predictions based on memories of previous observation sequences.

Figure 1: We build probabilistic generative models of OpenAI Gym [5] environments. These models
can mimic the actual environments (left). We test trained policies in the actual environments (right).
In fact, our M will be a large RNN that learns to predict the future given the past in an unsupervised
manner. M’s internal representations of memories of past observations and actions are perceived and
exploited by another NN called the controller (C) which learns through RL to perform some task
without a teacher. A small and simple C limits C’s credit assignment problem to a comparatively
small search space, without sacrificing the capacity and expressiveness of the large and complex M.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

