IntroVAE: Introspective Variational Autoencoders for
Photographic Image Synthesis

1

Huaibo Huang, Zhihang Li, Ran He∗, Zhenan Sun, Tieniu Tan
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA, Beijing, China
3
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA, Beijing, China
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
huaibo.huang@cripac.ia.ac.cn
{zhihang.li, rhe, znsun, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
We present a novel introspective variational autoencoder (IntroVAE) model for
synthesizing high-resolution photographic images. IntroVAE is capable of selfevaluating the quality of its generated samples and improving itself accordingly.
Its inference and generator models are jointly trained in an introspective way. On
one hand, the generator is required to reconstruct the input images from the noisy
outputs of the inference model as normal VAEs. On the other hand, the inference
model is encouraged to classify between the generated and real samples while the
generator tries to fool it as GANs. These two famous generative frameworks are
integrated in a simple yet efficient single-stream architecture that can be trained in
a single stage. IntroVAE preserves the advantages of VAEs, such as stable training
and nice latent manifold. Unlike most other hybrid models of VAEs and GANs,
IntroVAE requires no extra discriminators, because the inference model itself
serves as a discriminator to distinguish between the generated and real samples.
Experiments demonstrate that our method produces high-resolution photo-realistic
images (e.g., CELEBA images at 10242 ), which are comparable to or better than
the state-of-the-art GANs.

1

Introduction

In the recent years, many types of generative models such as autoregressive models [38, 37], variational autoencoders (VAEs) [20, 32], generative adversarial networks (GANs) [13], real-valued
non-volume preserving (real NVP) transformations [7] and generative moment matching networks
(GMMNs) [24] have been proposed and widely studied. They have achieved remarkable success
in various tasks, such as unconditional or conditional image synthesis [22, 27], image-to-image
translation [25, 46], image restoration [5, 17] and speech synthesis [12]. While each model has its
own significant strengths and limitations, the two most prominent models are VAEs and GANs. VAEs
are theoretically elegant and easy to train. They have nice manifold representations but produce very
blurry images that lack details. GANs usually generate much sharper images but face challenges in
training stability and sampling diversity, especially when synthesizing high-resolution images.
Many techniques have been developed to address these challenges. LAPGAN [6] and StackGAN [41]
train a stack of GANs within a Laplacian pyramid to generate high-resolution images in a coarseto-fine manner. StackGAN-v2 [42] and HDGAN [43] adopt multi-scale discriminators in a treelike structure. Some studies [11, 39] have trained a single generator with multiple discriminators
∗

Ran He is the corresponding author.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

