Training Deep Models Faster with
Robust, Approximate Importance Sampling
Tyler B. Johnson
University of Washington, Seattle
tbjohns@washington.edu

Carlos Guestrin
University of Washington, Seattle
guestrin@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
In theory, importance sampling speeds up stochastic gradient algorithms for supervised learning by prioritizing training examples. In practice, the cost of computing
importances greatly limits the impact of importance sampling. We propose a robust,
approximate importance sampling procedure (RAIS) for stochastic gradient descent. By approximating the ideal sampling distribution using robust optimization,
RAIS provides much of the benefit of exact importance sampling with drastically
reduced overhead. Empirically, we find RAIS-SGD and standard SGD follow
similar learning curves, but RAIS moves faster through these paths, achieving
speed-ups of at least 20% and sometimes much more.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models perform excellently on many tasks. Training such models is resource-intensive,
however, as stochastic gradient descent algorithms can require days or weeks to train effectively. After
a short period training, models usually perform well on some—or even most—training examples. As
training continues, frequently reconsidering such “easy” examples slows further improvement.
Importance sampling prioritizes training examples for SGD in a principled way. The technique
suggests sampling example i with probability proportional to the norm of loss term i’s gradient. This
distribution both prioritizes challenging examples and minimizes the stochastic gradient’s variance.
SGD with optimal importance sampling is impractical, however, since computing the sampling
distribution requires excessive time. [1] and [2] analyze importance sampling for SGD and convex
problems; practical versions of these algorithms sample proportional to fixed constants. For deep
models, other algorithms attempt closer approximations of gradient norms [3, 4, 5]. But these
algorithms are not inherently robust. Without carefully chosen hyperparameters or additional forward
passes, these algorithms do not converge, let alone speed up training.
We propose RAIS, an importance sampling procedure for SGD with several appealing qualities. First,
RAIS determines each sampling distribution by solving a robust optimization problem. As a result,
each sampling distribution is minimax optimal with respect to an uncertainty set. Since RAIS trains
this uncertainty set in an adaptive manner, RAIS is not sensitive to hyperparameters.
In addition, RAIS maximizes the benefit of importance sampling by adaptively increasing SGD’s
learning rate—an effective yet novel idea to our knowledge. This improvement invites the idea that
one RAIS-SGD iteration equates to more than one iteration of conventional SGD. Interestingly, when
plotted in terms of “epochs equivalent,” the learning curves of the algorithms align closely.
RAIS applies to any model that is trainable with SGD. RAIS also combines nicely with standard
“tricks,” including data augmentation, dropout, and batch normalization. We show this empirically in
§6. In this section, we also demonstrate that RAIS consistently improves training times. To provide
context for the paper, we include qualitative results from these experiments in Figure 1.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

