How Does Batch Normalization Help Optimization?

Shibani Santurkar∗
MIT
shibani@mit.edu

Dimitris Tsipras∗
MIT
tsipras@mit.edu

Andrew Ilyas∗
MIT
ailyas@mit.edu

Aleksander M ˛
adry
MIT
madry@mit.edu

Abstract
Batch Normalization (BatchNorm) is a widely adopted technique that enables
faster and more stable training of deep neural networks (DNNs). Despite its
pervasiveness, the exact reasons for BatchNorm’s effectiveness are still poorly
understood. The popular belief is that this effectiveness stems from controlling
the change of the layers’ input distributions during training to reduce the so-called
“internal covariate shift”. In this work, we demonstrate that such distributional
stability of layer inputs has little to do with the success of BatchNorm. Instead,
we uncover a more fundamental impact of BatchNorm on the training process: it
makes the optimization landscape significantly smoother. This smoothness induces
a more predictive and stable behavior of the gradients, allowing for faster training.

1

Introduction

Over the last decade, deep learning has made impressive progress on a variety of notoriously
difficult tasks in computer vision [16, 7], speech recognition [5], machine translation [29], and
game-playing [18, 25]. This progress hinged on a number of major advances in terms of hardware,
datasets [15, 23], and algorithmic and architectural techniques [27, 12, 20, 28]. One of the most
prominent examples of such advances was batch normalization (BatchNorm) [10].
At a high level, BatchNorm is a technique that aims to improve the training of neural networks by
stabilizing the distributions of layer inputs. This is achieved by introducing additional network layers
that control the first two moments (mean and variance) of these distributions.
The practical success of BatchNorm is indisputable. By now, it is used by default in most deep learning
models, both in research (more than 6,000 citations) and real-world settings. Somewhat shockingly,
however, despite its prominence, we still have a poor understanding of what the effectiveness of
BatchNorm is stemming from. In fact, there are now a number of works that provide alternatives to
BatchNorm [1, 3, 13, 31], but none of them seem to bring us any closer to understanding this issue.
(A similar point was also raised recently in [22].)
Currently, the most widely accepted explanation of BatchNorm’s success, as well as its original
motivation, relates to so-called internal covariate shift (ICS). Informally, ICS refers to the change in
the distribution of layer inputs caused by updates to the preceding layers. It is conjectured that such
continual change negatively impacts training. The goal of BatchNorm was to reduce ICS and thus
remedy this effect.
Even though this explanation is widely accepted, we seem to have little concrete evidence supporting
it. In particular, we still do not understand the link between ICS and training performance. The chief
goal of this paper is to address all these shortcomings. Our exploration lead to somewhat startling
discoveries.
∗

Equal contribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

