Exploration in Structured Reinforcement Learning

Jungseul Ok
KTH, EECS
Stockholm, Sweden
ockjs@illinois.edu

Alexandre Proutiere
KTH, EECS
Stockholm, Sweden
alepro@kth.se

Damianos Tranos
KTH, EECS
Stockholm, Sweden
tranos@kth.se

Abstract
We address reinforcement learning problems with finite state and action spaces
where the underlying MDP has some known structure that could be potentially
exploited to minimize the exploration rates of suboptimal (state, action) pairs. For
any arbitrary structure, we derive problem-specific regret lower bounds satisfied
by any learning algorithm. These lower bounds are made explicit for unstructured
MDPs and for those whose transition probabilities and average reward functions are
Lipschitz continuous w.r.t. the state and action. For Lipschitz MDPs, the bounds
are shown not to scale with the sizes S and A of the state and action spaces, i.e.,
they are smaller than c log T where T is the time horizon and the constant c only
depends on the Lipschitz structure, the span of the bias function, and the minimal
action sub-optimality gap. This contrasts with unstructured MDPs where the regret
lower bound typically scales as SA log T . We devise DEL (Directed Exploration
Learning), an algorithm that matches our regret lower bounds. We further simplify
the algorithm for Lipschitz MDPs, and show that the simplified version is still able
to efficiently exploit the structure.

1

Introduction

Real-world Reinforcement Learning (RL) problems often concern dynamical systems with large state
and action spaces, which make the design of efficient algorithms extremely challenging. This difficulty
is well illustrated by the known regret fundamental limits. The regret compares the accumulated
reward of an optimal policy (aware of the system dynamics and reward function) to that of the
algorithm considered, and it quantifies the loss incurred by the need of exploring sub-optimal (state,
action) pairs to learn the system dynamics and rewards. In √
online RL problems with undiscounted
reward, regret lower bounds typically scale as SA log T or SAT 1 , where S, A, and T denote the
sizes of the state and action spaces and the time horizon, respectively. Hence, with large state and
action spaces, it is essential to identify and exploit any possible structure existing in the system
dynamics and reward function so as to minimize exploration phases and in turn reduce regret to
reasonable values. Modern RL algorithms actually implicitly impose some structural properties
either in the model parameters (transition probabilities and reward function, see e.g. [Ortner and
Ryabko, 2012]) or directly in the Q-function (for discounted RL problems, see e.g. [Mnih et al.,
2015]. Despite the successes of these recent algorithms, our understanding of structured RL problems
remains limited.
In this paper, we explore structured RL problems with finite state and action spaces. We first
derive problem-specific regret lower bounds satisfied by any algorithm for RL problems with any
arbitrary structure. These lower bounds are instrumental to devise algorithms optimally balancing
exploration and exploitation, i.e., achieving the regret fundamental limits. A similar approach has
1
The first lower bound is asymptotic in T and problem-specific, the second is minimax. We ignore here for
simplicity the dependence of these bounds in the diameter, bias span, and action sub-optimality gap.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

