Faithful Inversion of Generative Models
for Effective Amortized Inference
Stefan Webb∗
University of Oxford
N. Siddharth
University of Oxford

Adam Goliński
University of Oxford

Tom Rainforth
University of Oxford

Robert Zinkov
UBC

Yee Whye Teh
University of Oxford

Frank Wood
UBC

Abstract
Inference amortization methods share information across multiple posteriorinference problems, allowing each to be carried out more efficiently. Generally, they
require the inversion of the dependency structure in the generative model, as the
modeller must learn a mapping from observations to distributions approximating
the posterior. Previous approaches have involved inverting the dependency structure in a heuristic way that fails to capture these dependencies correctly, thereby
limiting the achievable accuracy of the resulting approximations. We introduce an
algorithm for faithfully, and minimally, inverting the graphical model structure of
any generative model. Such inverses have two crucial properties: a) they do not
encode any independence assertions that are absent from the model and b) they are
local maxima for the number of true independencies encoded. We prove the correctness of our approach and empirically show that the resulting minimally faithful
inverses lead to better inference amortization than existing heuristic approaches.

1

Introduction

Evidence from human cognition suggests that the brain reuses the results of past inferences to speed
up subsequent related queries (Gershman & Goodman, 2014). In the context of Bayesian statistics,
it is reasonable to expect that, given a generative model, p(x, z), over data x and latent variables z,
inference on p(z | x1 ) is informative about inference on p(z | x2 ) for two related inputs, x1 and
x2 . Several algorithms (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014; Stuhlmüller et al., 2013;
Paige & Wood, 2016; Le et al., 2017, 2018; Maddison et al., 2017a; Naesseth et al., 2018) have
been developed with this insight to perform amortized inference by learning an inference artefact
q(z | x), which takes as input the values of the observed variables, and—typically with the use
of neural network architectures—return a distribution over the latent variables approximating the
posterior. These inference artefacts are known variously as inference networks, recognition models,
probabilistic encoders, and guide programs; we will adopt the term inference networks throughout.
Along with conventional fixed-model settings (Stuhlmüller et al., 2013; Le et al., 2017; Ritchie et al.,
2016; Paige & Wood, 2016), a common application of inference amortization is in the training of
variational auto-encoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014), for which the inference network is
simultaneously learned alongside a generative model. It is well documented that deficiencies in the
expressiveness or training of the inference network can also have a knock-on effect on the learned
generative model in such contexts (Burda et al., 2016; Cremer et al., 2017, 2018; Rainforth et al.,
2018), meaning that poorly chosen coarse-grained structures can be particularly damaging.
Implicit in the factorization of the generative model and inference network in both fixed and learned
model settings are probabilistic graphical models, commonly Bayesian networks (BNs), encoding
dependency structures. We refer to these as the coarse-grain structure, in opposition to the fine-grain
structure of the neural networks that form each inference (and generative) network factor. In this
sense, amortized inference can be framed as the problem of graphical model inversion—how to invert
the graphical model of the generative model to give a graphical model approximating the posterior.
∗

Correspondence to info@stefanwebb.me

