Global Convergence of Langevin Dynamics Based
Algorithms for Nonconvex Optimization
Pan Xu⇤
Department of Computer Science
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
panxu@cs.ucla.edu

Jinghui Chen⇤
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
jc4zg@virginia.edu

Difan Zou
Department of Computer Science
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
knowzou@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We present a unified framework to analyze the global convergence of Langevin
dynamics based algorithms for nonconvex finite-sum optimization with n component functions. At the core of our analysis is a direct analysis of the ergodicity
of the numerical approximations to Langevin dynamics, which leads to faster
convergence rates. Specifically, we show that gradient Langevin dynamics (GLD)
and stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) converge to the almost mine nd/( ✏) and O
e d7 /( 5 ✏5 ) stochastic gradient evaluations
imizer2 within O
3
respectively , where d is the problem dimension, and is the spectral gap of the
Markov chain generated by GLD. Both results improve upon the best known gradient complexity4 results [45]. Furthermore, for the first time we prove the global
convergence guarantee for variance reduced stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics
e pnd5 /( 4 ✏5/2 ) stochastic gradi(SVRG-LD) to the almost minimizer within O
ent evaluations, which outperforms the gradient complexities of GLD and SGLD
in a wide regime. Our theoretical analyses shed some light on using Langevin
dynamics based algorithms for nonconvex optimization with provable guarantees.

1

Introduction

We consider the following nonconvex finite-sum optimization problem
Pn
minx Fn (x) := 1/n i=1 fi (x),

(1.1)

where fi (x)’s are called component functions, and both Fn (x) and fi (·)’s can be nonconvex. Various
first-order optimization algorithms such as gradient descent [42], stochastic gradient descent [27] and
more recently variance-reduced stochastic gradient descent [46, 3] have been proposed and analyzed
for solving (1.1). However, all these algorithms are only guaranteed to converge to a stationary point,
which can be a local minimum, a local maximum, or even a saddle point. This raises an important
⇤

Equal contribution.
Following [45], an almost minimizer is defined to be a point which is within the ball of the global minimizer
with radius O(d log( + 1)/ ), where d is the problem dimension and is the inverse temperature parameter.
3e
O(·) notation hides polynomials of logarithmic terms and constants.
4
Gradient complexity is defined as the total number of stochastic gradient evaluations of an algorithm, which
is the number of stochastic gradients calculated per iteration times the total number of iterations.
2

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

