Conditional Adversarial Domain Adaptation

Mingsheng Long† , Zhangjie Cao† , Jianmin Wang† , and Michael I. Jordan]
†
School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
†
KLiss, MOE; BNRist; Research Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University, China
]
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, USA
{mingsheng, jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn caozhangjie14@gmail.com
jordan@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Adversarial learning has been embedded into deep networks to learn disentangled
and transferable representations for domain adaptation. Existing adversarial domain adaptation methods may not effectively align different domains of multimodal
distributions native in classification problems. In this paper, we present conditional
adversarial domain adaptation, a principled framework that conditions the adversarial adaptation models on discriminative information conveyed in the classifier
predictions. Conditional domain adversarial networks (CDANs) are designed with
two novel conditioning strategies: multilinear conditioning that captures the crosscovariance between feature representations and classifier predictions to improve the
discriminability, and entropy conditioning that controls the uncertainty of classifier
predictions to guarantee the transferability. With theoretical guarantees and a few
lines of codes, the approach has exceeded state-of-the-art results on five datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep networks have significantly improved the state-of-the-arts for diverse machine learning problems
and applications. When trained on large-scale datasets, deep networks learn representations which
are generically useful across a variety of tasks [36, 11, 54]. However, deep networks can be weak
at generalizing learned knowledge to new datasets or environments. Even a subtle change from the
training domain can cause deep networks to make spurious predictions on the target domain [54, 36].
While in many real applications, there is the need to transfer a deep network from a source domain
where sufficient training data is available to a target domain where only unlabeled data is available,
such a transfer learning paradigm is hindered by the shift in data distributions across domains [39].
Learning a model that reduces the dataset shift between training and testing distributions is known as
domain adaptation [38]. Previous domain adaptation methods in the shallow regime either bridge the
source and target by learning invariant feature representations or estimating instance importances
using labeled source data and unlabeled target data [24, 37, 15]. Recent advances of deep domain
adaptation methods leverage deep networks to learn transferable representations by embedding
adaptation modules in deep architectures, simultaneously disentangling the explanatory factors of
variations behind data and matching feature distributions across domains [12, 13, 29, 52, 31, 30, 51].
Adversarial domain adaptation [12, 52, 51] integrates adversarial learning and domain adaptation in a
two-player game similarly to Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [17]. A domain discriminator
is learned by minimizing the classification error of distinguishing the source from the target domains,
while a deep classification model learns transferable representations that are indistinguishable by the
domain discriminator. On par with these feature-level approaches, generative pixel-level adaptation
models perform distribution alignment in raw pixel space, by translating source data to the style of a
target domain using Image to Image translation techniques [56, 28, 22, 43]. Another line of works
align distributions of features and classes separately using different domain discriminators [23, 8, 50].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

