Pipe-SGD: A Decentralized Pipelined SGD
Framework for Distributed Deep Net Training
Youjie Li† , Mingchao Yu* , Songze Li* , Salman Avestimehr* ,
Nam Sung Kim† , and Alexander Schwing†
† University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* University of Southern California

Abstract
Distributed training of deep nets is an important technique to address some of the
present day computing challenges like memory consumption and computational demands. Classical distributed approaches, synchronous or asynchronous, are based
on the parameter server architecture, i.e., worker nodes compute gradients which
are communicated to the parameter server while updated parameters are returned.
Recently, distributed training with AllReduce operations gained popularity as well.
While many of those operations seem appealing, little is reported about wall-clock
training time improvements. In this paper, we carefully analyze the AllReduce
based setup, propose timing models which include network latency, bandwidth,
cluster size and compute time, and demonstrate that a pipelined training with a
width of two combines the best of both synchronous and asynchronous training.
Specifically, for a setup consisting of a four-node GPU cluster we show wall-clock
time training improvements of up to 5.4× compared to conventional approaches.

1

Introduction

Deep nets [25, 3] are omnipresent across fields from computer vision and natural language processing
to computational biology and robotics. Across domains and tasks they have demonstrated impressive
results by automatically extracting hierarchical abstractions of representations from many different
datasets. The surge in popularity pivoted in the 2010s, with impressive results being demonstrated
on the ImageNet dataset [22, 42]. Since then, deep nets have been applied to many more tasks.
Prominent examples include recognition of places [53], playing of Atari games [34, 35], and the
game of Go [45]. Common to all those methods is the use of large datasets to fuel the many layers of
deep nets.
Importantly, in the last few years, the number of layers, or more generally the depth of the computation
tree has increased significantly from a few layers for LeNet [26] to several 100s or 1000s [14, 24].
Inherent to the increasing complexity of the computation graph is an increase in training time and often
also an increase in the amount of data that is processed. Traditionally, computational performance
increases do not keep up with the desired processing needs despite the use of accelerators like GPUs.
Beyond accelerators, parallelization of computation on multiple computers is therefore popular.
However, it requires frequent communication to exchange a large amount of data among compute
nodes while the bandwidth of network interfaces is limited. This in turn significantly diminishes the
benefit of parallelization, as a substantial fraction of training time is spent to communicate data. The
fraction of time spent on communication is further increased when applying accelerators [16, 7, 38,
52, 48, 49, 44], as they decrease computation time while leaving communication time untouched.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

