Graphical model inference: Sequential Monte Carlo
meets deterministic approximations

Fredrik Lindsten
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University
Uppsala, Sweden
fredrik.lindsten@it.uu.se

Jouni Helske
Department of Science and Technology
Linköping University
Norrköping, Sweden
jouni.helske@liu.se

Matti Vihola
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Jyväskylä
Jyväskylä, Finland
matti.s.vihola@jyu.fi

Abstract
Approximate inference in probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) can be grouped
into deterministic methods and Monte-Carlo-based methods. The former can often
provide accurate and rapid inferences, but are typically associated with biases
that are hard to quantify. The latter enjoy asymptotic consistency, but can suffer
from high computational costs. In this paper we present a way of bridging the
gap between deterministic and stochastic inference. Specifically, we suggest an
efficient sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) algorithm for PGMs which can leverage
the output from deterministic inference methods. While generally applicable, we
show explicitly how this can be done with loopy belief propagation, expectation
propagation, and Laplace approximations. The resulting algorithm can be viewed as
a post-correction of the biases associated with these methods and, indeed, numerical
results show clear improvements over the baseline deterministic methods as well
as over “plain” SMC.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) are ubiquitous in machine learning for encoding dependencies
in complex and high-dimensional statistical models [18]. Exact inference over these models is
intractable in most cases, due to non-Gaussianity and non-linear dependencies between variables.
Even for discrete random variables, exact inference is not possible unless the graph has a tree-topology,
due to an exponential (in the size of the graph) explosion of the computational cost. This has resulted
in the development of many approximate inference methods tailored to PGMs. These methods can
roughly speaking be grouped into two categories: (i) methods based on deterministic (and often
heuristic) approximations, and (ii) methods based on Monte Carlo simulations.
The first group includes methods such as Laplace approximations [30], expectation propagation [23],
loopy belief propagation [26], and variational inference [36]. These methods are often promoted as
being fast and can reach higher accuracy than Monte-Carlo-based methods for a fixed computational
cost. The downside, however, is that the approximation errors can be hard to quantify and even if the
computational budget allows for it, simply spending more computations to improve the accuracy can
be difficult. The second group of methods, including Gibbs sampling [28] and sequential Monte Carlo
(SMC) [11, 24], has the benefit of being asymptotically consistent. That is, under mild assumptions
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

