Implicit Bias of Gradient Descent on Linear
Convolutional Networks
Suriya Gunasekar
TTI at Chicago, USA
suriya@ttic.edu

Jason D. Lee
USC Los Angeles, USA
jasonlee@marshall.usc.edu

Daniel Soudry
Technion, Israel
daniel.soudry@gmail.com

Nathan Srebro
TTI at Chicago, USA
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We show that gradient descent on full width linear convolutional networks of depth
L converges to a linear predictor related to the `2/L bridge penalty in the frequency
domain. This is in contrast to fully connected linear networks, where regardless of
depth, gradient descent converges to the `2 maximum margin solution.

1

Introduction

Implicit biases introduced by optimization algorithms play an crucial role in learning deep neural networks [Neyshabur et al., 2015b,a, Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997, Keskar et al., 2016, Chaudhari
et al., 2016, Dinh et al., 2017, Andrychowicz et al., 2016, Neyshabur et al., 2017, Zhang et al., 2017,
Wilson et al., 2017, Hoffer et al., 2017, Smith, 2018]. Large scale neural networks used in practice
are highly over-parameterized with far more trainable model parameters compared to the number of
training examples. Consequently, optimization objectives for learning such high capacity models
have many global minima that fit training data perfectly. However, minimizing the training loss
using specific optimization algorithms take us to not just any global minima, but some special global
minima, e.g., global minima minimizing some regularizer R(β). In over-parameterized models,
specially deep neural networks, much, if not most, of the inductive bias of the learned model comes
from this implicit regularization from the optimization algorithm. Understanding the implicit bias,
e.g., via characterizing R(β), is thus essential for understanding how and what the model learns.
For example, in linear regression we understand how minimizing an under-determined model (with
more parameters than samples) using gradient descent yields the minimum `2 norm solution, and for
linear logistic regression trained on linearly separable data, Soudry et al. [2017] recently showed that
gradient descent converges in the direction of the hard margin support vector machine solution, even
though the norm or margin is not explicitly specified in the optimization problem. Such minimum
norm or maximum margin solutions are of course very special among all solutions or separators
that fit the training data, and in particular can ensure generalization Bartlett and Mendelson [2003],
Kakade et al. [2009].
Changing the optimization algorithm, even without changing the model, changes this implicit bias,
and consequently also changes generalization properties of the learned models [Neyshabur et al.,
2015a, Keskar et al., 2016, Wilson et al., 2017, Gunasekar et al., 2017, 2018]. For example, for linear
logistic regression, using coordinate descent instead of gradient descent return a maximum `1 margin
solution instead of the hard margin support vector solution solution—an entirely different inductive
bias Telgarsky [2013], Gunasekar et al. [2018].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

