VideoCapsuleNet: A Simplified Network for Action
Detection
Kevin Duarte
kevin_duarte@knights.ucf.edu

Yogesh S Rawat
yogesh@crcv.ucf.edu

Mubarak Shah
shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Center for Research in Computer Vision
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL 32816

Abstract
The recent advances in Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) have shown
extremely good results for video human action classification, however, action
detection is still a challenging problem. The current action detection approaches
follow a complex pipeline which involves multiple tasks such as tube proposals,
optical flow, and tube classification. In this work, we present a more elegant solution
for action detection based on the recently developed capsule network. We propose
a 3D capsule network for videos, called VideoCapsuleNet: a unified network
for action detection which can jointly perform pixel-wise action segmentation
along with action classification. The proposed network is a generalization of
capsule network from 2D to 3D, which takes a sequence of video frames as
input. The 3D generalization drastically increases the number of capsules in
the network, making capsule routing computationally expensive. We introduce
capsule-pooling in the convolutional capsule layer to address this issue and make
the voting algorithm tractable. The routing-by-agreement in the network inherently
models the action representations and various action characteristics are captured
by the predicted capsules. This inspired us to utilize the capsules for action
localization and the class-specific capsules predicted by the network are used to
determine a pixel-wise localization of actions. The localization is further improved
by parameterized skip connections with the convolutional capsule layers and the
network is trained end-to-end with a classification as well as localization loss.
The proposed network achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple action
detection datasets including UCF-Sports, J-HMDB, and UCF-101 (24 classes)
with an impressive ∼20% improvement on UCF-101 and ∼15% improvement on
J-HMDB in terms of v-mAP scores.

1

Introduction

Human action detection is a challenging computer vision problem, which involves detecting human
actions in a long video as well as localizing these actions both spatially and temporally. In recent
years, great progress have been achieved in solving action detection problem using deep learning
methods [1]. Although the existing approaches have achieved a reasonable performance, these
methods can be very complex. These networks tend to use multi-stage pipelines, which extract action
proposals from a sequence of frames, classify these regions, and perform bounding box regressions on
the proposals [2, 3, 4]. The two-stream networks [5, 6] perform better but they require computation
and processing of optical flow. To overcome this drawback, we propose a simpler and more elegant
solution to action detection through the use of capsules.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

