Variational PDEs for Acceleration on Manifolds and
Application to Diffeomorphisms

Ganesh Sundaramoorthi
United Technologies Research Center
East Hartford, CT 06118
sundarga1@utrc.utc.com

Anthony Yezzi
School of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332
ayezzi@ece.gatech.edu

Abstract
We consider the optimization of cost functionals on infinite dimensional manifolds and derive a variational approach to accelerated methods on manifolds. We
demonstrate the methodology on the infinite-dimensional manifold of diffeomorphisms, motivated by optical flow problems in computer vision. We build on a
variational approach to accelerated optimization in finite dimensions, and generalize that approach to infinite dimensional manifolds. We derive the continuum
evolution equations, which are partial differential equations (PDE), and relate them
to mechanical principles. A particular case of our approach can be viewed as a
generalization of the L2 optimal mass transport problem. Our approach evolves
an infinite number of particles endowed with mass, represented as a mass density.
The density evolves with the optimization variable, and endows the particles with
dynamics. This is different than current accelerated methods where only a single
particle moves and hence the dynamics does not depend on mass. We derive theory
and the PDEs for acceleration, and illustrate the behavior of this new scheme.

1

Introduction

Accelerated optimization methods have gained wide interest within the machine learning and optimization communities (e.g., [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]). They are known for optimal
convergence rates among schemes that use only gradient (first order) information in the convex case.
In the non-convex case, they appear to provide robustness to shallow local minima. The intuitive
idea is that by considering a particle with mass that moves in an energy landscape, the particle
will gain momentum and surpass shallow local minimum and settle in in deeper and wider local
extrema. These methods have so far have only been used in finite dimensional optimization problems.
In this paper, we consider the generalization of these methods to infinite dimensional manifolds.
We are motivated by applications in computer vision, e.g., segmentation, 3D reconstruction, and
optical flow. In these problems, optimization is over infinite dimensional manifolds (e.g., curves,
surfaces, mappings). Recently there has been interest within machine learning in optimization on
finite dimensional manifolds, such as matrix groups, e.g., [14, 15, 16], in a non-variational framework,
and the methodology presented here can be adapted to those problems as well.
Recent work [17] has shown that the continuum limit of accelerated methods may be formulated
with variational principles. The resulting optimal continuum path is defined by an ordinary differential equation (ODE), which when discretized appropriately yields Nesterov’s method [13]. The
optimization problem is an action integral, which integrates the Bregman Lagrangian over paths.
The Bregman Lagrangian consists of a generalization of kinetic and potential energies. The kinetic
energy is defined using the Bregman divergence; the potential energy is the cost function that is to be
optimized. We build on the approach of [17] by formulating accelerated optimization with an action
integral, but we generalize that approach to manifolds. Our approach is general for manifolds, but we
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

