Meta-Gradient Reinforcement Learning

Zhongwen Xu
DeepMind
zhongwen@google.com

Hado van Hasselt
DeepMind
hado@google.com

David Silver
DeepMind
davidsilver@google.com

Abstract
The goal of reinforcement learning algorithms is to estimate and/or optimise
the value function. However, unlike supervised learning, no teacher or oracle is
available to provide the true value function. Instead, the majority of reinforcement
learning algorithms estimate and/or optimise a proxy for the value function. This
proxy is typically based on a sampled and bootstrapped approximation to the true
value function, known as a return. The particular choice of return is one of the
chief components determining the nature of the algorithm: the rate at which future
rewards are discounted; when and how values should be bootstrapped; or even the
nature of the rewards themselves. It is well-known that these decisions are crucial
to the overall success of RL algorithms. We discuss a gradient-based meta-learning
algorithm that is able to adapt the nature of the return, online, whilst interacting
and learning from the environment. When applied to 57 games on the Atari 2600
environment over 200 million frames, our algorithm achieved a new state-of-the-art
performance.
The central goal of reinforcement learning (RL) is to optimise the agent’s return (cumulative reward);
this is typically achieved by a combination of prediction and control. The prediction subtask is to
estimate the value function – the expected return from any given state. Ideally, this would be achieved
by updating an approximate value function towards the true value function. The control subtask is to
optimise the agent’s policy for selecting actions, so as to maximise the value function. Ideally, the
policy would simply be updated in the direction that increases the true value function. However, the
true value function is unknown and therefore, for both prediction and control, a sampled return is
instead used as a proxy. A large family of RL algorithms [Sutton, 1988, Rummery and Niranjan,
1994, van Seijen et al., 2009, Sutton and Barto, 2018], including several state-of-the-art deep RL
algorithms [Mnih et al., 2015, van Hasselt et al., 2016, Harutyunyan et al., 2016, Hessel et al., 2018,
Espeholt et al., 2018], are characterised by different choices of the return.
The discount factor γ determines the time-scale of the return. A discount factor close to γ = 1
provides a long-sighted goal that accumulates rewards far into the future, while a discount factor
close to γ = 0 provides a short-sighted goal that prioritises short-term rewards. Even in problems
where long-sightedness is clearly desired, it is frequently observed that discounts γ < 1 achieve
better results [Prokhorov and Wunsch, 1997], especially during early learning. It is known that many
algorithms converge faster with lower discounts [Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996], but of course too
low a discount can lead to highly sub-optimal policies that are too myopic. In practice it can be better
to first optimise for a myopic horizon, e.g., with γ = 0 at first, and then to repeatedly increase the
discount only after learning is somewhat successful [Prokhorov and Wunsch, 1997].
The return may also be bootstrapped at different time horizons. An n-step return accumulates rewards
over n time-steps and then adds the value function at the nth time-step. The λ-return [Sutton, 1988,
Sutton and Barto, 2018] is a geometrically weighted combination of n-step returns. In either case,
the meta-parameter n or λ can be important to the performance of the algorithm, trading off bias and
variance. Many researchers have sought to automate the selection of these parameters [Kearns and
Singh, 2000, Downey and Sanner, 2010, Konidaris et al., 2011, White and White, 2016].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

