Adaptive Sampling
Towards Fast Graph Representation Learning

Wenbing Huang1 , Tong Zhang2 , Yu Rong1 , Junzhou Huang1
1
Tencent AI Lab. ;
2
Australian National University;
hwenbing@126.com, tong.zhang@anu.edu.au,
yu.rong@hotmail.com, joehhuang@tencent.com

Abstract
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have become a crucial tool on learning
representations of graph vertices. The main challenge of adapting GCNs on largescale graphs is the scalability issue that it incurs heavy cost both in computation
and memory due to the uncontrollable neighborhood expansion across layers. In
this paper, we accelerate the training of GCNs through developing an adaptive
layer-wise sampling method. By constructing the network layer by layer in a
top-down passway, we sample the lower layer conditioned on the top one, where
the sampled neighborhoods are shared by different parent nodes and the over
expansion is avoided owing to the fixed-size sampling. More importantly, the
proposed sampler is adaptive and applicable for explicit variance reduction, which
in turn enhances the training of our method. Furthermore, we propose a novel
and economical approach to promote the message passing over distant nodes by
applying skip connections. Intensive experiments on several benchmarks verify the
effectiveness of our method regarding the classification accuracy while enjoying
faster convergence speed.

1

Introduction

Deep Learning, especially Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), has revolutionized various
machine learning tasks with grid-like input data, such as image classification [1] and machine
translation [2]. By making use of local connection and weight sharing, CNNs are able to pursue
translational invariance of the data. In many other contexts, however, the input data are lying on
irregular or non-euclidean domains, such as graphs which encode the pairwise relationships. This
includes examples of social networks [3], protein interfaces [4], and 3D meshes [5]. How to define
convolutional operations on graphs is still an ongoing research topic.
There have been several attempts in the literature to develop neural networks to handle arbitrarily
structured graphs. Whereas learning the graph embedding is already an important topic [6, 7, 8],
this paper mainly focus on learning the representations for graph vertices by aggregating their
features/attributes. The closest work to this vein is the Graph Convolution Network (GCN) [9] that
applies connections between vertices as convolution filters to perform neighborhood aggregation. As
demonstrated in [9], GCNs have achieved the state-of-the-art performance on node classification.
An obvious challenge for applying current graph networks is the scalability. Calculating convolutions
requires the recursive expansion of neighborhoods across layers, which however is computationally
prohibitive and demands hefty memory footprints. Even for a single node, it will quickly cover
a large portion of the graph due to the neighborhood expansion layer by layer if particularly the
graph is dense or powerlaw. Conventional mini-batch training is unable to speed up the convolution
computations, since every batch will involve a large amount of vertices, even the batch size is small.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

