Iterative Value-Aware Model Learning

Amir-massoud Farahmand∗
Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada
farahmand@vectorinstitute.ai

Abstract
This paper introduces a model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) framework
that incorporates the underlying decision problem in learning the transition model
of the environment. This is in contrast with conventional approaches to MBRL
that learn the model of the environment, for example by finding the maximum
likelihood estimate, without taking into account the decision problem. Value-Aware
Model Learning (VAML) framework argues that this might not be a good idea,
especially if the true model of the environment does not belong to the model class
from which we are estimating the model.
The original VAML framework, however, may result in an optimization problem
that is difficult to solve. This paper introduces a new MBRL class of algorithms,
called Iterative VAML, that benefits from the structure of how the planning is performed (i.e., through approximate value iteration) to devise a simpler optimization
problem. The paper theoretically analyzes Iterative VAML and provides finite
sample error upper bound guarantee for it.

1

Introduction

Value-Aware Model Learning (VAML) is a novel framework for learning the model of the environment in Model-Based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL) [Farahmand et al., 2017a, 2016a]. The
conventional approach to model learning in MBRL is based on minimizing some kind of probabilistic
loss. A common choice is to minimize the KL-divergence between the empirical data and the model,
which leads to the Maximum Likelihood Estimator (MLE). Farahmand et al. [2017a, 2016a] argue
that minimizing a probabilistic loss function might not be a good idea because it does not take into account the underlying decision problem. Any knowledge about the reward, value function, or policy is
ignored in the conventional model learning approaches in MBRL (some recent exceptions are Joseph
et al. [2013], Silver et al. [2017], Oh et al. [2017], Farquhar et al. [2018]; refer to the supplementary
material for a detailed literature review of MBRL). The main thesis behind decision-aware model
learning, including VAML, is that the knowledge about the underlying decision problem, which is
often available, should be considered in the model learning itself. VAML, as its name suggests, uses
the information about the value function. In particular, the formulation by Farahmand et al. [2017a]
incorporates the knowledge about the value function space in learning the model. In this work, we
suggest an alternative, and possibly simpler, approach called Iterative VAML (IterVAML, for short).
VAML defines a robust loss function and has a minP∈M maxV ∈F structure, where M is the transition
probability model of the environment to be learned and F is the function space to which the value
function belongs (we discuss this in more detail in Section 2). Solving this min max optimization can
be difficult in general, unless we impose some structure on F, e.g., linear function space. IterVAML
mitigates this issue by benefiting from special structure of how value functions are generated within
the approximate value iteration (AVI) framework (Section 3).
∗
Homepage: http://academic.sologen.net. Part of this work has been done when the author was
affiliated with Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), Cambridge, USA.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

