Nonparametric learning from Bayesian models with
randomized objective functions

Simon Lyddon
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
lyddon@stats.ox.ac.uk

Stephen Walker
Department of Mathematics
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX
s.g.walker@math.utexas.edu

Chris Holmes
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
cholmes@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Bayesian learning is built on an assumption that the model space contains a true
reflection of the data generating mechanism. This assumption is problematic, particularly in complex data environments. Here we present a Bayesian nonparametric
approach to learning that makes use of statistical models, but does not assume
that the model is true. Our approach has provably better properties than using
a parametric model and admits a Monte Carlo sampling scheme that can afford
massive scalability on modern computer architectures. The model-based aspect of
learning is particularly attractive for regularizing nonparametric inference when
the sample size is small, and also for correcting approximate approaches such as
variational Bayes (VB). We demonstrate the approach on a number of examples
including VB classifiers and Bayesian random forests.

1

Introduction

Bayesian updating provides a principled and coherent approach to inference for probabilistic models
[23], but is predicated on the model class being true. That is, for an observation x and a generative
model Fθ (x) parametrized by a finite-dimensional parameter θ ∈ Θ, then for some parameter value
θ0 ∈ Θ it is that x ∼ Fθ0 (x). In reality, however, all models are false. If the data is simple and
small, and the model space is sufficiently rich, then the consequences of model misspecification may
not be severe. However, data is increasingly being captured at scale, both in terms of the number
of observations as well as the diversity of data modalities. This poses a risk in conditioning on an
assumption that the model is true.
In this paper we discuss a scalable approach to Bayesian nonparametric learning (NPL) from models
without the assumption that x ∼ Fθ0 (x). To do this we use a nonparametric prior that is centered on
a model but does not assume the model to be true. A concentration parameter, c, in the nonparametric
prior quantifies trust in the baseline model and this is subsequently reflected in the nonparametric
update, through the relative influence given to the model-based inference for θ. In particular, c → ∞
recovers the standard model-based Bayesian update while c = 0 leads to a Bayesian bootstrap
estimator for the object of interest.
Our methodology can be applied in a number of situations, including:
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

