Knowledge Distillation by On-the-Fly Native
Ensemble
Xu Lan1 , Xiatian Zhu2 , and Shaogang Gong1
1

Queen Mary University of London
2
Vision Semantics Limited

Abstract
Knowledge distillation is effective to train the small and generalisable network
models for meeting the low-memory and fast running requirements. Existing
offline distillation methods rely on a strong pre-trained teacher, which enables
favourable knowledge discovery and transfer but requires a complex two-phase
training procedure. Online counterparts address this limitation at the price of
lacking a high-capacity teacher. In this work, we present an On-the-fly Native
Ensemble (ONE) learning strategy for one-stage online distillation. Specifically,
ONE only trains a single multi-branch network while simultaneously establishing
a strong teacher on-the-fly to enhance the learning of target network. Extensive
evaluations show that ONE improves the generalisation performance of a variety
of deep neural networks more significantly than alternative methods on four image
classification dataset: CIFAR10, CIFAR100, SVHN, and ImageNet, whilst having
the computational efficiency advantages.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have gained impressive success in many computer vision tasks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8]. However, the performance advantages often come at the cost of training and deploying resourceintensive networks with large depth and/or width [9, 4, 2]. This leads to the necessity of developing
compact yet discriminative models. Knowledge distillation [10] is one general meta-solution among
the others such as parameter binarisation [11, 12] and filter pruning [13]. The distillation process
begins with training a high-capacity teacher model (or an ensemble of models), followed by learning
a smaller student model which is encouraged to match the teacher’s predictions [10] or feature
representations [14, 15]. While promising the student model quality improvement from aligning
with a pre-trained teacher model, this strategy requires a longer training process, significant extra
computational cost and large memory (for a heavy teacher) in a more complex multi-phase training
procedure. These are commercially unattractive [16].
To simplify the distillation training process as above, simultaneous distillation algorithms [17, 16]
have been developed to perform knowledge online teaching in a one-phase training procedure. Instead
of pre-training a static teacher model, these methods train simultaneously a set of (typically two)
student models which learn from each other in a peer-teaching manner. This approach merges the
training processes of the teacher and student models, and uses the peer network to provide the teaching
knowledge. Beyond the original understanding of distillation that requires the teacher model larger
than the student, this online distilling strategy can improve the performance of any-capacity models,
leading to a more generically applicable technique. Such a peer-teaching strategy sometimes even
outperforms the teacher based offline distillation. The plausible reason is that the large teacher model
tends to overfit the training data therefore leading to less extra knowledge on top of the manually
labelled annotations [16].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

