The challenge of realistic music generation:
modelling raw audio at scale

Sander Dieleman

Aäron van den Oord Karen Simonyan
DeepMind
London, UK
{sedielem,avdnoord,simonyan}@google.com

Abstract
Realistic music generation is a challenging task. When building generative models
of music that are learnt from data, typically high-level representations such as scores
or MIDI are used that abstract away the idiosyncrasies of a particular performance.
But these nuances are very important for our perception of musicality and realism,
so in this work we embark on modelling music in the raw audio domain. It has
been shown that autoregressive models excel at generating raw audio waveforms
of speech, but when applied to music, we find them biased towards capturing
local signal structure at the expense of modelling long-range correlations. This
is problematic because music exhibits structure at many different timescales. In
this work, we explore autoregressive discrete autoencoders (ADAs) as a means to
enable autoregressive models to capture long-range correlations in waveforms. We
find that they allow us to unconditionally generate piano music directly in the raw
audio domain, which shows stylistic consistency across tens of seconds.

1

Introduction

Music is a complex, highly structured sequential data modality. When rendered as an audio signal,
this structure manifests itself at various timescales, ranging from the periodicity of the waveforms
at the scale of milliseconds, all the way to the musical form of a piece of music, which typically
spans several minutes. Modelling all of the temporal correlations in the sequence that arise from this
structure is challenging, because they span many different orders of magnitude.
There has been significant interest in computational music generation for many decades [11, 20].
More recently, deep learning and modern generative modelling techniques have been applied to this
task [5, 7]. Although music can be represented as a waveform, we can represent it more concisely
by abstracting away the idiosyncrasies of a particular performance. Almost all of the work in music
generation so far has focused on such symbolic representations: scores, MIDI1 sequences and other
representations that remove certain aspects of music to varying degrees.
The use of symbolic representations comes with limitations: the nuances abstracted away by such
representations are often musically quite important and greatly impact our enjoyment of music. For
example, the precise timing, timbre and volume of the notes played by a musician do not correspond
exactly to those written in a score. While these variations may be captured symbolically for some
instruments (e.g. the piano, where we can record the exact timings and intensities of each key press
[41]), this is usually very difficult and impractical for most instruments. Furthermore, symbolic
representations are often tailored to particular instruments, which reduces their generality and implies
that a lot of work is required to apply existing modelling techniques to new instruments.
1

Musical Instrument Digital Interface

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

