Empirical Risk Minimization in Non-interactive
Local Differential Privacy Revisited ∗

Di Wang
Marco Gaboardi
Jinhui Xu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
State University of New York at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY, 14260
Email:{dwang45,gaboardi,jinhui}@buffalo.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we revisit the Empirical Risk Minimization problem in the noninteractive local model of differential privacy. In the case of constant or low
dimensions (p  n), we first show that if the loss function is (∞, T )-smooth,
we can avoid a dependence of the sample complexity, to achieve error α, on the
exponential of the dimensionality p with base 1/α (i.e., α−p ), which answers a
question in [19]. Our approach is based on polynomial approximation. Then, we
propose player-efficient algorithms with 1-bit communication complexity and O(1)
computation cost for each player. The error bound is asymptotically the same
as the original one. With some additional assumptions, we also give an efficient
algorithm for the server. In the case of high dimensions (n  p), we show that if
the loss function is a convex generalized linear function, the error can be bounded
by using the Gaussian width of the constrained set, instead of p, which improves
the one in [19].

1

Introduction

Differential privacy [7] has emerged as a rigorous notion for privacy which allows accurate data
analysis with a guaranteed bound on the increase in harm for each individual to contribute her
data. Methods to guarantee differential privacy have been widely studied, and recently adopted in
industry [15, 8].
Two main user models have emerged for differential privacy: the central model and the local one. In
the central model, data are managed by a trusted central entity which is responsible for collecting
them and for deciding which differentially private data analysis to perform and to release. A classical
use case for this model is the one for collecting census data [9]. In the local model, each individual
manages his/her proper data and discloses them to a server through some differentially private
mechanisms. The server collects the (now private) data of each individual and combines them into a
resulting data analysis. A classical application of this model is the one aiming at collecting statistics
from user devices like in the case of Google’s Chrome browser [8], and Apple’s iOS-10 [15, 20].
In the local model, there are two basic kinds of protocols: interactive and non-interactive. Bassily
and Smith [2] have recently investigated the power of non-interactive differentially private protocols.
This type of protocols seems to be more appealing to real world applications, due to the fact that they
can be implemented more easily (i.e., less influenced by the network latency issue). Both Google and
Apple use the non-interactive model in their projects [15, 8].
∗

This research was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant No. CCF1422324, CCF-1716400, CCF-1718220 and CNS-1565365.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

