A Structured Prediction Approach for Label Ranking

Anna Korba, Alexandre Garcia, Florence d’Alché-Buc
LTCI, Télécom ParisTech
Université Paris-Saclay
Paris, France
firstname.lastname@telecom-paristech.fr

Abstract
We propose to solve a label ranking problem as a structured output regression task.
In this view, we adopt a least square surrogate loss approach that solves a supervised
learning problem in two steps: a regression step in a well-chosen feature space
and a pre-image (or decoding) step. We use specific feature maps/embeddings for
ranking data, which convert any ranking/permutation into a vector representation.
These embeddings are all well-tailored for our approach, either by resulting in
consistent estimators, or by solving trivially the pre-image problem which is often
the bottleneck in structured prediction. Their extension to the case of incomplete or
partial rankings is also discussed. Finally, we provide empirical results on synthetic
and real-world datasets showing the relevance of our method.

1

Introduction

Label ranking is a prediction task which aims at mapping input instances to a (total) order over a
given set of labels indexed by {1, . . . , K}. This problem is motivated by applications where the
output reflects some preferences, or order of relevance, among a set of objects. Hence there is an
increasing number of practical applications of this problem in the machine learning litterature. In
pattern recognition for instance (Geng and Luo, 2014), label ranking can be used to predict the
different objects which are the more likely to appear in an image among a predefined set. Similarly, in
sentiment analysis, (Wang et al., 2011) where the prediction of the emotions expressed in a document
is cast as a label ranking problem over a set of possible affective expressions. In ad targeting, the
prediction of preferences of a web user over ad categories (Djuric et al., 2014) can be also formalized
as a label ranking problem, and the prediction as a ranking guarantees that each user is qualified into
several categories, eliminating overexposure. Another application is metalearning, where the goal
is to rank a set of algorithms according to their suitability based on the characteristics of a target
dataset and learning problem (see Brazdil et al. (2003); Aiguzhinov et al. (2010)). Interestingly,
the label ranking problem can also be seen as an extension of several supervised tasks, such as
multiclass classification or multi-label ranking (see Dekel et al. (2004); Fürnkranz and Hüllermeier
(2003)). Indeed for these tasks, a prediction can be obtained by postprocessing the output of a label
ranking model in a suitable way. However, label ranking differs from other ranking problems, such as
in information retrieval or recommender systems, where the goal is (generally) to predict a target
variable under the form of a rating or a relevance score (Cao et al., 2007).
More formally, the goal of label ranking is to map a vector x lying in some feature space X to a
ranking y lying in the space of rankings Y. A ranking is an ordered list of items of the set {1, . . . , K}.
These relations linking the components of the y objects induce a structure on the output space
Y. The label ranking task thus naturally enters the framework of structured output prediction for
which an abundant litterature is available (Nowozin and Lampert, 2011). In this paper, we adopt
the Surrogate Least Square Loss approach introduced in the context of output kernels (Cortes et al.,
2005; Kadri et al., 2013; Brouard et al., 2016) and recently theoretically studied by Ciliberto et al.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

