DeepPINK: reproducible feature selection in deep
neural networks
Yang Young Lu ∗
Department of Genome Sciences
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
ylu465@uw.edu

Yingying Fan ∗
Data Sciences and Operations Department
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
fanyingy@marshall.usc.edu

Jinchi Lv
Data Sciences and Operations Department
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
jinchilv@marshall.usc.edu
William Stafford Noble
Department of Genome Sciences and Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
william-noble@uw.edu

Abstract
Deep learning has become increasingly popular in both supervised and unsupervised machine learning thanks to its outstanding empirical performance. However,
because of their intrinsic complexity, most deep learning methods are largely treated as black box tools with little interpretability. Even though recent attempts have
been made to facilitate the interpretability of deep neural networks (DNNs), existing methods are susceptible to noise and lack of robustness. Therefore, scientists
are justifiably cautious about the reproducibility of the discoveries, which is often
related to the interpretability of the underlying statistical models. In this paper, we
describe a method to increase the interpretability and reproducibility of DNNs by
incorporating the idea of feature selection with controlled error rate. By designing
a new DNN architecture and integrating it with the recently proposed knockoffs
framework, we perform feature selection with a controlled error rate, while maintaining high power. This new method, DeepPINK (Deep feature selection using
Paired-Input Nonlinear Knockoffs), is applied to both simulated and real data sets
to demonstrate its empirical utility. 2

1

Introduction

Rapid advances in machine learning techniques have revolutionized our everyday lives and had
profound impacts on many contemporary domains such as decision making, healthcare, and finance
∗
2

These authors contributed equally to this work.
All code and data will be available here: github.com/younglululu/DeepPINK.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

