Coupled Variational Bayes via
Optimization Embedding

∗

Bo Dai1,2 , ∗ Hanjun Dai1 , Niao He3 , Weiyang Liu1 , Zhen Liu1 ,
Jianshu Chen4 , Lin Xiao5 , Le Song1,6
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Google Brain, 3 University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
4
Tencent AI, 5 Microsoft Research, 6 Ant Financial

Abstract
Variational inference plays a vital role in learning graphical models, especially on
large-scale datasets. Much of its success depends on a proper choice of auxiliary
distribution class for posterior approximation. However, how to pursue an auxiliary
distribution class that achieves both good approximation ability and computation
efficiency remains a core challenge. In this paper, we proposed coupled variational
Bayes which exploits the primal-dual view of the ELBO with the variational distribution class generated by an optimization procedure, which is termed optimization
embedding. This flexible function class couples the variational distribution with
the original parameters in the graphical models, allowing end-to-end learning of
the graphical models by back-propagation through the variational distribution.
Theoretically, we establish an interesting connection to gradient flow and demonstrate the extreme flexibility of this implicit distribution family in the limit sense.
Empirically, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method on multiple
graphical models with either continuous or discrete latent variables comparing to
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic models with Bayesian inference provides a powerful tool for modeling data with
complex structure and capturing the uncertainty. The latent variables increase the flexibility of the
models, while making the inference intractable. Typically, one resorts to approximate inference such
as sampling [Neal, 1993, Neal et al., 2011, Doucet et al., 2001], or variational inference [Wainwright
and Jordan, 2003, Minka, 2001]. Sampling algorithms enjoys good asymptotic theoretical properties,
but they are also known to suffer from slow convergence especially for complex models. As a result,
variational inference algorithms become more and more attractive, especially driven by the recent
development on stochastic approximation methods [Hoffman et al., 2013].
Variational inference methods approximate the intractable posterior distributions by a family of
distributions. Choosing a proper variational distribution family is one of the core problems in
variational inference. For example, the mean-field approximation exploits the distributions generated
by the independence assumption. Such assumption will reduce the computation complexity, however,
it often leads to the distribution family that is too restricted to recover the exact posterior [Turner and
Sahani, 2011]. Mixture models and nonparametric family [Jaakkola and Jordon, 1999, Gershman
et al., 2012, Dai et al., 2016a] are the natural generalization. By introducing more components in
the parametrization, the distribution family become more and more flexible, and the approximation
error is reduced. However, the computational cost increases since it requires the evaluations of
the log-likelihood and/or its derivatives for each component in each update, which could limit
the scalability of variational inference. Inspired by the flexibility of deep neural networks, many
neural networks parametrized distributions [Kingma and Welling, 2013, Mnih and Gregor, 2014]
∗

indicates equal contributions.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

