Submodular Field Grammars: Representation,
Inference, and Application to Image Parsing

Abram L. Friesen and Pedro Domingos
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
{afriesen,pedrod}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Natural scenes contain many layers of part-subpart structure, and distributions
over them are thus naturally represented by stochastic image grammars, with one
production per decomposition of a part. Unfortunately, in contrast to language
grammars, where the number of possible split points for a production A → BC
is linear in the length of A, in an image there are an exponential number of ways
to split a region into subregions. This makes parsing intractable and requires
image grammars to be severely restricted in practice, for example by allowing
only rectangular regions. In this paper, we address this problem by associating
with each production a submodular Markov random field whose labels are the
subparts and whose labeling segments the current object into these subparts. We
call the resulting model a submodular field grammar (SFG). Finding the MAP
split of a region into subregions is now tractable, and by exploiting this we develop an efficient approximate algorithm for MAP parsing of images with SFGs.
Empirically, we show promising improvements in accuracy when using SFGs for
scene understanding, and demonstrate exponential improvements in inference time
compared to traditional methods, while returning comparable minima.

1

Introduction

Understanding natural scenes is a challenging problem that requires simultaneously detecting, segmenting, and recognizing each object in a scene despite noise, distractors, and ambiguity. Fortunately,
natural scenes possess inherent structure in the form of contextual and part-subpart relationships
between objects. Such relationships are well modeled by a grammar, which defines a set of production
rules that specify the decomposition of objects into their parts. Natural language is the most common
application of such grammars, but the compositional structure of natural scenes makes stochastic
image grammars a natural candidate for representing distributions over images (see Zhu and Mumford
[1] for a review). Importantly, natural language can be parsed efficiently with respect to a grammar
because the number of possible split points for each production A → BC is linear in the length of
the constituent corresponding to A. However, images cannot be parsed efficiently in this way because
there are an exponential number of ways to split an image into arbitrarily-shaped subregions. As
such, previous image-grammar approaches could only ensure tractability by severely limiting the
possible decompositions of each region either explicitly, for example by allowing only rectangular
regions, or by sampling (e.g., Poon and Domingos [2], Zhao and Zhu [3]).
Due to these limitations, many approaches to scene understanding instead use a Markov random
field (MRF) to define a probabilistic model over pixel labels (e.g., Shotton et al. [4], Gould et al.
[5]), thereby capturing some natural structure while still permitting objects to have arbitrary shapes.
Most such MRFs use planar- or tree-structured graphs in the label space [6, 7]. While these models
can improve labeling accuracy, their restricted structures mean that they can capture little of the
compositional structure present in natural images without an exponential number of labels. Inference
in MRFs is intractable in general [8] but is tractable under certain restrictions. For pairwise binary
MRFs, if the energy is submodular [9], meaning that each pair of neighboring pixels prefers to have
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

