Link Prediction Based on Graph Neural Networks
Muhan Zhang
Department of CSE
Washington University in St. Louis
muhan@wustl.edu

Yixin Chen
Department of CSE
Washington University in St. Louis
chen@cse.wustl.edu

Abstract
Link prediction is a key problem for network-structured data. Link prediction
heuristics use some score functions, such as common neighbors and Katz index,
to measure the likelihood of links. They have obtained wide practical uses due to
their simplicity, interpretability, and for some of them, scalability. However, every
heuristic has a strong assumption on when two nodes are likely to link, which
limits their effectiveness on networks where these assumptions fail. In this regard,
a more reasonable way should be learning a suitable heuristic from a given network
instead of using predefined ones. By extracting a local subgraph around each target
link, we aim to learn a function mapping the subgraph patterns to link existence,
thus automatically learning a “heuristic” that suits the current network. In this
paper, we study this heuristic learning paradigm for link prediction. First, we
develop a novel -decaying heuristic theory. The theory unifies a wide range of
heuristics in a single framework, and proves that all these heuristics can be well
approximated from local subgraphs. Our results show that local subgraphs reserve
rich information related to link existence. Second, based on the -decaying theory,
we propose a new method to learn heuristics from local subgraphs using a graph
neural network (GNN). Its experimental results show unprecedented performance,
working consistently well on a wide range of problems.

1

Introduction

Link prediction is to predict whether two nodes in a network are likely to have a link [1]. Given the
ubiquitous existence of networks, it has many applications such as friend recommendation [2], movie
recommendation [3], knowledge graph completion [4], and metabolic network reconstruction [5].
One class of simple yet effective approaches for link prediction is called heuristic methods. Heuristic
methods compute some heuristic node similarity scores as the likelihood of links [1, 6]. Existing
heuristics can be categorized based on the maximum hop of neighbors needed to calculate the
score. For example, common neighbors (CN) and preferential attachment (PA) [7] are first-order
heuristics, since they only involve the one-hop neighbors of two target nodes. Adamic-Adar (AA) and
resource allocation (RA) [8] are second-order heuristics, as they are calculated from up to two-hop
neighborhood of the target nodes. We define h-order heuristics to be those heuristics which require
knowing up to h-hop neighborhood of the target nodes. There are also some high-order heuristics
which require knowing the entire network. Examples include Katz, rooted PageRank (PR) [9], and
SimRank (SR) [10]. Table 3 in Appendix A summarizes eight popular heuristics.
Although working well in practice, heuristic methods have strong assumptions on when links may
exist. For example, the common neighbor heuristic assumes that two nodes are more likely to connect
if they have many common neighbors. This assumption may be correct in social networks, but is
shown to fail in protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks – two proteins sharing many common
neighbors are actually less likely to interact [11].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

