TopRank: A Practical Algorithm for Online
Stochastic Ranking

Tor Lattimore
DeepMind

Branislav Kveton
Google

Shuai Li
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Csaba Szepesvári
DeepMind and University of Alberta

Abstract
Online learning to rank is a sequential decision-making problem where in each
round the learning agent chooses a list of items and receives feedback in the form
of clicks from the user. Many sample-efficient algorithms have been proposed
for this problem that assume a specific click model connecting rankings and user
behavior. We propose a generalized click model that encompasses many existing
models, including the position-based and cascade models. Our generalization
motivates a novel online learning algorithm based on topological sort, which we
call TopRank. TopRank is (a) more natural than existing algorithms, (b) has
stronger regret guarantees than existing algorithms with comparable generality, (c)
has a more insightful proof that leaves the door open to many generalizations, and
(d) outperforms existing algorithms empirically.

1

Introduction

Learning to rank is an important problem with numerous applications in web search and recommender
systems [11]. Broadly speaking, the goal is to learn an ordered list of K items from a larger collection
of size L that maximizes the satisfaction of the user, often conditioned on a query. This problem has
traditionally been studied in the offline setting, where the ranking policy is learned from manuallyannotated relevance judgments. It has been observed that the feedback of users can be used to
significantly improve existing ranking policies [1, 16]. This is the main motivation for online learning
to rank, where the goal is to adaptively maximize the user satisfaction.
Numerous methods have been proposed for online learning to rank, both in the adversarial [12, 13]
and stochastic settings. Our focus is on the stochastic setup where recent work has leveraged click
models to mitigate the curse of dimensionality that arises from the combinatorial nature of the
action-set. A click model is a model for how users click on items in rankings and is widely studied by
the information retrieval community [2]. One popular click model in learning to rank is the cascade
model (CM), which assumes that the user scans the ranking from top to bottom, clicking on the first
item they find attractive [6, 3, 7, 18, 10, 5]. Another model is the position-based model (PBM), where
the probability that the user clicks on an item depends on its position and attractiveness, but not on
the surrounding items [8].
The cascade and position-based models have relatively few parameters, which is both a blessing and
a curse. On the positive side, a small model is easy to learn. More negatively, there is a danger that a
simplistic model will have a large approximation error. In fact, it has been observed experimentally
that no single existing click model captures the behavior of an entire population of users [4]. Zoghi
et al. [17] recently showed that under reasonable assumptions a single online learning algorithm can
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

