Bayesian Inference of Temporal Task Specifications
from Demonstrations
Ankit Shah
CSAIL, MIT
ajshah@mit.edu

Pritish Kamath
CSAIL, MIT
pritish@mit.edu

Shen Li
CSAIL, MIT
shenli@mit.edu

Julie Shah
CSAIL, MIT
julie_a_shah@mit.edu

Abstract
When observing task demonstrations, human apprentices are able to identify
whether a given task is executed correctly long before they gain expertise in actually
performing that task. Prior research into learning from demonstrations (LfD) has
failed to capture this notion of the acceptability of an execution; meanwhile, temporal logics provide a flexible language for expressing task specifications. Inspired
by this, we present Bayesian specification inference, a probabilistic model for inferring task specification as a temporal logic formula. We incorporate methods from
probabilistic programming to define our priors, along with a domain-independent
likelihood function to enable sampling-based inference. We demonstrate the efficacy of our model for inferring specifications with over 90% similarity between
the inferred specification and the ground truth, both within a synthetic domain and
a real-world table setting task.

1

Introduction

Imagine showing a friend how to play your favorite quest-based video game. A mission within such
a game might be composed of multiple sub-quests that must be completed in order to complete that
level. In this scenario, it is likely that your friend would comprehend what needs to be done in order
to complete the mission well before he or she was actually able to play the game effectively. While
learning from demonstrations, human apprentices can identify whether a task is executed correctly
well before gaining expertise in that task. Most current approaches to learning from demonstration
frame this problem as one of learning a reward function or policy within a Markov decision process
setting; however, user specification of acceptable behaviors through reward functions and policies
remains an open problem [1]. Temporal logics have been used in prior research as a language
for expressing desirable system behaviors, and can improve the interpretability of specifications if
expressed as compositions of simpler templates (akin to those described by Dwyer et al. [2]). In
this work, we propose a probabilistic model for inferring the temporal structure of a task as a linear
temporal logic (LTL) specification.
A specification inferred from demonstrations is valuable in conjunction with synthesis algorithms for
verifiable controllers ([3] and [4]), as a reward signal during reinforcement learning ([5], [6]), and as
a system model for execution monitoring. In our work, we frame specification learning as a Bayesian
inference problem.
The flexibility of LTL for specifying behaviors also represents a key challenge with regard to inference
due to a large hypothesis space. We define prior and likelihood distributions over a smaller but relevant
part of the LTL formulas, using templates based on work by Dwyer et al [2]. Ideas from universal
probabilistic programming languages formalized by Freer et al [7] and Goodman et al [8], [9] are
key to our modeling approach. Indeed, probabilistic programming languages enabled Ellis et al
[10], [11] to perform inference over complex, recursively defined hypothesis spaces of graphics
programs and pronunciation rules. We demonstrate the capability of our model to achieve greater
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

