Bayesian Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning

Jaesik Yoon∗3 , Taesup Kim∗‡2 , Ousmane Dia1 , Sungwoong Kim4 ,
Yoshua Bengio2,5 , Sungjin Ahn‡6
1

Element AI, 2 MILA Université de Montréal, 3 SAP, 4 Kakao Brain,
5
CIFAR Senior Fellow, 6 Rutgers University

Abstract
Due to the inherent model uncertainty, learning to infer Bayesian posterior from a
few-shot dataset is an important step towards robust meta-learning. In this paper,
we propose a novel Bayesian model-agnostic meta-learning method. The proposed
method combines efficient gradient-based meta-learning with nonparametric variational inference in a principled probabilistic framework. Unlike previous methods,
during fast adaptation, the method is capable of learning complex uncertainty
structure beyond a simple Gaussian approximation, and during meta-update, a
novel Bayesian mechanism prevents meta-level overfitting. Remaining a gradientbased method, it is also the first Bayesian model-agnostic meta-learning method
applicable to various tasks including reinforcement learning. Experiment results
show the accuracy and robustness of the proposed method in sinusoidal regression,
image classification, active learning, and reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Two-year-old children can infer a new category from only one instance (Smith & Slone, 2017). This
is presumed to be because during early learning, a human brain develops foundational structures such
as the “shape bias” in order to learn the learning procedure (Landau et al., 1988). This ability, also
known as learning to learn or meta-learning (Biggs, 1985; Bengio et al., 1990), has recently obtained
much attention in machine learning by formulating it as few-shot learning (Lake et al., 2015; Vinyals
et al., 2016). Because, initiating the learning from scratch, a neural network can hardly learn anything
meaningful from such a few data points, a learning algorithm should be able to extract the statistical
regularity from past tasks to enable warm-start for subsequent tasks.
Learning a new task from a few examples inherently induces a significant amount of uncertainty. This
is apparent when we train a complex model such as a neural network using only a few examples. It
is also empirically supported by the fact that a challenge in existing few-shot learning algorithms
is their tendency to overfit (Mishra et al., 2017). A robust meta-learning algorithm therefore must
be able to systematically deal with such uncertainty in order to be applicable to critical problems
such as healthcare and self-driving cars. Bayesian inference provides a principled way to address
this issue. It brings us not only robustness to overfitting but also numerous benefits such as improved
prediction accuracy by Bayesian ensembling (Balan et al., 2015), active learning (Gal et al., 2016), and
principled/safe exploration in reinforcement learning (Houthooft et al., 2016). Therefore, developing
a Bayesian few-shot learning method is an important step towards robust meta-learning.
Motivated by the above arguments, in this paper we propose a Bayesian meta-learning method,
called Bayesian MAML. By introducing Bayesian methods for fast adaptation and meta-update, the
proposed method learns to quickly obtain an approximate posterior of a given unseen task and thus
∗
Equal contribution, Correspondence to sungjin.ahn@rutgers.edu, ‡Work done also while working at
Element AI

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

