On Learning Markov Chains

Yi HAO
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
yih179@ucsd.edu

Alon Orlitsky
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
alon@ucsd.edu

Venkatadheeraj Pichapati
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
dheerajpv7@ucsd.edu

Abstract
The problem of estimating an unknown discrete distribution from its samples
is a fundamental tenet of statistical learning. Over the past decade, it attracted
significant research effort and has been solved for a variety of divergence measures.
Surprisingly, an equally important problem, estimating an unknown Markov chain
from its samples, is still far from understood. We consider two problems related to
the min-max risk (expected loss) of estimating an unknown k-state Markov chain
from its n sequential samples: predicting the conditional distribution of the next
sample with respect to the KL-divergence, and estimating the transition matrix with
respect to a natural loss induced by KL or a more general f -divergence measure.
For the first measure, we determine the min-max prediction risk to within a linear
factor in the alphabet size, showing it is Ω(k log log n/n) and O(k 2 log log n/n).
For the second, if the transition probabilities can be arbitrarily small, then only
trivial uniform risk upper bounds can be derived. We therefore consider transition probabilities that are bounded away from zero, and resolve the problem for
essentially all sufficiently smooth f -divergences, including KL-, L2 -, Chi-squared,
Hellinger, and Alpha-divergences.

1

Introduction

Many natural phenomena are inherently probabilistic. With past observations at hand, probabilistic
models can therefore help us predict, estimate, and understand, future outcomes and trends. The two
most fundamental probabilistic models for sequential data are i.i.d. processes and Markov chains.
In an i.i.d. process, for each i ≥ 1, a sample Xi is generated independently according to the same
underlying distribution. In Markov chains, for each i ≥ 2, the distribution of sample Xi is determined
by just the value of Xi−1 .
Let us confine our discussion to random processes over finite alphabets, without loss of generality,
assumed to be [k] := {1, 2, . . . , k}. An i.i.d. process is defined by a single distribution p over [k],
while a Markov chain is characterized by a transition probability matrix M over [k] × [k]. We denote
the initial and stationary distributions of a Markov model by µ and π, respectively. For notational
consistency let P = (p) denote an i.i.d. model and P = (M ) denote a Markov model.
Having observed a sample sequence X n := X1 , . . . , Xn from an unknown i.i.d. process or Markov
chain, a natural problem is to predict the next sample point Xn+1 . Since Xn+1 is a random
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

