Generalizing Point Embeddings using the
Wasserstein Space of Elliptical Distributions
Boris Muzellec
CREST, ENSAE
boris.muzellec@ensae.fr

Marco Cuturi
Google Brain and CREST, ENSAE
cuturi@google.com

Abstract
Embedding complex objects as vectors in low dimensional spaces is a longstanding
problem in machine learning. We propose in this work an extension of that
approach, which consists in embedding objects as elliptical probability distributions,
namely distributions whose densities have elliptical level sets. We endow these
measures with the 2-Wasserstein metric, with two important benefits: (i) For such
measures, the squared 2-Wasserstein metric has a closed form, equal to a weighted
sum of the squared Euclidean distance between means and the squared Bures
metric between covariance matrices. The latter is a Riemannian metric between
positive semi-definite matrices, which turns out to be Euclidean on a suitable factor
representation of such matrices, which is valid on the entire geodesic between
these matrices. (ii) The 2-Wasserstein distance boils down to the usual Euclidean
metric when comparing Diracs, and therefore provides a natural framework to
extend point embeddings. We show that for these reasons Wasserstein elliptical
embeddings are more intuitive and yield tools that are better behaved numerically
than the alternative choice of Gaussian embeddings with the Kullback-Leibler
divergence. In particular, and unlike previous work based on the KL geometry, we
learn elliptical distributions that are not necessarily diagonal. We demonstrate the
advantages of elliptical embeddings by using them for visualization, to compute
embeddings of words, and to reflect entailment or hypernymy.

1

Introduction

One of the holy grails of machine learning is to compute meaningful low-dimensional embeddings
for high-dimensional complex data. That ability has recently proved crucial to tackle more advanced
tasks, such as for instance: inference on texts using word embeddings [Mikolov et al., 2013b,
Pennington et al., 2014, Bojanowski et al., 2017], improved image understanding [Norouzi et al.,
2014], representations for nodes in large graphs [Grover and Leskovec, 2016].
Such embeddings have been traditionally recovered by seeking isometric embeddings in lower
dimensional Euclidean spaces, as studied in [Johnson and Lindenstrauss, 1984, Bourgain, 1985].
Given n input points x1 , . . . , xn , one seeks as many embeddings y1 , . . . , yn in a target space Y = Rd
whose pairwise distances kyi yj k2 do not depart too much from the original distances dX (xi , xj )
in the input space. Note that when d is restricted to be 2 or 3, these embeddings (yi )i provide a useful
way to visualize the entire dataset. Starting with metric multidimensional scaling (mMDS) [De Leeuw,
1977, Borg and Groenen, 2005], several approaches have refined this intuition [Tenenbaum et al.,
2000, Roweis and Saul, 2000, Hinton and Roweis, 2003, Maaten and Hinton, 2008]. More general
criteria, such as reconstruction error [Hinton and Salakhutdinov, 2006, Kingma and Welling, 2014];
co-occurence [Globerson et al., 2007]; or relational knowledge, be it in metric learning [Weinberger
and Saul, 2009] or between words [Mikolov et al., 2013b] can be used to obtain vector embeddings.
In such cases, distances kyi yj k2 between embeddings, or alternatively their dot-products hyi , yj i
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

