Sparse Attentive Backtracking:
Temporal Credit Assignment Through Reminding
Nan Rosemary Ke1,2 , Anirudh Goyal1 , Olexa Bilaniuk1 , Jonathan Binas1 ,
Michael C. Mozer3 , Chris Pal1,2,4 , Yoshua Bengio1†
1
Mila, Université de Montréal
2
Mila, Polytechnique Montréal
3
University of Colorado, Boulder
4
Element AI
†
CIFAR Senior Fellow.

Abstract
Learning long-term dependencies in extended temporal sequences requires credit
assignment to events far back in the past. The most common method for training
recurrent neural networks, back-propagation through time (BPTT), requires credit
information to be propagated backwards through every single step of the forward
computation, potentially over thousands or millions of time steps. This becomes
computationally expensive or even infeasible when used with long sequences.
Importantly, biological brains are unlikely to perform such detailed reverse replay
over very long sequences of internal states (consider days, months, or years.)
However, humans are often reminded of past memories or mental states which
are associated with the current mental state. We consider the hypothesis that
such memory associations between past and present could be used for credit
assignment through arbitrarily long sequences, propagating the credit assigned to
the current state to the associated past state. Based on this principle, we study a
novel algorithm which only back-propagates through a few of these temporal skip
connections, realized by a learned attention mechanism that associates current states
with relevant past states. We demonstrate in experiments that our method matches or
outperforms regular BPTT and truncated BPTT in tasks involving particularly longterm dependencies, but without requiring the biologically implausible backward
replay through the whole history of states. Additionally, we demonstrate that the
proposed method transfers to longer sequences significantly better than LSTMs
trained with BPTT and LSTMs trained with full self-attention.

1

Introduction

Humans have a remarkable ability to remember events from the distant past which are associated
with the current mental state (Ciaramelli et al., 2008). Most experimental and theoretical analyses
of memory have focused on understanding the deliberate route to memory formation and recall.
But automatic reminding—when memories pop into one’s head—can have a potent influence on
cognition. Reminding is normally triggered by contextual features present at the moment of retrieval
which match distinctive features of the memory being recalled (Berntsen et al., 2013; Wharton
et al., 1996), and can occur more often following unexpected events (Read & Ian, 1991). Thus, an
individual’s current state of understanding can trigger reminding of a past state. Reminding can
provide distracting sources of irrelevant information (Forbus et al., 1995; Novick, 1988), but it can
also serve a useful computational role in ongoing cognition by providing information essential to
decision making (Benjamin & Ross, 2010).
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

