Sharp Bounds for Generalized Uniformity Testing

Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Southern California
diakonik@usc.edu

Daniel M. Kane
University of California, San Diego
dakane@ucsd.edu

Alistair Stewart
University of Southern California
stewart.al@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the problem of generalized uniformity testing of a discrete probability
distribution: Given samples from a probability distribution p over an unknown
size discrete domain Ω, we want to distinguish, with probability at least 2/3,
between the case that p is uniform on some subset of Ω versus -far, in total variation distance, from any such uniform distribution. We establish tight bounds
on the sample complexity of generalized uniformity testing. In more detail, we
present a computationally efficient tester whose sample complexity is optimal,
within constant factors, and a matching worst-case information-theoretic lower
bound. Specifically, we show that the samplecomplexity of generalized uniformity testing is Θ 1/(4/3 kpk3 ) + 1/(2 kpk2 ) .

1

Introduction

Consider the following statistical task: Given independent samples from a distribution over an unknown size discrete domain Ω, determine whether it is uniform on some subset of the domain versus
def
significantly different from any such uniform distribution. Formally, let CU = {uS : S ⊆ Ω}
denote the set of uniform distributions uS over subsets S of Ω. Given sample access to an unknown
distribution p on Ω and a proximity parameter  > 0, we want to correctly distinguish between the
def
case that p ∈ CU versus dTV (p, CU ) = minS⊆Ω dTV (p, uS ) ≥ , with probability at least 2/3.
Here, dTV (p, q) = (1/2)kp − qk1 denotes the total variation distance between distributions p and q.
This natural problem, termed generalized uniformity testing, was recently introduced by Batu and
Canonne [BC17], who gave the first upper and lower bounds on its sample complexity.
Generalized uniformity testing bears a strong resemblance to the familiar task of uniformity testing,
where one is given samples from a distribution p on a domain of known size n and the goal is to
determine, with probability at least 2/3, whether p is the uniform distribution un on this domain
versus dTV (p, un ) ≥ . Uniformity testing is arguably the most extensively studied problem in
distribution property testing [GR00, Pan08, VV14, DKN15b, Gol16, DGPP16, DGPP17] and its
sample complexity is well understood. Specifically, it is known [Pan08, CDVV14, VV14, DKN15b]
that Θ(n1/2 /2 ) samples are necessary and sufficient for this task.
The field of distribution property testing [BFR+ 00] has seen substantial progress in the past decade,
see [Rub12, Can15] for two recent surveys. A large body of the literature has focused on characterizing the sample size needed to test properties of arbitrary distributions of a given support
size. This regime is fairly well understood: for many properties of interest there exist sampleefficient testers [Pan08, CDVV14, VV14, DKN15b, ADK15, CDGR16, DK16, DGPP16, CDS17,
DGPP18, CDKS18]. Moreover, an emerging body of work has focused on leveraging a pri32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

