A Unified Feature Disentangler for Multi-Domain
Image Translation and Manipulation

Alexander H. Liu1

Yen-Cheng Liu2

Yu-Ying Yeh3

Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,4

1

2

National Taiwan University, Taiwan
3
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
University of California, San Diego, USA
4
MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare, Taiwan
b03902034@ntu.edu.tw, ycliu@gatech.edu
yuyeh@eng.ucsd.edu, ycwang@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
We present a novel and unified deep learning framework which is capable of learning domain-invariant representation from data across multiple domains. Realized
by adversarial training with additional ability to exploit domain-specific information, the proposed network is able to perform continuous cross-domain image
translation and manipulation, and produces desirable output images accordingly. In
addition, the resulting feature representation exhibits superior performance of unsupervised domain adaptation, which also verifies the effectiveness of the proposed
model in learning disentangled features for describing cross-domain data.

1

Introduction

Learning interpretable feature representation has been an active research topic in the fields of computer
vision and machine learning. In particular, learning deep representation with the ability to exploit
relationship between data across different data domains has attracted the attention from the researchers.
Recent developments of deep learning technologies have shown progress in the tasks of cross-domain
visual classification [6, 26, 27] and cross-domain image translation [10, 24, 30, 11, 28, 17, 16, 4].
While such tasks typically learn feature mapping from one domain to another or derive a joint
representation across domains, the developed models have limited capacities in manipulating specific
feature attributes for recovering cross-domain data.
With the goal of understanding and describing underlying explanatory factors across distinct data
domains, cross-domain representation disentanglement aims to derive a joint latent feature space,
where selected feature dimensions would represent particular semantic information [1]. Once such a
disentangled representation across domains is learned, one can describe and manipulate the attribute
of interest for data in either domain accordingly. While recent work [18] have demonstrated promising
ability in the above task, designs of exisitng models typically require high computational costs when
more than two data domains or multiple feature attributes are of interest.
To perform joint feature disentanglement and translation across multiple data domains, we propose
a compact yet effective model of Unified Feature Disentanglement Network (UFDN), which is
composed of a pair of unified encoder and generator as shown in Figure 1. From this figure, it can be
seen that our encoder takes data instances from multiple domains as inputs, and a domain-invariant
latent feature space is derived via adversarial training, followed by a generator/decoder which recovers
or translates data across domains. Our model is able to disentangle the underlying factors which
represent domain-specific information (e.g., domain code, attribute of interest, etc.). This is achieved
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

