Lipschitz regularity of deep neural networks:
analysis and efficient estimation

Kevin Scaman
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
kevin.scaman@huawei.com

Aladin Virmaux
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
aladin.virmaux@huawei.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks are notorious for being sensitive to small well-chosen perturbations, and estimating the regularity of such architectures is of utmost importance for safe and robust practical applications. In this paper, we investigate one
of the key characteristics to assess the regularity of such methods: the Lipschitz
constant of deep learning architectures. First, we show that, even for two layer
neural networks, the exact computation of this quantity is NP-hard and state-ofart methods may significantly overestimate it. Then, we both extend and improve
previous estimation methods by providing AutoLip, the first generic algorithm for
upper bounding the Lipschitz constant of any automatically differentiable function. We provide a power method algorithm working with automatic differentiation, allowing efficient computations even on large convolutions. Second, for
sequential neural networks, we propose an improved algorithm named SeqLip that
takes advantage of the linear computation graph to split the computation per pair
of consecutive layers. Third we propose heuristics on SeqLip in order to tackle
very large networks. Our experiments show that SeqLip can significantly improve
on the existing upper bounds. Finally, we provide an implementation of AutoLip
in the PyTorch environment that may be used to better estimate the robustness of
a given neural network to small perturbations or regularize it using more precise
Lipschitz estimations.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks made a striking entree in machine learning and quickly became state-of-theart algorithms in many tasks such as computer vision [1, 2, 3, 4], speech recognition and generation
[5, 6] or natural language processing [7, 8].
However, deep neural networks are known for being very sensitive to their input, and adversarial
examples provide a good illustration of their lack of robustness [9, 10]. Indeed, a well-chosen small
perturbation of the input image can mislead a neural network and significantly decrease its classification accuracy. One metric to assess the robustness of neural networks to small perturbations is
the Lipschitz constant (see Definition 1), which upper bounds the relationship between input perturbation and output variation for a given distance. For generative models, the recent Wasserstein
GAN [11] improved the training stability of GANs by reformulating the optimization problem as a
minimization of the Wasserstein distance between the real and generated distributions [12]. However, this method relies on an efficient way of constraining the Lipschitz constant of the critic, which
was only partially addressed in the original paper, and the object of several follow-up works [13, 14].
Recently, Lipschitz continuity was used in order to improve the state-of-the-art in several deep learning topics: (1) for robust learning, avoiding adversarial attacks was achieved in [15] by constraining
local Lipschitz constants in neural networks. (2) For generative models, using spectral normalization on each layer allowed [13] to successfully train a GAN on ILRSVRC2012 dataset. (3) In deep
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

