Generalizing to Unseen Domains
via Adversarial Data Augmentation

Riccardo Volpi∗,†
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia

Hongseok Namkoong∗
Stanford University

Ozan Sener
Intel Labs

John Duchi
Stanford University

Vittorio Murino
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Università di Verona

Silvio Savarese
Stanford University

Abstract
We are concerned with learning models that generalize well to different unseen
domains. We consider a worst-case formulation over data distributions that are
near the source domain in the feature space. Only using training data from a single
source distribution, we propose an iterative procedure that augments the dataset
with examples from a fictitious target domain that is "hard" under the current model.
We show that our iterative scheme is an adaptive data augmentation method where
we append adversarial examples at each iteration. For softmax losses, we show that
our method is a data-dependent regularization scheme that behaves differently from
classical regularizers that regularize towards zero (e.g., ridge or lasso). On digit
recognition and semantic segmentation tasks, our method learns models improve
performance across a range of a priori unknown target domains.

1

Introduction

In many modern applications of machine learning, we wish to learn a system that can perform
uniformly well across multiple populations. Due to high costs of data acquisition, however, it is
often the case that datasets consist of a limited number of population sources. Standard models that
perform well when evaluated on the validation dataset—usually collected from the same population
as the training dataset—often perform poorly on populations different from that of the training
data [15, 3, 1, 32, 38]. In this paper, we are concerned with generalizing to populations different
from the training distribution, in settings where we have no access to any data from the unknown
target distributions. For example, consider a module for self-driving cars that needs to generalize
well across weather conditions and city environments unexplored during training.
A number of authors have proposed domain adaptation methods (for example, see [9, 39, 36, 26, 40])
in settings where a fully labeled source dataset and an unlabeled (or partially labeled) set of examples
from fixed target distributions are available. Although such algorithms can successfully learn models
that perform well on known target distributions, the assumption of a priori fixed target distributions
can be restrictive in practical scenarios. For example, consider a semantic segmentation algorithm
used by a robot: every task, robot, environment and camera configuration will result in a different
target distribution, and these diverse scenarios can be identified only after the model is trained and
deployed, making it difficult to collect samples from them.
In this work, we develop methods that can learn to better generalize to new unknown domains. We
consider the restrictive setting where training data only comes from a single source domain. Inspired
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done while author was a Visiting Student Researcher at Stanford University.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

