Generalizing graph matching beyond quadratic
assignment model

Tianshu Yu
Arizona State University
tianshuy@asu.edu

Junchi Yan
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn

Wei Liu
Tecent AI Lab
wl2223@columbia.edu

Yilin Wang
Arizona State University
yilwang@adobe.com

Baoxin Li
Arizona State University
baoxin.li@asu.edu

Abstract
Graph matching has received persistent attention over several decades, which can
be formulated as a quadratic assignment problem (QAP). We show that a large
family of functions, which we define as Separable Functions, can approximate
discrete graph matching in the continuous domain asymptotically by varying the
approximation controlling parameters. We also study the properties of global
optimality and devise convex/concave-preserving extensions to the widely used
Lawler’s QAP form. Our theoretical findings show the potential for deriving new
algorithms and techniques for graph matching. We deliver solvers based on two
specific instances of Separable Functions, and the state-of-the-art performance of
our method is verified on popular benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Given two graphs, graph matching algorithms (GM) seek to find node-to-node correspondences by
optimizing a pre-defined affinity score function. This problem falls into the category of quadratic
assignment problem (QAP) [1], and has wide applications from object categorization [2] to protein
alignment [3]. While a line of works using combinatorial heuristics [4, 5] attempt to solve graph
matching, relaxation of original problem into the continuous domain is mostly employed and solved
with different optimization techniques e.g. gradient [6] or multiplication [7, 8] based methods. The
dominance of continuous relaxation may be partly because it is easier to analyze the local behavior of
continuous functions, and one can often find a local optimum. In this paper, we focus on continuous
relaxation of graph matching.
Graph matching seeks the solution to the quadratic assignment problem maxX vec(X)> Avec(X),
2
where vec(X) ∈ {0, 1}n is the column-wise vectorized version of the binary (partial) assignment
2
2
matrix X ∈ {0, 1}n×n and the so-called affinity matrix A ∈ <n ×n in the real domain consists of
the affinity score measuring how one edge in one graph is similar to another from the other graph.
2
Traditionally, the common practice is relaxing vec(X) into the continuous real domain vec(X) ∈ <n
[9, 7, 10].
In this paper, we show that a large family of functions, defined as Separable Functions, can asymptotically approximate the discrete matching problem by varying the approximation controlling parameters.
With this function family, there exist infinite modelings of graph matching problem, thereby providing
the feasibility of adapting different practical problems with different models. This provides a new
perspective of considering graph matching. We also give analysis on the conditions based on which
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

