Learning Task Specifications from Demonstrations

Marcell Vazquez-Chanlatte1 , Susmit Jha2 , Ashish Tiwari2 , Mark K. Ho1 , Sanjit A. Seshia1
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 SRI International, Menlo Park
{marcell.vc, sseshia, mark_ho}@eecs.berkeley.edu {susmit.jha, tiwari}@sri.com

Abstract
Real-world applications often naturally decompose into several sub-tasks. In
many settings (e.g., robotics) demonstrations provide a natural way to specify the
sub-tasks. However, most methods for learning from demonstrations either do
not provide guarantees that the artifacts learned for the sub-tasks can be safely
recombined or limit the types of composition available. Motivated by this deficit,
we consider the problem of inferring Boolean non-Markovian rewards (also known
as logical trace properties or specifications) from demonstrations provided by an
agent operating in an uncertain, stochastic environment. Crucially, specifications
admit well-defined composition rules that are typically easy to interpret. In this
paper, we formulate the specification inference task as a maximum a posteriori
(MAP) probability inference problem, apply the principle of maximum entropy to
derive an analytic demonstration likelihood model and give an efficient approach to
search for the most likely specification in a large candidate pool of specifications.
In our experiments, we demonstrate how learning specifications can help avoid
common problems that often arise due to ad-hoc reward composition.

1

Introduction

In many settings (e.g., robotics) demonstrations provide a natural way to specify a task. For example, an agent (e.g., human expert) gives one or more demonstrations of the task from which
we seek to automatically synthesize a policy for the robot to execute. Typically, one models the
demonstrator as episodically operating within a dynamical system whose transition relation only
depends on the current state and action (called the Markov condition). However, even if the dynamics are Markovian, many problems are naturally modeled in non-Markovian terms (see Ex 1).
Example 1. Consider the task illustrated in Figure 1. In this task,
the agent moves in a discrete gridworld and can take actions to move
in the cardinal directions (north, south, east, west). Further, the agent
can sense abstract features of the domain represented as colors. The
task is to reach any of the yellow (recharge) tiles without touching
a red tile (lava) – we refer to this sub-task as YR. Additionally, if a
blue tile (water) is stepped on, the agent must step on a brown tile
(drying tile) before going to a yellow tile – we refer to this sub-task
as BBY. The last constraint requires recall of two state bits of history
(and is thus not Markovian): one bit for whether the robot is wet and
another bit encoding if the robot recharged while wet.

Figure 1

Further, like Ex 1, many tasks are naturally decomposed into several sub-tasks. This work aims to
address the question of how to systematically and separately learn non-Markovian sub-tasks such
that they can be readily and safely recomposed into the larger meta-task.
Here, we argue that non-Markovian Boolean specifications provide a powerful, flexible, and easily
transferable formalism for task representations when learning from demonstrations. This stands
in contrast to the quantitative scalar reward functions commonly associated with Markov Decision
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

