GroupReduce: Block-Wise Low-Rank Approximation
for Neural Language Model Shrinking

Patrick H. Chen∗
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA
patrickchen@g.ucla.edu
Yang Li
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
liyang@google.com

Si Si
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
sisidaisy@google.com

Ciprian Chelba
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
ciprianchelba@google.com

Cho-Jui Hsieh
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Model compression is essential for serving large deep neural nets on devices with
limited resources or applications that require real-time responses. As a case study, a
neural language model usually consists of one or more recurrent layers sandwiched
between an embedding layer used for representing input tokens and a softmax
layer for generating output tokens. For problems with a very large vocabulary
size, the embedding and the softmax matrices can account for more than half of
the model size. For instance, the bigLSTM model achieves great performance
on the One-Billion-Word (OBW) dataset with around 800k vocabulary, and its
word embedding and softmax matrices use more than 6GBytes space, and are
responsible for over 90% of the model parameters. In this paper, we propose
GroupReduce, a novel compression method for neural language models, based
on vocabulary-partition (block) based low-rank matrix approximation and the
inherent frequency distribution of tokens (the power-law distribution of words).
The experimental results show our method can significantly outperform traditional
compression methods such as low-rank approximation and pruning. On the OBW
dataset, our method achieved 6.6 times compression rate for the embedding and
softmax matrices, and when combined with quantization, our method can achieve
26 times compression rate, which translates to a factor of 12.8 times compression
for the entire model with very little degradation in perplexity.

1

Introduction

Deep neural nets with a large number of parameters have a great capacity for modeling complex
problems. However, the large size of these models is a major obstacle for serving them on-device
where computational resources are limited. As such, compressing deep neural nets has become a
crucial problem that draws an increasing amount of interest from the research community. Given
a large neural net, the goal of compression is to build a light-weight approximation of the original
model, which can offer a much smaller model size while maintaining the same (or similar) prediction
accuracy.
In this paper, we focus on compressing neural language models, which have been successfully
applied in a range of important NLP tasks including language modeling (e.g., next word prediction)
∗

Work is done when interning at Google.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

