Learning Abstract Options

Matthew Riemer, Miao Liu, and Gerald Tesauro
IBM Research
T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY
{mdriemer, miao.liu1, gtesauro}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Building systems that autonomously create temporal abstractions from data is a
key challenge in scaling learning and planning in reinforcement learning. One
popular approach for addressing this challenge is the options framework [29].
However, only recently in [1] was a policy gradient theorem derived for online
learning of general purpose options in an end to end fashion. In this work, we
extend previous work on this topic that only focuses on learning a two-level
hierarchy including options and primitive actions to enable learning simultaneously
at multiple resolutions in time. We achieve this by considering an arbitrarily deep
hierarchy of options where high level temporally extended options are composed
of lower level options with finer resolutions in time. We extend results from
[1] and derive policy gradient theorems for a deep hierarchy of options. Our
proposed hierarchical option-critic architecture is capable of learning internal
policies, termination conditions, and hierarchical compositions over options without
the need for any intrinsic rewards or subgoals. Our empirical results in both discrete
and continuous environments demonstrate the efficiency of our framework.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), options [29, 21] provide a general framework for defining temporally
abstract courses of action for learning and planning. Discovering these temporal abstractions autonomously has been the subject of extensive research [16, 28, 17, 27, 26] with approaches that can be
used in continuous state and/or action spaces only recently becoming feasible [9, 20, 15, 14, 10, 31, 3].
Most existing work has focused on finding subgoals (i.e. useful states for the agent to reach) and
then learning policies to achieve them. However, these approaches do not scale well because of their
combinatorial nature. Recent work on option-critic learning blurs the line between option discovery
and option learning by providing policy gradient theorems for optimizing a two-level hierarchy of options and primitive actions [1]. These approaches have achieved success when applied to Q-learning
on Atari games, but also in continuous action spaces [7] and with asynchronous parallelization [6].
In this paper, we extend option-critic to a novel hierarchical option-critic framework, presenting
generalized policy gradient theorems that can be applied to an arbitrarily deep hierarchy of options.

Figure 1: State trajectories over a three-level hierarchy of options. Open circles represent SMDP
decision points while filled circles are primitive steps within an option. The low level options are
temporally extended over primitive actions, and high level options are even further extended.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

