Lipschitz-Margin Training: Scalable Certification of
Perturbation Invariance for Deep Neural Networks

Yusuke Tsuzuku
The University of Tokyo
RIKEN
tsuzuku@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Issei Sato
The University of Tokyo
RIKEN
sato@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Masashi Sugiyama
RIKEN
The University of Tokyo
sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
High sensitivity of neural networks against malicious perturbations on inputs causes
security concerns. To take a steady step towards robust classifiers, we aim to create
neural network models provably defended from perturbations. Prior certification
work requires strong assumptions on network structures and massive computational
costs, and thus the range of their applications was limited. From the relationship between the Lipschitz constants and prediction margins, we present a computationally
efficient calculation technique to lower-bound the size of adversarial perturbations
that can deceive networks, and that is widely applicable to various complicated
networks. Moreover, we propose an efficient training procedure that robustifies
networks and significantly improves the provably guarded areas around data points.
In experimental evaluations, our method showed its ability to provide a non-trivial
guarantee and enhance robustness for even large networks.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are highly vulnerable against intentionally created small perturbations on inputs
[29], called adversarial perturbations, which cause serious security concerns in applications such
as self-driving cars. Adversarial perturbations in object recognition systems have been intensively
studied [29, 10, 6], and we mainly target the object recognition systems.
One approach to defend from adversarial perturbations is to mask gradients. Defensive distillation
[23], which distills networks into themselves, is one of the most prominent methods. However, Carlini
and Wagner [6] showed that we can create adversarial perturbations that deceive networks trained with
defensive distillation. Input transformations and detections [32, 11] are some other defense strategies,
although we can bypass them [5]. Adversarial training [10, 16, 18], which injects adversarially
perturbed data into training data, is a promising approach. However, there is a risk of overfitting to
attacks [16, 30]. Many other heuristics have been developed to make neural networks insensitive
against small perturbations on inputs. However, recent work has repeatedly succeeded to create
adversarial perturbations for networks protected with heuristics in the literature [1]. For instance,
Athalye et al. [2] reported that many ICLR 2018 defense papers did not adequately protect networks
soon after the announcement of their acceptance. This indicates that even protected networks can
be unexpectedly vulnerable, which is a crucial problem for this specific line of research because the
primary concern of these studies is security threats.
The literature indicates the difficulty of defense evaluations. Thus, our goal is to ensure the lower
bounds on the size of adversarial perturbations that can deceive networks for each input. Many
existing approaches, which we cover in Sec. 2, are applicable only for special-structured small
networks. On the other hand, common networks used in evaluations of defense methods are wide,
which makes prior methods computationally intractable and complicated, which makes some prior
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

