Optimistic Optimization of a Brownian

Jean-Bastien Grill
Michal Valko
Rémi Munos
SequeL team, INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, France and DeepMind Paris, France
jbgrill@google.com

michal.valko@inria.fr

munos@google.com

Abstract
We address the problem of optimizing a Brownian motion. We consider a (random)
realization W of a Brownian motion with input space in [0, 1]. Given W , our goal
is to return an ε-approximation of its maximum using the smallest possible number
of function evaluations, the sample complexity of the algorithm. We provide an
algorithm with sample complexity of order log2 (1/ε). This improves over previous
results of Al-Mharmah and Calvin (1996) and Calvin et al. (2017) which provided
only polynomial rates. Our algorithm is adaptive—each query depends on previous
values—and is an instance of the optimism-in-the-face-of-uncertainty principle.

1

Introduction to sample-efficient Brownian optimization

We are interested in optimizing a sample of a standard Brownian motion on [0, 1], denoted by W.
More precisely, we want to sequentially select query points tn ∈ [0, 1], observe W (tn ), and decide

c = W tb in order to well approximate its maximum
when to stop to return a point tb and its value M
M , supt∈[0,1] W (t). The evaluations tn can be chosen adaptively as a function of previously
observed values W (t1 ), ..., W (tn−1 ). Given an ε > 0, our goal is to stop evaluating the function
as early aspossible while still being able to return b
t such that with probability at least 1 − ε,
M −W b
t ≤ ε. The number of function evaluations required by the algorithm to achieve this
ε-approximation of the maximum defines the sample-complexity.
Motivation There are two types of situations where this problem is useful. The first type is when the
random sample function W (drawn from the random process) already exists prior to the optimization.
Either it has been generated before the optimization starts and the queries correspond to reading
values of the function already stored somewhere. For example, financial stocks are stored at a high
temporal resolution and we want to retrieve the maximum of a stock using a small number of memory
queries. Alternatively, the process physically exists and the queries correspond to measuring it.
Another situation is when the function does not exist prior to the optimization but is built simultaneously as it is optimized. In other words, observing the function actually creates it. An application of
this is when we want to return a sample of the maximum (and the location of the maximum) of a
Brownian motion conditioned on a set of already observed values. For example, in Bayesian optimization for Gaussian processes, a technique called Thomson sampling (Thompson, 1933; Chapelle and
Li, 2011; Russo et al., 2018; Basu and Ghosh, 2018) requires returning the maximum of a sampled
function drawn from the posterior distribution. The problem considered in the present paper can
be seen as a way to approximately perform this step in a computationally efficient way when this
Gaussian process is a Brownian motion.
Moreover, even though our algorithm comes from the ideas of learning theory, it has applications
beyond it. For instance, in order to computationally sample a solution of a stochastic differential
equation, Hefter and Herzwurm (2017) express its solution as a function of the Brownian motion W
and its running minimum. They then need, as a subroutine, an algorithm for the optimization of
Brownian motion to compute its running minimum. We are giving them that and it is light-speed fast.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

