Structure-Aware Convolutional Neural Networks
Jianlong Chang1,2
Jie Gu1,2
Lingfeng Wang1
Gaofeng Meng1
1,2
1
Shiming Xiang
Chunhong Pan
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jianlong.chang, jie.gu, lfwang, gfmeng, smxiang, chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are inherently subject to invariable filters
that can only aggregate local inputs with the same topological structures. It causes
that CNNs are allowed to manage data with Euclidean or grid-like structures (e.g.,
images), not ones with non-Euclidean or graph structures (e.g., traffic networks). To
broaden the reach of CNNs, we develop structure-aware convolution to eliminate
the invariance, yielding a unified mechanism of dealing with both Euclidean and
non-Euclidean structured data. Technically, filters in the structure-aware convolution are generalized to univariate functions, which are capable of aggregating local
inputs with diverse topological structures. Since infinite parameters are required
to determine a univariate function, we parameterize these filters with numbered
learnable parameters in the context of the function approximation theory. By replacing the classical convolution in CNNs with the structure-aware convolution,
Structure-Aware Convolutional Neural Networks (SACNNs) are readily established. Extensive experiments on eleven datasets strongly evidence that SACNNs
outperform current models on various machine learning tasks, including image
classification and clustering, text categorization, skeleton-based action recognition,
molecular activity detection, and taxi flow prediction.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) provide an effective and efficient framework to deal with
Euclidean structured data, including speeches and images. As a core module in CNNs, the convolution
unit explicitly allows to share parameters among the whole spatial domains to extremely reduce the
number of parameters, without sacrificing the expressive capability of networks [3]. Benefiting from
such artful modeling, significant successes have been achieved in a multitude of fields, including the
image classification [15, 24] and clustering [5, 6], the object detection [9, 32], and amongst others.
Although the achievements in the literature are brilliant, CNNs are still incompetent to handle nonEuclidean structured data, such as the traffic flow data on traffic networks, the relational data on
social networks, and the active data on molecule structure networks. The major limitation originates
from that the classical filters are invariant at each location. As a result, the filters can only be applied
to aggregate local inputs with the same topological structures, not with diverse topological structures.
In order to eliminate the limitation, we develop structure-aware convolution in which a single shareable filter suffices to aggregate local inputs with diverse topological structures. For this purpose, we
generalize the classical filters to univariate functions that can be effectively and efficiently parameterized under the guidance of the function approximation theory. Then, we introduce local structure
representations to quantificationally encode topological structures. By modeling these representations
into the generalized filters, the corresponding local inputs can be aggregated based on the generalized
filters consequently. In practice, Structure-Aware Convolutional Neural Networks (SACNNs) can
be readily established by replacing the classical convolution in CNNs with our structure-aware
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

