An intriguing failing of convolutional neural networks
and the CoordConv solution
Rosanne Liu1

Joel Lehman1

Piero Molino1

Alex Sergeev2
1

Felipe Petroski Such1

Eric Frank1

Jason Yosinski1

Uber AI Labs, San Francisco, CA, USA

2

Uber Technologies, Seattle, WA, USA

{rosanne,joel.lehman,piero,felipe.such,mysterefrank,asergeev,yosinski}@uber.com

Abstract
Few ideas have enjoyed as large an impact on deep learning as convolution. For any
problem involving pixels or spatial representations, common intuition holds that
convolutional neural networks may be appropriate. In this paper we show a striking
counterexample to this intuition via the seemingly trivial coordinate transform
problem, which simply requires learning a mapping between coordinates in (x, y)
Cartesian space and coordinates in one-hot pixel space. Although convolutional
networks would seem appropriate for this task, we show that they fail spectacularly.
We demonstrate and carefully analyze the failure first on a toy problem, at which
point a simple fix becomes obvious. We call this solution CoordConv, which
works by giving convolution access to its own input coordinates through the use of
extra coordinate channels. Without sacrificing the computational and parametric
efficiency of ordinary convolution, CoordConv allows networks to learn either
complete translation invariance or varying degrees of translation dependence, as
required by the end task. CoordConv solves the coordinate transform problem with
perfect generalization and 150 times faster with 10–100 times fewer parameters
than convolution. This stark contrast raises the question: to what extent has this
inability of convolution persisted insidiously inside other tasks, subtly hampering
performance from within? A complete answer to this question will require further
investigation, but we show preliminary evidence that swapping convolution for
CoordConv can improve models on a diverse set of tasks. Using CoordConv in
a GAN produced less mode collapse as the transform between high-level spatial
latents and pixels becomes easier to learn. A Faster R-CNN detection model
trained on MNIST detection showed 24% better IOU when using CoordConv, and
in the Reinforcement Learning (RL) domain agents playing Atari games benefit
significantly from the use of CoordConv layers.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [17] have enjoyed immense success as a key tool for enabling
effective deep learning in a broad array of applications, like modeling natural images [36, 16], images
of human faces [15], audio [33], and enabling agents to play games in domains with synthetic imagery
like Atari [21]. Although straightforward CNNs excel at many tasks, in many other cases progress
has been accelerated through the development of specialized layers that complement the abilities
of CNNs. Detection models like Faster R-CNN [27] make use of layers to compute coordinate
transforms and focus attention, spatial transformer networks [13] make use of differentiable cameras
to transform data from the output of one CNN into a form more amenable to processing with another,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

