Maximum Causal Tsallis Entropy Imitation Learning

Kyungjae Lee1 , Sungjoon Choi2 , and Songhwai Oh1
Dep. of Electrical and Computer Engineering and ASRI, Seoul National University1
Kakao Brain2
kyungjae.lee@rllab.snu.ac.kr, sam.choi@kakaobrain.com,
songhwai@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel maximum causal Tsallis entropy (MCTE) framework for imitation learning which can efficiently learn a sparse multi-modal policy
distribution from demonstrations. We provide the full mathematical analysis of the
proposed framework. First, the optimal solution of an MCTE problem is shown to
be a sparsemax distribution, whose supporting set can be adjusted. The proposed
method has advantages over a softmax distribution in that it can exclude unnecessary actions by assigning zero probability. Second, we prove that an MCTE
problem is equivalent to robust Bayes estimation in the sense of the Brier score.
Third, we propose a maximum causal Tsallis entropy imitation learning (MCTEIL)
algorithm with a sparse mixture density network (sparse MDN) by modeling mixture weights using a sparsemax distribution. In particular, we show that the causal
Tsallis entropy of an MDN encourages exploration and efficient mixture utilization
while Shannon entropy is less effective.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we focus on the problem of imitating demonstrations of an expert who behaves nondeterministically depending on the situation. In imitation learning, it is often assumed that the expert’s
policy is deterministic. However, there are instances, especially for complex tasks, where multiple
action sequences perform the same task equally well. We can model such nondeterministic behavior
of an expert using a stochastic policy. For example, expert drivers normally show consistent behaviors
such as keeping lane or keeping the distance from a frontal car, but sometimes they show different
actions for the same situation, such as overtaking a car and turning left or right at an intersection,
as suggested in [1]. Furthermore, learning multiple optimal action sequences to perform a task is
desirable in terms of robustness since an agent can easily recover from failure due to unexpected
events [2, 3]. In addition, a stochastic policy promotes exploration and stability during learning
[4, 2, 5]. Hence, modeling experts’ stochasticity can be a key factor in imitation learning.
To this end, we propose a novel maximum causal Tsallis entropy (MCTE) framework for imitation
learning, which can learn from a uni-modal to multi-modal policy distribution by adjusting its
supporting set. We first show that the optimal policy under the MCTE framework follows a sparsemax
distribution [6], which has an adaptable supporting set in a discrete action space. Traditionally, the
maximum causal entropy (MCE) framework [1, 7] has been proposed to model stochastic behavior in
demonstrations, where the optimal policy follows a softmax distribution. However, it often assigns
non-negligible probability mass to non-expert actions when the number of actions increases [3, 8].
On the contrary, as the optimal policy of the proposed method can adjust its supporting set, it can
model various expert’s behavior from a uni-modal distribution to a multi-modal distribution.
To apply the MCTE framework to a complex and model-free problem, we propose a maximum causal
Tsallis entropy imitation learning (MCTEIL) with a sparse mixture density network (sparse MDN)
whose mixture weights are modeled as a sparsemax distribution. By modeling expert’s behavior
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

