A Probabilistic U-Net for Segmentation of Ambiguous
Images
∗

Simon A. A. Kohl1 ,2, , Bernardino Romera-Paredes1 , Clemens Meyer1 , Jeffrey De Fauw1 ,
Joseph R. Ledsam1 , Klaus H. Maier-Hein2 , S. M. Ali Eslami1 , Danilo Jimenez Rezende1 , and
Olaf Ronneberger1
1

2

DeepMind, London, UK
Division of Medical Image Computing, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany
{simon.kohl,k.maier-hein}@dkfz.de
{brp,meyerc,defauw,jledsam,aeslami,danilor,olafr}@google.com

Abstract
Many real-world vision problems suffer from inherent ambiguities. In clinical
applications for example, it might not be clear from a CT scan alone which particular region is cancer tissue. Therefore a group of graders typically produces
a set of diverse but plausible segmentations. We consider the task of learning a
distribution over segmentations given an input. To this end we propose a generative
segmentation model based on a combination of a U-Net with a conditional variational autoencoder that is capable of efficiently producing an unlimited number
of plausible hypotheses. We show on a lung abnormalities segmentation task
and on a Cityscapes segmentation task that our model reproduces the possible
segmentation variants as well as the frequencies with which they occur, doing so
significantly better than published approaches. These models could have a high
impact in real-world applications, such as being used as clinical decision-making
algorithms accounting for multiple plausible semantic segmentation hypotheses to
provide possible diagnoses and recommend further actions to resolve the present
ambiguities.

1

Introduction

The semantic segmentation task assigns a class label to each pixel in an image. While in many
cases the context in the image provides sufficient information to resolve the ambiguities in this
mapping, there exists an important class of images where even the full image context is not sufficient
to resolve all ambiguities. Such ambiguities are common in medical imaging applications, e.g.,
in lung abnormalities segmentation from CT images. A lesion might be clearly visible, but the
information about whether it is cancer tissue or not might not be available from this image alone.
Similar ambiguities are also present in photos. E.g. a part of fur visible under the sofa might belong
to a cat or a dog, but it is not possible from the image alone to resolve this ambiguity2 . Most existing
segmentation algorithms either provide only one likely consistent hypothesis (e.g., “all pixels belong
to a cat”) or a pixel-wise probability (e.g., “each pixel is 50% cat and 50% dog”).
Especially in medical applications where a subsequent diagnosis or a treatment depends on the segmentation map, an algorithm that only provides the most likely hypothesis might lead to misdiagnoses
∗

work done during an internship at DeepMind.
In [1] this is defined as ambiguous evidence in contrast to implicit class confusion, that stems from an
ambiguous class definition (e.g. the concepts of desk vs. table). For the presented work this differentiation is not
required.
2

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

