Generative Modeling for Protein Structures
Namrata Anand
Bioengineering Department, Stanford
namrataa@stanford.edu

Po-Ssu Huang
Bioengineering Department, Stanford
possu@stanford.edu

Abstract
Analyzing the structure and function of proteins is a key part of understanding
biology at the molecular and cellular level. In addition, a major engineering
challenge is to design new proteins in a principled and methodical way. Current
computational modeling methods for protein design are slow and often require human oversight and intervention. Here, we apply Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) to the task of generating protein structures, toward application in fast de
novo protein design. We encode protein structures in terms of pairwise distances
between ↵-carbons on the protein backbone, which eliminates the need for the generative model to learn translational and rotational symmetries. We then introduce a
convex formulation of corruption-robust 3D structure recovery to fold the protein
structures from generated pairwise distance maps, and solve these problems using
the Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers. We test the effectiveness of our
models by predicting completions of corrupted protein structures and show that the
method is capable of quickly producing structurally plausible solutions.

1

Introduction

The ability to determine and design protein structures has deepened our understanding of biology.
Advancements in computational modeling methods have led to remarkable outcomes in protein
design including the development of new therapies [1, 2], enzymes [3, 4, 5], small-molecule binders
[6], and biosensors [7]. These efforts are largely limited to modifying naturally occurring, or “native,”
proteins. To fully control the structure and function of engineered proteins, it is ideal in practice to
create proteins de novo [8]. A fundamental question is discovering new, non-native folds or structural
elements that can be used for designing these novel proteins. The protein design problem remains a
major engineering challenge because the current design process relies heavily on heuristics, requiring
subjective expertise to negotiate pitfalls that result from optimizing imperfect scoring functions.
We demonstrate the potential of deep generative modeling for fast generation of new, viable protein
structures for use in protein design applications. We use Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
to generate novel protein structures [9, 10] and use our trained models to predict missing sections
of corrupted protein structures. We use a data representation restricted to structural information–
pairwise distances of ↵-carbons on the protein backbone. Despite this reduced representation, our
method successfully learns to generate new structures and, importantly, can be used to infer solutions
for completing corrupted structures. We use the Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM)
algorithm to “fold” 2D pairwise distances into 3D Cartesian coordinates [11]. The algorithm presented
is a new method to do 3D structure generation and recovery using deep generative models, which is
invariant to transformations in the Lie group of rotations and translations (SE(3)).
This paper is a step toward learning the protein design and folding process. Ultimately, our goal is to
extend the generative model described, with subsequent steps of reinforcement learning or imitation
learning to produce realistic protein structure at atomic resolution.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

