Neural Architecture Search
with Bayesian Optimisation and Optimal Transport

Kirthevasan Kandasamy, Willie Neiswanger, Jeff Schneider, Barnabás Póczos, Eric P Xing
Carnegie Mellon University, Petuum Inc.
{kandasamy, willie, schneide, bapoczos, epxing}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Bayesian Optimisation (BO) refers to a class of methods for global optimisation of
a function f which is only accessible via point evaluations. It is typically used in
settings where f is expensive to evaluate. A common use case for BO in machine
learning is model selection, where it is not possible to analytically model the generalisation performance of a statistical model, and we resort to noisy and expensive
training and validation procedures to choose the best model. Conventional BO
methods have focused on Euclidean and categorical domains, which, in the context
of model selection, only permits tuning scalar hyper-parameters of machine learning algorithms. However, with the surge of interest in deep learning, there is an
increasing demand to tune neural network architectures. In this work, we develop
NASBOT, a Gaussian process based BO framework for neural architecture search.
To accomplish this, we develop a distance metric in the space of neural network
architectures which can be computed efficiently via an optimal transport program.
This distance might be of independent interest to the deep learning community as it
may find applications outside of BO. We demonstrate that NASBOT outperforms
other alternatives for architecture search in several cross validation based model
selection tasks on multi-layer perceptrons and convolutional neural networks.

1

Introduction

In many real world problems, we are required to sequentially evaluate a noisy black-box function
f with the goal of finding its optimum in some domain X . Typically, each evaluation is expensive
in such applications, and we need to keep the number of evaluations to a minimum. Bayesian
optimisation (BO) refers to an approach for global optimisation that is popularly used in such settings.
It uses Bayesian models for f to infer function values at unexplored regions and guide the selection
of points for future evaluations. BO has been successfully applied for many optimisation problems in
optimal policy search, industrial design, and scientific experimentation. That said, the quintessential
use case for BO in machine learning is model selection [14, 40]. For instance, consider selecting
the regularisation parameter λ and kernel bandwidth h for an SVM. We can set this up as a zeroth
order optimisation problem where our domain is a two dimensional space of (λ, h) values, and each
function evaluation trains the SVM on a training set, and computes the accuracy on a validation set.
The goal is to find the model, i.e. hyper-parameters, with the highest validation accuracy.
The majority of the BO literature has focused on settings where the domain X is either Euclidean
or categorical. This suffices for many tasks, such as the SVM example above. However, with
recent successes in deep learning, neural networks are increasingly becoming the method of choice
for many machine learning applications. A number of recent work have designed novel neural
network architectures to significantly outperform the previous state of the art [12, 13, 37, 45]. This
motivates studying model selection over the space of neural architectures to optimise for generalisation
performance. A critical challenge in this endeavour is that evaluating a network via train and validation
procedures is very expensive. This paper proposes a BO framework for this problem.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

