Algorithms and Theory for
Multiple-Source Adaptation
Judy Hoffman
CS Department UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
jhoffman@eecs.berkeley.edu

Mehryar Mohri
Courant Institute and Google
New York, NY 10012
mohri@cims.nyu.edu

Ningshan Zhang
New York University
New York, NY 10012
nzhang@stern.nyu.edu

Abstract
We present a number of novel contributions to the multiple-source adaptation
problem. We derive new normalized solutions with strong theoretical guarantees
for the cross-entropy loss and other similar losses. We also provide new guarantees
that hold in the case where the conditional probabilities for the source domains
are distinct. Moreover, we give new algorithms for determining the distributionweighted combination solution for the cross-entropy loss and other losses. We
report the results of a series of experiments with real-world datasets. We find that
our algorithm outperforms competing approaches by producing a single robust
model that performs well on any target mixture distribution. Altogether, our theory,
algorithms, and empirical results provide a full solution for the multiple-source
adaptation problem with very practical benefits.

1

Introduction

In many modern applications, often the learner has access to information about several source
domains, including accurate predictors possibly trained and made available by others, but no direct
information about a target domain for which one wishes to achieve a good performance. The target
domain can typically be viewed as a combination of the source domains, that is a mixture of their
joint distributions, or it may be close to such mixtures. In addition, often the learner does not have
access to all source data simultaneously, for legitimate reasons such as privacy or storage limitation.
Thus, the learner cannot simply pool all source data together to learn a predictor.
Such problems arise commonly in speech recognition where different groups of speakers (domains)
yield different acoustic models and the problem is to derive an accurate acoustic model for a broader
population that may be viewed as a mixture of the source groups (Liao, 2013). In object recognition,
multiple image databases exist, each with its own bias and labeled categories (Torralba and Efros,
2011), but the target application may contain images which most closely resemble only a subset of
the available training data. Finally, in sentiment analysis, accurate predictors may be available for
sub-domains such as TVs, laptops and CD players, each previously trained on labeled data, but no
labeled data or predictor may be at the learner’s disposal for the more general category of electronics,
which can be modeled as a mixture of the sub-domains (Blitzer et al., 2007; Dredze et al., 2008).
The problem of transfer from a single source to a known target domain (Ben-David, Blitzer, Crammer,
and Pereira, 2006; Mansour, Mohri, and Rostamizadeh, 2009b; Cortes and Mohri, 2014; Cortes,
Mohri, and Muñoz Medina, 2015), either through unsupervised adaptation techniques (Gong et al.,
2012; Long et al., 2015; Ganin and Lempitsky, 2015; Tzeng et al., 2015), or via lightly supervised
ones (some amount of labeled data from the target domain) (Saenko et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2007;
Hoffman et al., 2013; Girshick et al., 2014), has been extensively investigated in the past. Here, we
focus on the problem of multiple-source domain adaptation and ask how the learner can combine
relatively accurate predictors available for each source domain to derive an accurate predictor for
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

