GumBolt: Extending Gumbel trick to Boltzmann
priors
Amir H. Khoshaman
D-Wave Systems Inc.⇤
khoshaman@gmail.com

Mohammad H. Amin
D-Wave Systems Inc.
Simon Fraser University
mhsamin@dwavesys.com

Abstract
Boltzmann machines (BMs) are appealing candidates for powerful priors in variational autoencoders (VAEs), as they are capable of capturing nontrivial and multimodal distributions over discrete variables. However, non-differentiability of the
discrete units prohibits using the reparameterization trick, essential for low-noise
back propagation. The Gumbel trick resolves this problem in a consistent way by
relaxing the variables and distributions, but it is incompatible with BM priors. Here,
we propose the GumBolt, a model that extends the Gumbel trick to BM priors in
VAEs. GumBolt is significantly simpler than the recently proposed methods with
BM prior and outperforms them by a considerable margin. It achieves state-of-theart performance on permutation invariant MNIST and OMNIGLOT datasets in the
scope of models with only discrete latent variables. Moreover, the performance can
be further improved by allowing multi-sampled (importance-weighted) estimation
of log-likelihood in training, which was not possible with previous models.

1

Introduction

Variational autoencoders (VAEs) are generative models with the useful feature of learning representations of input data in their latent space. A VAE comprises of a prior (the probability distribution
of the latent space), a decoder and an encoder (also referred to as the approximating posterior or
the inference network). There have been efforts devoted to making each of these components more
powerful. The decoder can be made richer by using autoregressive methods such as pixelCNNs,
pixelRNNs (Oord et al., 2016) and MADEs (Germain et al., 2015). However, VAEs tend to ignore
the latent code (in the sense described by Yeung et al. (2017)) in the presence of powerful decoders
(Chen et al., 2016; Gulrajani et al., 2016; Goyal et al., 2017). There are also a myriad of works
strengthening the encoder distribution (Kingma et al., 2016; Rezende and Mohamed, 2015; Salimans
et al., 2015). Improving the priors is manifestly appealing, since it directly translates into a more
powerful generative model. Moreover, a rich structure in the latent space is one of the main purposes
of VAEs. Chen et al. (2016) observed that a more powerful autoregressive prior and a simple encoder
is commensurate with a powerful inverse autoregressive approximating posterior and a simple prior.
Boltzmann machines (BMs) are known to represent intractable and multi-modal distributions (Le Roux and Bengio, 2008), ideal for priors in VAEs, since they can lead to a more expressive
generative model. However, BMs contain discrete variables which are incompatible with the reparameterization trick, required for efficient propagation of gradients through stochastic units. It is
desirable to have discrete latent variables in many applications such as semi-supervised learning
⇤

Currently at Borealis AI

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

