Modelling and unsupervised learning of
symmetric deformable object categories

James Thewlis1

Hakan Bilen2

1

Andrea Vedaldi1
2

Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
{jdt,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
hbilen@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a new approach to model and learn, without manual supervision, the
symmetries of natural objects, such as faces or flowers, given only images as input.
It is well known that objects that have a symmetric structure do not usually result in
symmetric images due to articulation and perspective effects. This is often tackled
by seeking the intrinsic symmetries of the underlying 3D shape, which is very
difficult to do when the latter cannot be recovered reliably from data. We show that,
if only raw images are given, it is possible to look instead for symmetries in the
space of object deformations. We can then learn symmetries from an unstructured
collection of images of the object as an extension of the recently-introduced object
frame representation, modified so that object symmetries reduce to the obvious
symmetry groups in the normalized space. We also show that our formulation
provides an explanation of the ambiguities that arise in recovering the pose of
symmetric objects from their shape or images and we provide a way of discounting
such ambiguities in learning.

1

Introduction

Most natural objects are symmetric: mammals have a bilateral symmetry, a glass is rotationally
symmetric, many flowers have a radial symmetry, etc. While such symmetries are easy to understand
for a human, it remains surprisingly challenging to develop algorithms that can reliably detect the
symmetries of visual object in images. The key difficulty is that objects that are structurally symmetric
do not generally result in symmetric images; in fact, the latter occurs only when the object is imaged
under special viewpoints and, for deformable objects, with a special poses (Leonardo’s Vitruvian
Man illustrates this point).
The standard approach to characterizing symmetries in objects is to look not at their images, but at
their 3D shape; if the latter is available, then symmetries can be recovered by analysing the intrinsic
geometry of the shape. However, often only images of the objects are available, and reconstructing an
accurate 3D shape from them can be very challenging, especially if the object is deformable.
In this paper, we thus seek a new approach to learn without supervision and from raw images alone
the symmetries of deformable object categories. This may sound difficult since even characterising
the basic geometry of natural objects without external supervision remains largely an open problem.
Nevertheless, we show that it is possible to extend the method of [38], which was recently introduced
to learn the “topology” of object categories, to do exactly this.
There are three key enabling factors in our approach. First, we do not consider symmetries of a single
object or 3D shape in isolation; instead, we seek symmetries shared by all the instances of the objects
in a given category, imaged under different viewing conditions and deformations. Second, rather than
considering the common concept of intrinsic symmetries, we propose to look at symmetries not of
3D shapes, but of the space of their deformations (section 4). Third, we show that the normalized
object frame of [38] can be learned in such a way that the deformation symmetries are represented by
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

