Discovery of Latent 3D Keypoints via
End-to-end Geometric Reasoning

Supasorn SuwajanakornB∗ Noah Snavely♦ Jonathan Tompson♦ Mohammad Norouzi♦
supasorn@vistec.ac.th, {snavely, tompson, mnorouzi}@google.com
B
♦
Vidyasirimedhi Institute of Science and Technology
Google AI

Abstract
This paper presents KeypointNet, an end-to-end geometric reasoning framework to
learn an optimal set of category-specific 3D keypoints, along with their detectors.
Given a single image, KeypointNet extracts 3D keypoints that are optimized for
a downstream task. We demonstrate this framework on 3D pose estimation by
proposing a differentiable objective that seeks the optimal set of keypoints for
recovering the relative pose between two views of an object. Our model discovers
geometrically and semantically consistent keypoints across viewing angles and
instances of an object category. Importantly, we find that our end-to-end framework
using no ground-truth keypoint annotations outperforms a fully supervised baseline
using the same neural network architecture on the task of pose estimation. The
discovered 3D keypoints on the car, chair, and plane categories of ShapeNet [6] are
visualized at keypointnet.github.io.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks have shown that jointly optimizing feature extraction and classification
pipelines can significantly improve object recognition [26, 25]. That being said, current approaches
to geometric vision problems, such as 3D reconstruction [47] and shape alignment [29], comprise a
separate keypoint detection module, followed by geometric reasoning as a post-process. In this paper,
we explore whether one can benefit from an end-to-end geometric reasoning framework, in which
keypoints are jointly optimized as a set of latent variables for a downstream task.
Consider the problem of determining the 3D pose of a car in an image. A standard solution first
detects a sparse set of category-specific keypoints, and then uses such points within a geometric
reasoning framework (e.g., a PnP algorithm [28]) to recover the 3D pose or camera angle. Towards
this end, one can develop a set of keypoint detectors by leveraging strong supervision in the form of
manual keypoint annotations in different images of an object category, or by using expensive and error
prone offline model-based fitting methods. Researchers have compiled large datasets of annotated
keypoints for faces [44], hands [51], and human bodies [3, 30]. However, selection and consistent
annotation of keypoints in images of an object category is expensive and ill-defined. To devise a
reasonable set of points, one should take into account the downstream task of interest. Directly
optimizing keypoints for a downstream geometric task should naturally encourage desirable keypoint
properties such as distinctiveness, ease of detection, diversity, etc.
This paper presents KeypointNet, an end-to-end geometric reasoning framework to learn an optimal
set of category-specific 3D keypoints, along with their detectors, for a specific downstream task.
Our novelty stands in contrast to prior work that learns latent keypoints through an arbitrary proxy
self-supervision objective, such as reconstruction [63, 17]. Our framework is applicable to any
downstream task represented by an objective function that is differentiable with respect to keypoint
positions. We formulate 3D pose estimation as one such task, and our key technical contributions
include (1) a novel differentiable pose estimation objective and (2) a multi-view consistency loss
∗

Work done while S. Suwajanakorn was a member of the Google AI Residency program (g.co/airesidency).

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

