Interactive Structure Learning with Structural
Query-by-Committee
Christopher Tosh
Columbia University
c.tosh@columbia.edu

Sanjoy Dasgupta
UC San Diego
dasgupta@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
In this work, we introduce interactive structure learning, a framework that unifies
many different interactive learning tasks. We present a generalization of the queryby-committee active learning algorithm for this setting, and we study its consistency
and rate of convergence, both theoretically and empirically, with and without noise.

1

Introduction

We introduce interactive structure learning, an abstract problem that encompasses many interactive
learning tasks that have traditionally been studied in isolation, including active learning of binary
classifiers, interactive clustering, interactive embedding, and active learning of structured output
predictors. These problems include variants of both supervised and unsupervised tasks, and allow
many different types of feedback, from binary labels to must-link/cannot-link constraints to similarity
assessments to structured outputs. Despite these surface differences, they conform to a common
template that allows them to be fruitfully unified.
In interactive structure learning, there is a space of items X —for instance, an input space on which a
classifier is to be learned, or points to cluster, or points to embed in a metric space—and the goal
is to learn a structure on X , chosen from a family G. This set G could consist, for example, of all
linear classifiers on X , or all hierarchical clusterings of X , or all knowledge graphs on X . There is a
target structure g ⇤ 2 G and the hope is to get close to this target. This is achieved by combining a
loss function or prior on G with interactive feedback from an expert.

We allow this interaction to be fairly general. In most interactive learning work, the dominant
paradigm has been question-answering: the learner asks a question (like “what is the label of this
point x?”) and the expert provides the answer. We allow a more flexible protocol in which the learner
provides a constant-sized snapshot of its current structure and asks whether it is correct (“does the
clustering, restricted to these ten points, look right?”). If the snapshot is correct, the expert accepts it;
otherwise, the expert fixes some part of it. This type of feedback, first studied in generality by [15],
can be called partial correction. It is a strict generalization of question-answering, and as we explain
in more detail below, it allows more intuitive interactions in many scenarios.
In Section 3, we present structural query-by-committee, a simple algorithm that can be used for
any instance of interactive structure learning. It is a generalization of the well-known query-bycommittee (QBC) algorithm [33, 16], and operates, roughly, by maintaining a posterior distribution
over structures and soliciting feedback on snapshots on which there is high uncertainty. We also
introduce an adaptation of the algorithm that allows convex loss functions to handle the noise. This
helps computational complexity in some practical settings, most notably when G consists of linear
functions, and also makes it possible to efficiently kernelize structural QBC.
In Section 4, we show that structural QBC is guaranteed to converge to the target g ⇤ , even when the
expert’s feedback is noisy. In the appendix, we give rates of convergence in terms of a shrinkage
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

