Generalized Zero-Shot Learning with Deep
Calibration Network
Shichen Liu† , Mingsheng Long† (B), Jianmin Wang† , and Michael I. Jordan]
†
School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
†
KLiss, MOE; BNRist; Research Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University, China
]
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, USA
liushichen95@gmail.com {mingsheng, jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn
jordan@berkeley.edu

Abstract
A technical challenge of deep learning is recognizing target classes without seen
data. Zero-shot learning leverages semantic representations such as attributes or
class prototypes to bridge source and target classes. Existing standard zero-shot
learning methods may be prone to overfitting the seen data of source classes as they
are blind to the semantic representations of target classes. In this paper, we study
generalized zero-shot learning that assumes accessible to target classes for unseen
data during training, and prediction on unseen data is made by searching on both
source and target classes. We propose a novel Deep Calibration Network (DCN)
approach towards this generalized zero-shot learning paradigm, which enables
simultaneous calibration of deep networks on the confidence of source classes and
uncertainty of target classes. Our approach maps visual features of images and
semantic representations of class prototypes to a common embedding space such
that the compatibility of seen data to both source and target classes are maximized.
We show superior accuracy of our approach over the state of the art on benchmark
datasets for generalized zero-shot learning, including AwA, CUB, SUN, and aPY.

1

Introduction

Remarkable advances in object recognition has been achieved in recent years with the prosperity of
deep convolutional neural networks [7, 29, 46, 24]. Despite the exciting advances, most successful
recognition models are based on supervised deep learning, which often requires large-scale labeled
samples to learn category concept and visual representation [44]. This addiction of deep learning
to large-scale labeled data has limited well-established deep models to tasks with only thousands
of classes, while recognizing objects “in the wild” without labeled training data remains a major
technical challenge to artificial intelligence. In many real applications, objects in different categories
may follow a long-tailed distribution that some popular categories have a large number of training
images while other categories have few or even no training images. Furthermore, collecting and
annotating a large-scale set of representative examplar images for target categories is expensive and
in many cases prohibitive [14]. In contrast to deep learning, humans can learn from few examples, by
effectively transferring knowledge from relevant categories, and even recognize unseen objects [19].
Such capability of humans has motivated the active research in one-shot and zero-shot learning [8].
It is thus imperative to design versatile algorithms for zero-shot learning, which extends classifiers
from source categories, of which labeled images are available during training, to target categories,
of which labeled images are not accessible [32, 37]. Zero-shot learning (ZSL) has attracted wide
attention in various research areas including face verification [30], object recognition [32], and video
understanding [52]. The main idea of zero-shot learning is to recognize objects of target classes by
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

