Distilled Wasserstein Learning for
Word Embedding and Topic Modeling

Hongteng Xu1,2 Wenlin Wang2
Wei Liu3
Lawrence Carin2
1
2
3
Infinia ML, Inc.
Duke University
Tencent AI Lab
hongteng.xu@infiniaml.com

Abstract
We propose a novel Wasserstein method with a distillation mechanism, yielding
joint learning of word embeddings and topics. The proposed method is based on
the fact that the Euclidean distance between word embeddings may be employed
as the underlying distance in the Wasserstein topic model. The word distributions
of topics, their optimal transports to the word distributions of documents, and
the embeddings of words are learned in a unified framework. When learning
the topic model, we leverage a distilled underlying distance matrix to update the
topic distributions and smoothly calculate the corresponding optimal transports.
Such a strategy provides the updating of word embeddings with robust guidance,
improving the algorithmic convergence. As an application, we focus on patient
admission records, in which the proposed method embeds the codes of diseases
and procedures and learns the topics of admissions, obtaining superior performance
on clinically-meaningful disease network construction, mortality prediction as a
function of admission codes, and procedure recommendation.

1

Introduction

Word embedding and topic modeling play important roles in natural language processing (NLP), as
well as other applications with textual and sequential data. Many modern embedding methods [30,
33, 28] assume that words can be represented and predicted by contextual (surrounding) words.
Accordingly, the word embeddings are learned to inherit those relationships. Topic modeling
methods [8], in contrast, typically represent documents by the distribution of words, or other “bagof-words” techniques [17, 24], ignoring the order and semantic relationships among words. The
distinction between how the word order is (or is not) accounted for when learning topics and word
embeddings manifests a potential methodological gap or mismatch.
This gap is important when considering clinical-admission analysis, the motivating application of
this paper. Patient admissions in hospitals are recorded by the code of international classification
of diseases (ICD). For each admission, one may observe a sequence of ICD codes corresponding
to certain kinds of diseases and procedures, and each code is treated as a “word.” To reveal the
characteristics of the admissions and relationships between different diseases/procedures, we seek to
model the “topics” of admissions and also learn an embedding for each ICD code. However, while
we want embeddings of similar diseases/procedures to be nearby in the embedding space, learning
the embedding vectors based on surrounding ICD codes for a given patient admission is less relevant,
as there is often a diversity in the observed codes for a given admission, and the code order may
hold less meaning. Take the MIMIC-III dataset [25] as an example. The ICD codes in each patient’s
admission are ranked according to a manually-defined priority, and the adjacent codes are often not
clinically-correlated with each other. Therefore, we desire a model that jointly learns topics and word
embeddings, and that for both does not consider the word (ICD code) order. Interestingly, even in the
context of traditional NLP tasks, it has been recognized recently that effective word embeddings may
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

