Does mitigating ML’s impact disparity
require treatment disparity?

Zachary C. Lipton1 , Alexandra Chouldechova1 , Julian McAuley2
1
Carnegie Mellon University
2
University of California, San Diego
zlipton@cmu.edu, achould@cmu.edu, jmcauley@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Following precedent in employment discrimination law, two notions of disparity
are widely-discussed in papers on fairness and ML. Algorithms exhibit treatment
disparity if they formally treat members of protected subgroups differently; algorithms exhibit impact disparity when outcomes differ across subgroups (even
unintentionally). Naturally, we can achieve impact parity through purposeful treatment disparity. One line of papers aims to reconcile the two parities proposing
disparate learning processes (DLPs). Here, the sensitive feature is used during
training but a group-blind classifier is produced. In this paper, we show that: (i)
when sensitive and (nominally) nonsensitive features are correlated, DLPs will
indirectly implement treatment disparity, undermining the policy desiderata they
are designed to address; (ii) when group membership is partly revealed by other features, DLPs induce within-class discrimination; and (iii) in general, DLPs provide
suboptimal trade-offs between accuracy and impact parity. Experimental results on
several real-world datasets highlight the practical consequences of applying DLPs.

1

Introduction

Effective decision-making requires choosing among options given the available information. That
much is unavoidable, unless we wish to make trivial decisions. In selection processes, such as hiring,
university admissions, and loan approval, the options are people; the available features include (but
are rarely limited to) direct evidence of qualifications; and decisions impact lives.
Laws in many countries restrict the ways in which certain decisions can be made. For example, Title
VII of the US Civil Rights Act [1], forbids employment decisions that discriminate on the basis of
certain protected characteristics. Interpretation of this law has led to two notions of discrimination:
disparate treatment and disparate impact. Disparate treatment addresses intentional discrimination,
including (i) decisions explicitly based on protected characteristics; and (ii) intentional discrimination
via proxy variables (e.g literacy tests for voting eligibility). Disparate impact addresses facially
neutral practices that might nevertheless have an “unjustified adverse impact on members of a
protected class” [1]. One might hope that detecting unjustified impact were as simple as detecting
unequal outcomes. However, absent intentional discrimination, unequal outcomes can emerge due
to correlations between protected and unprotected characteristics. Complicating matters, unequal
outcomes may not always signal unlawful discrimination [2].
Recently, owing to the increased use of machine learning (ML) to assist in consequential decisions,
the topic of quantifying and mitigating ML-based discrimination has attracted interest in both policy
and ML. However, while the existing legal doctrine offers qualitative ideas, intervention in an MLbased system requires more concrete formalism. Inspired by the relevant legal concepts, technical
papers have proposed several criteria to quantify discrimination. One criterion requires that the
fraction given a positive decision be equal across different groups. Another criterion states that a
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

