A Theory-Based Evaluation of Nearest Neighbor
Models Put Into Practice
Hendrik Fichtenberger∗
TU Dortmund
Dortmund, Germany
hendrik.fichtenberger@tu-dortmund.de

Dennis Rohde†
TU Dortmund
Dortmund, Germany
dennis.rohde@cs.tu-dortmund.de

Abstract
In the k-nearest neighborhood model (k-NN), we are given a set of points P , and
we shall answer queries q by returning the k nearest neighbors of q in P according
to some metric. This concept is crucial in many areas of data analysis and data
processing, e.g., computer vision, document retrieval and machine learning. Many
k-NN algorithms have been published and implemented, but often the relation
between parameters and accuracy of the computed k-NN is not explicit. We study
property testing of k-NN graphs in theory and evaluate it empirically: given a point
set P ⊂ Rδ and a directed graph G = (P, E), is G a k-NN graph, i.e., every point
p ∈ P has outgoing edges to its k nearest neighbors, or is it -far from being a
k-NN graph? Here, -far means that one has to change more than an -fraction of
the edges in order to make G a k-NN graph. We develop a randomized algorithm
with one-sided error that decides this
√ question, i.e., a property tester for the kNN property, with complexity O( nk 2 /2 ) measured in terms of thep
number
of vertices and edges it inspects, and we prove a lower bound of Ω( n/k).
We evaluate our tester empirically on the k-NN models computed by various
algorithms and show that it can be used to detect k-NN models with bad accuracy
in significantly less time than the building time of the k-NN model.

1

Introduction

The k-nearest neighborhood (k-NN) of a point q with respect to some set of points P is one of the
most fundamental concepts used in data analysis tasks such as classification, regression and machine
learning. In the past decades, many algorithms have been proposed in theory as well as in practice
to efficiently answer k-NN queries [e.g., 1, 7–10, 18, 20, 23, 26, 27, 30, 36]. For example, one can
construct a k-NN graph of a point set P , i.e., a directed graph G = (P, E) of size n = |P | such that E
contains an edge (p, q) for every k-nearest neighbor q of p for every p ∈ P , in time O(n log n + kn)
for constant dimension δ [8]. Due to restrictions on computational resources, approximations and
heuristics are often used instead (see, e.g., [9, 10] and the discussion therein for details). Given the
output graph G0 of such a randomized approximation algorithm or heuristic, one might want to check
whether G0 resembles a k-NN graph before using it, e.g., in a data processing pipeline. However, the
time required for exact verification might cancel out the advantages gained by using an approximation
algorithm or a heuristic. On the other hand, testing whether G0 is at least close to a k-NN graph will
suffice for many purposes. Property testing is a framework for the theoretical analysis of decision and
verification problems that are relaxed in favor of sublinear complexity. One motivation of property
testing is to fathom the theoretical foundations of efficiently assessing approximation and heuristic
algorithms’ outputs.
∗
†

ORCID iD: 0000-0003-3246-5323
ORCID iD: 0000-0001-8984-1962

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

