Generalisation of structural knowledge in the
hippocampal-entorhinal system

James C.R. Whittington*
University of Oxford, UK
james.whittington@magd.ox.ac.uk
Timothy H. Muller*
University of Oxford, UK
timothymuller127@gmail.com

Shirley Mark
University College London, UK
s.mark@ucl.ac.uk

Caswell Barry
University College London, UK
caswell.barry@ucl.ac.uk

Timothy E.J. Behrens
University of Oxford, UK
behrens@fmrib.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
A central problem to understanding intelligence is the concept of generalisation.
This allows previously learnt structure to be exploited to solve tasks in novel situations differing in their particularities. We take inspiration from neuroscience,
specifically the hippocampal-entorhinal system known to be important for generalisation. We propose that to generalise structural knowledge, the representations of
the structure of the world, i.e. how entities in the world relate to each other, need to
be separated from representations of the entities themselves. We show, under these
principles, artificial neural networks embedded with hierarchy and fast Hebbian
memory, can learn the statistics of memories and generalise structural knowledge. Spatial neuronal representations mirroring those found in the brain emerge,
suggesting spatial cognition is an instance of more general organising principles.
We further unify many entorhinal cell types as basis functions for constructing
transition graphs, and show these representations effectively utilise memories.
We experimentally support model assumptions, showing a preserved relationship
between entorhinal grid and hippocampal place cells across environments.

1

Introduction

Animals have a remarkable ability to flexibly take knowledge from one domain and generalise it to
another. This is not yet the case for machines. The advantages of generalising knowledge are clear
- it allows one to make quick inferences in new situations, without having to always learn afresh.
Generalisation of statistical structure (the relationships between objects in the world) imbues an agent
with the ability to fit things/concepts together that share the same statistical structure, but differ in the
particularities, e.g. when one hears a new story, they can fit it in with what they already know about
stories in general, such as there is a beginning, middle and end - when the funny story appears while
listening to the the news, it can be inferred that the programme is about to end.
Generalisation is a topic of much interest. Advances in machine learning and artificial intelligence
(AI) have been impressive [23, 28], however there is scepticism over whether ’true’ underlying
structure is being learned. We propose that in order to learn and generalise structural knowledge, this
structure must be represented explicitly, i.e. separated from the representations of sensory objects in
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

