On Learning Intrinsic Rewards for
Policy Gradient Methods

Zeyu Zheng

Junhyuk Oh
Computer Science & Engineering
University of Michigan
{zeyu,junhyuk,baveja}@umich.edu

Satinder Singh

Abstract
In many sequential decision making tasks, it is challenging to design reward
functions that help an RL agent efficiently learn behavior that is considered good
by the agent designer. A number of different formulations of the reward-design
problem have been proposed in the literature. In this paper we build on the Optimal
Rewards Framework of Singh et al. [2010] that defines the optimal intrinsic reward
function as one that when used by an RL agent achieves behavior that optimizes the
task-specifying or extrinsic reward function. Previous work in this framework has
shown how good intrinsic reward functions can be learned for lookahead search
based planning agents. Whether it is possible to learn intrinsic reward functions
for learning agents remains an open problem. In this paper we derive a novel
algorithm for learning intrinsic rewards for policy-gradient based learning agents.
We compare the performance of an augmented agent that uses our algorithm to
provide additive intrinsic rewards to an A2C-based policy learner (for Atari games)
and a PPO-based policy learner (for Mujoco domains) with a baseline agent that
uses the same policy learners but with only extrinsic rewards. We also compare our
method with using a constant “live bonus” and with using a count-based exploration
bonus (i.e., pixel-SimHash). Our results show improved performance on most but
not all of the domains.

1

Introduction

One of the challenges facing an agent-designer in formulating a sequential decision making task
as a Reinforcement Learning (RL) problem is that of defining a reward function. In some cases a
choice of reward function is clear from the designer’s understanding of the task. For example, in
board games such as Chess or Go the notion of win/loss/draw comes with the game definition, and in
Atari games there is a game score that is part of the game. In other cases there may not be any clear
choice of reward function. For example, in domains in which the agent is interacting with humans in
the environment and the objective is to maximize human-satisfaction it can be hard to define a reward
function. Similarly, when the task objective contains multiple criteria such as minimizing energy
consumption and maximizing throughput and minimizing latency, it is not clear how to combine
these into a single scalar-valued reward function.
Even when a reward function can be defined, it is not unique in the sense that certain transformations
of the reward function, e.g., adding a potential-based reward [Ng et al., 1999], will not change
the resulting ordering over agent behaviors. While the choice of potential-based or other (policy)
order-preserving reward function used to transform the original reward function does not change what
the optimal policy is, it can change for better or for worse the sample (and computational) complexity
of the RL agent learning from experience in its environment using the transformed reward function.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

