Quadrature-based features for kernel approximation

Marina Munkhoeva†

Yermek Kapushev†

Evgeny Burnaev†

Ivan Oseledets†,‡

†

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Moscow, Russia
‡
Institute of Numerical Mathematics of the Russian Academy of Sciences
Moscow, Russia

Abstract
We consider the problem of improving kernel approximation via randomized
feature maps. These maps arise as Monte Carlo approximation to integral
representations of kernel functions and scale up kernel methods for larger datasets.
Based on an efficient numerical integration technique, we propose a unifying
approach that reinterprets the previous random features methods and extends to
better estimates of the kernel approximation. We derive the convergence behaviour
and conduct an extensive empirical study that supports our hypothesis1 .

1

Introduction

Kernel methods proved to be an efficient technique in numerous real-world problems. The core idea
of kernel methods is the kernel trick – compute an inner product in a high-dimensional (or even
infinite-dimensional) feature space by means of a kernel function k:
k(x, y) = hψ(x), ψ(y)i,
(1)
where ψ : X → F is a non-linear feature map transporting elements of input space X into a feature
space F. It is a common knowledge that kernel methods incur space and time complexity infeasible
to be used with large-scale datasets directly. For example, kernel regression has O(N 3 + N d2 )
training time, O(N 2 ) memory, O(N d) prediction time complexity for N data points in original
d-dimensional space X .
One of the most successful techniques to handle this problem, known as Random Fourier Features
(RFF) proposed by [29], introduces a low-dimensional randomized approximation to feature maps:
k(x, y) ≈ Ψ̂(x)> Ψ̂(y).
(2)
This is essentially carried out by using Monte-Carlo sampling to approximate scalar product in (1).
A randomized D-dimensional mapping Ψ̂(·) applied to the original data input allows employing
standard linear methods, i.e. reverting the kernel trick. In doing so one reduces the complexity to
that of linear methods, e.g. D-dimensional approximation admits O(N D2 ) training time, O(N D)
memory and O(N ) prediction time.

It is well known that as D → ∞, the inner product in (2) converges to the exact kernel k(x, y).
Recent research [35; 14; 9] aims to improve the convergence of approximation so that a smaller D
can be used to obtain the same quality of approximation.

This paper considers kernels that allow the following integral representation
kwk2
1
− 2
k(x, y) = Ep(w) fxy (w) = I(fxy ), p(w) =
e
, fxy = φ(w> x)φ(w> y). (3)
(2π)d/2
1

The code for this paper is available at https://github.com/maremun/quffka.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

