Deep Non-Blind Deconvolution via
Generalized Low-Rank Approximation

Wenqi Ren ∗
IIE, CAS

Jiawei Zhang
SenseTime Research

Wangmeng Zuo
HIT

Lin Ma
Tencent AI Lab

Wei Liu
Tencent AI Lab

Jinshan Pan
NJUST

Xiaochun Cao †
IIE, CAS

Ming-Hsuan Yang
UCMerced, Google Cloud

Abstract
In this paper, we present a deep convolutional neural network to capture the inherent
properties of image degradation, which can handle different kernels and saturated
pixels in a unified framework. The proposed neural network is motivated by
the low-rank property of pseudo-inverse kernels. Specifically, we first compute
a generalized low-rank approximation to a large number of blur kernels, and
then use separable filters to initialize the convolutional parameters in the network.
Our analysis shows that the estimated decomposed matrices contain the most
essential information of an input kernel, which ensures the proposed network to
handle various blurs in a unified framework and generate high-quality deblurring
results. Experimental results on benchmark datasets with noisy and saturated pixels
demonstrate that the proposed deconvolution approach relying on generalized
low-rank approximation performs favorably against the state-of-the-arts.

1

Introduction

Image blur is often inevitable due to numerous factors including low illumination, camera motion,
telephoto lens, or small aperture for a wide depth of field. The shift-invariant blur process can be
modeled by
y = c(k ∗ x) + n,
(1)
where y, x, k, and n denote blurry input, latent image, blur kernel, and image noise, respectively; ∗
denotes a convolution operator; c(·) is a non-linear function describing a camera imaging system. It
is well-known that estimating the latent image from a blurry input is challenging. If the blur kernel
is unknown, the problem is called blind deconvolution [8, 19]. Otherwise, it reduces to non-blind
deconvolution [9, 26] if the blur kernel is known. As non-blind deconvolution remains as an active
and challenging research topic due to its ill-posedness [32], we present a method to tackle this
problem.
Existing algorithms are usually based on the spatial [5, 6, 21] or frequency [3, 15, 16] domain.
However, the spatial domain based methods have a high computational cost since these methods need
to solve large linear systems. Although the frequency-based approaches are computationally efficient
thanks to the use of Fast Fourier Transformations (FFTs), these methods often generate significant
ringing artifacts since blur kernels are band-limited with sharp frequency cut-off. In addition, existing
non-blind deconvolution algorithms usually assume that the noise level is small and less effective for
blurry images with significant noisy and saturated pixels [31].
∗
†

Part of this work was done while Wenqi Ren was with Tencent AI Lab as a Visiting Scholar.
Corresponding author, caoxiaochun@iie.ac.cn.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

