Deep Reinforcement Learning of
Marked Temporal Point Processes
Utkarsh Upadhyay
MPI-SWS
utkarshu@mpi-sws.org

Abir De
MPI-SWS
ade@mpi-sws.org

Manuel Gomez-Rodrizuez
MPI-SWS
manuelgr@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
In a wide variety of applications, humans interact with a complex environment
by means of asynchronous stochastic discrete events in continuous time. Can we
design online interventions that will help humans achieve certain goals in such asynchronous setting? In this paper, we address the above problem from the perspective
of deep reinforcement learning of marked temporal point processes, where both
the actions taken by an agent and the feedback it receives from the environment
are asynchronous stochastic discrete events characterized using marked temporal
point processes. In doing so, we define the agent’s policy using the intensity and
mark distribution of the corresponding process and then derive a flexible policy
gradient method, which embeds the agent’s actions and the feedback it receives
into real-valued vectors using deep recurrent neural networks. Our method does not
make any assumptions on the functional form of the intensity and mark distribution
of the feedback and it allows for arbitrarily complex reward functions. We apply
our methodology to two different applications in personalized teaching and viral
marketing and, using data gathered from Duolingo and Twitter, we show that it
may be able to find interventions to help learners and marketers achieve their goals
more effectively than alternatives.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the framework of marked temporal point processes (MTPPs) [1] has become increasingly popular for modeling asynchronous event data in continuous time, which is ubiquitous
in a wide range of application domains, from social and information networks to finance or health
informatics. For example, in social and information networks, events may represent users’ posts,
clicks or likes; in finance, they may represent buying and selling orders; or, in health informatics,
they may represent when a patient exhibits different symptoms or receives treatment. In most cases,
the development of a new model reduces to the problem of designing an appropriate functional form
for the conditional intensity (or intensities) of the events of interest as well as the distribution of the
corresponding mark(s).
In this context, a recent line of work [13, 27, 29, 30, 33, 34] has exploited an alternative view
of MTPPs as stochastic differential equations (SDEs) with jumps [10] to design online, adaptive
interventions using stochastic optimal control. While this line of work has shown promise at enhancing
the functioning of social and information systems, their wide spread use and deployment is precluded
mainly by two drawbacks. First, they make strong assumptions about the functional form of the
conditional intensities and mark distributions of the MTPPs, which in turn prevent them from using
state of the art MTPP models based on deep learning [5, 11, 17]. Second, the objective functions that
the interventions optimize upon, need to be carefully chosen to ensure that the underlying stochastic
optimal control problem remains tractable. As a consequence, the use of (more) meaningful objective
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

