Precision and Recall for Time Series
Nesime Tatbul ∗
Intel Labs and MIT
tatbul@csail.mit.edu

Tae Jun Lee ∗
Microsoft
tae_jun_lee@alumni.brown.edu

Mejbah Alam
Intel Labs
mejbah.alam@intel.com

Stan Zdonik
Brown University
sbz@cs.brown.edu

Justin Gottschlich
Intel Labs
justin.gottschlich@intel.com

Abstract
Classical anomaly detection is principally concerned with point-based anomalies,
those anomalies that occur at a single point in time. Yet, many real-world anomalies
are range-based, meaning they occur over a period of time. Motivated by this
observation, we present a new mathematical model to evaluate the accuracy of time
series classification algorithms. Our model expands the well-known Precision and
Recall metrics to measure ranges, while simultaneously enabling customization
support for domain-specific preferences.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection (AD) is the process of identifying non-conforming items, events, or behaviors
[1, 9]. The proper identification of anomalies can be critical for many domains. Examples include
early diagnosis of medical diseases [22], threat detection for cyber-attacks [3, 18, 36], or safety
analysis for self-driving cars [38]. Many real-world anomalies can be detected in time series data.
Therefore, systems that detect anomalies should reason about them as they occur over a period of
time. We call such events range-based anomalies. Range-based anomalies constitute a subset of both
contextual and collective anomalies [9]. More precisely, a range-based anomaly is one that occurs
over a consecutive sequence of time points, where no non-anomalous data points exist between the
beginning and the end of the anomaly. The standard metrics for evaluating time series classification
algorithms today, Precision and Recall, have been around since the 1950s. Originally formulated
to evaluate document retrieval algorithms by counting the number of documents that were correctly
returned against those that were not [6], Precision and Recall can be formally defined as follows [1]
(where TP , FP , FN are the number of true positives, false positives, false negatives, respectively):
P recision = T P ÷ (T P + F P )
Recall = T P ÷ (T P + F N )

(1)
(2)

Informally, Precision is the fraction of all detected anomalies that are real anomalies, whereas, Recall
is the fraction of all real anomalies that are successfully detected. In this sense, Precision and Recall
are complementary, and this characterization proves useful when they are combined (e.g., using
Fβ -Score, where β represents the relative importance of Recall to Precision) [6]. Such combinations
help gauge the quality of anomaly predictions. While useful for point-based anomalies, classical
Precision and Recall suffer from the inability to represent domain-specific time series anomalies.
This has a negative side-effect on the advancement of AD systems. In particular, many time series AD
systems’ accuracy is being misrepresented, because point-based Precision and Recall are being used
to measure their effectiveness for range-based anomalies. Moreover, the need to accurately identify
time series anomalies is growing in importance due to the explosion of streaming and real-time
systems [2, 5, 16, 19, 27, 28, 30, 31, 37, 40].
To address this need, we redefine Precision and Recall to encompass range-based anomalies. Unlike
prior work [2, 25], our new mathematical definitions extend their classical counterparts, enabling
∗

Lead authors.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

