Learning Compressed Transforms
with Low Displacement Rank
Anna T. Thomas†⇤, Albert Gu†⇤, Tri Dao† , Atri Rudra‡ , Christopher Ré†
†
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
‡
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, SUNY
{thomasat,albertgu,trid}@stanford.edu, atri@buffalo.edu, chrismre@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
The low displacement rank (LDR) framework for structured matrices represents a
matrix through two displacement operators and a low-rank residual. Existing use of
LDR matrices in deep learning has applied fixed displacement operators encoding
forms of shift invariance akin to convolutions. We introduce a class of LDR
matrices with more general displacement operators, and explicitly learn over both
the operators and the low-rank component. This class generalizes several previous
constructions while preserving compression and efficient computation. We prove
bounds on the VC dimension of multi-layer neural networks with structured weight
matrices and show empirically that our compact parameterization can reduce the
sample complexity of learning. When replacing weight layers in fully-connected,
convolutional, and recurrent neural networks for image classification and language
modeling tasks, our new classes exceed the accuracy of existing compression
approaches, and on some tasks also outperform general unstructured layers while
using more than 20x fewer parameters.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen a surge of interest in structured representations for deep learning, motivated
by achieving compression and acceleration while maintaining generalization properties. A popular
approach for learning compact models involves constraining the weight matrices to exhibit some form
of dense but compressible structure and learning directly over the parameterization of this structure.
Examples of structures explored for the weight matrices of deep learning pipelines include low-rank
matrices [15, 42], low-distortion projections [49], (block-)circulant matrices [8, 17], Toeplitz-like
matrices [34, 45], and constructions derived from Fourier-related transforms [37]. Though they confer
significant storage and computation benefits, these constructions tend to underperform general fullyconnected layers in deep learning. This raises the question of whether broader classes of structured
matrices can achieve superior downstream performance while retaining compression guarantees.
Our approach leverages the low displacement rank (LDR) framework (Section 2), which encodes
structure through two sparse displacement operators and a low-rank residual term [27]. Previous
work studying neural networks with LDR weight matrices assumes fixed displacement operators and
learns only over the residual [45, 50]. The only case attempted in practice that explicitly employs the
LDR framework uses fixed operators encoding shift invariance, producing weight matrices which
were found to achieve superior downstream quality than several other compression approaches [45].
Unlike previous work, we consider learning the displacement operators jointly with the low-rank
residual. Building upon recent progress on structured dense matrix-vector multiplication [14], we
introduce a more general class of LDR matrices and develop practical algorithms for using these
⇤

These authors contributed equally.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

