Informative Features for Model Comparison

Wittawat Jitkrittum
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

Heishiro Kanagawa
Gatsby Unit, UCL

wittawat@tuebingen.mpg.de

heishirok@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Patsorn Sangkloy
Georgia Institute of Technology

James Hays
Georgia Institute of Technology

patsorn_sangkloy@gatech.edu

hays@gatech.edu

Bernhard Schölkopf
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

Arthur Gretton∗
Gatsby Unit, UCL

bernhard.schoelkopf@tuebingen.mpg.de

arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
Given two candidate models, and a set of target observations, we address the problem of measuring the relative goodness of fit of the two models. We propose two
new statistical tests which are nonparametric, computationally efficient (runtime
complexity is linear in the sample size), and interpretable. As a unique advantage,
our tests can produce a set of examples (informative features) indicating the regions
in the data domain where one model fits significantly better than the other. In a
real-world problem of comparing GAN models, the test power of our new test
matches that of the state-of-the-art test of relative goodness of fit, while being one
order of magnitude faster.

1

Introduction

One of the most fruitful areas in recent machine learning research has been the development of
effective generative models for very complex and high dimensional data. Chief among these have
been the generative adversarial networks [Goodfellow et al., 2014, Arjovsky et al., 2017, Nowozin
et al., 2016], where samples may be generated without an explicit generative model or likelihood
function. A related thread has emerged in the statistics community with the advent of Approximate
Bayesian Computation, where simulation-based models without closed-form likelihoods are widely
applied in bioinformatics applications [see Lintusaari et al., 2017, for a review]. In these cases, we
might have several competing models, and wish to evaluate which is the better fit for the data.
The problem of model criticism is traditionally defined as follows: how well does a model Q fit a
i.i.d.
given sample Zn := {z i }ni=1 ∼ R? This task can be addressed in two ways: by comparing samples
n
Yn := {y i }i=1 from the model Q and data samples, or by directly evaluating the goodness of fit of
the model itself. In both of these cases, the tests have a null hypothesis (that the model agrees with
the data), which they will reject given sufficient evidence. Two-sample tests fall into the first category:
there are numerous nonparametric tests which may be used [Alba Fernández et al., 2008, Gretton
et al., 2012a, Friedman and Rafsky, 1979, Székely and Rizzo, 2004, Rosenbaum, 2005, Harchaoui
et al., 2008, Hall and Tajvidi, 2002, Jitkrittum et al., 2016], and recent work in applying two-sample
tests to the problem of model criticism [Lloyd and Ghahramani, 2015]. A second approach requires
the model density q explicitly. In the case of simple models for which normalisation is not an issue
(e.g., checking for Gaussianity), several tests exist [Baringhaus and Henze, 1988, Székely and Rizzo,
∗

Arthur Gretton’s ORCID ID: 0000-0003-3169-7624.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

