Context-Dependent Upper-Confidence Bounds for
Directed Exploration
Raksha Kumaraswamy1 , Matthew Schlegel1 , Adam White1,2 , Martha White1
1
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta; 2 DeepMind
{kumarasw, mkschleg}@ualberta.ca, adamwhite@google.com, whitem@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Directed exploration strategies for reinforcement learning are critical for learning
an optimal policy in a minimal number of interactions with the environment. Many
algorithms use optimism to direct exploration, either through visitation estimates
or upper-confidence bounds, as opposed to data-inefficient strategies like ✏-greedy
that use random, undirected exploration. Most data-efficient exploration methods
require significant computation, typically relying on a learned model to guide
exploration. Least-squares methods have the potential to provide some of the
data-efficiency benefits of model-based approaches—because they summarize past
interactions—with the computation closer to that of model-free approaches. In
this work, we provide a novel, computationally efficient, incremental exploration
strategy, leveraging this property of least-squares temporal difference learning
(LSTD). We derive upper-confidence bounds on the action-values learned by
LSTD, with context-dependent (or state-dependent) noise variance. Such contextdependent noise focuses exploration on a subset of variable states, and allows for
reduced exploration in other states. We empirically demonstrate that our algorithm
can converge more quickly than other incremental exploration strategies using
confidence estimates on action-values.

1

Introduction

Exploration is crucial in reinforcement learning, as the data gathering process significantly impacts
the optimality of the learned policies and values. The agent needs to balance the amount of time
taking exploratory actions to learn about the world, versus taking actions to maximize cumulative
rewards. If the agent explores insufficiently, it could converge to a suboptimal policy; exploring too
conservatively, however, results in many suboptimal decisions. The goal of the agent is data-efficient
exploration: to minimize how many samples are wasted in exploration, particularly exploring parts of
the world that are known, while still ensuring convergence to the optimal policy.
To achieve such a goal, directed exploration strategies are key. Undirected strategies, where random
actions are taken such as in ✏-greedy, are a common default. In small domains these methods are
guaranteed to find an optimal policy [35], because the agent is guaranteed to visit the entire space—
but may take many many steps to do so, as undirected exploration can interfere with improving
policies in incremental control. In this paper we explore the idea of constructing confidence intervals
around the agent’s value estimates. The agent can use these learned confidence intervals to select
actions with the highest upper-confidence bound ensuring actions selected are of high value or whose
values are highly uncertain. This optimistic approach is promising for directed exploration, but as yet
there are few such methods that are model-free, incremental and computationally efficient.
Directed exploration strategies have largely been explored under the framework of “optimism in
the face of uncertainty” [13]. These can generally be categorized into count-based approaches
and confidence-based approaches. Count-based approaches estimate the “known-ness” of a state,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

