Where Do You Think You’re Going?:
Inferring Beliefs about Dynamics from Behavior

Siddharth Reddy, Anca D. Dragan, Sergey Levine
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley
{sgr,anca,svlevine}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Inferring intent from observed behavior has been studied extensively within the
frameworks of Bayesian inverse planning and inverse reinforcement learning.
These methods infer a goal or reward function that best explains the actions of
the observed agent, typically a human demonstrator. Another agent can use this
inferred intent to predict, imitate, or assist the human user. However, a central
assumption in inverse reinforcement learning is that the demonstrator is close to
optimal. While models of suboptimal behavior exist, they typically assume that
suboptimal actions are the result of some type of random noise or a known cognitive
bias, like temporal inconsistency. In this paper, we take an alternative approach,
and model suboptimal behavior as the result of internal model misspecification: the
reason that user actions might deviate from near-optimal actions is that the user has
an incorrect set of beliefs about the rules – the dynamics – governing how actions
affect the environment. Our insight is that while demonstrated actions may be
suboptimal in the real world, they may actually be near-optimal with respect to the
user’s internal model of the dynamics. By estimating these internal beliefs from
observed behavior, we arrive at a new method for inferring intent. We demonstrate
in simulation and in a user study with 12 participants that this approach enables us
to more accurately model human intent, and can be used in a variety of applications,
including offering assistance in a shared autonomy framework and inferring human
preferences.

1

Introduction

Characterizing the drive behind human actions in the form of a goal or reward function is broadly
useful for predicting future behavior, imitating human actions in new situations, and augmenting
human control with automated assistance – critical functions in a wide variety of applications, including pedestrian motion prediction [57], virtual character animation [38], and robotic teleoperation
[35]. For example, remotely operating a robotic arm to grasp objects can be challenging for a human
user due to unfamiliar or unintuitive dynamics of the physical system and control interface. Existing
frameworks for assistive teleoperation and shared autonomy aim to help users perform such tasks
[35, 29, 46, 8, 45]. These frameworks typically rely on existing methods for intent inference in the
sequential decision-making context, which use Bayesian inverse planning or inverse reinforcement
learning to learn the user’s goal or reward function from observed control demonstrations. These
methods typically assume that user actions are near-optimal, and deviate from optimality due to
random noise [56], specific cognitive biases in planning [16, 15, 4], or risk sensitivity [33].
See https://sites.google.com/view/inferring-internal-dynamics for supplementary materials, including videos and code.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

