Chain of Reasoning for Visual Question Answering

Chenfei Wu∗, Jinlai Liu∗ , Xiaojie Wang, Xuan Dong
Center for Intelligence Science and Technology
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{wuchenfei,liujinlai, xjwang, dongxuan8811}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Reasoning plays an essential role in Visual Question Answering (VQA). Multi-step
and dynamic reasoning is often necessary for answering complex questions. For
example, a question “What is placed next to the bus on the right of the picture?”
talks about a compound object “bus on the right,” which is generated by the
relation <bus, on the right of, picture>. Furthermore, a new relation including this
compound object <sign, next to, bus on the right> is then required to infer the
answer. However, previous methods support either one-step or static reasoning,
without updating relations or generating compound objects. This paper proposes
a novel reasoning model for addressing these problems. A chain of reasoning
(CoR) is constructed for supporting multi-step and dynamic reasoning on changed
relations and objects. In detail, iteratively, the relational reasoning operations form
new relations between objects, and the object refining operations generate new
compound objects from relations. We achieve new state-of-the-art results on four
publicly available datasets. The visualization of the chain of reasoning illustrates
the progress that the CoR generates new compound objects that lead to the answer
of the question step by step.

1

Introduction

“The technical issues of acquiring knowledge, representing it, and using it appropriately to construct
and explain lines-of-reasoning, are important problems in the design of knowledge-based systems,
which illuminates the art of Artificial Intelligence” [1]. Advances in image and language processing
have developed powerful tools on knowledge representation, such as long short-term memory
(LSTM) [2] and convolutional neural network (CNN) [3]. However, it is still a challenge to construct
“lines-of-reasoning” with these representations for different tasks. This paper meets the challenge in
visual question answering, a typical field of Artificial Intelligence.
Visual question answering (VQA) aims to select an answer given an image and a related question.
The left part of Fig. 1 gives an example of the image and the question. Lots of work has been
done on this task in recent years. Among them, reasoning, named in different ways, plays a critical
role. Most of existing VQA models that enable reasoning can be divided into three categories.
Firstly, relation-based method [4] views reasoning procedure as relational reasoning. It calculates
the relations between image regions to infer the answer in one-step. However, one-step relational
reasoning can only construct pairwise relations between initial objects, which is not always sufficient
for complex questions. It is not a trivial problem to extend one-step reasoning to multi-step because
of the exponential increase of computational complexity. Secondly, attention-based methods [5, 6]
view reasoning procedure as to update the attention distribution on objects, such as image regions
or bounding boxes, so as to gradually infer the answer. However, no matter how many times the
attention distributions are updated, the objects are still from the original input, and the entire reasoning
∗

The first two authors contributed equally.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

