Approximating Real-Time Recurrent Learning with
Random Kronecker Factors
Asier Mujika ∗
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
asierm@inf.ethz.ch

Florian Meier
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
meierflo@inf.ethz.ch

Angelika Steger
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
steger@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Despite all the impressive advances of recurrent neural networks, sequential data is
still in need of better modelling. Truncated backpropagation through time (TBPTT),
the learning algorithm most widely used in practice, suffers from the truncation bias,
which drastically limits its ability to learn long-term dependencies.The Real-Time
Recurrent Learning algorithm (RTRL) addresses this issue, but its high computational requirements make it infeasible in practice. The Unbiased Online Recurrent
Optimization algorithm (UORO) approximates RTRL with a smaller runtime and
memory cost, but with the disadvantage of obtaining noisy gradients that also limit
its practical applicability. In this paper we propose the Kronecker Factored RTRL
(KF-RTRL) algorithm that uses a Kronecker product decomposition to approximate
the gradients for a large class of RNNs. We show that KF-RTRL is an unbiased and
memory efficient online learning algorithm. Our theoretical analysis shows that,
under reasonable assumptions, the noise introduced by our algorithm is not only
stable over time but also asymptotically much smaller than the one of the UORO
algorithm. We also confirm these theoretical results experimentally. Further, we
show empirically that the KF-RTRL algorithm captures long-term dependencies
and almost matches the performance of TBPTT on real world tasks by training
Recurrent Highway Networks on a synthetic string memorization task and on
the Penn TreeBank task, respectively. These results indicate that RTRL based
approaches might be a promising future alternative to TBPTT.

1

Introduction

Processing sequential data is a central problem in the field of machine learning. In recent years,
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) have achieved great success, outperforming all other approaches in
many different sequential tasks like machine translation, language modeling, reinforcement learning
and more.
Despite this success, it remains unclear how to train such models. The standard algorithm, Truncated
Back Propagation Through Time (TBPTT) [18], considers the RNN as a feed-forward model over
time with shared parameters. While this approach works extremely well in the range of a few hundred
time-steps, it scales very poorly to longer time dependencies. As the time horizon is increased, the
∗

Author was supported by grant no. CRSII5_173721 of the Swiss National Science Foundation.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

