Sequence-to-Segments Networks
for Segment Detection

Zijun Wei1 Boyu Wang1 Minh Hoai1 Jianming Zhang2 Zhe Lin2
Xiaohui Shen3 Radomír Měch2 Dimitris Samaras1
1
Stony Brook University, 2 Adobe Research, 3 ByteDance AI Lab

Abstract
Detecting segments of interest from an input sequence is a challenging problem
which often requires not only good knowledge of individual target segments, but
also contextual understanding of the entire input sequence and the relationships
between the target segments. To address this problem, we propose the Sequence-toSegments Network (S2 N), a novel end-to-end sequential encoder-decoder architecture. S2 N first encodes the input into a sequence of hidden states that progressively
capture both local and holistic information. It then employs a novel decoding
architecture, called Segment Detection Unit (SDU), that integrates the decoder
state and encoder hidden states to detect segments sequentially. During training,
we formulate the assignment of predicted segments to ground truth as the bipartite
matching problem and use the Earth Mover’s Distance to calculate the localization
errors. Experiments on temporal action proposal and video summarization show
that S2 N achieves state-of-the-art performance on both tasks.

1

Introduction

We address the problem of detecting temporal segments of “interest” in an input time series. Here
we define “interest” as an abstract concept that denotes the parts of the data that have the highest
(application dependent) semantic values. We assume there are training time series with annotated
segments of interest (e.g., labeled by humans), and our goal is to train a neural network that can
detect the segments of interest in unseen time series. This general problem arises in many situations
including temporal event detection [17, 18], video summarization [47, 48], sentence chunking [32],
gene localization [24], and discriminative localization [19, 31]. For human action detection, the
segments of interest are the ones that correspond to the temporal extents of human actions. For video
summarization, the segments of interest are the video snippets that summarize the video.
A typical approach to address this problem is to train a classifier to separate the annotated segments of
interest from some negative examples. Once trained, the classifier can be used to evaluate individual
candidate segments of the input time series in a sliding window approach to identify the segments of
interest. This approach however has two drawbacks. First, the computational complexity depends on
the number of candidate segments, and this scales quadratically with the length of the time series.
Second, the independent evaluation of each segment is suboptimal for many situations because
“interest” might be a contextual concept. To detect a set of target segments, not only do we need
to evaluate the local content of individual segments, but also their collective relationships and their
roles in the global context. Taking video summarization as an example, to summarize a video, it is
important to know and preserve the gist of the video, and this requires a holistic analysis of the video.
Furthermore, the set of selected video snippets should not overlap temporally or semantically, and
this can only be avoided by collectively evaluating the segments. The second drawback of the sliding
window classification approach is commonly addressed by applying a post-processing step such as
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

