Learning Hierarchical Semantic Image Manipulation
through Structured Representations

Seunghoon Hong

†

†

†

Xinchen Yan
Thomas Huang
†
University of Michigan
‡
Google Brain

{hongseu,xcyan,thomaseh,honglak}@umich.edu

‡

†

‡,†

Honglak Lee

honglak@google.com

Abstract
Understanding, reasoning, and manipulating semantic concepts of images have
been a fundamental research problem for decades. Previous work mainly focused
on direct manipulation on natural image manifold through color strokes, keypoints, textures, and holes-to-fill. In this work, we present a novel hierarchical
framework for semantic image manipulation. Key to our hierarchical framework is
that we employ structured semantic layout as our intermediate representation for
manipulation. Initialized with coarse-level bounding boxes, our structure generator
first creates pixel-wise semantic layout capturing the object shape, object-object
interactions, and object-scene relations. Then our image generator fills in the
pixel-level textures guided by the semantic layout. Such framework allows a
user to manipulate images at object-level by adding, removing, and moving one
bounding box at a time. Experimental evaluations demonstrate the advantages
of the hierarchical manipulation framework over existing image generation and
context hole-filing models, both qualitatively and quantitatively. Benefits of the
hierarchical framework are further demonstrated in applications such as semantic
object manipulation, interactive image editing, and data-driven image manipulation.

1

Introduction

Learning to perceive, reason and manipulate images has been one of the core research problems in
computer vision, machine learning and graphics for decades [1, 7, 8, 9]. Recently the problem has
been actively studied in interactive image editing using deep neural networks, where the goal is to
manipulate an image according to the various types of user-controls, such as color strokes [20, 32],
key-points [19, 32], textures [26], and holes-to-fill (in-painting) [17]. While these interactive image
editing approaches have made good advances in synthesizing high-quality manipulation results, they
are limited to direct manipulation on natural image manifold.
The main focus of this paper is to achieve semantic-level manipulation of images. Instead of
manipulating images on natural image manifold, we consider semantic label map as an interface for
manipulation. By editing the label map, users are able to specify the desired images at semantic-level,
such as the location, object class, and object shape. Recently, approaches based on image-toimage translation [3, 11, 24] have demonstrated promising results on semantic image manipulation.
However, the existing works mostly focused on learning a style transformation function from label
maps to pixels, while manipulation of structure of the labels remains fully responsible to users. The
requirement on direct control over pixel-wise labels makes the manipulation task still challenging
since it requires a precise and considerable amount of user inputs to specify the structure of the
objects and scene. Although the problem can be partly addressed by template-based manipulation
interface (e.g. adding the objects from the pre-defined sets of template masks [24], blind pasting
of the object mask is problematic since the structure of the object should be determined adaptively
depending on the surrounding context.
In this work, we tackle the task of semantic image manipulation as a hierarchical generative process.
We start our image manipulation task from a coarse-level abstraction of the scene: a set of semantic
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

