Domain Adaptation by Using Causal Inference to
Predict Invariant Conditional Distributions
Sara Magliacane
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research∗
sara.magliacane@gmail.com
Tom Claassen
Radboud University Nijmegen
tomc@cs.ru.nl

Thijs van Ommen
University of Amsterdam
thijsvanommen@gmail.com

Stephan Bongers
University of Amsterdam
srbongers@gmail.com

Philip Versteeg
University of Amsterdam
p.j.j.p.versteeg@uva.nl

Joris M. Mooij
University of Amsterdam
j.m.mooij@uva.nl

Abstract
An important goal common to domain adaptation and causal inference is to make
accurate predictions when the distributions for the source (or training) domain(s)
and target (or test) domain(s) differ. In many cases, these different distributions
can be modeled as different contexts of a single underlying system, in which each
distribution corresponds to a different perturbation of the system, or in causal terms,
an intervention. We focus on a class of such causal domain adaptation problems,
where data for one or more source domains are given, and the task is to predict the
distribution of a certain target variable from measurements of other variables in one
or more target domains. We propose an approach for solving these problems that
exploits causal inference and does not rely on prior knowledge of the causal graph,
the type of interventions or the intervention targets. We demonstrate our approach
by evaluating a possible implementation on simulated and real world data.

1

Introduction

Predicting unknown values based on observed data is a problem central to many sciences, and well
studied in statistics and machine learning. This problem becomes significantly harder if the training
and test data do not have the same distribution, for example because they come from different
domains. Such a distribution shift can happen whenever the circumstances under which the training
data were gathered are different from those for which the predictions are to be made. A rich literature
exists on this problem of domain adaptation, a particular task in the field of transfer learning; see
e.g. Quiñonero-Candela et al. [2009], Pan and Yang [2010] for overviews.
When the domain changes, so may the relations between the different variables under consideration.
While for some sets of variables A, a function f : A → Y learned in one domain may continue
to offer good predictions for Y ∈ Y in a different domain, this may not be true of other sets A0 of
variables. Causal graphs [e.g., Pearl, 2009, Spirtes et al., 2000] allow us to reason about this in a
principled way when the domains correspond to different external interventions on the system, or
more generally, to different contexts in which a system has been measured. Knowledge of the causal
graph that describes the data generating mechanism, and of which parts of the model are invariant
∗

Most of the work was performed while at the University of Amsterdam.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

