Multitask Boosting for Survival Analysis with
Competing Risks

Alexis Bellot
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
alexis.bellot@eng.ox.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Oxford and The Alan Turing Institute
London, United Kingdom
mschaar@turing.ac.uk

Abstract
The co-occurrence of multiple diseases among the general population is an important problem as those patients have more risk of complications and represent a large
share of health care expenditure. Learning to predict time-to-event probabilities for
these patients is a challenging problem because the risks of events are correlated
(there are competing risks) with often only few patients experiencing individual
events of interest, and of those only a fraction are actually observed in the data. We
introduce in this paper a survival model with the flexibility to leverage a common
representation of related events that is designed to correct for the strong imbalance
in observed outcomes. The procedure is sequential: outcome-specific survival
distributions form the components of nonparametric multivariate estimators which
we combine into an ensemble in such a way as to ensure accurate predictions
on all outcome types simultaneously. Our algorithm is general and represents
the first boosting-like method for time-to-event data with multiple outcomes. We
demonstrate the performance of our algorithm on synthetic and real data.

1

Introduction

There is now significant evidence that the progressions of many diseases interact with one another
such that the prediction of events of interest, for example death due to breast cancer in a population
of women, will be influenced by their simultaneous risks of developing related diseases, such as
cardiovascular or pulmonary diseases [19, 20]. A central problem in survival analysis is to predict
the relationship between variables and survival, which is especially challenging when a number of
different correlated events might occur - i.e., there are competing risks. Current approaches jointly
model competing risks in an attempt to capture shared latent biological traits or common risk factors.
In the presence of multiple events however, jointly modelling these conditions leads to predictive
models that neglect individual diseases with lower incidence. Clinical prognosis tools may result in
high overall accurate predictions rates while also having unacceptably low performance with respect
to an underrepresented disease outcome, which strongly reduces their explanatory power for practical
purposes. The design of therapies and medical planning relies on survival estimates of predictive
models. Examples of similar settings can be found in many fields beyond medicine including failure
analysis in engineering and prediction of multiple economic events in economics.
The focus of this work is to provide a new interpretation of boosting algorithms [11] in a multitask
learning framework [8] that extends this family to time-to-event data with multiple competing
outcomes. Motivated by the ideas discussed above, we specifically intend to leverage the heterogeneity
present in large modern data sets, the complexity in underlying relationships between events/tasks
and the strong imbalance often observed between events/tasks. The aim is a flexible simultaneous
description of the likelihood of different events over time that we achieve by estimating full probability
distributions, in contrast to single time prediction problems such as regression or classification.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

