Learning to Specialize with Knowledge Distillation
for Visual Question Answering

Jonghwan Mun1,3
Kimin Lee2
Jinwoo Shin2
Bohyung Han3
1
Computer Vision Lab., POSTECH, Pohang, Korea
2
Algorithmic Intelligence Lab., KAIST, Daejeon, Korea
3
Computer Vision Lab., ASRI, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
1

choco1916@postech.ac.kr

2

{kiminlee,jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr

3

bhhan@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Visual Question Answering (VQA) is a notoriously challenging problem because it
involves various heterogeneous tasks defined by questions within a unified framework. Learning specialized models for individual types of tasks is intuitively
attracting but surprisingly difficult; it is not straightforward to outperform naïve
independent ensemble approach. We present a principled algorithm to learn specialized models with knowledge distillation under a multiple choice learning (MCL)
framework, where training examples are assigned dynamically to a subset of models for updating network parameters. The assigned and non-assigned models are
learned to predict ground-truth answers and imitate their own base models before specialization, respectively. Our approach alleviates the limitation of data
deficiency in existing MCL frameworks, and allows each model to learn its own
specialized expertise without forgetting general knowledge. The proposed framework is model-agnostic and applicable to any tasks other than VQA, e.g., image
classification with a large number of labels but few per-class examples, which
is known to be difficult under existing MCL schemes. Our experimental results
indeed demonstrate that our method outperforms other baselines for VQA and
image classification.

1

Introduction

Visual Question Answering (VQA) [9] is a task to find an answer for a question about an input image.
This is an extremely challenging problem because VQA models deal with various recognition tasks
at the same time within a unified framework, which requires to understand local and global context
of an image as well as a question. A VQA model thus should have diverse reasoning capabilities to
capture appropriate information from input images and questions. Despite such challenges, recent
approaches [4, 8, 16, 27, 31, 33, 34] show impressive performance by leveraging advance of deep
neural networks and emergence of large-scale datasets [9, 14].
Although VQA is composed of various tasks defined by questions, existing algorithms typically train
a universal model generalized for all possible questions as depicted in Figure 1(a). This is partly
because designing and learning specialized models on each task is difficult by itself and it is not
straightforward to develop an algorithm assigning tasks to a subset of models in a principled way. In
practice, it is challenging to show improved performance by model specialization compared to naïve
independent ensemble. This paper tackles how to associate models with individual types of tasks and
how to learn the specialized models effectively as illustrated in Figure 1(b).
Recently, Multiple Choice Learning (MCL) [10, 19, 21] has been investigated as an elegant framework
to learn specialized models for recognition. In MCL, examples are typically assigned to a subset
of models with the highest accuracy, thus each model is expected to be specialized to certain types
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

