Mixture Matrix Completion

Daniel Pimentel-Alarcón
Department of Computer Science
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA, 30303
pimentel@gsu.edu

Abstract
Completing a data matrix X has become an ubiquitous problem in modern data
science, with motivations in recommender systems, computer vision, and networks
inference, to name a few. One typical assumption is that X is low-rank. A more
general model assumes that each column of X corresponds to one of several lowrank matrices. This paper generalizes these models to what we call mixture matrix
completion (MMC): the case where each entry of X corresponds to one of several
low-rank matrices. MMC is a more accurate model for recommender systems, and
brings more flexibility to other completion and clustering problems. We make four
fundamental contributions about this new model. First, we show that MMC is theoretically possible (well-posed). Second, we give its precise information-theoretic
identifiability conditions. Third, we derive the sample complexity of MMC. Finally, we give a practical algorithm for MMC with performance comparable to the
state-of-the-art for simpler related problems, both on synthetic and real data.

1

Introduction

Matrix completion aims to estimate the missing entries of an incomplete data matrix X. One of
its main motivations arises in recommender systems, where each row represents an item, and each
column represents a user. We only observe an entry in X whenever a user rates an item, and the goal
is to predict unseen ratings in order to make good recommendations.
Related Work. In 2009, Candès and Recht [1] introduced low-rank matrix completion (LRMC),
arguably the most popular model for this task. LRMC assumes that each column (user) can be
represented as a linear combination of a few others, whence X is low-rank. Later in 2012, Eriksson
et. al. [2] introduced high-rank matrix completion (HRMC), also known as subspace clustering with
missing data. This more general model assumes that each column of X comes from one of several
low-rank matrices, thus allowing several types of users. Since their inceptions, both LRMC and
HRMC have attracted a tremendous amount of attention (see [1–27] for a very incomplete list).
Paper contributions. This paper introduces an even more general model: mixture matrix completion
(MMC), which assumes that each entry in X (rather than column) comes from one out of several
low-rank matrices, and the goal is to recover the matrices in the mixture. Figure 1 illustrates the
generalization from LRMC to HRMC and to MMC. One of the main motivations behind MMC is
that users often share the same account, and so each column in X may contain ratings from several
users. Nonetheless, as we show in Section 2, MMC is also a more accurate model for many other
contemporary applications, including networks inference, computer vision, and metagenomics. This
paper makes several fundamental contributions about MMC:
– Well posedness. First, we show that MMC is theoretically possible if we observe the right entries
and the mixture is generic (precise definitions below).
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

