Learning SMaLL Predictors

Vikas K. Garg
CSAIL, MIT
vgarg@csail.mit.edu

Ofer Dekel
Microsoft Research
oferd@microsoft.com

Lin Xiao
Microsoft Research
lin.xiao@microsoft.com

Abstract
We introduce a new framework for learning in severely resource-constrained settings. Our technique delicately amalgamates the representational richness of multiple linear predictors with the sparsity of Boolean relaxations, and thereby yields
classifiers that are compact, interpretable, and accurate. We provide a rigorous
formalism of the learning problem, and establish fast convergence of the ensuing
algorithm via relaxation to a minimax saddle point objective. We supplement the
theoretical foundations of our work with an extensive empirical evaluation.

1

Introduction

Modern advances in machine learning have produced models that achieve unprecedented accuracy
on standard prediction tasks. However, this remarkable progress in model accuracy has come at a
significant cost. Many state-of-the-art models have ballooned in size and applying them to a new
point can require tens of GFLOPs, which renders these methods ineffectual on resource-constrained
platforms like smart phones and wearables [1, 2]. Indeed, in these settings, inference with a compact
learner that can fit on the small device becomes an overarching determinant even if it comes at the
expense of slightly worse accuracy. Moreover, large models are often difficult to interpret, simply
because humans are not good at reasoning about large, complex objects. Modern machine learning
models are also more costly to train, but we sidestep that problem in this paper by assuming that we
can train our models on powerful servers in the cloud.
In our pursuit of compact and interpretable models, we take inspiration from the classic problem
of learning disjunctive normal forms (DNFs) [3]. Specifically, a p-term k-DNF is a DNF with p
terms, where each term contains exactly k Boolean variables. Small DNFs are a natural starting point
for our research, because they pack a powerful nonlinear descriptive capacity in a succinct form.
The DNF structure is also known to be intuitive and interpretable by humans [4, 5]. However, with
the exception of a few practical heuristics [4, 5, 6], an overwhelming body of work [7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17] theoretically characterizes the difficulty of learning a k-DNF under various
restricted models of learning. Our method, Sparse Multiprototype Linear Learner (SMaLL), bypasses
this issue by crafting a continuous relaxation that amounts to a form of improper learning of the
k-DNFs in the sense that the hypothesis space subsumes p-term k-DNF classifiers, and thus is at
least as powerful as the original k-DNF family. Armed with our technical paraphernalia, we design a
practical algorithm that yields small and interpretable models.
Our work may also be viewed as a delicate fusion of multiple prototypes [1, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22]
with Boolean relaxations [23]. The richness of models with multiple prototypes overcomes the
representational limitations of sparse linear models like Lasso and Elastic-Net [24, 25, 26] that are
typically not expressive enough to achieve state-of-the-art accuracy. Boolean relaxations afford
us the ability to control the degree of sparsity explicitly in our predictors akin to exploiting an `0
regularization, unlike the `1 based methods that may require extensive tuning. Thus, our approach
harnesses the best of both worlds. Moreover, folding sparsity in the training objective obviates
the costs that would otherwise be incurred in compressing a large model via methods like pruning
[27, 28, 29], low-rank approximation [30, 31], hashing [32], or parameter quantization [27, 33].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

