An Improved Analysis of Alternating Minimization
for Structured Multi-Response Regression

Sheng Chen ∗
The Voleon Group
chen2832@umn.edu

Arindam Banerjee
Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
banerjee@cs.umn.edu

Abstract
Multi-response linear models aggregate a set of vanilla linear models by assuming
correlated noise across them, which has an unknown covariance structure. To find
the coefficient vector, estimators with a joint approximation of the noise covariance
are often preferred than the simple linear regression in view of their superior
empirical performance, which can be generally solved by alternating-minimizationtype procedures. Due to the non-convex nature of such joint estimators, the
theoretical justification of their efficiency is typically challenging. The existing
analyses fail to fully explain the empirical observations due to the assumption of
resampling on the alternating procedures, which requires access to fresh samples in
each iteration. In this work, we present a resampling-free analysis for the alternating
minimization algorithm applied to the multi-response regression. In particular,
we focus on the high-dimensional setting of multi-response linear models with
structured coefficient parameter, and the statistical error of the parameter can be
expressed by the complexity measure, Gaussian width, which is related to the
assumed structure. More importantly, to the best of our knowledge, our result
reveals for the first time that the alternating minimization with random initialization
can achieve the same performance as the well-initialized one when solving this
multi-response regression problem. Experimental results support our theoretical
developments.

1

Introduction

We consider the following multi-response linear model [1, 5, 18] with m real-valued outputs,
y = Xθ∗ + η ,

1/2

where η = Σ∗ η̃

(1)

where y ∈ Rm is the response vector and X ∈ Rm×p consists of m p-dimensional feature vectors,
and η̃ ∈ Rm is a zero-mean isotropic noise vector. The m responses share the same underlying
parameter θ∗ ∈ Rp , which corresponds to the so-called pooled model [17]. Without loss of generality,
the counterpart of (1) with response-specific parameters can be equivalently written in the above form,
by block-diagonalizing rows of X and concatenating different parameters into a single vector. What
makes this model different from vanilla linear models is the correlated noise η across responses, which
is assumed to be a linear transformation of η̃. The noise covariance of η is given by Cov(η) = Σ∗ .
This model has found numbers of real-world applications, such as econometrics [17], computational
biology [22] and climate informatics [14, 15], just to name a few.
In practice, we are given n observations of (X, y), denoted by D = {(Xi , yi )}ni=1 , while the
noise covariance structure Σ∗ between responses is typically unknown. Our goal is to estimate the
∗

This work was done when the author studied at University of Minnesota, Twin Cities

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

