DAGs with NO TEARS:
Continuous Optimization for Structure Learning
Xun Zheng1 , Bryon Aragam1 , Pradeep Ravikumar1 , Eric P. Xing1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Petuum Inc.
{xunzheng,naragam,pradeepr,epxing}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Estimating the structure of directed acyclic graphs (DAGs, also known as Bayesian
networks) is a challenging problem since the search space of DAGs is combinatorial
and scales superexponentially with the number of nodes. Existing approaches
rely on various local heuristics for enforcing the acyclicity constraint. In this
paper, we introduce a fundamentally different strategy: we formulate the structure
learning problem as a purely continuous optimization problem over real matrices
that avoids this combinatorial constraint entirely. This is achieved by a novel
characterization of acyclicity that is not only smooth but also exact. The resulting
problem can be efficiently solved by standard numerical algorithms, which also
makes implementation effortless. The proposed method outperforms existing
ones, without imposing any structural assumptions on the graph such as bounded
treewidth or in-degree.

1

Introduction

Learning directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) from data is an NP-hard problem [8, 11], owing mainly to
the combinatorial acyclicity constraint that is difficult to enforce efficiently. At the same time, DAGs
are popular models in practice, with applications in biology [33], genetics [49], machine learning
[22], and causal inference [42]. For this reason, the development of new methods for learning DAGs
remains a central challenge in machine learning and statistics.
In this paper, we propose a new approach for score-based learning of DAGs by converting the
traditional combinatorial optimization problem (left) into a continuous program (right):
min

W 2Rd⇥d

F (W )

subject to G(W ) 2 DAGs

min

()

W 2Rd⇥d

F (W )

subject to h(W ) = 0,

(1)

where G(W ) is the d-node graph induced by the weighted adjacency matrix W , F : Rd⇥d ! R is a
score function (see Section 2.1 for details), and our key technical device h : Rd⇥d ! R is a smooth
function over real matrices, whose level set at zero exactly characterizes acyclic graphs. Although the
two problems are equivalent, the continuous program on the right eliminates the need for specialized
algorithms that are tailored to search over the combinatorial space of DAGs. Instead, we are able
to leverage standard numerical algorithms for constrained problems, which makes implementation
particularly easy, not requiring any knowledge about graphical models. This is similar in spirit to the
situation for undirected graphical models, in which the formulation of a continuous log-det program
[4] sparked a series of remarkable advances in structure learning for undirected graphs (Section 2.2).
Unlike undirected models, which can be reduced to a convex program, however, the program (1) is
nonconvex. Nonetheless, as we will show, even naïve solutions to this program yield state-of-the-art
results for learning DAGs.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

