Middle-Out Decoding

Leonid Sigal
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
lsigal@cs.ubc.ca

Shikib Mehri
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
amehri@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Despite being virtually ubiquitous, sequence-to-sequence models are challenged
by their lack of diversity and inability to be externally controlled. In this paper,
we speculate that a fundamental shortcoming of sequence generation models is
that the decoding is done strictly from left-to-right, meaning that outputs values
generated earlier have a profound effect on those generated later. To address this
issue, we propose a novel middle-out decoder architecture that begins from an
initial middle-word and simultaneously expands the sequence in both directions.
To facilitate information flow and maintain consistent decoding, we introduce
a dual self-attention mechanism that allows us to model complex dependencies
between the outputs. We illustrate the performance of our model on the task of
video captioning, as well as a synthetic sequence de-noising task. Our middleout decoder achieves significant improvements on de-noising and competitive
performance in the task of video captioning, while quantifiably improving the
caption diversity. Furthermore, we perform a qualitative analysis that demonstrates
our ability to effectively control the generation process of our decoder.

1

Introduction

Neural encoder-decoder architectures have gained significant popularity in tasks such as language
translation (Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2016), image captioning (Vinyals
et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2015), video captioning (Venugopalan et al., 2015a), visual question answering
(Antol et al., 2015; Malinowski et al., 2015) and many others. In such architectures, the input is
typically encoded through the use of an encoder (e.g., a CNN for an image or RNN, with LSTM or
GRU cells, for a sentence or a variable length input) into a fixed-length vector hidden representation.
The decoder, for most problems, is then tasked with generating a sequence of words, or, more
generally, vector values, conditioned on the hidden representation of the encoder.
One issue with such encoder-decoder architectures is that conditioning is done through the initial
hidden state of the decoder (Vinyals et al., 2015) and has to be propagated forward to generate a
relevant output sequence. This design makes it difficult, for example, to generate relevant image
captions as the encoded image information is often overwhelmed by the language prior implicitly
learned by the decoder (Devlin et al., 2015; Heuer et al., 2016). Among potential solutions is the
use of an encoded feature vector as a recurrent input to each decoder cell (Mao et al., 2015) or the
use of attention over the encoder (Xu et al., 2015) to focus generation of each subsequent output.
Modeling of long dependencies among the outputs in the decoded sequence is another challenge,
often addressed by self-attention (Werlen et al., 2018; Daniluk et al., 2017; Vaswani et al., 2017).
In the existing architectures, however, the decoding is done strictly from left-to-right meaning that
earlier generated output values have a profound effect on the later generated tokens. This makes the
decoding (linguistically) consistent, but at the same time limited in diversity. Left-to-right decoding
also presents challenges when one wants to have some control over a word or value that should appear
later in the sequence. Ensuring that a particular important word explicitly appears in the caption is
not possible with any of the left-to-right decoding mechanisms. Similarly, for decoding of symmetric
sequences, a left-to-right decoding may introduce biases which break natural symmetries.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

