Legendre Decomposition for Tensors

Mahito Sugiyama
Hiroyuki Nakahara
Koji Tsuda
National Institute of Informatics RIKEN Center for Brain Science The University of Tokyo
JST, PRESTO
hiro@brain.riken.jp
NIMS; RIKEN AIP
mahito@nii.ac.jp
tsuda@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We present a novel nonnegative tensor decomposition method, called Legendre
decomposition, which factorizes an input tensor into a multiplicative combination
of parameters. Thanks to the well-developed theory of information geometry, the
reconstructed tensor is unique and always minimizes the KL divergence from an input tensor. We empirically show that Legendre decomposition can more accurately
reconstruct tensors than other nonnegative tensor decomposition methods.

1

Introduction

Matrix and tensor decomposition is a fundamental technique in machine learning; it is used to analyze
data represented in the form of multi-dimensional arrays, and is used in a wide range of applications
such as computer vision (Vasilescu and Terzopoulos, 2002, 2007), recommender systems (Symeonidis, 2016), signal processing (Cichocki et al., 2015), and neuroscience (Beckmann and Smith, 2005).
The current standard approaches include nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF; Lee and Seung,
1999, 2001) for matrices and CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition (Harshman, 1970) or
Tucker decomposition (Tucker, 1966) for tensors. CP decomposition compresses an input tensor
into a sum of rank-one components, and Tucker decomposition approximates an input tensor by a
core tensor multiplied by matrices. To date, matrix and tensor decomposition has been extensively
analyzed, and there are a number of variations of such decomposition (Kolda and Bader, 2009),
where the common goal is to approximate a given tensor by a smaller number of components, or
parameters, in an eﬃcient manner.
However, despite the recent advances of decomposition techniques, a learning theory that can
systematically define decomposition for any order tensors including vectors and matrices is still
under development. Moreover, it is well known that CP and Tucker tensor decomposition include
non-convex optimization and that the global convergence is not guaranteed. Although there are a
number of extensions to transform the problem into a convex problem (Liu et al., 2013; Tomioka and
Suzuki, 2013), one needs additional assumptions on data, such as a bounded variance.
Here we present a new paradigm of matrix and tensor decomposition, called Legendre decomposition,
based on information geometry (Amari, 2016) to solve the above open problems of matrix and tensor
decomposition. In our formulation, an arbitrary order tensor is treated as a discrete probability
distribution in a statistical manifold as long as it is nonnegative, and Legendre decomposition is
realized as a projection of the input tensor onto a submanifold composed of reconstructable tensors.
The key to introducing the formulation is to use the partial order (Davey and Priestley, 2002; Gierz
et al., 2003) of indices, which allows us to treat any order tensors as a probability distribution in the
information geometric framework.
Legendre decomposition has the following remarkable properties: It always finds the unique tensor
that minimizes the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence from an input tensor. This is because Legendre
decomposition is formulated as convex optimization, and hence we can directly use gradient descent,
which always guarantees the global convergence, and the optimization can be further speeded up by
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

