Mean-field theory of graph neural networks
in graph partitioning

Tatsuro Kawamoto, Masashi Tsubaki
Artificial Intelligence Research Center,
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology,
2-3-26 Aomi, Koto-ku, Tokyo, Japan
{kawamoto.tatsuro, tsubaki.masashi}@aist.go.jp
Tomoyuki Obuchi
Department of Mathematical and Computing Science, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
2-12-1 Ookayama Meguro-ku Tokyo, Japan
obuchi@c.titech.ac.jp

Abstract
A theoretical performance analysis of the graph neural network (GNN) is presented. For classification tasks, the neural network approach has the advantage
in terms of flexibility that it can be employed in a data-driven manner, whereas
Bayesian inference requires the assumption of a specific model. A fundamental
question is then whether GNN has a high accuracy in addition to this flexibility. Moreover, whether the achieved performance is predominately a result of the
backpropagation or the architecture itself is a matter of considerable interest. To
gain a better insight into these questions, a mean-field theory of a minimal GNN
architecture is developed for the graph partitioning problem. This demonstrates a
good agreement with numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have been subject to significant attention concerning many tasks in machine
learning, and a plethora of models and algorithms have been proposed in recent years. The application of the neural network approach to problems on graphs is no exception and is being actively
studied, with applications including social networks and chemical compounds [1, 2]. A neural network model on graphs is termed a graph neural network (GNN) [3]. While excellent performances
of GNNs have been reported in the literature, many of these results rely on experimental studies,
and seem to be based on the blind belief that the nonlinear nature of GNNs leads to such strong performances. However, when a deep neural network outperforms other methods, the factors that are
really essential should be clarified: Is this thanks to the learning of model parameters, e.g., through
the backpropagation [4], or rather the architecture of the model itself? Is the choice of the architecture predominantly crucial, or would even a simple choice perform sufficiently well? Moreover,
does the GNN generically outperform other methods?
To obtain a better understanding of these questions, not only is empirical knowledge based on benchmark tests required, but also theoretical insights. To this end, we develop a mean-field theory of
GNN, focusing on a problem of graph partitioning. The problem concerns a GNN with random
model parameters, i.e., an untrained GNN. If the architecture of the GNN itself is essential, then the
performance of the untrained GNN should already be effective. On the other hand, if the fine-tuning
of the model parameters via learning is crucial, then the result for the untrained GNN is again useful
to observe the extent to which the performance is improved.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

