Modeling Dynamic Missingness of Implicit Feedback
for Recommendation
Menghan Wang
College of Computer Science,
Zhejiang University
wangmengh@zju.edu.cn

Mingming Gong
Department of Biomedical Informatics,
University of Pittsburgh
mig73@pitt.edu

Xiaolin Zheng∗
College of Computer Science,
Zhejiang University
xlzheng@zju.edu.cn

Kun Zhang
Department of Philosophy,
Carnegie Mellon University
kunz1@cmu.edu

Abstract
Implicit feedback is widely used in collaborative filtering methods for recommendation. It is well known that implicit feedback contains a large number of values that
are missing not at random (MNAR); and the missing data is a mixture of negative
and unknown feedback, making it difficult to learn users’ negative preferences.
Recent studies modeled exposure, a latent missingness variable which indicates
whether an item is exposed to a user, to give each missing entry a confidence of
being negative feedback. However, these studies use static models and ignore the
information in temporal dependencies among items, which seems to be an essential
underlying factor to subsequent missingness. To model and exploit the dynamics
of missingness, we propose a latent variable named “user intent” to govern the temporal changes of item missingness, and a hidden Markov model to represent such
a process. The resulting framework captures the dynamic item missingness and
incorporate it into matrix factorization (MF) for recommendation. We also explore
two types of constraints to achieve a more compact and interpretable representation
of user intents. Experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of
our method against state-of-the-art recommender systems.

1

Introduction

Collaborative filtering methods based on implicit feedback (e.g., purchase records and browsing
history) are widely used in recommender systems. Compared to explicit feedback (e.g., 1-5 star
ratings), implicit feedback is more abundant and accessible in real-world applications. However,
the missing data of implicit feedback also brings two challenges. First, the data is missing not at
random (MNAR). Only positive feedback is collected in implicit feedback and all negative feedback
is missing, leading to a severely biased dataset. Second, the missing data is a mixture of negative and
unknown feedback; a missing entry may indicate the user either dislikes or does not know the item,
which makes it hard to learn user’s negative preferences. Several previous works [Hu et al., 2008,
Marlin and Zemel, 2009] provided evidence that both ignoring missing data and treating all missing
data as negative feedback will lead to biased recommendations.
A possible solution is to model the MNAR mechanism and treat the missing data properly. Several
researchers have proposed various methods to address this issue. Popular methods [Hu et al., 2008,
∗

Corresponding author

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

