Scalable Methods for 8-bit Training of Neural
Networks
Ron Banner1∗, Itay Hubara2∗, Elad Hoffer2∗, Daniel Soudry2
{itayhubara, elad.hoffer, daniel.soudry}@gmail.com
{ron.banner}@intel.com

(1) Intel - Artificial Intelligence Products Group (AIPG)
(2) Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel

Abstract
Quantized Neural Networks (QNNs) are often used to improve network efficiency
during the inference phase, i.e. after the network has been trained. Extensive
research in the field suggests many different quantization schemes. Still, the number
of bits required, as well as the best quantization scheme, are yet unknown. Our
theoretical analysis suggests that most of the training process is robust to substantial
precision reduction, and points to only a few specific operations that require
higher precision. Armed with this knowledge, we quantize the model parameters,
activations and layer gradients to 8-bit, leaving at a higher precision only the final
step in the computation of the weight gradients. Additionally, as QNNs require
batch-normalization to be trained at high precision, we introduce Range BatchNormalization (BN) which has significantly higher tolerance to quantization noise
and improved computational complexity. Our simulations show that Range BN is
equivalent to the traditional batch norm if a precise scale adjustment, which can be
approximated analytically, is applied. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this
work is the first to quantize the weights, activations, as well as a substantial volume
of the gradients stream, in all layers (including batch normalization) to 8-bit while
showing state-of-the-art results over the ImageNet-1K dataset.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) achieved remarkable results in many fields making them the most
common off-the-shelf approach for a wide variety of machine learning applications. However, as
networks get deeper, using neural network (NN) algorithms and training them on conventional
general-purpose digital hardware is highly inefficient. The main computational effort is due to
massive amounts of multiply-accumulate operations (MACs) required to compute the weighted sums
of the neurons’ inputs and the parameters’ gradients.
Much work has been done to reduce the size of networks. The conventional approach is to compress a trained (full precision) network [4, 19, 12] using weights sharing, low rank approximation,
quantization, pruning or some combination thereof. For example, Han et al., 2015 [7] successfully
pruned several state-of-the-art large-scale networks and showed that the number of parameters can be
reduced by an order of magnitude.
Since training neural networks requires approximately three times more computation power than just
evaluating them, quantizing the gradients is a critical step towards faster training machines. Previous
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.
∗

Equal contribution

