Reinforcement Learning with Multiple Experts:
A Bayesian Model Combination Approach

Michael Gimelfarb
Mechanical and Industrial Engineering
University of Toronto
mike.gimelfarb@mail.utoronto.ca

Scott Sanner
Mechanical and Industrial Engineering
University of Toronto
ssanner@mie.utoronto.ca

Chi-Guhn Lee
Mechanical and Industrial Engineering
University of Toronto
cglee@mie.utoronto.ca

Abstract
Potential based reward shaping is a powerful technique for accelerating convergence
of reinforcement learning algorithms. Typically, such information includes an
estimate of the optimal value function and is often provided by a human expert or
other sources of domain knowledge. However, this information is often biased or
inaccurate and can mislead many reinforcement learning algorithms. In this paper,
we apply Bayesian Model Combination with multiple experts in a way that learns
to trust a good combination of experts as training progresses. This approach is
both computationally efficient and general, and is shown numerically to improve
convergence across discrete and continuous domains and different reinforcement
learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

Potential-based reward shaping incorporates prior domain knowledge in the form of additional
rewards provided during training to speed up convergence of reinforcement learning algorithms,
without changing the optimal policies (Ng et al. [1999]). While much of the existing theory and
applications assume that advice comes from a single source throughout training (Grześ [2017],
Harutyunyan et al. [2015], Tenorio-Gonzalez et al. [2010]), there is much less work done on learning
from multiple sources of advice as training progresses. One reason for doing so is that expert
demonstrations or advice can often be biased or incomplete, so being able to identify good advice
from bad is critical to guarantee robustness of convergence.
In this paper, the decision maker is presented with multiple sources of expert advice in the form of
potential-based reward functions, some of which can be misleading and should not be trusted. The
decision maker does not know a priori which expert(s) to trust, but rather learns this from experience
in a Bayesian framework. More specifically, the decision maker starts with a prior distribution over
the probability simplex, and updates the belief to a posterior distribution as new training rewards are
observed. Because our proposed algorithm follows the potential-based reward shaping framework, it
preserves the theoretical guarantees for policy invariance established in Ng et al. [1999].
This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the key definitions used throughout the paper.
In Section 3, we apply Bayesian model combination, that allows the decision maker to asymptotically
learn the best combination of experts, all with reduced variance as compared to similar approaches. In
Section 3.1, we show that the total return can be written as a linear combination of individual return
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

