Norm-Ranging LSH for Maximum Inner Product
Search
Xiao Yan, Jinfeng Li, Xinyan Dai, Hongzhi Chen, James Cheng
Department of Computer Science
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, Hong Kong
{xyan, jfli, xydai, hzchen, jcheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Neyshabur and Srebro proposed SIMPLE - LSH [2015], which is the state-of-the-art
hashing based algorithm for maximum inner product search (MIPS). We found
that the performance of SIMPLE - LSH, in both theory and practice, suffers from
long tails in the 2-norm distribution of real datasets. We propose NORM - RANGING
LSH , which addresses the excessive normalization problem caused by long tails
by partitioning a dataset into sub-datasets and building a hash index for each
sub-dataset independently. We prove that NORM - RANGING LSH achieves lower
query time complexity than SIMPLE - LSH under mild conditions. We also show
that the idea of dataset partitioning can improve another hashing based MIPS
algorithm. Experiments show that NORM - RANGING LSH probes much less items
than SIMPLE - LSH at the same recall, thus significantly benefiting MIPS based
applications.

1

Introduction

Given a dataset S ⊂ Rd containing n vectors (also called items) and a query q ∈ Rd , maximum inner
product search (MIPS) finds the vector in S that has the maximum inner product with q,
p = arg max q > x.
x∈S

(1)

MIPS may require items with the top k inner products and it usually suffices to return approximate results (i.e., items with inner products close to the maximum). MIPS has many important
applications including recommendation based on user and item embeddings obtained from matrix
factorization [Koren et al., 2009], multi-class classification with linear classifier [Dean et al., 2013],
filtering in computer vision [Felzenszwalb et al., 2010], etc.
MIPS is a challenging problem as modern datasets often have high dimensionality and large cardinality.
Initially, tree-based methods [Ram and Gray, 2012, Koenigstein et al., 2012] were proposed for
MIPS, which use the idea of branch and bound similar to k-d tree [Friedman and Tukey, 1974].
However, these methods suffer from the curse of dimensionality and their performance can be even
worse than linear scan when feature dimension is as low as 20 [Weber et al., 1998]. Shrivastava
and Li proposed L 2 - ALSH [2014], which attains the first provable sub-linear query time complexity
for approximate MIPS that is independent of dimensionality. L 2 - ALSH applies an asymmetric
transformation 1 to transform MIPS into L2 similarity search, which can be solved with well-known
LSH functions. Following the idea of L 2 - ALSH, Shrivastava and Li formulated another pair of
asymmetric transformations called SIGN - ALSH [2015] to transform MIPS into angular similarity
search and obtained lower query time complexity than that of L 2 - ALSH.
1

Asymmetric transformation means that the transformations for the queries and the items are different, while
symmetric transformation means the same transformation is applied to the items and queries.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

