Stein Variational Gradient Descent
as Moment Matching

Qiang Liu, Dilin Wang
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
{lqiang, dilin}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) is a non-parametric inference algorithm
that evolves a set of particles to fit a given distribution of interest. We analyze the
non-asymptotic properties of SVGD, showing that there exists a set of functions,
which we call the Stein matching set, whose expectations are exactly estimated by
any set of particles that satisfies the fixed point equation of SVGD. This set is the
image of Stein operator applied on the feature maps of the positive definite kernel
used in SVGD. Our results provide a theoretical framework for analyzing properties
of SVGD with different kernels, shedding insight into optimal kernel choice. In
particular, we show that SVGD with linear kernels yields exact estimation of means
and variances on Gaussian distributions, while random Fourier features enable
probabilistic bounds for distributional approximation. Our results offer a refreshing
view of the classical inference problem as fitting Stein’s identity or solving the
Stein equation, which may motivate more efficient algorithms.

1

Introduction

One of the core problems of modern statistics and machine learning is to approximate difficultto-compute probability distributions. Two fundamental ideas have been extensively studied and
used in the literature: variational inference (VI) and Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling
(e.g., Koller & Friedman, 2009; Wainwright et al., 2008). MCMC has the advantage of being nonparametric and asymptotically exact, but often suffers from difficulty in convergence, while VI frames
the inference into a parametric optimization of the KL divergence and works much faster in practice,
but loses the asymptotic consistency. An ongoing theme of research is to combine the advantages of
these two methodologies.
Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) (Liu & Wang, 2016) is a synthesis of MCMC and VI that
inherits the non-parametric nature of MCMC while maintaining the optimization perspective of VI.
In brief, SVGD for distribution p(x) updates a set of particles {xi }ni=1 parallelly with a velocity field
φ(·) that balances the gradient force and repulsive force,
n

xi ← xi + φ(xi ),

φ(·) =

1X
∇xj log p(xj )k(xj , ·) + ∇xj k(xj , ·),
n j=1

where  is a step size and k(x, x0 ) is a positive definite kernel defined by the user. This update is
derived as approximating a kernelized Wasserstein gradient flow of KL divergence (Liu et al., 2017)
with connection to Stein’s method (Stein, 1972) and optimal transport (Ollivier et al., 2014); see
also Anderes & Coram (2002). SVGD has been applied to solve challenging inference problems
in various domains; examples include Bayesian inference (Liu & Wang, 2016; Feng et al., 2017),
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

