The Effect of Network Width on the Performance of
Large-batch Training

Lingjiao Chen1 , Hongyi Wang1 , Jinman Zhao1 ,
Paraschos Koutris, 1 Dimitris Papailiopoulos2
1
Department of Computer Sciences, 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Abstract
Distributed implementations of mini-batch stochastic gradient descent (SGD) suffer from communication overheads, attributed to the high frequency of gradient
updates inherent in small-batch training. Training with large batches can reduce
these overheads; however it besets the convergence of the algorithm and the generalization performance. In this work, we take a first step towards analyzing how
the structure (width and depth) of a neural network affects the performance of
large-batch training. We present new theoretical results which suggest that–for a
fixed number of parameters–wider networks are more amenable to fast large-batch
training compared to deeper ones. We provide extensive experiments on residual
and fully-connected neural networks which suggest that wider networks can be
trained using larger batches without incurring a convergence slow-down, unlike
their deeper variants.

1

Introduction

Distributed implementations of stochastic optimization algorithms have become the standard in largescale model training [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Most machine learning frameworks, including Tensorflow
[1], MxNet [4], and Caffe2 [7], implement variants of mini-batch SGD as their default distributed
training algorithm. During a distributed iteration of mini-batch SGD a parameter server (PS) stores
the global model, and P compute nodes evaluate a total of B gradients; B is commonly referred
to as the batch size. Once the PS receives the sum of these B gradients from every compute node,
it applies them to the global model and sends the model back to the compute nodes, where a new
distributed iteration begins.
The main premise of a distributed implementation is speedup gains, i.e., how much faster training
takes on P vs 1 compute node. In practice, these gains usually saturate beyond a few 10s of compute
nodes [6, 8, 9]. This is because communication becomes the bottleneck, i.e., for a fixed batch of B
examples, as the number of compute nodes increases, these nodes will eventually spend more time
communicating gradients to the PS rather than computing them. To mitigate this bottleneck, a plethora
of recent work has studied low-precision training and gradient sparsification, e.g., [10, 11, 12].
An alternative approach to alleviate these overheads is to increase the batch size B, since B directly
controls the communication-computation ratio. Recent work develops sophisticated methods that
enable large-batch training on state-of-the-art models and data sets [13, 14, 15]. At the same time,
several studies suggest that large-batch training can affect the generalizability of the models [16], can
slow down convergence [17, 18, 19], and is more sensitive to hyperparameter mis-tuning [20].
Several theoretical results [21, 18, 22, 19, 17] suggest that, when the batch size B becomes larger
than a problem-dependent threshold B ∗ , the total number of iterations to converge significantly
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

