Streamlining Variational Inference for Constraint
Satisfaction Problems
Aditya Grover, Tudor Achim, Stefano Ermon
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
{adityag, tachim, ermon}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Several algorithms for solving constraint satisfaction problems are based on survey
propagation, a variational inference scheme used to obtain approximate marginal
probability estimates for variable assignments. These marginals correspond to
how frequently each variable is set to true among satisfying assignments, and are
used to inform branching decisions during search; however, marginal estimates
obtained via survey propagation are approximate and can be self-contradictory.
We introduce a more general branching strategy based on streamlining constraints,
which sidestep hard assignments to variables. We show that streamlined solvers
consistently outperform decimation-based solvers on random k-SAT instances
for several problem sizes, shrinking the gap between empirical performance and
theoretical limits of satisfiability by 16.3% on average for k = 3, 4, 5, 6.

1

Introduction

Constraint satisfaction problems (CSP), such as boolean satisfiability (SAT), are useful modeling
abstractions for many artificial intelligence and machine learning problems, including planning [13],
scheduling [27], and logic-based probabilistic modeling frameworks such as Markov Logic Networks [30]. More broadly, the ability to combine constraints capturing domain knowledge with
statistical reasoning has been successful across diverse areas such as ontology matching, information
extraction, entity resolution, and computer vision [15, 4, 32, 29, 33]. Solving a CSP involves finding
an assignment to the variables that renders all of the problem’s constraints satisfied, if one exists.
Solvers that explore the search space exhaustively do not scale since the state space is exponential
in the number of variables; thus, the selection of branching criteria for variable assignments is the
central design decision for improving the performance of these solvers [5].
Any CSP can be represented as a factor graph, with variables as nodes and the constraints between
these variables (known as clauses in the SAT case) as factors. With such a representation, we can
design branching strategies by inferring the marginal probabilities of each variable assignment.
Intuitively, the variables with more extreme marginal probability for a particular value are more likely
to assume that value across the satisfying assignments to the CSP. In fact, if we had access to an
oracle that could perform exact inference, one could trivially branch on variable assignments with
non-zero marginal probability and efficiently find solutions (if one exists) to hard CSPs such as SAT
in time linear in the number of variables. In practice however, exact inference is intractable for even
moderately sized CSPs and approximate inference techniques are essential for obtaining estimates of
marginal probabilities.
Variational inference is at the heart of many such approximate inference techniques. The key idea
is to cast inference over an intractable joint distribution as an optimization problem over a family
of tractable approximations to the true distribution [6, 34, 38]. Several such approximations exist,
e.g., mean field, belief propagation etc. In this work, we focus on survey propagation. Inspired from
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

