Large Margin Deep Networks for Classification

Gamaleldin F. Elsayed ∗
Google Research

Dilip Krishnan
Google Research

Hossein Mobahi
Google Research

Kevin Regan
Google Research

Samy Bengio
Google Research
{gamaleldin, dilipkay, hmobahi, kevinregan, bengio}@google.com

Abstract
We present a formulation of deep learning that aims at producing a large margin
classifier. The notion of margin, minimum distance to a decision boundary, has
served as the foundation of several theoretically profound and empirically successful results for both classification and regression tasks. However, most large
margin algorithms are applicable only to shallow models with a preset feature
representation; and conventional margin methods for neural networks only enforce
margin at the output layer. Such methods are therefore not well suited for deep
networks. In this work, we propose a novel loss function to impose a margin on
any chosen set of layers of a deep network (including input and hidden layers).
Our formulation allows choosing any lp norm (p ≥ 1) on the metric measuring
the margin. We demonstrate that the decision boundary obtained by our loss has
nice properties compared to standard classification loss functions. Specifically, we
show improved empirical results on the MNIST, CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets
on multiple tasks: generalization from small training sets, corrupted labels, and
robustness against adversarial perturbations. The resulting loss is general and
complementary to existing data augmentation (such as random/adversarial input
transform) and regularization techniques such as weight decay, dropout, and batch
norm. 2

1

Introduction

The large margin principle has played a key role in the course of machine learning history, producing
remarkable theoretical and empirical results for classification (Vapnik, 1995) and regression problems
(Drucker et al., 1997). However, exact large margin algorithms are only suitable for shallow models.
In fact, for deep models, computation of the margin itself becomes intractable. This is in contrast
to classic setups such as kernel SVMs, where the margin has an analytical form (the l2 norm of the
parameters). Desirable benefits of large margin classifiers include better generalization properties
and robustness to input perturbations (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995; Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2002).
To overcome the limitations of classical margin approaches, we design a novel loss function based
on a first-order approximation of the margin. This loss function is applicable to any network
architecture (e.g., arbitrary depth, activation function, use of convolutions, residual networks), and
complements existing general-purpose regularization techniques such as weight-decay, dropout and
batch normalization.
∗

Work done as member of the Google AI Residency program https://ai.google/research/join-us/
ai-residency/
2
Code for the large margin loss function is released at https://github.com/google-research/
google-research/tree/master/large_margin
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

