Learning latent variable structured prediction models
with Gaussian perturbations

Kevin Bello
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
kbellome@purdue.edu

Jean Honorio
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
jhonorio@purdue.edu

Abstract
The standard margin-based structured prediction commonly uses a maximum loss
over all possible structured outputs [26, 1, 5, 25]. The large-margin formulation
including latent variables [30, 21] not only results in a non-convex formulation but
also increases the search space by a factor of the size of the latent space. Recent
work [11] has proposed the use of the maximum loss over random structured
outputs sampled independently from some proposal distribution, with theoretical
guarantees. We extend this work by including latent variables. We study a new
family of loss functions under Gaussian perturbations and analyze the effect of
the latent space on the generalization bounds. We show that the non-convexity
of learning with latent variables originates naturally, as it relates to a tight upper
bound of the Gibbs decoder distortion with respect to the latent space. Finally, we
provide a formulation using random samples and relaxations that produces a tighter
upper bound of the Gibbs decoder distortion up to a statistical accuracy, which
enables a polynomial time evaluation of the objective function. We illustrate the
method with synthetic experiments and a computer vision application.

1

Introduction

Structured prediction is of high interest in many domains such as computer vision [19], natural
language processing [32, 33], and computational biology [14]. Some standard methods for structured
prediction are conditional random fields (CRFs) [13] and structured SVMs (SSVMs) [25, 26].
In many tasks it is crucial to take into account latent variables. For example, in machine translation,
one is usually given a sentence x and its translation y, but not the linguistic structure h that connects
them (e.g. alignments between words). Even if h is not observable it is important to include this
information in the model in order to obtain better prediction results. Examples also arise in computer
vision, for instance, most images in indoor scene understanding [28] are cluttered by furniture and
decorations, whose appearances vary drastically across scenes, and can hardly be modeled (or even
hand-labeled) consistently. In this application, the input x is an image, the structured output y is the
layout of the faces (floor, ceiling, walls) and furniture, while the latent structure h assigns a binary
label to each pixel (clutter or non-clutter.)
During past years, there has been several solutions to address the problem of latent variables in
structured prediction. In the field of computer vision, hidden conditional random fields (HCRF)
[23, 29, 22] have been widely applied for object recognition and gesture detection. In natural language
processing there is also work in applying discriminative probabilistic latent variable models, for
example the training of probabilistic context free grammars with latent annotations in a discriminative
manner [20]. The work of Yu and Joachims [30] extends the margin re-scaling SSVM in [26] by
introducing latent variables (LSSVM) and obtains a formulation that is optimized using the concave32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

