√
Streaming Kernel PCA with Õ( n) Random Features

Enayat Ullah †
enayat@jhu.edu

Poorya Mianjy †
mianjy@jhu.edu

Teodor V. Marinov †
tmarino2@jhu.edu

Raman Arora †
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
We study the statistical and computational aspects of kernel principal component
analysis
using random Fourier features and show that under mild assumptions,
√
O( n log (n)) features suffice to achieve O(1/2 ) sample complexity. Furthermore, we give a memory efficient streaming algorithm based on classical Oja’s
algorithm that achieves this rate.

1

Introduction

Kernel methods represent an important class of machine learning algorithms that simultaneously
enjoy strong theoretical guarantees as well as empirical performance. However, it is notoriously
hard to scale them to large datasets due to space and runtime complexity (typically O(n2 ) and
O(n3 ), respectively, for most problems) [Smola and Schölkopf, 1998]. There have been many efforts
to overcome these computational challenges, including Nyström method [Williams and Seeger,
2001], incomplete Cholesky factorization [Fine and Scheinberg, 2001], random Fourier features
(RFF) [Rahimi and Recht, 2007] and randomized sketching [Yang et al., 2015]. In this paper, we
focus on random Fourier features due to its broad applicability to a large class of kernel problems.
In a seminal paper by Rahimi and Recht [2007], the authors appealed to Bochner’s theorem to argue
that any shift-invariant kernel can be approximated as k(x, y) ≈ hz(x), z(y)i, where the random
Fourier feature mapping z : Rd → Rm is obtained by sampling from the inverse Fourier transform
of the kernel function. This allows one to invoke fast linear techniques to solve the linear problem
in Rm . However, subsequent work analyzing kernel methods based on RFF for learning problems
suggests that to achieve the same asymptotic rates (as obtained using the true kernel) on the excess
risk, one requires m = Ω(n) random features [Rahimi and Recht, 2009], which defeats the purpose
of using random features from a computational perspective and fails to explain its empirical success.
Last year at NIPS, while Rahimi and Recht won the test-of-time award for their work on RFF [Rahimi
and Recht, 2007], Rudi and Rosasco [2017] showed for the first time that at least for the kernel ridge
regression problem, under some mild distributional assumptions and for appropriately chosen
√ regularization parameter, one can achieve minimax optimal statistical rates using only m = O( n log (n))
random features. It is then natural to ask if the same holds for other kernel problems.
In this paper, we focus on Kernel Principal Component Analysis (KPCA) [Schölkopf et al., 1998],
which is a popular technique for unsupervised nonlinear representation learning. We argue that
scalability is an even bigger issue in the unsupervised setting since big data is largely unlabeled.
Furthermore, when extending the results from the supervised learning to unsupervised learning we
have to deal with additional challenges stemming from the non-convexity of the KPCA problem.
We pose KPCA as a stochastic optimization problem and investigate the tradeoff between statistical
samples and random features needed to guarantee -suboptimality on the population objective (aka a
small generalization error).
KPCA entails computing the top-k principal components of the data mapped into a Reproducing
Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) induced by a positive definite kernel [Aronszajn, 1950]. In Schölkopf
et al. [1998], authors showed that given a sample of n i.i.d. draws from the underlying distribution,
the infinite dimensional problem (over RKHS) can be reduced to a finite dimensional problem (in Rn )
† Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21204
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

