Adversarial Scene Editing:
Automatic Object Removal from Weak Supervision

Rakshith Shetty1
1

Mario Fritz2

Bernt Schiele1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
2
CISPA Helmholtz Center i.G., Saarland Informatics Campus
Saarbrücken, Germany
1
firstname.lastname@mpi-inf.mpg.de
2
firstname.lastname@cispa.saarland

Abstract
While great progress has been made recently in automatic image manipulation, it
has been limited to object centric images like faces or structured scene datasets. In
this work, we take a step towards general scene-level image editing by developing
an automatic interaction-free object removal model. Our model learns to find and
remove objects from general scene images using image-level labels and unpaired
data in a generative adversarial network (GAN) framework. We achieve this
with two key contributions: a two-stage editor architecture consisting of a mask
generator and image in-painter that co-operate to remove objects, and a novel GAN
based prior for the mask generator that allows us to flexibly incorporate knowledge
about object shapes. We experimentally show on two datasets that our method
effectively removes a wide variety of objects using weak supervision only.

1

Introduction

Automatic editing of scene-level images to add/remove objects and manipulate attributes of objects
like color/shape etc. is a challenging problem with a wide variety of applications. Such an editor can
be used for data augmentation [1], test case generation, automatic content filtering and visual privacy
filtering [2]. To be scalable, the image manipulation should be free of human interaction and should
learn to perform the editing without needing strong supervision. In this work, we investigate such
an automatic interaction free image manipulation approach that involves editing an input image to
remove target objects, while leaving the rest of the image intact.
The advent of powerful generative models like generative adversarial networks (GAN) has led to
significant progress in various image manipulation tasks. Recent works have demonstrated altering
facial attributes like hair color, orientation [3], gender [4] and expressions [5] and changing seasons
in scenic photographs [6]. An encouraging aspect of these works is that the image manipulation is
learnt without ground truth supervision, but with using unpaired data from different attribute classes.
While this progress is remarkable, it has been limited to single object centric images like faces or
constrained images like street scenes from a single point of view [7]. In this work we move beyond
these object-centric images and towards scene-level image editing on general images. We propose an
automatic object removal model that takes an input image and a target class and edits the image to
remove the target object class. It learns to perform this task with only image-level labels and without
ground truth target images, i.e. using only unpaired images containing different object classes.
Our model learns to remove objects primarily by trying to fool object classifiers in a GAN framework.
However, simply training a generator to re-synthesize the input image to fool object classifiers leads
to degenerate solutions where the generator uses adversarial patterns to fool the classifiers. We
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

