On Markov Chain Gradient Descent∗
Tao Sun
College of Computer
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, Hunan 410073, China
nudtsuntao@163.com

Yuejiao Sun
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
sunyj@math.ucla.edu

Wotao Yin
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
wotaoyin@math.ucla.edu

Abstract
Stochastic gradient methods are the workhorse (algorithms) of large-scale optimization problems in machine learning, signal processing, and other computational
sciences and engineering. This paper studies Markov chain gradient descent, a
variant of stochastic gradient descent where the random samples are taken on the
trajectory of a Markov chain. Existing results of this method assume convex objectives and a reversible Markov chain and thus have their limitations. We establish
new non-ergodic convergence under wider step sizes, for nonconvex problems, and
for non-reversible finite-state Markov chains. Nonconvexity makes our method
applicable to broader problem classes. Non-reversible finite-state Markov chains,
on the other hand, can mix substatially faster. To obtain these results, we introduce
a new technique that varies the mixing levels of the Markov chains. The reported
numerical results validate our contributions.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider a stochastic minimization problem. Let Ξ be a statistical sample space with
probability distribution Π (we omit the underlying σ-algebra). Let X ⊆ Rn be a closed convex set,
which represents the parameter space. F (·; ξ) : X → R is a closed convex function associated with
ξ ∈ Ξ. We aim to solve the following problem:
Z

minimize
E
F
(x;
ξ)
=
F (x, ξ)dΠ(ξ).
(1)
ξ
n
x∈X⊆R

Π

A common method to minimize (1) is Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) [11]:

i.i.d
xk+1 = ProjX xk − γk ∂F (xk ; ξ k ) , samples ξ k ∼ Π.

(2)

However, for some problems and distributions, direct sampling from Π is expensive or impossible,
and it is possible that the sample space Ξ is not explicitly known. In these cases, it can be much
cheaper to sample by following a Markov chain that has a desired equilibrium distribution Π.
∗

The work is supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China 2017YFB0202902, China
Scholarship Council. The work of Y. Sun and W. Yin was supported in part by AFOSR MURI FA9550-18-1-0502,
NSF DMS-1720237, NSFC 11728105, and ONR N000141712162.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

