Convex Elicitation of Continuous Real Properties

Jessica Finocchiaro
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado, Boulder
jessica.finocchiaro@colorado.edu

Rafael Frongillo
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado, Boulder
raf@colorado.edu

Abstract
A property or statistic of a distribution is said to be elicitable if it can be expressed
as the minimizer of some loss function in expectation. Recent work shows that
continuous real-valued properties are elicitable if and only if they are identifiable,
meaning the set of distributions with the same property value can be described
by linear constraints. From a practical standpoint, one may ask for which such
properties do there exist convex loss functions. In this paper, in a finite-outcome
setting, we show that in fact essentially every elicitable real-valued property can be
elicited by a convex loss function. Our proof is constructive, and leads to convex
loss functions for new properties.

1

Introduction

Property elicitation is the study of statistics, or properties, of probability distributions which one
can incentivize an expected-utility-maximizing agent to reveal. In a machine learning context, this
“agent” is an algorithm following the principle of empirical risk minimization (ERM), wherein a
hypothesis is fit to the data by minimizing its error on a training data set, as judged by some loss
function. The interest in property elicitation across the economics, statistics, and machine learning
communities is reflected in the literature, with important results appearing in all three.
A central thread of this literature, weaving between all three communities, asks which continuous
real-valued properties are elicitable, and which loss functions elicit them. Building on earlier work
of Osband [16] and Lambert [12], Steinwart et al. [22] show that a property is elicitable if and only
if it is identifiable, a concept introduced by Osband which says that the set of distributions sharing
the same property value can be described by a set of linear constraints. Moreover, these papers give
characterizations of the loss functions eliciting these identifiable properties, showing that every loss
can be written as the integral of a positive-weighted identification function.
A question of practical interest remains, however: for which properties do there exist convex loss
functions eliciting them? Convex losses give concrete algorithms to efficiently solve ERM problems,
and are also useful more broadly in statistical and economic settings (see § 6). At first glance, the
answer to this question might appear to follow immediately from the comprehensive loss function
characterizations of Lambert [12] and Steinwart et al. [22]. Unfortunately, it is far from clear in
these characterizations whether there exists a weight function rendering their construction convex.
In this paper, we address this question of convex elicitability in the finite-outcome setting. Surprisingly, we find that, under somewhat mild smoothness assumptions, every identifiable real-valued
property is convex elicitable. Our proof proceeds by pinpointing a few key attributes of identification functions, and then solving the following abstract problem: given a set of functions F from R
to R, when does there exist a weight function λ : R → R>0 making λf increasing over the report
space R for all f ∈ F? We give a constructive solution to this problem under certain conditions,
and show that identification functions happen to satisfy these conditions.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

