Assessing the Scalability of Biologically-Motivated
Deep Learning Algorithms and Architectures

Sergey Bartunov
DeepMind

Adam Santoro
DeepMind

Geoffrey E. Hinton
Google Brain

Blake A. Richards
University of Toronto

Luke Marris
DeepMind

Timothy P. Lillicrap
DeepMind, University College London

Abstract
The backpropagation of error algorithm (BP) is impossible to implement in a
real brain. The recent success of deep networks in machine learning and AI,
however, has inspired proposals for understanding how the brain might learn
across multiple layers, and hence how it might approximate BP. As of yet, none
of these proposals have been rigorously evaluated on tasks where BP-guided deep
learning has proved critical, or in architectures more structured than simple fullyconnected networks. Here we present results on scaling up biologically motivated
models of deep learning on datasets which need deep networks with appropriate
architectures to achieve good performance. We present results on the MNIST,
CIFAR-10, and ImageNet datasets, explore variants of target-propagation (TP) and
feedback alignment (FA) algorithms, and examine performance in both fully- and
locally-connected architectures. We also introduce weight-transport-free variants
of difference target propagation (DTP) modified to remove backpropagation from
the penultimate layer. Many of these algorithms perform well for MNIST, but for
CIFAR and ImageNet we find that TP and FA variants perform significantly worse
than BP, especially for networks composed of locally connected units, opening
questions about whether new architectures and algorithms are required to scale
these approaches. Our results and implementation details help establish baselines
for biologically motivated deep learning schemes going forward.

1

Introduction

The suitability of the backpropagation of error (BP) algorithm [32] for explaining learning in the
brain was questioned soon after it was popularized [11, 8]. Weaker objections included undesirable
characteristics of artificial networks in general, such as their violation of Dale’s Law, their lack of
cell-type variability, and the need for the gradient signals to be both positive and negative. More
serious objections were: (1) The need for the feedback connections carrying the gradient to have the
same weights as the corresponding feedforward connections and (2) The need for a distinct form of
information propagation (error feedback) that does not influence neural activity, and hence does not
conform to known biological feedback mechanisms underlying neural communication. Researchers
have long sought biologically plausible and empirically powerful learning algorithms that avoid these
flaws [2, 30, 31, 1, 26, 39, 14, 16, 12, 5, 23]. Recent work has demonstrated that the first objection
may not be as problematic as often supposed [22]: the feedback alignment (FA) algorithm uses
random weights in backward pathways to successfully deliver error information to earlier layers. At
the same time, FA still suffers from the second objection: it requires the delivery of signed error
vectors via a distinct pathway.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

