Active Matting

Xin Yang∗
Dalian University of Technology
City University of Hong Kong
xinyang@dlut.edu.cn

Ke Xu∗
Dalian University of Technology
City University of Hong Kong
kkangwing@mail.dlut.edu.cn

Shaozhe Chen
Dalian University of Technology
csz@mail.dlut.edu.cn

Shengfeng He†
South China University of Technology
hesfe@scut.edu.cn

Baocai Yin
Dalian University of Technology
ybc@dlut.edu.cn

Rynson W.H. Lau‡
City University of Hong Kong
rynson.lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Image matting is an ill-posed problem. It requires a user input trimap or some
strokes to obtain an alpha matte of the foreground object. A fine user input is
essential to obtain a good result, which is either time consuming or suitable for
experienced users who know where to place the strokes. In this paper, we explore
the intrinsic relationship between the user input and the matting algorithm to
address the problem of where and when the user should provide the input. Our
aim is to discover the most informative sequence of regions for user input in
order to produce a good alpha matte with minimum labeling efforts. To this
end, we propose an active matting method with recurrent reinforcement learning.
The proposed framework involves human in the loop by sequentially detecting
informative regions for trivial human judgement. Comparing to traditional matting
algorithms, the proposed framework requires much less efforts, and can produce
satisfactory results with just 10 regions. Through extensive experiments, we show
that the proposed model reduces user efforts significantly and achieves comparable
performance to dense trimaps in a user-friendly manner. We further show that
the learned informative knowledge can be generalized across different matting
algorithms.

1

Introduction

Alpha matting (or image matting) refers to accurately extracting a foreground object of interest from
an input image. This problem as well as its inverse process (known as image composition) have been
well studied by both research and industrial communities. Mathematically, alpha matting can be
modeled by the following under-constrained equation:
Iz = αz Fz + (1 − αz )Bz ,
(1)
where z = (x, y) denotes the pixel position in the input image I. F and B refer to the output
foreground and background images. α is the alpha matte, whose values range between [0, 1] defining
the opacity of the foreground.
∗

Joint first authors.
Corresponding author.
‡
This work was led by Rynson Lau.
†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

