Automatic differentiation in ML:
Where we are and where we should be going

Bart van Merriënboer
Mila, Google Brain
bartvm@google.com

Olivier Breuleux
Mila
breuleuo@iro.umontreal.ca

Arnaud Bergeron
Mila
bergearn@iro.umontreal.ca

Pascal Lamblin
Mila, Google Brain
lamblinp@google.com

Abstract
We review the current state of automatic differentiation (AD) for array programming in machine learning (ML), including the different approaches such as operator
overloading (OO) and source transformation (ST) used for AD, graph-based intermediate representations for programs, and source languages. Based on these
insights, we introduce a new graph-based intermediate representation (IR) which
specifically aims to efficiently support fully-general AD for array programming.
Unlike existing dataflow programming representations in ML frameworks, our IR
naturally supports function calls, higher-order functions and recursion, making
ML models easier to implement. The ability to represent closures allows us to
perform AD using ST without a tape, making the resulting derivative (adjoint) program amenable to ahead-of-time optimization using tools from functional language
compilers, and enabling higher-order derivatives. Lastly, we introduce a proof of
concept compiler toolchain called Myia which uses a subset of Python as a front
end.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in ML, and deep learning in particular, have in part been driven by advances in
hardware [23, 31]. This increase in computational power has spurred the development of a large
number of software libraries, compute kernels, programming languages, and compiler toolchains in
order to exploit it. We distinguish some features and objectives that separate these ML frameworks
from traditional array programming frameworks.
Firstly, many machine learning models use optimization algorithms which require access to derivatives
of the model. Automatic differentiation [16] comprises a collection of techniques that can be employed
to calculate the derivatives of a function specified by a computer program, and is a central feature of
popular ML frameworks such as TensorFlow [1] and PyTorch [28].
ML frameworks also put heavy emphasis on being able to iterate quickly on new models using
high-level, dynamically typed languages, while maintaining high performance through aggressively
exploiting resources (e.g., through parallelism, distributed computing, accelerators, static optimization). Moreover, since the derivative code is generated programmatically using AD, frameworks
cannot always rely on users writing hand-tuned code and must instead provide compiler optimizations.
Despite the growth in ML frameworks, many have been developed in isolation of the AD community,
and many of their insights regarding language design and interactions between source transformation
and compiler optimizations have gone largely ignored. Moreover, although many ML frameworks
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

