Statistical mechanics of low-rank tensor
decomposition

Jonathan Kadmon
Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University
kadmonj@stanford.edu
Surya Ganguli
Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University and Google Brain, Mountain View, CA
sganguli@stanford.edu

Abstract
Often, large, high dimensional datasets collected across multiple modalities can
be organized as a higher order tensor. Low-rank tensor decomposition then arises
as a powerful and widely used tool to discover simple low dimensional structures
underlying such data. However, we currently lack a theoretical understanding of
the algorithmic behavior of low-rank tensor decompositions. We derive Bayesian
approximate message passing (AMP) algorithms for recovering arbitrarily shaped
low-rank tensors buried within noise, and we employ dynamic mean field theory to
precisely characterize their performance. Our theory reveals the existence of phase
transitions between easy, hard and impossible inference regimes, and displays an
excellent match with simulations. Moreover it reveals several qualitative surprises
compared to the behavior of symmetric, cubic tensor decomposition. Finally, we
compare our AMP algorithm to the most commonly used algorithm, alternating
least squares (ALS), and demonstrate that AMP significantly outperforms ALS in
the presence of noise.

1

Introduction

The ability to take noisy, complex data structures and decompose them into smaller, interpretable
components in an unsupervised manner is essential to many fields, from machine learning and signal
processing [1, 2] to neuroscience [3]. In datasets that can be organized as an order 2 data matrix, many
popular unsupervised structure discovery algorithms, like PCA, ICA, SVD or other spectral methods,
can be unified under rubric of low rank matrix decomposition. More complex data consisting of
measurements across multiple modalities can be organized as higher dimensional data arrays, or
higher order tensors. Often, one can find simple structures in such data by approximating the data
tensor as a sum of rank 1 tensors. Such decompositions are known by the name of rank-decomposition,
CANDECOMP/PARAFAC or CP decomposition (see [4] for an extensive review).
The most widely used algorithm to perform rank decomposition is alternating least squares (ALS)
[5, 6], which uses convex optimization techniques on different slices of the tensor. However, a major
disadvantage of ALS is that it does not perform well in the presence of highly noisy measurements.
Moreover, its theoretical properties are not well understood. Here we derive and analyze an approximate message passing (AMP) algorithm for optimal Bayesian recovery of arbitrarily shaped,
high-order low-rank tensors buried in noise. As a result, we obtain an AMP algorithm that both
out-performs ALS and admits an analytic theory of its performance limits.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

