Deep Anomaly Detection Using Geometric
Transformations
Izhak Golan
Department of Computer Science
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
izikgo@cs.technion.ac.il

Ran El-Yaniv
Department of Computer Science
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
rani@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We consider the problem of anomaly detection in images, and present a new
detection technique. Given a sample of images, all known to belong to a “normal”
class (e.g., dogs), we show how to train a deep neural model that can detect
out-of-distribution images (i.e., non-dog objects). The main idea behind our
scheme is to train a multi-class model to discriminate between dozens of geometric
transformations applied on all the given images. The auxiliary expertise learned
by the model generates feature detectors that effectively identify, at test time,
anomalous images based on the softmax activation statistics of the model when
applied on transformed images. We present extensive experiments using the
proposed detector, which indicate that our technique consistently improves all
known algorithms by a wide margin.

1

Introduction

Future machine learning applications such as self-driving cars or domestic robots will, inevitably,
encounter various kinds of risks including statistical uncertainties. To be usable, these applications
should be as robust as possible to such risks. One such risk is exposure to statistical errors or
inconsistencies due to distributional divergences or noisy observations. The well-known problem
of anomaly/novelty detection highlights some of these risks, and its resolution is of the utmost
importance to mission critical machine learning applications. While anomaly detection has long
been considered in the literature, conclusive understanding of this problem in the context of deep
neural models is sorely lacking. For example, in machine vision applications, presently available
novelty detection methods can suffer from poor performance in some problems, as demonstrated by
our experiments.
In the basic anomaly detection problem, we have a sample from a “normal” class of instances,
emerging from some distribution, and the goal is to construct a classifier capable of detecting outof-distribution “abnormal” instances [5].1 There are quite a few variants of this basic anomaly
detection problem. For example, in the positive and unlabeled version, we are given a sample from
the “normal” class, as well as an unlabeled sample that is contaminated with abnormal instances.
This contaminated-sample variant turns out to be easier than the pure version of the problem (in the
sense that better performance can be achieved) [2]. In the present paper, we focus on the basic (and
harder) version of anomaly detection, and consider only machine vision applications for which deep
models (e.g., convolutional neural networks) are essential.
There are a few works that tackle the basic, pure-sample-anomaly detection problem in the context
of images. The most successful results among these are reported for methods that rely on one of
1

Unless otherwise mentioned, the use of the adjective “normal” is unrelated to the Gaussian distribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

