Symbolic Graph Reasoning Meets Convolutions

Xiaodan Liang1 , Zhiting hu2 , Hao Zhang2 , Liang Lin3 , Eric P. Xing4
1
School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
2
Carnegie Mellon University
3
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University
4
Petuum Inc.
xdliang328@gmail.com, {zhitingh,hao, epxing}@cs.cmu.edu, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Beyond local convolution networks, we explore how to harness various external
human knowledge for endowing the networks with the capability of semantic
global reasoning. Rather than using separate graphical models (e.g. CRF) or
constraints for modeling broader dependencies, we propose a new Symbolic Graph
Reasoning (SGR) layer, which performs reasoning over a group of symbolic nodes
whose outputs explicitly represent different properties of each semantic in a prior
knowledge graph. To cooperate with local convolutions, each SGR is constituted
by three modules: a) a primal local-to-semantic voting module where the features
of all symbolic nodes are generated by voting from local representations; b) a
graph reasoning module propagates information over knowledge graph to achieve
global semantic coherency; c) a dual semantic-to-local mapping module learns
new associations of the evolved symbolic nodes with local representations, and
accordingly enhances local features. The SGR layer can be injected between
any convolution layers and instantiated with distinct prior graphs. Extensive
experiments show incorporating SGR significantly improves plain ConvNets on
three semantic segmentation tasks and one image classification task. More analyses
show the SGR layer learns shared symbolic representations for domains/datasets
with the different label set given a universal knowledge graph, demonstrating its
superior generalization capability.

1

Introduction

Despite significant advances in standard recognition tasks such as image classification [12] and
segmentation [6] achieved by convolution networks, the dominant paradigm lies in the stack of deeper
and complicated local convolutions, and we hope it captures everything about the relationship between
inputs and targets. But such networks compromise the feature interpretability and also lack the global
reasoning capability that is crucial for complicated real-world tasks. Some works [51, 41, 5] thus
formulated graphical models and structure constraints (e.g. CRF [22, 19]) as recurrent works to effect
on final convolution predictions. However, they cannot explicitly enhance feature representations,
leading to the limited generalization capability. The very recent capsule network [39, 14] extends
to learn the sharing of knowledge across locations to find feature clusters, but it can only exploit
implicit and uncontrollable feature hierarchy. As emphasized in [3], visual reasoning over external
knowledge is crucial for human decision-making. The lack of explicitly reasoning over contexts and
high-level semantics would hinder the advances of convolution networks in recognizing objects in a
large concept vocabulary where exploring semantic correlations and constraints plays an important
role. On the other hand, structured knowledge provides rich cues to record human observations and
commonsense using symbolic words (e.g. nouns or predicates). It is thus desirable to bridge symbolic
semantics with learned local feature representations for better graph reasoning.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

