Bayesian Nonparametric Spectral Estimation

Felipe Tobar
Universidad de Chile
ftobar@dim.uchile.cl

Abstract
Spectral estimation (SE) aims to identify how the energy of a signal (e.g., a time
series) is distributed across different frequencies. This can become particularly
challenging when only partial and noisy observations of the signal are available,
where current methods fail to handle uncertainty appropriately. In this context, we
propose a joint probabilistic model for signals, observations and spectra, where SE
is addressed as an exact inference problem. Assuming a Gaussian process prior
over the signal, we apply Bayes’ rule to find the analytic posterior distribution of
the spectrum given a set of observations. Besides its expressiveness and natural
account of spectral uncertainty, the proposed model also provides a functional-form
representation of the power spectral density, which can be optimised efficiently.
Comparison with previous approaches, in particular against Lomb-Scargle, is
addressed theoretically and also experimentally in three different scenarios.
Code and demo available at github.com/GAMES-UChile.

1

Introduction

The need for frequency representation arises naturally in a number of disciplines such as natural
sound processing [1, 2], astrophysics [3], biomedical engineering [4] and Doppler-radar data analysis
[5]. When the signal of interest is known without uncertainty, the frequency representation can
be obtained by means of the Fourier transform [6]. However, real-world applications usually only
provide us with a limited number of observations corrupted by noise. In this sense, the main challenge
in Spectral Estimation (SE) comes from the fact that, due to the convolutional structure of the Fourier
transform, the uncertainty related to missing, noisy and unevenly-sampled data propagates across
the entire frequency domain. In this article, we take a probabilistic perspective to SE, thus aiming to
quantify uncertainty in a principled manner.
Classical—yet still widely used—methods for spectral estimation can be divided in two categories.
First, parametric models that impose a deterministic structure on the latent signal, which result in a
parametric form for the spectrum [7–9]. Second, nonparametric models that do not assume structure
in the data, such as the periodogram [10] computed through the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) [11].
Uncertainty is not inherently accounted for in either of these approaches, although one can equip
parameter estimates with error bars in the first case, or consider subsets of training data to then
average over the estimated spectra.
Despite the key role of the frequency representation in various applications as well as recent advances
in probabilistic modelling, the Bayesian machinery has not been fully exploited for the construction
of rigorous and meaningful SE methods. In particular, our hypothesis is that Bayesian nonparametric
models can greatly advance SE theory and practice by incorporating temporal-structure parameterfree generative models, inherent uncertainty representation, and a natural treatment of missing and
noisy observations. Our main contribution is then to propose a nonparametric joint generative model
for a signal and its spectrum, where SE is addressed by solving an exact inference problem.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

