Near-Optimal Policies for Dynamic Multinomial
Logit Assortment Selection Models
Yining Wang
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
yiningwa@cs.cmu.edu

Xi Chen
Stern School of Business
New York University
xchen3@stern.nyu.edu

Yuan Zhou
Computer Science Department
Indiana University at Bloomington
and
Department of Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
yuanz@illinois.edu

Abstract
In this paper we consider the dynamic assortment selection problem under an
uncapacitated multinomial-logit (MNL) model. By carefully analyzing a revenue potential function, we show that
?a trisection based algorithm achieves an
item-independent regret bound of Op T log log T q, which matches information
theoretical lower bounds up to iterated logarithmic terms. Our proof technique
draws tools from the unimodal/convex bandit literature as well as adaptive confidence parameters in minimax multi-armed bandit problems.
Keywords: dynamic assortment planning, multinomial logit choice model, trisection algorithm, regret analysis.

1

Introduction

Assortment planning has a wide range of applications in e-commerce and online advertising. Given a
large number of substitutable products, the assortment planning problem refers to the selection of a
subset of products (a.k.a., an assortment) offering to a customer such that the expected revenue is
maximized [2, 3, 14, 17, 20]. Given N items, each associated with a revenue parameter 1 ri P r0, 1s
representing the revenue a retailer collects once a customer purchases the i-th item. The revenue
parameters tri uN
i“1 are typically known to the retailer, who has full knowledge of each item’s
prices/costs. In a dynamic assortment planning problem, assuming that there are a total of T time
epochs, the retailer presents an assortment St Ď rN s to an incoming customer, and observes his/her
purchasing action it P St Y t0u. (If it “ 0 then the customer makes no purchases at time t.) If
a purchasing action is made (i.e., it ‰ 0), the corresponding revenue rit is collected. It is worthy
noting that since items are substitutable (e.g., different models of cell phones), a typical setting of
assortment planning usually restricts a purchase to be a single item.
The retailer’s objective is to maximize the expected revenue over the T time periods. Such objectives
can be best measured and evaluated under a “regret minimization” framework, in which the retailer’s
1

The constraint ri ď 1 is without loss of generality, because it is only a normalization of revenues.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

