A Spectral View of Adversarially Robust Features

Shivam Garg

Vatsal Sharan∗

Brian Hu Zhang∗

Gregory Valiant

Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
{shivamgarg, vsharan, bhz, gvaliant}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Given the apparent difficulty of learning models that are robust to adversarial perturbations, we propose tackling the simpler problem of developing adversarially
robust features. Specifically, given a dataset and metric of interest, the goal is to
return a function (or multiple functions) that 1) is robust to adversarial perturbations, and 2) has significant variation across the datapoints. We establish strong
connections between adversarially robust features and a natural spectral property
of the geometry of the dataset and metric of interest. This connection can be
leveraged to provide both robust features, and a lower bound on the robustness of
any function that has significant variance across the dataset. Finally, we provide
empirical evidence that the adversarially robust features given by this spectral
approach can be fruitfully leveraged to learn a robust (and accurate) model.

1

Introduction

While machine learning models have achieved spectacular performance in many settings, including
human-level accuracy for a variety of image recognition tasks, these models exhibit a striking
vulnerability to adversarial examples. For nearly every input datapoint—including training data—a
small perturbation can be carefully chosen to make the model misclassify this perturbed point. Often,
these perturbations are so minute that they are not discernible to the human eye.
Since the initial work of Szegedy et al. [2013] and Goodfellow et al. [2014] identified this surprising
brittleness of many models trained over high-dimensional data, there has been a growing appreciation
for the importance of understanding this vulnerability. From a conceptual standpoint, this lack of
robustness seems to be one of the most significant differences between humans’ classification abilities
(particularly for image recognition tasks), and computer models. Indeed this vulnerability is touted
as evidence that computer models are not really learning, and are simply assembling a number of
cheap and effective, but easily fooled, tricks. Fueled by a recent line of work demonstrating that
adversarial examples can actually be created in the real world (as opposed to requiring the ability
to edit the individual pixels in an input image) [Evtimov et al., 2017, Brown et al., 2017, Kurakin
et al., 2016, Athalye and Sutskever, 2017], there has been a significant effort to examine adversarial
examples from a security perspective. In certain settings where trained machine learning systems
make critically important decisions, developing models that are robust to adversarial examples might
be a requisite for deployment.
Despite the intense recent interest in both computing adversarial examples and on developing learning
algorithms that yield robust models, we seem to have more questions than answers. In general,
ensuring that models trained on high-dimensional data are robust to adversarial examples seems to be
extremely difficult: for example, Athalye et al. [2018] claims to have broken six attempted defenses
∗

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

