Continuous-time Value Function Approximation
in Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces
Motoya Ohnishi
Keio Univ., KTH, RIKEN
motoya.ohnishi@riken.jp
Mikael Johansson
KTH
mikaelj@ee.kth.se

Masahiro Yukawa
Keio Univ., RIKEN
yukawa@elec.keio.ac.jp
Masashi Sugiyama
RIKEN, Univ. Tokyo
masashi.sugiyama@riken.jp

Abstract
Motivated by the success of reinforcement learning (RL) for discrete-time tasks
such as AlphaGo and Atari games, there has been a recent surge of interest in using
RL for continuous-time control of physical systems (cf. many challenging tasks
in OpenAI Gym and DeepMind Control Suite). Since discretization of time is
susceptible to error, it is methodologically more desirable to handle the system
dynamics directly in continuous time. However, very few techniques exist for
continuous-time RL and they lack flexibility in value function approximation.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for model-based continuous-time
value function approximation in reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces. The resulting
framework is so flexible that it can accommodate any kind of kernel-based approach,
such as Gaussian processes and kernel adaptive filters, and it allows us to handle
uncertainties and nonstationarity without prior knowledge about the environment
or what basis functions to employ. We demonstrate the validity of the presented
framework through experiments.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [37, 20, 35] has been successful in a variety of applications such as
AlphaGo and Atari games, particularly for discrete stochastic systems. Recently, application of RL to
physical control tasks has also been gaining attention, because solving an optimal control problem
(or the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman-Isaacs equation) [21] directly is computationally prohibitive for
complex nonlinear system dynamics and/or cost functions.
In the physical world, states and actions are continuous, and many dynamical systems evolve in
continuous time. OpenAI Gym [7] and DeepMind Control Suite [40] offer several representative
examples of such physical tasks. When handling continuous-time (CT) systems, CT formulations
are methodologically desirable over the use of discrete-time (DT) formulations with the small time
intervals, since such discretization is susceptible to errors. In terms of computational complexities
and the ease of analysis, CT formulations are also more advantageous over DT counterparts for
control-theoretic analyses such as stability and forward invariance [14], which are useful for safetycritical applications. As we will show in this paper, our framework allows to constrain control inputs
and/or states in a computationally efficient way.
One of the early examples of RL for CT systems [4] pointed out that Q learning is incabable of
learning in continuous time and proposed advantage updating. Convergence proofs were given
in [25] for systems described by stochastic differential equations (SDEs) [28] using a grid-based
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

