On Coresets for Logistic Regression

Alexander Munteanu
Department of Computer Science
TU Dortmund University
44227 Dortmund, Germany
alexander.munteanu@tu-dortmund.de

Chris Schwiegelshohn
Department of Computer Science
Sapienza University of Rome
00185 Rome, Italy
schwiegelshohn@diag.uniroma1.it

Christian Sohler
Department of Computer Science
TU Dortmund University
44227 Dortmund, Germany
christian.sohler@tu-dortmund.de

David P. Woodruff
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Coresets are one of the central methods to facilitate the analysis of large data. We
continue a recent line of research applying the theory of coresets to logistic regression. First, we show the negative result that no strongly sublinear sized coresets
exist for logistic regression. To deal with intractable worst-case instances we introduce a complexity measure µ(X), which quantifies the hardness of compressing a
data set for logistic regression. µ(X) has an intuitive statistical interpretation that
may be of independent interest. For data sets with bounded µ(X)-complexity, we
show that a novel sensitivity sampling scheme produces the first provably sublinear
(1 ± ε)-coreset. We illustrate the performance of our method by comparing to
uniform sampling as well as to state of the art methods in the area. The experiments
are conducted on real world benchmark data for logistic regression.

1

Introduction

Scalability is one of the central challenges of modern data analysis and machine learning. Algorithms
with polynomial running time might be regarded as efficient in a conventional sense, but nevertheless
become intractable when facing massive data sets. As a result, performing data reduction techniques
in a preprocessing step to speed up a subsequent optimization problem has received considerable
attention. A natural approach is to sub-sample the data according to a certain probability distribution.
This approach has been successfully applied to a variety of problems including clustering [31, 22, 6, 4],
mixture models [21, 33], low rank approximation [16], spectral approximation [2, 32], and Nyström
methods [2, 37].
The unifying feature of these works is that the probability distribution is based on the sensitivity
score of each point. Informally, the sensitivity of a point corresponds to the importance of the point
with respect to the objective function we wish to minimize. If the total sensitivity, i.e., the sum of
all sensitivity scores S, is bounded by a reasonably small value S, there exists a collection of input
points known as a coreset with very strong aggregation properties. Given any candidate solution (e.g.,
a set of k centers for k-means, or a hyperplane for linear regression), the objective function computed
on the coreset evaluates to the objective function of the original data up to a small multiplicative error.
See Sections 2 and 4 for formal definitions of sensitivity and coresets.
Our Contribution We investigate coresets for logistic regression within the sensitivity framework.
Logistic regression is an instance of a generalized linear model where we are given data Z ∈ Rn×d ,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

