Training Neural Networks Using Features Replay

1

Zhouyuan Huo1,2 , Bin Gu2 , Heng Huang1,2∗
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, 2 JDDGlobal.com
zhouyuan.huo@pitt.edu, jsgubin@gmail.com
heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
Training a neural network using backpropagation algorithm requires passing error
gradients sequentially through the network. The backward locking prevents us from
updating network layers in parallel and fully leveraging the computing resources.
Recently, there are several works trying to decouple and parallelize the backpropagation algorithm. However, all of them suffer from severe accuracy loss or memory
explosion when the neural network is deep. To address these challenging issues,
we propose a novel parallel-objective formulation for the objective function of the
neural network. After that, we introduce features replay algorithm and prove that
it is guaranteed to converge to critical points for the non-convex problem under
certain conditions. Finally, we apply our method to training deep convolutional
neural networks, and the experimental results show that the proposed method
achieves faster convergence, lower memory consumption, and better generalization
error than compared methods.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the deep convolutional neural networks have made great breakthroughs in computer
vision [8, 10, 19, 20, 32, 33], natural language processing [15, 16, 31, 36], and reinforcement learning
[21, 23, 24, 25]. The growth of the depths of the neural networks is one of the most critical factors
contributing to the success of deep learning, which has been verified both in practice [8, 10] and
in theory [2, 7, 35]. Gradient-based methods are the major methods to train deep neural networks,
such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [29], ADAGRAD [6], RMSPROP [9] and ADAM [17].
As long as the loss functions are differentiable, we can compute the gradients of the networks using
backpropagation algorithm [30]. The backpropagation algorithm requires two passes of the neural
network, the forward pass to compute activations and the backward pass to compute gradients. As
shown in Figure 1 (BP), error gradients are repeatedly propagated from the top (output layer) all
the way back to the bottom (input layer) in the backward pass. The sequential propagation of the
error gradients is called backward locking because all layers of the network are locked until their
dependencies have executed. According to the benchmark report in [14], the computational time of
the backward pass is about twice of the computational time of the forward pass. When networks are
quite deep, backward locking becomes the bottleneck of making good use of computing resources,
preventing us from updating layers in parallel.
There are several works trying to break the backward locking in the backpropagation algorithm.
[4] and [34] avoid the backward locking by removing the backpropagation algorithm completely.
In [4], the authors proposed the method of auxiliary coordinates (MAC) and simplified the nested
functions by imposing quadratic penalties. Similarly, [34] used Lagrange multipliers to enforce
equality constraints between auxiliary variables and activations. Both of the reformulated problems
do not require backpropagation algorithm at all and are easy to be parallelized. However, neither of
∗

Corresponding Author.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

