Theoretical guarantees for the EM algorithm when
applied to mis-specified Gaussian mixture models

Raaz Dwivedi?

Nhat Ho? Koulik Khamaru?
UC Berkeley
{raaz.rsk, minhnhat, koulik}@berkeley.edu
Martin J. Wainwright
UC Berkeley
Voleon Group
wainwrig@berkeley.edu

Michael I. Jordan
UC Berkeley
jordan@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed substantial progress in understanding the behavior
of EM for mixture models that are correctly specified. Given that model misspecification is common in practice, it is important to understand EM in this more
general setting. We provide non-asymptotic guarantees for the population and
sample-based EM algorithms when used to estimate parameters of certain misspecified Gaussian mixture models. Due to mis-specification, the EM iterates no
longer converge to the true model and instead converge to the projection of the
true model onto the fitted model class. We provide two classes of theoretical guarantees: (a) a characterization of the bias introduced due to the mis-specification;
and (b) guarantees of geometric convergence of the population EM to the model
projection given a suitable initialization. This geometric convergence rate for population EM implies
√ that the EM algorithm based on n samples converges to an estimate with 1/ n accuracy. We validate our theoretical findings in different cases
via several numerical examples.

1

Introduction

Mixture models play a central role in statistical applications, where they are used to capture heterogeneity of data arising from several underlying subpopulations. However, estimating the parameters
of mixture models is a challenging task, due to the non-convexity of the log likelihood function.
As shown by classical work, the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) often has good properties for
mixture models, but its computation can be non-trivial. One of the most popular algorithms used to
compute the MLE (approximately) is the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm. Although EM
is widely used in practice, it does not always converge to the MLE, and its convergence rate can vary
as a function of the problem. Classical results provide guarantees about the convergence rates of EM
to local maxima [4, 16]. In the specific setting of Gaussian mixtures, population EM (idealized EM
with infinite samples) was shown to have a range of behavior from super-linear convergence to slow
convergence like a first-order method depending on the overlap between the mixtures [9, 18]. More
recently, there has been a renewed interest in providing explicit and non-asymptotic guarantees on
the convergence of EM. Notably, Balakrishnan et al. [1] developed a rather general framework for
characterizing the convergence of EM. For well-specified problems—including the two-component
Gaussian location mixture as a particular example—they provided sufficient conditions for the EM
?

Raaz Dwivedi, Nhat Ho, and Koulik Khamaru contributed equally to this work.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

