Adversarial vulnerability for any classifier

Alhussein Fawzi
DeepMind
afawzi@google.com

Hamza Fawzi
Department of Applied Mathematics
& Theoretical Physics
University of Cambridge
h.fawzi@damtp.cam.ac.uk

Omar Fawzi
ENS de Lyon∗
omar.fawzi@ens-lyon.fr

Abstract
Despite achieving impressive performance, state-of-the-art classifiers remain highly
vulnerable to small, imperceptible, adversarial perturbations. This vulnerability
has proven empirically to be very intricate to address. In this paper, we study the
phenomenon of adversarial perturbations under the assumption that the data is
generated with a smooth generative model. We derive fundamental upper bounds
on the robustness to perturbations of any classification function, and prove the
existence of adversarial perturbations that transfer well across different classifiers
with small risk. Our analysis of the robustness also provides insights onto key
properties of generative models, such as their smoothness and dimensionality of
latent space. We conclude with numerical experimental results showing that our
bounds provide informative baselines to the maximal achievable robustness on
several datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are powerful models that achieve state-of-the-art performance across several
domains, such as bioinformatics [1, 2], speech [3], and computer vision [4, 5]. Though deep networks
have exhibited very good performance in classification tasks, they have recently been shown to be
unstable to adversarial perturbations of the data [6, 7]. In fact, very small and often imperceptible
perturbations of the data samples are sufficient to fool state-of-the-art classifiers and result in incorrect
classification. This discovery of the surprising vulnerability of classifiers to perturbations has led to a
large body of work that attempts to design robust classifiers [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. However, advances
in designing robust classifiers have been accompanied with stronger perturbation schemes that defeat
such defenses [14, 15, 16].
In this paper, we assume that the data distribution is defined by a smooth generative model (mapping latent representations to images), and study theoretically the existence of small adversarial
perturbations for arbitrary classifiers. We summarize our main contributions as follows:
• We show fundamental upper bounds on the robustness of any classifier to perturbations,
which provides a baseline to the maximal achievable robustness. When the latent space of
the data distribution is high dimensional, our analysis shows that any classifier is vulnerable
to very small perturbations. Our results further suggest the existence of a tight relation
between robustness and linearity of the classifier in the latent space.
• We prove the existence of adversarial perturbations that transfer across different classifiers.
This provides theoretical justification to previous empirical findings that highlighted the
existence of such transferable perturbations.
∗

Univ Lyon, ENS de Lyon, CNRS, UCBL, LIP, F-69342, Lyon Cedex 07, France

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

