Forward Modeling for Partial Observation
Strategy Games - A StarCraft Defogger

Gabriel Synnaeve∗
Facebook, NYC
gab@fb.com
Vegard Mella
Facebook, Paris
vegardmella@fb.com

Zeming Lin∗
Facebook, NYC
zlin@fb.com

Jonas Gehring
Facebook, Paris
jgehring@fb.com

Vasil Khalidov
Facebook, Paris
vkhalidov@fb.com

Dan Gant
Facebook, NYC
danielgant@fb.com

Nicolas Carion
Facebook, Paris
alcinos@fb.com

Nicolas Usunier
Facebook, Paris
usunier@fb.com

Abstract
We formulate the problem of defogging as state estimation and future state prediction from previous, partial observations in the context of real-time strategy games.
We propose to employ encoder-decoder neural networks for this task, and introduce
proxy tasks and baselines for evaluation to assess their ability of capturing basic
game rules and high-level dynamics. By combining convolutional neural networks
and recurrent networks, we exploit spatial and sequential correlations and train
well-performing models on a large dataset of human games of StarCraft R : Brood
War R † . Finally, we demonstrate the relevance of our models to downstream tasks
by applying them for enemy unit prediction in a state-of-the-art, rule-based StarCraft bot. We observe improvements in win rates against several strong community
bots.

1

Introduction

A current challenge in AI is to design policies to act in complex and partially observable environments.
Many real-world scenarios involve a large number of agents that interact in different ways, and only a
few of these interactions are observable at a given point in time. Yet, long-term planning is possible
because high-level behavioral patterns emerge from the agents acting to achieve one of a limited
set of long-term goals, under the constraints of the dynamics of the environment. In contexts where
observational data is cheap but exploratory interaction costly, a fundamental question is whether we
can learn reasonable priors – of these purposeful behaviors and the environment’s dynamics – from
observations of the natural flow of the interactions alone.
We address this question by considering the problems of state estimation and future state prediction
in partially observable real-time strategy (RTS) games, taking StarCraft: Brood War as a running
example. RTS games are multi-player games in which each player must gather resources, build an
economy and recruit an army to eventually win against the opponent. Each player controls their units
individually, and has access to a bird’s-eye view of the environment where only the vicinity of the
player’s units is revealed.
Though still artificial environments, RTS games offer many of the properties of real-world scenarios
at scales that are extremely challenging for the current methods. A typical state in StarCraft can be
represented by a 512 × 512 2D map of “walk tiles”, which contains static terrain and buildings, as
∗

These authors contributed equally
StarCraft is a trademark or registered trademark of Blizzard Entertainment, Inc., in the U.S. and/or other
countries. Nothing in this paper should be construed as approval, endorsement, or sponsorship by Blizzard
Entertainment, Inc.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.
†

