Efficient Projection onto the Perfect Phylogeny Model

Bei Jia∗
jiabe@bc.edu

Surjyendu Ray
raysc@bc.edu

Sam Safavi
safavisa@bc.edu

José Bento
jose.bento@bc.edu

Boston College

Abstract
Several algorithms build on the perfect phylogeny model to infer evolutionary trees.
This problem is particularly hard when evolutionary trees are inferred from the
fraction of genomes that have mutations in different positions, across different
samples. Existing algorithms might do extensive searches over the space of possible
trees. At the center of these algorithms is a projection problem that assigns a fitness
cost to phylogenetic trees. In order to perform a wide search over the space of
the trees, it is critical to solve this projection problem fast. In this paper, we use
Moreau’s decomposition for proximal operators, and a tree reduction scheme, to
develop a new algorithm to compute this projection. Our algorithm terminates with
an exact solution in a finite number of steps, and is extremely fast. In particular, it
can search over all evolutionary trees with fewer than 11 nodes, a size relevant for
several biological problems (more than 2 billion trees) in about 2 hours.

1

Introduction

The perfect phylogeny model (PPM) [1, 2] is used in biology to study evolving populations. It
assumes that the same position in the genome never mutates twice, hence mutations only accumulate.
Consider a population of organisms evolving under the PPM. The evolution process can be described
by a labeled rooted tree, T = (r, V, E), where r is the root, i.e., the common oldest ancestor, the
nodes V are the mutants, and the edges E are mutations acquired between older and younger mutants.
Since each position in the genome only mutates once, we can associate with each node v 6= r, a
unique mutated position, the mutation associated to the ancestral edge of v. By convention, let us
associate with the root r, a null mutation that is shared by all mutants in T . This allows us to refer
to each node v ∈ V as both a mutation in a position in the genome (the mutation associated to the
ancestral edge of v), and a mutant (the mutant with the fewest mutations that has a mutation v).
Hence, without loss of generality, V = {1, . . . , q}, E = {2, . . . , q}, where q is the length of the
genome, and r = 1 refers to both the oldest common ancestor and the null mutation shared by all.
One very important use of the PPM is to infer how mutants of a common ancestor evolve [3–8].
A common type of data used for this purpose is the frequency, with which different positions in
the genome mutate across multiple samples, obtained, e.g., from whole-genome or targeted deep
sequencing [9]. Consider a sample s, one of p samples, obtained at a given stage of the evolution
process. This sample has many mutants, some with the same genome, some with different genomes.
Let F ∈ Rq×p be such that Fv,s is the fraction of genomes in s with a mutation in position v in the
genome. Let M ∈ Rq×p be such that Mv,s is the fraction of mutant v in s. By definition, the columns
of M must sum to 1. Let U ∈ {0, 1}q×q be such that Uv,v0 = 1, if and only if mutant v is an ancestor
of mutant v 0 , or if v = v 0 . We denote the set of all possible U matrices, M matrices and labeled
rooted trees T , by U, M and T , respectively. See Figure 1 for an illustration. The PPM implies
F = U M.
(1)
Our work contributes to the problem of inferring clonal evolution from mutation-frequencies: How
do we infer M and U from F ? Note that finding U is the same as finding T (see Lemma B.2).
∗

Bei Jia is currently with Element AI.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

