Joint Autoregressive and Hierarchical Priors for
Learned Image Compression

David Minnen, Johannes Ballé, George Toderici
Google Research
{dminnen, jballe, gtoderici}@google.com

Abstract
Recent models for learned image compression are based on autoencoders that learn
approximately invertible mappings from pixels to a quantized latent representation.
The transforms are combined with an entropy model, which is a prior on the latent
representation that can be used with standard arithmetic coding algorithms to generate a compressed bitstream. Recently, hierarchical entropy models were introduced
as a way to exploit more structure in the latents than previous fully factorized priors,
improving compression performance while maintaining end-to-end optimization.
Inspired by the success of autoregressive priors in probabilistic generative models, we examine autoregressive, hierarchical, and combined priors as alternatives,
weighing their costs and benefits in the context of image compression. While it
is well known that autoregressive models can incur a significant computational
penalty, we find that in terms of compression performance, autoregressive and hierarchical priors are complementary and can be combined to exploit the probabilistic
structure in the latents better than all previous learned models. The combined
model yields state-of-the-art rate–distortion performance and generates smaller
files than existing methods: 15.8% rate reductions over the baseline hierarchical
model and 59.8%, 35%, and 8.4% savings over JPEG, JPEG2000, and BPG, respectively. To the best of our knowledge, our model is the first learning-based
method to outperform the top standard image codec (BPG) on both the PSNR and
MS-SSIM distortion metrics.

1

Introduction

Most recent methods for learning-based, lossy image compression adopt an approach based on
transform coding [1]. In this approach, image compression is achieved by first mapping pixel
data into a quantized latent representation and then losslessly compressing the latents. Within the
deep learning research community, the transforms typically take the form of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), which learn nonlinear functions with the potential to map pixels into a more
compressible latent space than the linear transforms used by traditional image codecs. This nonlinear
transform coding method resembles an autoencoder [2], [3], which consists of an encoder transform
from the data (in this case, pixels) to a reduced-dimensionality latent space, and a decoder, an
approximate inverse function that maps latents back to pixels. While dimensionality reduction
can be seen as a simple form of compression, it is not equivalent since the goal of compression
is to reduce the entropy of the representation under a prior probability model shared between the
sender and the receiver (the entropy model), not just to reduce the dimensionality. To improve
compression performance, recent methods have focused on better encoder/decoder transforms and
on more sophisticated entropy models [4]–[14]. Finally, the entropy model is used in conjunction
with standard entropy coding algorithms such as arithmetic, range, or Huffman coding [15]–[17] to
generate a compressed bitstream.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

