Leveraged volume sampling for linear regression
Michał Dereziński and Manfred K. Warmuth
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Santa Cruz
mderezin@berkeley.edu, manfred@ucsc.edu

Daniel Hsu
Computer Science Department
Columbia University, New York
djhsu@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Suppose an n ⇥ d design matrix in a linear regression problem is given, but the
response for each point is hidden unless explicitly requested. The goal is to sample
only a small number k ⌧ n of the responses, and then produce a weight vector
whose sum of squares loss over all points is at most 1 + ✏ times the minimum.
When k is very small (e.g., k = d), jointly sampling diverse subsets of points
is crucial. One such method called volume sampling has a unique and desirable
property that the weight vector it produces is an unbiased estimate of the optimum.
It is therefore natural to ask if this method offers the optimal unbiased estimate in
terms of the number of responses k needed to achieve a 1 + ✏ loss approximation.
Surprisingly we show that volume sampling can have poor behavior when we
require a very accurate approximation – indeed worse than some i.i.d. sampling
techniques whose estimates are biased, such as leverage score sampling. We then
develop a new rescaled variant of volume sampling that produces an unbiased
estimate which avoids this bad behavior and has at least as good a tail bound as
leverage score sampling: sample size k = O(d log d + d/✏) suffices to guarantee
total loss at most 1 + ✏ times the minimum with high probability. Thus we improve
on the best previously known sample size for an unbiased estimator, k = O(d2 /✏).
Our rescaling procedure leads to a new efficient algorithm for volume sampling
which is based on a determinantal rejection sampling technique with potentially
broader applications to determinantal point processes. Other contributions include
introducing the combinatorics needed for rescaled volume sampling and developing
tail bounds for sums of dependent random matrices which arise in the process.

1

Introduction

Consider a linear regression problem where the input points in Rd are provided, but the associated
response for each point is withheld unless explicitly requested. The goal is to sample the responses
for just a small subset of inputs, and then produce a weight vector whose total square loss on all n
points is at most 1 + ✏ times that of the optimum.1 This scenario is relevant in many applications
where data points are cheap to obtain but responses are expensive. Surprisingly, with the aid of
having all input points available, such multiplicative loss bounds are achievable without any range
dependence on the points or responses common in on-line learning [see, e.g., 8].
A natural and intuitive approach to this problem is volume sampling, since it prefers “diverse” sets of
points that will likely result in a weight vector with low total loss, regardless of what the corresponding
responses turn out to be [11]. Volume sampling is closely related to optimal design criteria [18, 26],
which are appropriate under statistical models of the responses; here we study a worst-case setting
where the algorithm must use randomization to guard itself against worst-case responses.
1

The total loss being 1 + ✏ times the optimum is the same as the regret being ✏ times the optimum.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

