The Nearest Neighbor Information Estimator is
Adaptively Near Minimax Rate-Optimal

Jiantao Jiao
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of California, Berkeley
jiantao@berkeley.edu
Weihao Gao
Department of ECE
Coordinated Science Laboratory
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
wgao9@illinois.edu
Yanjun Han
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
yjhan@stanford.edu

Abstract
We analyze the Kozachenko–Leonenko (KL) fixed k-nearest neighbor estimator
for the differential entropy. We obtain the first uniform upper bound on its performance for any fixed k over Hölder balls on a torus without assuming any conditions on how close the density could be from zero. Accompanying a recent minimax lower bound over the Hölder ball, we show that the KL estimator for any fixed
k is achieving the minimax rates up to logarithmic factors without cognizance of
the smoothness parameter s of the Hölder ball for s ∈ (0, 2] and arbitrary dimension d, rendering it the first estimator that provably satisfies this property.

1

Introduction

Information theoretic measures such as entropy, Kullback-Leibler divergence and mutual information quantify the amount of information among random variables. They have many applications in
modern machine learning tasks, such as classification [48], clustering [46, 58, 10, 41] and feature
selection [1, 17]. Information theoretic measures and their variants can also be applied in several
data science domains such as causal inference [18], sociology [49] and computational biology [36].
Estimating information theoretic measures from data is a crucial sub-routine in the aforementioned
applications and has attracted much interest in statistics community. In this paper, we study the problem of estimating Shannon differential entropy, which is the basis of estimating other information
theoretic measures for continuous random variables.
Suppose we observe n independent identically distributed random vectors X = {X1 , . . . , Xn }
drawn from density function f where Xi ∈ Rd . We consider the problem of estimating the differential entropy
R
h(f ) = − f (x) ln f (x)dx ,
(1)
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

