Cooperative Learning of Audio and Video Models
from Self-Supervised Synchronization

Bruno Korbar
Dartmouth College
bruno.18@dartmouth.edu

Du Tran
Facebook Research
trandu@fb.com

Lorenzo Torresani
Dartmouth College
LT@dartmouth.edu

Abstract
There is a natural correlation between the visual and auditive elements of a video.
In this work we leverage this connection to learn general and effective models
for both audio and video analysis from self-supervised temporal synchronization.
We demonstrate that a calibrated curriculum learning scheme, a careful choice of
negative examples, and the use of a contrastive loss are critical ingredients to obtain
powerful multi-sensory representations from models optimized to discern temporal
synchronization of audio-video pairs. Without further finetuning, the resulting
audio features achieve performance superior or comparable to the state-of-the-art
on established audio classification benchmarks (DCASE2014 and ESC-50). At the
same time, our visual subnet provides a very effective initialization to improve the
accuracy of video-based action recognition models: compared to learning from
scratch, our self-supervised pretraining yields a remarkable gain of +19.9% in
action recognition accuracy on UCF101 and a boost of +17.7% on HMDB51.

1

Introduction

Image recognition has undergone dramatic progress since the breakthrough of AlexNet [1] and the
widespread availability of progressively large datasets such as Imagenet [2]. Models pretrained on
Imagenet [2] have enabled the development of feature extractors achieving strong performance on a
variety of related still-image analysis tasks, including object detection [3, 4], pose estimation [5, 6]
and semantic segmentation [7, 8]. Deep learning approaches in video understanding have been less
successful, as evidenced by the fact that deep spatiotemporal models trained on videos [9, 10] still
barely outperform the best hand-crafted features [11].
Researchers have devoted significant and laudable efforts in creating video benchmarks of much
larger size compared to the past [9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16], both in terms of number of examples as well
as number of action classes. The growth in scale has enabled more effective end-to-end training
of deep models and the finer-grained definition of classes has made possible the learning of more
discriminative features. This has inspired a new generation of deep video models [17, 18, 19] greatly
advancing the field. But such progress has come at a high cost in terms of time-consuming manual
annotations. In addition, one may argue that future significant improvements by mere dataset growth
will require scaling up existing benchmarks by one or more orders of magnitude, which may not be
possible in the short term.
In this paper, we explore a different avenue by introducing a self-supervision scheme that does not
require any manual labeling of videos and thus can be applied to create arbitrarily-large training sets
for video modeling. Our idea is to leverage the natural synergy between the audio and the visual
channels of a video by introducing a self-supervised task that entails deciding whether a given audio
sample and a visual sequence are either “in-sync” or “out-of-sync.” This is formally defined as a
binary classification problem which we name “Audio-Visual Temporal Synchronization” (AVTS). We
propose to address this task via a two-stream network, where one stream receives audio as input and
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

