On the Local Minima of the Empirical Risk

Chi Jin∗
University of California, Berkeley
chijin@cs.berkeley.edu
Rong Ge
Duke University
rongge@cs.duke.edu

Lydia T. Liu∗
University of California, Berkeley
lydiatliu@cs.berkeley.edu
Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Population risk is always of primary interest in machine learning; however, learning
algorithms only have access to the empirical risk. Even for applications with
nonconvex nonsmooth losses (such as modern deep networks), the population
risk is generally significantly more well-behaved from an optimization point of
view than the empirical risk. In particular, sampling can create many spurious
local minima. We consider a general framework which aims to optimize a smooth
nonconvex function F (population risk) given only access to an approximation f
(empirical risk) that is pointwise close to F (i.e., kF − f k∞ ≤ ν). Our objective
is to find the -approximate local minima of the underlying function F while
avoiding the shallow local minima—arising because of the tolerance ν—which
exist only in f . We propose a simple algorithm based on stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) on a smoothed version of f that is guaranteed to achieve our goal as long as
ν ≤ O(1.5 /d). We also provide an almost matching lower bound showing that
our algorithm achieves optimal error tolerance ν among all algorithms making
a polynomial number of queries of f . As a concrete example, we show that our
results can be directly used to give sample complexities for learning a ReLU unit.

1

Introduction

The optimization of nonconvex loss functions has been key to the success of modern machine
learning. While classical research in optimization focused on convex functions having a unique
critical point that is both locally and globally minimal, a nonconvex function can have many local
maxima, local minima and saddle points, all of which pose significant challenges for optimization.
A recent line of research has yielded significant progress on one aspect of this problem—it has
been established that favorable rates of convergence can be obtained even in the presence of saddle
points, using simple variants of stochastic gradient descent [e.g., Ge et al., 2015, Carmon et al., 2016,
Agarwal et al., 2017, Jin et al., 2017a]. These research results have introduced new analysis tools
for nonconvex optimization, and it is of significant interest to begin to use these tools to attack the
problems associated with undesirable local minima.
It is NP-hard to avoid all of the local minima of a general nonconvex function. But there are some
classes of local minima where we might expect that simple procedures—such as stochastic gradient
descent—may continue to prove effective. In particular, in this paper we consider local minima that
are created by small perturbations to an underlying smooth objective function. Such a setting is
natural in statistical machine learning problems, where data arise from an underlying population, and
the population risk, F , is obtained as an expectation over a continuous loss function and is hence
∗

The first two authors contributed equally.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

