Paraphrasing Complex Network: Network
Compression via Factor Transfer

Jangho Kim
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
kjh91@snu.ac.kr

SeongUk Park
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
swpark0703@snu.ac.kr

Nojun Kwak
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
nojunk@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Many researchers have sought ways of model compression to reduce the size of
a deep neural network (DNN) with minimal performance degradation in order
to use DNNs in embedded systems. Among the model compression methods, a
method called knowledge transfer is to train a student network with a stronger
teacher network. In this paper, we propose a novel knowledge transfer method
which uses convolutional operations to paraphrase teacher’s knowledge and to
translate it for the student. This is done by two convolutional modules, which are
called a paraphraser and a translator. The paraphraser is trained in an unsupervised
manner to extract the teacher factors which are defined as paraphrased information
of the teacher network. The translator located at the student network extracts the
student factors and helps to translate the teacher factors by mimicking them. We
observed that our student network trained with the proposed factor transfer method
outperforms the ones trained with conventional knowledge transfer methods.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural nets (DNNs) have shown their remarkable capabilities in various parts
of computer vision and pattern recognition tasks such as image classification, object detection,
localization and segmentation. Although many researchers have studied DNNs for their application
in various fields, high-performance DNNs generally require a vast amount of computational power
and storage, which makes them difficult to be used in embedded systems that have limited resources.
Given the size of the equipment we use, tremendous GPU computations are not generally available in
real world applications.
To deal with this problem, many researchers studied DNN structures to make DNNs smaller and
more efficient to be applicable for embedded systems. These studies can be roughly classified into
four categories: 1) network pruning, 2) network quantization, 3) building efficient small networks,
and 4) knowledge transfer. First, network pruning is a way to reduce network complexity by pruning
the redundant and non-informative weights in a pretrained model [26, 17, 7]. Second, network
quantization compresses a pretrained model by reducing the number of bits used to represent the
weight parameters of the pretrained model [20, 27]. Third, Iandola et al. [13] and Howard et al. [11]
proposed efficient small network models which fit into the restricted resources. Finally, knowledge
transfer (KT) method is to transfer large model’s information to a smaller network [22, 30, 10].
Among the four approaches, in this paper, we focus on the last method, knowledge transfer. Previous
studies such as attention transfer (AT) [30] and knowledge distillation (KD) [10] have achieved
meaningful results in the field of knowledge transfer, where their loss function can be collectively
summarized as the difference between the attention maps or softened distributions of the teacher and
the student networks. These methods directly transfer the teacher network’s softened distribution [10]
or its attention map [30] to the student network, inducing the student to mimic the teacher.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

