Approximate Knowledge Compilation by
Online Collapsed Importance Sampling
Tal Friedman
Computer Science Department
University of California
Los Angeles, CA 90095
tal@cs.ucla.edu

Guy Van den Broeck
Computer Science Department
University of California
Los Angeles, CA 90095
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We introduce collapsed compilation, a novel approximate inference algorithm for
discrete probabilistic graphical models. It is a collapsed sampling algorithm that
incrementally selects which variable to sample next based on the partial compilation obtained so far. This online collapsing, together with knowledge compilation
inference on the remaining variables, naturally exploits local structure and contextspecific independence in the distribution. These properties are used implicitly
in exact inference, but are difficult to harness for approximate inference. Moreover, by having a partially compiled circuit available during sampling, collapsed
compilation has access to a highly effective proposal distribution for importance
sampling. Our experimental evaluation shows that collapsed compilation performs
well on standard benchmarks. In particular, when the amount of exact inference is
equally limited, collapsed compilation is competitive with the state of the art, and
outperforms it on several benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Modern probabilistic inference algorithms for discrete graphical models are designed to exploit
key properties of the distribution. In addition to classical conditional independence, they exploit
local structure in the individual factors, determinism coming from logical constraints (Darwiche,
2009), and the context-specific independencies that arise in such distributions (Boutilier et al., 1996).
The knowledge compilation approach in particular forms the basis for state-of-the-art probabilistic
inference algorithms in a wide range of models, including Bayesian networks (Chavira & Darwiche,
2008), factor graphs (Choi et al., 2013), statistical relational models (Chavira et al., 2006; Van den
Broeck, 2013), probabilistic programs (Fierens et al., 2015), probabilistic databases (Van den Broeck
& Suciu, 2017), and dynamic Bayesian networks (Vlasselaer et al., 2016). Based on logical reasoning
techniques, knowledge compilation algorithms construct an arithmetic circuit representation of
the distribution on which inference is guaranteed to be efficient (Darwiche, 2003). The inference
algorithms listed above have one common limitation: they perform exact inference by compiling a
worst-case exponentially-sized arithmetic circuit representation. Our goal in this paper is to upgrade
these techniques to allow for approximate probabilistic inference, while still naturally exploiting
the structure in the distribution. We aim to open up a new direction towards scaling up knowledge
compilation to larger distributions.
When knowledge compilation produces circuits that are too large, a natural solution is to sample some
random variables and do exact compilation on the smaller distribution over the remaining variables.
This collapsed sampling approach suffers from two problems. First, collapsed sampling assumes that
one can determine a priori which variables need to be sampled to make the distribution amenable to
exact inference. When dealing with large amounts of context-specific independence, it is difficult to
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

