Assessing Generative Models via Precision and Recall
Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi∗
MPI for Intelligent Systems,
Max Planck ETH Center
for Learning Systems

Olivier Bachem
Google Brain

Olivier Bousquet
Google Brain

Mario Lucic
Google Brain

Sylvain Gelly
Google Brain

Abstract
Recent advances in generative modeling have led to an increased interest in the
study of statistical divergences as means of model comparison. Commonly used
evaluation methods, such as the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID), correlate well
with the perceived quality of samples and are sensitive to mode dropping. However,
these metrics are unable to distinguish between different failure cases since they
only yield one-dimensional scores. We propose a novel definition of precision
and recall for distributions which disentangles the divergence into two separate
dimensions. The proposed notion is intuitive, retains desirable properties, and
naturally leads to an efficient algorithm that can be used to evaluate generative
models. We relate this notion to total variation as well as to recent evaluation
metrics such as Inception Score and FID. To demonstrate the practical utility
of the proposed approach we perform an empirical study on several variants of
Generative Adversarial Networks and Variational Autoencoders. In an extensive
set of experiments we show that the proposed metric is able to disentangle the
quality of generated samples from the coverage of the target distribution.

1 Introduction
Deep generative models, such as Variational Autoencoders (VAE) [12] and Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN) [8], have received a great deal of attention due to their ability to learn complex,
high-dimensional distributions. One of the biggest impediments to future research is the lack of
quantitative evaluation methods to accurately assess the quality of trained models. Without a proper
evaluation metric researchers often need to visually inspect generated samples or resort to qualitative
techniques which can be subjective. One of the main difficulties for quantitative assessment lies in
the fact that the distribution is only specified implicitly – one can learn to sample from a predefined
distribution, but cannot evaluate the likelihood efficiently. In fact, even if likelihood computation were
computationally tractable, it might be inadequate and misleading for high-dimensional problems [22].
As a result, surrogate metrics are often used to assess the quality of the trained models. Some proposed
measures, such as Inception Score (IS) [20] and Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [9], have shown
promising results in practice. In particular, FID has been shown to be robust to image corruption, it
correlates well with the visual fidelity of the samples, and it can be computed on unlabeled data.
However, all of the metrics commonly applied to evaluating generative models share a crucial
weakness: Since they yield a one-dimensional score, they are unable to distinguish between different
failure cases. For example, the generative models shown in Figure 1 obtain similar FIDs but exhibit
∗

This work was done during an internship at Google Brain.
Correspondence: msajjadi.com, bachem@google.com, lucic@google.com.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

