Learning to Play With Intrinsically-Motivated,
Self-Aware Agents
Nick Haber1,2,3,⇤, Damian Mrowca4,⇤, Stephanie Wang4 , Li Fei-Fei4 , and
Daniel L. K. Yamins1,4,5
Departments of Psychology1 , Pediatrics2 , Biomedical Data Science3 , Computer Science4 , and Wu
Tsai Neurosciences Institute5 , Stanford, CA 94305
{nhaber, mrowca}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Infants are experts at playing, with an amazing ability to generate novel structured
behaviors in unstructured environments that lack clear extrinsic reward signals.
We seek to mathematically formalize these abilities using a neural network that
implements curiosity-driven intrinsic motivation. Using a simple but ecologically
naturalistic simulated environment in which an agent can move and interact with
objects it sees, we propose a “world-model” network that learns to predict the
dynamic consequences of the agent’s actions. Simultaneously, we train a separate
explicit “self-model” that allows the agent to track the error map of its worldmodel. It then uses the self-model to adversarially challenge the developing
world-model. We demonstrate that this policy causes the agent to explore novel
and informative interactions with its environment, leading to the generation of a
spectrum of complex behaviors, including ego-motion prediction, object attention,
and object gathering. Moreover, the world-model that the agent learns supports
improved performance on object dynamics prediction, detection, localization and
recognition tasks. Taken together, our results are initial steps toward creating
flexible autonomous agents that self-supervise in realistic physical environments.

1

Introduction

Truly autonomous artificial agents must be able to discover useful behaviors in complex environments
without having humans present to constantly pre-specify tasks and rewards. This ability is beyond
that of today’s most advanced autonomous robots. In contrast, human infants exhibit a wide range of
interesting, apparently spontaneous, visuo-motor behaviors — including navigating their environment,
seeking out and attending to novel objects, and engaging physically with these objects in novel and
surprising ways [4, 9, 13, 15, 20, 21, 44]. In short, young children are excellent at playing —
“scientists in the crib” [13] who create, intentionally, events that are new, informative, and exciting to
them [9, 42]. Aside from being fun, play behaviors are an active learning process [40], driving selfsupervised learning of representations underlying sensory judgments and motor planning [4, 15, 24].
But how can we use these observations on infant play to improve artificial intelligence? AI theorists
have long realized that playful behavior in the absence of rewards can be mathematically formalized
via loss functions encoding intrinsic reward signals, in which an agent chooses actions that result
in novel but predictable states that maximize its learning [38]. These ideas rely on a virtuous cycle
in which the agent actively self-curricularizes as it pushes the boundaries of what its world-modelprediction systems can achieve. As world-modeling capacity improves, what used to be novel
becomes old hat, and the cycle starts again.
⇤

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

