Topkapi: Parallel and Fast Sketches for Finding
Top-K Frequent Elements

Ankush Mandal
School of Computer Science
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA
ankush@gatech.edu

He Jiang
Department of Computer Science
Rice University
Houston, TX
cary.jiang@rice.edu

Anshumali Shrivastava
Department of Computer Science
Rice University
Houston, TX
anshumali@rice.edu

Vivek Sarkar
School of Computer Science
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA
vsarkar@gatech.edu

Abstract
Identifying the top-K frequent items in a collection or data stream is one of the
most common and important operations in large data processing systems. As a result, several solutions have been proposed to solve this problem approximately. We
observe that the existing algorithms, although theoretically sound, are suboptimal
from the performance perspective because of their limitations in exploiting parallelism in modern distributed compute settings. In particular, for identifying top-K
frequent items, Count-Min Sketch (CMS) has an excellent update time, but lacks the
important property of reducibility which is needed for exploiting available massive
data parallelism. On the other end, the popular Frequent algorithm (FA) leads to
reducible summaries but its update costs are significant. In this paper, we present
Topkapi, a fast and parallel algorithm for finding top-K frequent items, which
gives the best of both worlds, i.e., it is reducible and has fast update time similar
to CMS. Topkapi possesses strong theoretical guarantees and leads to significant
performance gains due to increased parallelism, relative to past work.

1

Introduction

Counting and identifying frequently occurring items, or “heavy hitters”, is one of the most important
and intuitive metrics to gain insight into large-scale data. The naive way to extract top-K items from a
data stream is to count the exact number of occurrences of each distinct item, then sort the histogram
to obtain the most frequent items. This naive but popular approach suffers from a time complexity of
O(n log n), in which n is the total number of elements in the dataset, and also a space requirement
of O(n), assuming sorting is performed in linear space. In a distributed environment, where data
sharding is common, the problem is quite severe. We would have to keep a local frequency histogram
on each node, which is usually of size n itself. These local histograms will need to be communicated
across the nodes, and followed by global merge and sort operations. Thus, each node would need
to communicate O(n) sized histograms, which can lead to a significant communication bottleneck.
Consider the simple task of keeping track of most popular phrases, of up to 4 words, on twitter feeds.
With a vocabulary of over a million, the total number of items we need to keep track of becomes
n = (106 )4 = 1024 . Similarly, counts of the number of clicks on “Amazon.com”, given specific
user’s features and their combinations, in the past hour, are common in clickthrough prediction [12].
In general, the O(n) time complexity becomes unacceptably large for “big data”.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

