Attention in Convolutional LSTM for Gesture
Recognition

Liang Zhang∗
Xidian University
liangzhang@xidian.edu.cn

Guangming Zhu∗
Xidian University
gmzhu@xidian.edu.cn

Lin Mei
Xidian University
l_mei72@hotmail.com
Syed Afaq Ali Shah
Central Queensland University
afaq.shah@uwa.edu.au

Peiyi Shen
Xidian University
pyshen@xidian.edu.cn
Mohammed Bennamoun
University of Western Australia
mohammed.bennamoun@uwa.edu.au

Abstract
Convolutional long short-term memory (LSTM) networks have been widely used
for action/gesture recognition, and different attention mechanisms have also been
embedded into the LSTM or the convolutional LSTM (ConvLSTM) networks.
Based on the previous gesture recognition architectures which combine the threedimensional convolution neural network (3DCNN) and ConvLSTM, this paper
explores the effects of attention mechanism in ConvLSTM. Several variants of ConvLSTM are evaluated: (a) Removing the convolutional structures of the three gates
in ConvLSTM, (b) Applying the attention mechanism on the input of ConvLSTM,
(c) Reconstructing the input and (d) output gates respectively with the modified
channel-wise attention mechanism. The evaluation results demonstrate that the
spatial convolutions in the three gates scarcely contribute to the spatiotemporal
feature fusion, and the attention mechanisms embedded into the input and output
gates cannot improve the feature fusion. In other words, ConvLSTM mainly contributes to the temporal fusion along with the recurrent steps to learn the long-term
spatiotemporal features, when taking as input the spatial or spatiotemporal features.
On this basis, a new variant of LSTM is derived, in which the convolutional structures are only embedded into the input-to-state transition of LSTM. The code of
the LSTM variants is publicly available2 .

1

Introduction

Long short-term memory (LSTM) [1] recurrent neural networks are widely used to process sequential
data [2]. Several variants of LSTM have been proposed since its inception in 1995 [3]. By extending
the fully connected LSTM (FC-LSTM) to have convolutional structures in both the input-to-state
and state-to-state transitions, Shi et al. [4] proposed the convolutional LSTM (ConvLSTM) network
to process sequential images for precipitation nowcasting. Thereafter, ConvLSTM has been used
for action recognition [5, 6], gesture recognition [7–9] and in other fields [10–12]. When LSTM is
used to process video or sequential images, the spatial features of two-dimensional convolutional
∗
2

Equal Contribution
https://github.com/GuangmingZhu/AttentionConvLSTM

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

