Privacy Amplification by Subsampling: Tight
Analyses via Couplings and Divergences
Borja Balle
Amazon Research

Gilles Barthe
IMDEA Software Institute

Marco Gaboardi
University at Buffalo, SUNY

pigem@amazon.co.uk

gilles.barthe@imdea.org

gaboardi@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Differential privacy comes equipped with multiple analytical tools for the design
of private data analyses. One important tool is the so-called “privacy amplification
by subsampling” principle, which ensures that a differentially private mechanism
run on a random subsample of a population provides higher privacy guarantees
than when run on the entire population. Several instances of this principle have
been studied for different random subsampling methods, each with an ad-hoc
analysis. In this paper we present a general method that recovers and improves prior
analyses, yields lower bounds and derives new instances of privacy amplification
by subsampling. Our method leverages a characterization of differential privacy as
a divergence which emerged in the program verification community. Furthermore,
it introduces new tools, including advanced joint convexity and privacy profiles,
which might be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Subsampling is a fundamental tool in the design and analysis of differentially private mechanisms.
Broadly speaking, the intuition behind the “privacy amplification by subsampling” principle is that
the privacy guarantees of a differentially private mechanism can be amplified by applying it to a
small random subsample of records from a given dataset. In machine learning, many classes of
algorithms involve sampling operations, e.g. stochastic optimization methods and Bayesian inference
algorithms, and it is not surprising that results quantifying the privacy amplification obtained via
subsampling play a key role in designing differentially private versions of these learning algorithms
[Bassily et al., 2014, Wang et al., 2015, Abadi et al., 2016, Jälkö et al., 2017, Park et al., 2016b,a].
Additionally, from a practical standpoint subsampling provides a straightforward method to obtain
privacy amplification when the final mechanism is only available as a black-box. For example, in
Apple’s iOS and Google’s Chrome deployments of differential privacy for data collection the privacy
parameters are hard-coded into the implementation and cannot be modified by the user. In this type
of settings, if the default privacy parameters are not satisfactory one could achieve a stronger privacy
guarantee by devising a strategy that only submits to the mechanism a random sample of the data.
Despite the practical importance of subsampling, existing tools to bound privacy amplification only
work for specific forms of subsampling and typically come with cumbersome proofs providing no
information about the tightness of the resulting bounds. In this paper we remedy this situation by providing a general framework for deriving tight privacy amplification results that can be applied to any
of the subsampling strategies considered in the literature. Our framework builds on a characterization
of differential privacy in terms of α-divergences [Barthe and Olmedo, 2013]. This characterization
has been used before for program verification [Barthe et al., 2012, 2016], while we use it here for
the first time in the context of algorithm analysis. In order to do this, we develop several novel
analytical tools, including advanced joint convexity – a property of α-divergence with respect to
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

