Reinforcement Learning for Solving the
Vehicle Routing Problem

Mohammadreza Nazari Afshin Oroojlooy Martin Takáč Lawrence V. Snyder
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015
{mon314,afo214,takac,lvs2}@lehigh.edu

Abstract
We present an end-to-end framework for solving the Vehicle Routing Problem
(VRP) using reinforcement learning. In this approach, we train a single policy
model that finds near-optimal solutions for a broad range of problem instances of
similar size, only by observing the reward signals and following feasibility rules.
We consider a parameterized stochastic policy, and by applying a policy gradient
algorithm to optimize its parameters, the trained model produces the solution as
a sequence of consecutive actions in real time, without the need to re-train for
every new problem instance. On capacitated VRP, our approach outperforms
classical heuristics and Google’s OR-Tools on medium-sized instances in solution
quality with comparable computation time (after training). We demonstrate how
our approach can handle problems with split delivery and explore the effect of such
deliveries on the solution quality. Our proposed framework can be applied to other
variants of the VRP such as the stochastic VRP, and has the potential to be applied
more generally to combinatorial optimization problems.

1

Introduction

The Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) is a combinatorial optimization problem that has been studied
in applied mathematics and computer science for decades. VRP is known to be a computationally
difficult problem for which many exact and heuristic algorithms have been proposed, but providing
fast and reliable solutions is still a challenging task. In the simplest form of the VRP, a single
capacitated vehicle is responsible for delivering items to multiple customer nodes; the vehicle must
return to the depot to pick up additional items when it runs out. The objective is to optimize a set of
routes, all beginning and ending at a given node, called the depot, in order to attain the maximum
possible reward, which is often the negative of the total vehicle distance or average service time. This
problem is computationally difficult to solve to optimality, even with only a few hundred customer
nodes [12], and is classified as an NP-hard problem. For an overview of the VRP, see, for example,
[15, 23, 24, 33].
The prospect of new algorithm discovery, without any hand-engineered reasoning, makes neural
networks and reinforcement learning a compelling choice that has the potential to be an important
milestone on the path toward solving these problems. In this work, we develop a framework with
the capability of solving a wide variety of combinatorial optimization problems using Reinforcement
Learning (RL) and show how it can be applied to solve the VRP. For this purpose, we consider the
Markov Decision Process (MDP) formulation of the problem, in which the optimal solution can be
viewed as a sequence of decisions. This allows us to use RL to produce near-optimal solutions by
increasing the probability of decoding “desirable” sequences.
A naive approach would be to train an instance-specific policy by considering every instance separately.
In this approach, an RL algorithm needs to take many samples, maybe millions of them, from the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

