Trajectory Convolution for Action Recognition

Yue Zhao
Department of Information Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
zy317@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Yuanjun Xiong
Amazon Rekognition
yuanjx@amazon.com

Dahua Lin
Department of Information Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
How to leverage the temporal dimension is one major question in video analysis.
Recent works [47, 36] suggest an efficient approach to video feature learning,
i.e., factorizing 3D convolutions into separate components respectively for spatial
and temporal convolutions. The temporal convolution, however, comes with an
implicit assumption – the feature maps across time steps are well aligned so that
the features at the same locations can be aggregated. This assumption can be
overly strong in practical applications, especially in action recognition where the
motion serves as a crucial cue. In this work, we propose a new CNN architecture
TrajectoryNet, which incorporates trajectory convolution, a new operation for
integrating features along the temporal dimension, to replace the existing temporal
convolution. This operation explicitly takes into account the changes in contents
caused by deformation or motion, allowing the visual features to be aggregated
along the the motion paths, trajectories. On two large-scale action recognition
datasets, Something-Something V1 and Kinetics, the proposed network architecture
achieves notable improvement over strong baselines.

1

Introduction

The past decade has witnessed significant progress in action recognition [37, 38, 29, 42, 1], especially
due to the advances in deep learning. Deep learning based methods for action recognition mostly
fall into two categories, two-stream architectures [29] with 2D convolutional networks and 3D
convolutional networks [34]. Particularly, the latter has demonstrated great potential on large-scale
video datasets [19, 25], with the use of new training strategies like transferring weights from pretrained
2D CNNs [42, 1].
However, for 3D convolution, several key questions remain to be answered: (1) 3D convolution
involves substantially increased computing cost. Is it really necessary? (2) 3D convolution treats the
spatial and temporal dimensions uniformly. Is it the most effective way for video modeling? We are
not the first to raise such questions. In recent works, there have been attempts to move beyond 3D
convolution and further improve the efficiency and effectiveness of joint spatio-temporal analysis. For
instance, both Separable-3D (S3D) [47] and R(2+1)D [36] obtain superior performance by factorizing
the 3D convolutional filter into separate spatial and temporal operations. However, both methods
are based on an implicit assumption that the feature maps across frames are well aligned so that the
features at the same locations (across consecutive frames) can be aggregated via temporal convolution.
This assumption ignores the motion of people or objects, a key aspect in video analysis.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

