Banach Wasserstein GAN
Jonas Adler
Department of Mathematics
KTH - Royal institute of Technology
Research and Physics
Elekta
jonasadl@kth.se

Sebastian Lunz
Department of Applied Mathematics
and Theoretical Physics
University of Cambridge
lunz@math.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Networks (WGANs) can be used to generate
realistic samples from complicated image distributions. The Wasserstein metric
used in WGANs is based on a notion of distance between individual images, which
induces a notion of distance between probability distributions of images. So far
the community has considered `2 as the underlying distance. We generalize the
theory of WGAN with gradient penalty to Banach spaces, allowing practitioners to
select the features to emphasize in the generator. We further discuss the effect of
some particular choices of underlying norms, focusing on Sobolev norms. Finally,
we demonstrate a boost in performance for an appropriate choice of norm on
CIFAR-10 and CelebA.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are one of the most popular generative models [6]. A
neural network, the generator, learns a map that takes random input noise to samples from a given
distribution. The training involves using a second neural network, the critic, to discriminate between
real samples and the generator output.
In particular, [2, 7] introduces a critic built around the Wasserstein distance between the distribution
of true images and generated images. The Wasserstein distance is inherently based on a notion of
distance between images which in all implementations of Wasserstein GANs (WGAN) so far has
been the `2 distance. On the other hand, the imaging literature contains a wide range of metrics used
to compare images [4] that each emphasize different features of interest, such as edges or to more
accurately approximate human observer perception of the generated image.
There is hence an untapped potential in selecting a norm beyond simply the classical `2 norm. We
could for example select an appropriate Sobolev space to either emphasize edges, or large scale
behavior. In this work we extend the classical WGAN theory to work on these and more general
Banach spaces.
Our contributions are as follows:
• We introduce Banach Wasserstein GAN (BWGAN), extending WGAN implemented via a
gradient penalty (GP) term to any separable complete normed space.
• We describe how BWGAN can be efficiently implemented. The only practical difference
from classical WGAN with gradient penalty is that the `2 norm is replaced with a dual norm.
We also give theoretically grounded heuristics for the choice of regularization parameters.
• We compare BWGAN with different norms on the CIFAR-10 and CelebA datasets. Using the
Space L10 , which puts strong emphasize on outliers, we achieve an unsupervised inception
score of 8.31 on CIFAR-10, state of the art for non-progressive growing GANs.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

