Scaling the Poisson GLM to massive neural datasets
through polynomial approximations

David M. Zoltowski
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University; Princeton, NJ 08544
zoltowski@princeton.edu

Jonathan W. Pillow
Princeton Neuroscience Institute & Psychology
Princeton University; Princeton, NJ 08544
pillow@princeton.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in recording technologies have allowed neuroscientists to record
simultaneous spiking activity from hundreds to thousands of neurons in multiple
brain regions. Such large-scale recordings pose a major challenge to existing
statistical methods for neural data analysis. Here we develop highly scalable
approximate inference methods for Poisson generalized linear models (GLMs)
that require only a single pass over the data. Our approach relies on a recently
proposed method for obtaining approximate sufficient statistics for GLMs using
polynomial approximations [7], which we adapt to the Poisson GLM setting.
We focus on inference using quadratic approximations to nonlinear terms in the
Poisson GLM log-likelihood with Gaussian priors, for which we derive closed-form
solutions to the approximate maximum likelihood and MAP estimates, posterior
distribution, and marginal likelihood. We introduce an adaptive procedure to
select the polynomial approximation interval and show that the resulting method
allows for efficient and accurate inference and regularization of high-dimensional
parameters. We use the quadratic estimator to fit a fully-coupled Poisson GLM to
spike train data recorded from 831 neurons across five regions of the mouse brain
for a duration of 41 minutes, binned at 1 ms resolution. Across all neurons, this
model is fit to over 2 billion spike count bins and identifies fine-timescale statistical
dependencies between neurons within and across cortical and subcortical areas.

1

Introduction

The Poisson GLM is a standard model of neural encoding and decoding that has proved useful
for characterizing heterogeneity and correlations in neuronal populations [12, 19, 23, 15, 13]. As
new large-scale recording technologies such as the Neuropixels probe are generating simultaneous
recordings of spiking activity from hundreds or thousands of neurons [8, 21, 4], Poisson GLMs
will be a useful tool for investigating encoding and statistical dependencies within and across brain
regions. However, the size of these datasets makes inference computationally expensive. For example,
it may not be possible to store the design matrix and data in local memory.
In this work, we develop scalable approximate inference methods for Poisson GLMs to analyze
such data. Our approach follows from the polynomial approximate sufficient statistics for GLMs
framework (PASS-GLM) developed in [7], which allows for inference to be performed with only
a single pass over the dataset. This method substantially reduces computation time and storage
requirements for inference in Poisson GLMs without sacrificing time resolution, as the sufficient
statistics are computed as sums over time.
Our specific contributions are the following. Using quadratic approximations to nonlinear terms in
the log-likelihood, we derive the closed-form approximate maximum likelihood and MAP estimates
of the parameters in Poisson GLMs with general link functions and Gaussian priors. We introduce
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

