Embedding Logical Queries on Knowledge Graphs

William L. Hamilton

Payal Bajaj

Marinka Zitnik

Dan Jurafsky†

Jure Leskovec

{wleif, pbajaj, jurafsky}@stanford.edu, {jure, marinka}@cs.stanford.edu
Stanford University, Department of Computer Science, † Department of Linguistics

Abstract
Learning low-dimensional embeddings of knowledge graphs is a powerful approach used to predict unobserved or missing edges between entities. However,
an open challenge in this area is developing techniques that can go beyond simple
edge prediction and handle more complex logical queries, which might involve
multiple unobserved edges, entities, and variables. For instance, given an incomplete biological knowledge graph, we might want to predict what drugs are likely
to target proteins involved with both diseases X and Y?—a query that requires
reasoning about all possible proteins that might interact with diseases X and Y.
Here we introduce a framework to efficiently make predictions about conjunctive
logical queries—a flexible but tractable subset of first-order logic—on incomplete
knowledge graphs. In our approach, we embed graph nodes in a low-dimensional
space and represent logical operators as learned geometric operations (e.g., translation, rotation) in this embedding space. By performing logical operations within a
low-dimensional embedding space, our approach achieves a time complexity that
is linear in the number of query variables, compared to the exponential complexity
required by a naive enumeration-based approach. We demonstrate the utility of
this framework in two application studies on real-world datasets with millions
of relations: predicting logical relationships in a network of drug-gene-disease
interactions and in a graph-based representation of social interactions derived from
a popular web forum.

1

Introduction

A wide variety of heterogeneous data can be naturally represented as networks of interactions between
typed entities, and a fundamental task in machine learning is developing techniques to discover or
predict unobserved edges using this graph-structured data. Link prediction [25], recommender
systems [48], and knowledge base completion [28] are all instances of this common task, where the
goal is to predict unobserved edges between nodes in a graph using an observed set of training edges.
However, an open challenge in this domain is developing techniques to make predictions about more
complex graph queries that involve multiple unobserved edges, nodes, and even variables—rather
than just single edges.
One particularly useful set of such graph queries, and the focus of this work, are conjunctive
queries, which correspond to the subset of first-order logic using only the conjunction and existential
quantification operators [1]. In terms of graph structure, conjunctive queries allow one to reason
about the existence of subgraph relationships between sets of nodes, which makes conjunctive queries
a natural focus for knowledge graph applications. For example, given an incomplete biological
knowledge graph—containing known interactions between drugs, diseases, and proteins—one could
pose the conjunctive query: “what protein nodes are likely to be associated with diseases that have
both symptoms X and Y?” In this query, the disease node is an existentially quantified variable—
i.e., we only care that some disease connects the protein node to these symptom nodes X and Y.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

