Adversarial Risk and Robustness: General Definitions
and Implications for the Uniform Distribution

Dimitrios I. Diochnos∗
University of Virginia
diochnos@virginia.edu

Saeed Mahloujifar∗
University of Virginia
saeed@virginia.edu

Mohammad Mahmoody†
University of Virginia
mohammad@virginia.edu

Abstract
We study adversarial perturbations when the instances are uniformly distributed
over {0, 1}n . We study both “inherent” bounds that apply to any problem and any
classifier for such a problem as well as bounds that apply to specific problems and
specific hypothesis classes.
As the current literature contains multiple definitions of adversarial risk and robustness, we start by giving a taxonomy for these definitions based on their direct
goals; we identify one of them as the one guaranteeing misclassification by pushing the instances to the error region. We then study some classic algorithms for
learning monotone conjunctions and compare their adversarial robustness under
different definitions by attacking the hypotheses using instances drawn from the
uniform distribution. We observe that sometimes these definitions lead to significantly different bounds. Thus, this study advocates for the use of the error-region
definition, even though other definitions, in other contexts with context-dependent
assumptions, may coincide with the error-region definition.
Using the error-region definition of adversarial perturbations, we then study inherent bounds on risk and robustness of any classifier for any classification problem
whose instances are uniformly distributed over {0, 1}n . Using the isoperimetric
inequality for the Boolean hypercube, we show that for√initial error 0.01, there
always exists an adversarial perturbation that changes O( n) bits of the instances
to increase the risk to 0.5, making classifier’s decisions meaningless. Furthermore,
√
by also using the central limit theorem we show that when n → ∞, at most c · n
bits of perturbations, for a√
universal constant c < 1.17, suffice for increasing the
risk to 0.5, and the same c n bits of perturbations√on average suffice to increase
the risk to 1, hence bounding the robustness by c · n.

1

Introduction

In recent years, modern machine learning tools (e.g., neural networks) have pushed to new heights
the classification results on traditional datasets that are used as testbeds for various machine learning
methods.1 As a result, the properties of these methods have been put into further scrutiny. In
particular, studying the robustness of the trained models in various adversarial contexts has gained
special attention, leading to the active area of adversarial machine learning.
Within adversarial machine learning, one particular direction of research that has gained attention
in recent years deals with the study of the so-called adversarial perturbations of the test instances.
This line of work was particularly popularized, in part, by the work of Szegedy et al. [32] within
∗

Authors have contributed equally.
Supported by NSF CAREER CCF-1350939 and University of Virginia SEAS Research Innovation Award.
1
For example, http://rodrigob.github.io/are_we_there_yet/build/ has a summary of state-of-the-art results.

†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

