Dimensionality Reduction for Stationary Time Series
via Stochastic Nonconvex Optimization
Minshuo Chen1 Lin F. Yang2 Mengdi Wang2 Tuo Zhao1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Princeton University
1
{mchen393, tourzhao}@gatech.edu 2 {lin.yang, mengdiw}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Stochastic optimization naturally arises in machine learning. Efficient algorithms
with provable guarantees, however, are still largely missing, when the objective
function is nonconvex and the data points are dependent. This paper studies this
fundamental challenge through a streaming PCA problem for stationary time series
data. Specifically, our goal is to estimate the principle component of time series data
with respect to the covariance matrix of the stationary distribution. Computationally,
we propose a variant of Oja’s algorithm combined with downsampling to control
the bias of the stochastic gradient caused by the data dependency. Theoretically, we
quantify the uncertainty of our proposed stochastic algorithm based on diffusion
approximations. This allows us to prove the asymptotic rate of convergence and
further implies near optimal asymptotic sample complexity. Numerical experiments
are provided to support our analysis.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning problems can be formulated as a stochastic optimization problem in the
following form,
min EZ⇠D [f (u, Z)] subject to u 2 U,
(1.1)
u

where f is a possibly nonconvex loss function, Z denotes the random sample generated from some
underlying distribution D (also known as statistical model), u is the parameter of our interest, and
U is a possibly nonconvex feasible set for imposing modeling constraints on u. For finite sample
settings, we usually consider n (possibly dependent) realizations of Z denoted by
1 , ..., zn }, and
P{z
n
the loss function in (1.1) is further reduced to an additive form, E[f (u, z)] = n1 i=1 f (u, zi ). For
continuously differentiable f , Robbins and Monro (1951) propose a simple iterative stochastic search
algorithm for solving (1.1). Specifically, at the k-th iteration, we obtain zk sampled from D and take
uk+1 = ⇧U [uk ⌘ru f (uk , zk )],
(1.2)
where ⌘ is the step-size parameter (also known as the learning rate in machine learning literature),
ru f (uk , zk ) is an unbiased stochastic gradient for approximating ru EZ⇠D f (uk , Z), i.e.,
Ezk ru f (uk , zk ) = ru EZ⇠D f (uk , Z),
and ⇧U is a projection operator onto the feasible set U . This seminal work is the foundation of the
research on stochastic optimization, and has a tremendous impact on the machine learning community.
The theoretical properties of such a stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm have been well
studied for decades, when both f and U are convex. For example, Sacks (1958); Bottou (1998);
Chung (2004); Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2011) show that under various regularity conditions, SGD
converges to a global optimum as k ! 1 at different rates. Such a line of research for convex and
smooth objective function f is fruitful and has been generalized to nonsmooth optimization (Duchi
et al., 2012b; Shamir and Zhang, 2013; Dang and Lan, 2015; Reddi et al., 2016).
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

