Sequential Attend, Infer, Repeat: Generative
Modelling of Moving Objects

Adam R. Kosiorek∗ § †
§

Hyunjik Kim†

Applied Artificial Intelligence Lab
Oxford Robotics Institute
University of Oxford

Ingmar Posner§
†

Yee Whye Teh†

Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Abstract
We present Sequential Attend, Infer, Repeat (SQAIR), an interpretable deep generative model for videos of moving objects. It can reliably discover and track objects
throughout the sequence of frames, and can also generate future frames conditioning on the current frame, thereby simulating expected motion of objects. This is
achieved by explicitly encoding object presence, locations and appearances in the
latent variables of the model. S QAIR retains all strengths of its predecessor, Attend,
Infer, Repeat (AIR, Eslami et al., 2016), including learning in an unsupervised
manner, and addresses its shortcomings. We use a moving multi-MNIST dataset to
show limitations of AIR in detecting overlapping or partially occluded objects, and
show how SQAIR overcomes them by leveraging temporal consistency of objects.
Finally, we also apply SQAIR to real-world pedestrian CCTV data, where it learns
to reliably detect, track and generate walking pedestrians with no supervision.

1

Introduction

The ability to identify objects in their environments and to understand relations between them is a
cornerstone of human intelligence (Kemp and Tenenbaum, 2008). Arguably, in doing so we rely on
a notion of spatial and temporal consistency which gives rise to an expectation that objects do not
appear out of thin air, nor do they spontaneously vanish, and that they can be described by properties
such as location, appearance and some dynamic behaviour that explains their evolution over time.
We argue that this notion of consistency can be seen as an inductive bias that improves the efficiency
of our learning. Equally, we posit that introducing such a bias towards spatio-temporal consistency
into our models should greatly reduce the amount of supervision required for learning.
One way of achieving such inductive biases is through model structure. While recent successes in deep
learning demonstrate that progress is possible without explicitly imbuing models with interpretable
structure (LeCun, Bengio, et al., 2015), recent works show that introducing such structure into deep
models can indeed lead to favourable inductive biases improving performance e.g. in convolutional
networks (LeCun, Boser, et al., 1989) or in tasks requiring relational reasoning (Santoro et al.,
2017). Structure can also make neural networks useful in new contexts by significantly improving
generalization, data efficiency (Jacobsen et al., 2016) or extending their capabilities to unstructured
inputs (Graves et al., 2016).
Attend, Infer, Repeat (AIR), introduced by Eslami et al., 2016, is a notable example of such a structured
probabilistic model that relies on deep learning and admits efficient amortized inference. Trained
without any supervision, AIR is able to decompose a visual scene into its constituent components and
to generate a (learned) number of latent variables that explicitly encode the location and appearance
of each object. While this approach is inspiring, its focus on modelling individual (and thereby
inherently static) scenes leads to a number of limitations. For example, it often merges two objects
that are close together into one since no temporal context is available to distinguish between them.
∗

Corresponding author: adamk@robots.ox.ac.uk

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

