Variational Inference with Tail-adaptive f -Divergence

Dilin Wang
UT Austin
dilin@cs.utexas.edu

Hao Liu ∗
UESTC
uestcliuhao@gmail.com

Qiang Liu
UT Austin
lqiang@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Variational inference with α-divergences has been widely used in modern probabilistic machine learning. Compared to Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, a major
advantage of using α-divergences (with positive α values) is their mass-covering
property. However, estimating and optimizing α-divergences require to use importance sampling, which may have large or infinite variance due to heavy tails
of importance weights. In this paper, we propose a new class of tail-adaptive f divergences that adaptively change the convex function f with the tail distribution
of the importance weights, in a way that theoretically guarantees finite moments,
while simultaneously achieving mass-covering properties. We test our method on
Bayesian neural networks, and apply it to improve a recent soft actor-critic (SAC)
algorithm (Haarnoja et al., 2018) in deep reinforcement learning. Our results show
that our approach yields significant advantages compared with existing methods
based on classical KL and α-divergences.

1

Introduction

Variational inference (VI) (e.g., Jordan et al., 1999; Wainwright et al., 2008) has been established
as a powerful tool in modern probabilistic machine learning for approximating intractable posterior
distributions. The basic idea is to turn the approximation problem into an optimization problem, which
finds the best approximation of an intractable distribution from a family of tractable distributions by
minimizing a divergence objective function. Compared with Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC),
which is known to be consistent but suffers from slow convergence, VI provides biased results but
is often practically faster. Combined with techniques like stochastic optimization (Ranganath et al.,
2014; Hoffman et al., 2013) and reparameterization trick (Kingma & Welling, 2014), VI has become
a major technical approach for advancing Bayesian deep learning, deep generative models and deep
reinforcement learning (e.g., Kingma & Welling, 2014; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Levine, 2018).
A key component of successful variational inference lies on choosing a proper divergence metric.
Typically, closeness is defined by the KL divergence KL(q || p) (e.g., Jordan et al., 1999), where p
is the intractable distribution of interest and q is a simpler distribution constructed to approximate
p. However, VI with KL divergence often under-estimates the variance and may miss important
local modes of the true posterior (e.g., Christopher, 2016; Blei et al., 2017). To mitigate this issue,
alternative metrics have been studied in the literature, a large portion of which are special cases of
f -divergence (e.g., Csiszár & Shields, 2004):
 


p(x)
Df (p || q) = Ex∼q f
− f (1) ,
(1)
q(x)
where f : R+ → R is any convex function. The most notable class of f -divergence that has been
exploited in VI is α-divergence, which takes f (t) = tα /(α(α − 1)) for α ∈ R \ {0, 1}. By choosing
different α, we get a large number of well-known divergences as special cases, including the standard
∗

Work done at UT Austin

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

