On the Global Convergence of Gradient Descent for
Over-parameterized Models using Optimal Transport

Lénaïc Chizat
INRIA, ENS, PSL Research University
Paris, France
lenaic.chizat@inria.fr

Francis Bach
INRIA, ENS, PSL Research University
Paris, France
francis.bach@inria.fr

Abstract
Many tasks in machine learning and signal processing can be solved by minimizing
a convex function of a measure. This includes sparse spikes deconvolution or
training a neural network with a single hidden layer. For these problems, we study
a simple minimization method: the unknown measure is discretized into a mixture
of particles and a continuous-time gradient descent is performed on their weights
and positions. This is an idealization of the usual way to train neural networks
with a large hidden layer. We show that, when initialized correctly and in the
many-particle limit, this gradient flow, although non-convex, converges to global
minimizers. The proof involves Wasserstein gradient flows, a by-product of optimal
transport theory. Numerical experiments show that this asymptotic behavior is
already at play for a reasonable number of particles, even in high dimension.

1

Introduction

A classical task in machine learning and signal processing is to search for an element in a Hilbert
space F that minimizes a smooth, convex loss function R : F → R+ and that is a linear combination
of a few elements from a large given parameterized set {φ(θ)}θ∈Θ ⊂ F. A general formulation of
this problem is to describe the linear combination through an unknown signed measure µ on the
parameter space and to solve for
Z

J ∗ = min J(µ),
J(µ) := R
φdµ + G(µ)
(1)
µ∈M(Θ)

where M(Θ) is the set of signed measures on the parameter space Θ and G : M(Θ) → R is an
optional convex regularizer, typically the total variation norm when sparse solutions are preferred. In
this paper, we consider the infinite-dimensional case where the parameter space Θ is a domain of Rd
and θ 7→ φ(θ) is differentiable. This framework covers:
• Training neural networks with a single hidden layer, where the goal is to select, within a
specific class, a function that maps features in Rd−1 to labels in R, from the observation
of a joint distribution of features and labels. This corresponds to F being the space of
square-integrable real-valued functions on Rd−1 , R being, e.g., the quadratic or the logistic
Pd−1
loss function, and φ(θ) : x 7→ σ( i=1 θi xi + θd ), with an activation function σ : R → R.
Common choices are the sigmoid function or the rectified linear unit [18, 14], see more
details in Section 4.2.
• Sparse spikes deconvolution, where one attempts to recover a signal which is a mixture
of impulses on Θ given a noisy and filtered observation y (a square-integrable function
on Θ). This corresponds to F being the space of square-integrable real-valued functions
on Rd , defining φ(θ) : x 7→ ψ(x − θ) the translations of the filter impulse response ψ
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

