A Smoothed Analysis of the Greedy Algorithm for the
Linear Contextual Bandit Problem
Sampath Kannan
University of Pennsylvania

Jamie Morgenstern
Georgia Tech

Bo Waggoner
Microsoft Research, NYC

Aaron Roth
University of Pennsylvania

Zhiwei Steven Wu
University of Minnesota

Abstract
Bandit learning is characterized by the tension between long-term exploration and
short-term exploitation. However, as has recently been noted, in settings in which
the choices of the learning algorithm correspond to important decisions about
individual people (such as criminal recidivism prediction, lending, and sequential
drug trials), exploration corresponds to explicitly sacrificing the well-being of one
individual for the potential future benefit of others. In such settings, one might like
to run a “greedy” algorithm, which always makes the optimal decision for the individuals at hand — but doing this can result in a catastrophic failure to learn. In this
paper, we consider the linear contextual bandit problem and revisit the performance
of the greedy algorithm. We give a smoothed analysis, showing that even when
contexts may be chosen by an adversary, small perturbations of the adversary’s
choices suffice for the algorithm to achieve “no regret”, perhaps (depending on
the specifics of the setting) with a constant amount of initial training data. This
suggests that in slightly perturbed environments, exploration and exploitation need
not be in conflict in the linear setting.1

1

Introduction

Learning algorithms often need to operate in partial feedback settings (also known as bandit settings),
in which the decisions of the algorithm determine the data that it observes. Many real-world
application domains of machine learning have this flavor. Predictive policing algorithms [Rudin,
2013] deploy police officers and receive feedback about crimes committed and observed in areas the
algorithm chose to deploy officers. Lending algorithms [Byrnes, 2016] observe whether individuals
who were granted loans pay them back, but do not get to observe counterfactuals: would an individual
not granted a loan have repaid such a loan? Algorithms which inform bail and parole decisions
[Barry-Jester et al., 2015] observe whether individuals who are released go on to recidivate, but do
not get to observe whether individuals who remain incarcerated would have committed crimes had
they been released. Algorithms assigning drugs to patients in clinical trials do not get to observe the
effects of the drugs that were not assigned to particular patients.
Learning in partial feedback settings faces the well-understood tension between exploration and
exploitation. In order to perform well, the algorithms need at some point to exploit the information
they have gathered and make the best decisions they can. But they also need to explore: to make
decisions which do not seem optimal according to the algorithm’s current point-predictions, in order
to gather more information about less explored portions of the decision space.
1

The full version of this paper is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.03423.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

