Improving Simple Models with Confidence Profiles

Amit Dhurandhar*
IBM Research,
Yorktown Heights, NY
adhuran@us.ibm.com

Karthikeyan Shanmugam*
IBM Research,
Yorktown Heights, NY
karthikeyan.shanmugam2@ibm.com

Ronny Luss
IBM Research,
Yorktown Heights, NY
rluss@us.ibm.com

Peder Olsen
IBM Research,
Yorktown Heights, NY
pederao@us.ibm.com
∗

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new method called ProfWeight for transferring information from a pre-trained deep neural network that has a high test accuracy to a
simpler interpretable model or a very shallow network of low complexity and a
priori low test accuracy. We are motivated by applications in interpretability and
model deployment in severely memory constrained environments (like sensors).
Our method uses linear probes to generate confidence scores through flattened
intermediate representations. Our transfer method involves a theoretically justified
weighting of samples during the training of the simple model using confidence
scores of these intermediate layers. The value of our method is first demonstrated
on CIFAR-10, where our weighting method significantly improves (3-4%) networks
with only a fraction of the number of Resnet blocks of a complex Resnet model.
We further demonstrate operationally significant results on a real manufacturing
problem, where we dramatically increase the test accuracy of a CART model (the
domain standard) by roughly 13%.

1

Introduction

Complex models such as deep neural networks have shown remarkable success in applications such
as computer vision, speech and time series analysis [15, 18, 26, 10]. One of the primary concerns with
these models has been their lack of transparency which has curtailed their widespread use in domains
where human experts are responsible for critical decisions [21]. Recognizing this limitation, there
has been a surge of methods recently [29, 27, 5, 28, 25] to make deep networks more interpretable.
These methods highlight important features that contribute to the particular classification of an input
by a deep network and have been shown to reasonably match human intuition.
We, in this paper, however, propose an intuitive model agnostic method to enhance the performance
of simple models (viz. lasso, decision trees, etc.) using a pretrained deep network. A natural question
to ask is, given the plethora of explanation techniques available for deep networks, why do we care
about enhancing simple models? Here are a few reasons why simple models are still important.
Domain Experts Preference: In applications where the domain experts are responsible for critical
decisions, they usually have a favorite model (viz. lasso in medical decision trees in advanced
manufacturing) that they trust [31]. Their preference is to use something they have been using for
years and are comfortable with.
∗

First two authors have equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

