Parameters as interacting particles: long time
convergence and asymptotic error scaling of neural
networks
Grant M. Rotskoff
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
rotskoff@cims.nyu.edu

Eric Vanden-Eijnden
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
eve2@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
The performance of neural networks on high-dimensional data distributions suggests that it may be possible to parameterize a representation of a given highdimensional function with controllably small errors, potentially outperforming
standard interpolation methods. We demonstrate, both theoretically and numerically, that this is indeed the case. We map the parameters of a neural network
to a system of particles relaxing with an interaction potential determined by the
loss function. We show that in the limit that the number of parameters n is large,
the landscape of the mean-squared error becomes convex and the representation
error in the function scales as O(n−1 ). In this limit, we prove a dynamical variant
of the universal approximation theorem showing that the optimal representation
can be attained by stochastic gradient descent, the algorithm ubiquitously used
for parameter optimization in machine learning. In the asymptotic regime, we
study the fluctuations around the optimal representation and show that they arise
at a scale O(n−1 ). These fluctuations in the landscape identify the natural scale
for the noise in stochastic gradient descent. Our results apply to both single and
multi-layer neural networks, as well as standard kernel methods like radial basis
functions.

1

Introduction

The methods and models of machine learning are rapidly becoming de facto tools for the analysis and
interpretation of large data sets. The ability to synthesize and simplify high-dimensional data raises
the possibility that neural networks may also find applications as efficient representations of known
high-dimensional functions. In fact, these techniques have already been explored in the context of
free energy calculations [1], partial differential equations [2, 3], and forcefield parameterization [4].
Yet determining the optimal set of parameters or “training” a given neural network remains one of
the central challenges in applications due to the slow dynamics of training [5] and the complexity
of the objective function [6, 7]. Parameter optimization in machine learning typically relies on the
stochastic gradient descent algorithm (SGD), which makes an empirical estimate of the gradient of
the objective function over a small number of sample points [5]. SGD has been analyzed in some
cases—for example, when the problem is known to be convex, as in the over-parameterized limit or
other idealized settings [8, 9, 10, 11], there are rigorous guarantees of convergence and estimates of
convergence rates [12].
While finding the best set of parameters is computationally challenging, we have strong theoretical
guarantees that neural networks can represent a large class of functions. The universal approximation
theorems [13, 14, 15] ensure the existence of a (possibly large) set of parameters that bring a neural
network arbitrarily close to a given function over a compact domain. A similar statement has been
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

