Using Trusted Data to Train Deep Networks on
Labels Corrupted by Severe Noise

Dan Hendrycks∗
University of California, Berkeley
hendrycks@berkeley.edu

Mantas Mazeika∗
University of Chicago
mantas@ttic.edu

Duncan Wilson
Foundational Research Institute
duncanw@nevada.unr.edu

Kevin Gimpel
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
kgimpel@ttic.edu

Abstract
The growing importance of massive datasets used for deep learning makes robustness to label noise a critical property for classifiers to have. Sources of label noise
include automatic labeling, non-expert labeling, and label corruption by data poisoning adversaries. Numerous previous works assume that no source of labels can
be trusted. We relax this assumption and assume that a small subset of the training
data is trusted. This enables substantial label corruption robustness performance
gains. In addition, particularly severe label noise can be combated by using a set of
trusted data with clean labels. We utilize trusted data by proposing a loss correction
technique that utilizes trusted examples in a data-efficient manner to mitigate the
effects of label noise on deep neural network classifiers. Across vision and natural
language processing tasks, we experiment with various label noises at several
strengths, and show that our method significantly outperforms existing methods.

1

Introduction

Robustness to label noise is set to become an increasingly important property of supervised learning
models. With the advent of deep learning, the need for more labeled data makes it inevitable that
not all examples will have high-quality labels. This is especially true of data sources that admit
automatic label extraction, such as web crawling for images, and tasks for which high-quality labels
are expensive to produce, such as semantic segmentation or parsing. Additionally, label corruption
may arise in data poisoning [10, 24]. Both natural and malicious label corruptions tend to sharply
degrade the performance of classification systems [30].
Most prior work on label corruption robustness assumes that all training data are potentially corrupted.
However, it is usually the case that a number of trusted examples are available. Trusted data are
gathered to create validation and test sets. When it is possible to curate trusted data, a small set of
trusted data could be created for training. We depart from the assumption that all training data are
potentially corrupted by assuming that a subset of the training is trusted. In turn we demonstrate
that having some amount of trusted training data enables significant robustness gains.
To leverage the additional information from trusted labels, we propose a new loss correction and
empirically verify it on a number of vision and natural language datasets with label corruption.
Specifically, we demonstrate recovery from extremely high levels of label noise, including the dire
case when the untrusted data has a majority of its labels corrupted. Such severe corruption can occur
in adversarial situations like data poisoning, or when the number of classes is large. In comparison to
∗

Equal contribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

