Transfer Learning with Neural AutoML

Catherine Wong
MIT
catwong@mit.edu

Neil Houlsby
Google Brain
neilhoulsby@google.com

Yifeng Lu
Google Brain
yifenglu@google.com

Andrea Gesmundo
Google Brain
agesmundo@google.com

Abstract
We reduce the computational cost of Neural AutoML with transfer learning. AutoML relieves human effort by automating the design of ML algorithms. Neural
AutoML has become popular for the design of deep learning architectures, however,
this method has a high computation cost. To address this we propose Transfer
Neural AutoML that uses knowledge from prior tasks to speed up network design.
We extend RL-based architecture search methods to support parallel training on
multiple tasks and then transfer the search strategy to new tasks. On language and
image classification tasks, Transfer Neural AutoML reduces convergence time over
single-task training by over an order of magnitude on many tasks.

1

Introduction

Automatic Machine Learning (AutoML) aims to find the best performing learning algorithms with
minimal human intervention. Many AutoML methods exist, including random search [1], performance modelling [2, 3], Bayesian optimization [4], genetic algorithms [5, 6] and RL [7, 8]. We
focus on neural AutoML, that uses deep RL to optimize architectures. These methods have shown
promising results. For example, Neural Architecture Search has discovered novel networks that rival
the best human-designed architectures on challenging image classification tasks [9, 10].
However, neural AutoML is expensive because it requires training many networks. This may require
vast computations resources; Zoph and Le [8] report 800 concurrent GPUs to train on Cifar-10.
Further, training needs to be repeated for every new task. Some methods have been proposed
to address this cost, such as using a progressive search space [11], or by sharing weights among
generated networks [12, 13]. We propose a complementary solution, applicable when one has multiple
ML tasks to solve. Humans can tune networks based on knowledge gained from prior tasks. We aim
to leverage the same information using transfer learning.
We exploit the fact that deep RL-based AutoML algorithms learn an explicit parameterization of the
distribution over performant models. We present Transfer Neural AutoML, a method to accelerate
network design on new tasks based on priors learned on previous tasks. To do this we design a
network that performs neural AutoML on multiple tasks simultaneously. Our method for multitask
neural AutoML learns both hyperparameter choices common to multiple tasks and specific choices
for individual tasks. We then transfer this controller to new tasks and leverage the learned priors over
performant models. We reduce the time to converge in both text and image domains by over an order
of magnitude in most tasks. In our experiments we save 10s of CPU hours for every task that we
transfer to.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

