Distributionally Robust Graphical Models

Rizal Fathony, Ashkan Rezaei, Mohammad Ali Bashiri, Xinhua Zhang, Brian D. Ziebart
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
{rfatho2, arezae4, mbashi4, zhangx, bziebart}@uic.edu

Abstract
In many structured prediction problems, complex relationships between variables
are compactly defined using graphical structures. The most prevalent graphical prediction methods—probabilistic graphical models and large margin methods—have
their own distinct strengths but also possess significant drawbacks. Conditional
random fields (CRFs) are Fisher consistent, but they do not permit integration of
customized loss metrics into their learning process. Large-margin models, such as
structured support vector machines (SSVMs), have the flexibility to incorporate
customized loss metrics, but lack Fisher consistency guarantees. We present adversarial graphical models (AGM), a distributionally robust approach for constructing
a predictor that performs robustly for a class of data distributions defined using
a graphical structure. Our approach enjoys both the flexibility of incorporating
customized loss metrics into its design as well as the statistical guarantee of Fisher
consistency. We present exact learning and prediction algorithms for AGM with
time complexity similar to existing graphical models and show the practical benefits
of our approach with experiments.

1

Introduction

Learning algorithms must consider complex relationships between variables to provide useful predictions in many structured prediction problems. These complex relationships are often represented
using graphs to convey the independence assumptions being employed. For example, chain structures
are used when modeling sequences like words and sentences [1], tree structures are popular for
natural language processing tasks that involve prediction for entities in parse trees [2–4], and lattice
structures are often used for modeling images [5]. The most prevalent methods for learning with
graphical structure are probabilistic graphical models (e.g., conditional random fields (CRFs) [6]) and
large margin models (e.g., structured support vector machines (SSVMs) [7] and maximum margin
Markov networks (M3 Ns) [8]). Both types of models have unique advantages and disadvantages.
CRFs with sufficiently expressive feature representation are consistent estimators of the marginal
probabilities of variables in cliques of the graph [9], but are oblivious to the evaluative loss metric
during training. On the other hand, SSVMs directly incorporate the evaluative loss metric in the
training optimization, but lack consistency guarantees for multiclass settings [10, 11].
To address these limitations, we propose adversarial graphical models (AGM), a distributionally
robust framework for leveraging graphical structure among variables that provides both the flexibility
to incorporate customized loss metrics during training as well as the statistical guarantee of Fisher
consistency for a chosen loss metric. Our approach is based on a robust adversarial formulation
[12–14] that seeks a predictor that minimizes a loss metric in the worst-case given the statistical
summaries of the empirical distribution. We replace the empirical training data for evaluating our
predictor with an adversary that is free to choose an evaluating distribution from the set of distributions
that match the statistical summaries of empirical training data via moment matching constraints, as
defined by a graphical structure.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

