Phase Retrieval Under a Generative Prior
Paul Hand⇤
Northeastern University
p.hand@northeastern.edu

Oscar Leong
Rice University
oscar.f.leong@rice.edu

Vladislav Voroninski
Helm.ai
vlad@helm.ai

Abstract
We introduce a novel deep learning inspired formulation of the phase retrieval
problem, which asks to recover a signal y0 2 Rn from m quadratic observations,
under structural assumptions on the underlying signal. As is common in many
imaging problems, previous methodologies have considered natural signals as
being sparse with respect to a known basis, resulting in the decision to enforce a
generic sparsity prior. However, these methods for phase retrieval have encountered
possibly fundamental limitations, as no computationally efficient algorithm for
sparse phase retrieval has been proven to succeed with fewer than O(k 2 log n)
generic measurements, which is larger than the theoretical optimum of O(k log n).
In this paper, we propose a new framework for phase retrieval by modeling natural
signals as being in the range of a deep generative neural network G : Rk ! Rn .
We introduce an empirical risk formulation that has favorable global geometry for
gradient methods, as soon as m = O(kd2 log n), under the model of a d-layer
fully-connected neural network with random weights. Specifically, when suitable
deterministic conditions on the generator and measurement matrix are met, we
construct a descent direction for any point outside of a small neighborhood around
the true k-dimensional latent code and a negative multiple thereof. This formulation
for structured phase retrieval thus benefits from two effects: generative priors can
more tightly represent natural signals than sparsity priors, and this empirical risk
formulation can exploit those generative priors at an information theoretically
optimal sample complexity, unlike for a sparsity prior. We corroborate these results
with experiments showing that exploiting generative models in phase retrieval tasks
outperforms both sparse and general phase retrieval methods.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of recovering a signal y0 2 Rn given m ⌧ n phaseless observations of the
form b = |Ay0 | where the measurement matrix A 2 Rm⇥n is known and | · | is understood to act
entrywise. This is known as the phase retrieval problem. In this work, we assume, as a prior, that
the signal y0 is in the range of a generative model G : Rk ! Rn so that y0 = G(x0 ) for some
x0 2 Rk . To recover y0 , we first recover the original latent code x0 corresponding to it, from which
y0 is obtained by applying G. Hence we study the phase retrieval problem under a generative prior
which asks:
find x 2 Rk such that b = |AG(x)|.
We will refer to this formulation as Deep Phase Retrieval (DPR). The phase retrieval problem has
applications in X-ray crystallography [21, 29], optics [34], astronomical imaging [14], diffraction
⇤

Authors are listed in alphabetical order.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

