CapProNet: Deep Feature Learning via Orthogonal
Projections onto Capsule Subspaces

Liheng Zhang† , Marzieh Edraki† , and Guo-Jun Qi†‡∗
†

Laboratory for MAchine Perception and LEarning,
University of Central Florida
http://maple.cs.ucf.edu
‡

Huawei Cloud, Seattle, USA

Abstract
In this paper, we formalize the idea behind capsule nets of using a capsule vector
rather than a neuron activation to predict the label of samples. To this end, we
propose to learn a group of capsule subspaces onto which an input feature vector is
projected. Then the lengths of resultant capsules are used to score the probability
of belonging to different classes. We train such a Capsule Projection Network
(CapProNet) by learning an orthogonal projection matrix for each capsule subspace, and show that each capsule subspace is updated until it contains input feature
vectors corresponding to the associated class. We will also show that the capsule
projection can be viewed as normalizing the multiple columns of the weight matrix
simultaneously to form an orthogonal basis, which makes it more effective in
incorporating novel components of input features to update capsule representations.
In other words, the capsule projection can be viewed as a multi-dimensional weight
normalization in capsule subspaces, where the conventional weight normalization
is simply a special case of the capsule projection onto 1D lines. Only a small
negligible computing overhead is incurred to train the network in low-dimensional
capsule subspaces or through an alternative hyper-power iteration to estimate the
normalization matrix. Experiment results on image datasets show the presented
model can greatly improve the performance of the state-of-the-art ResNet backbones by 10 − 20% and that of the Densenet by 5 − 7% respectively at the same
level of computing and memory expenses. The CapProNet establishes the competitive state-of-the-art performance for the family of capsule nets by significantly
reducing test errors on the benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Since the idea of capsule net [15, 9] was proposed, many efforts [8, 17, 14, 1] have been made to
seek better capsule architectures as the next generation of deep network structures. Among them are
the dynamic routing [15] that can dynamically connect the neurons between two consecutive layers
based on their output capsule vectors. While these efforts have greatly revolutionized the idea of
building a new generation of deep networks, there are still a large room to improve the state of the art
for capsule nets.
In this paper, we do not intend to introduce some brand new architectures for capsule nets. Instead,
we focus on formalizing the principled idea of using the overall length of a capsule rather than
∗

Corresponding author: G.-J. Qi, email: guojunq@gmail.com and guojun.qi@huawei.com.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

