A Convex Duality Framework for GANs

Farzan Farnia∗
farnia@stanford.edu

David Tse∗
dntse@stanford.edu

Abstract
Generative adversarial network (GAN) is a minimax game between a generator
mimicking the true model and a discriminator distinguishing the samples produced
by the generator from the real training samples. Given an unconstrained discriminator able to approximate any function, this game reduces to finding the generative
model minimizing a divergence score, e.g. the Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence, to
the data distribution. However, in practice the discriminator is constrained to be
in a smaller class F such as convolutional neural nets. Then, a natural question is
how the divergence minimization interpretation will change as we constrain F. In
this work, we address this question by developing a convex duality framework for
analyzing GAN minimax problems. For a convex set F, this duality framework
interprets the original vanilla GAN problem as finding the generative model with
the minimum JS-divergence to the distributions penalized to match the moments
of the data distribution, with the moments specified by the discriminators in F.
We show that this interpretation more generally holds for f-GAN and Wasserstein
GAN. We further apply the convex duality framework to explain why regularizing
the discriminator’s Lipschitz constant, e.g. via spectral normalization or gradient penalty, can greatly improve the training performance in a general f-GAN
problem including the vanilla GAN formulation. We prove that Lipschitz regularization can be interpreted as convolving the original divergence score with the
first-order Wasserstein distance, which results in a continuously-behaving target
divergence measure. We numerically explore the power of Lipschitz regularization
for improving the continuity behavior and training performance in GAN problems.

1

Introduction

Learning a probability model from data samples is a fundamental task in unsupervised learning. The
recently developed generative adversarial network (GAN) [1] leverages the power of deep neural
networks to successfully address this task across various domains [2]. In contrast to traditional
methods of parameter fitting like maximum likelihood estimation, the GAN approach views the
problem as a game between a generator G whose goal is to generate fake samples that are close to
the real data training samples and a discriminator D whose goal is to distinguish between the real
and fake samples. The generator creates the fake samples by mapping from random noise input.
The following minimax problem is the original GAN problem, also called vanilla GAN, introduced in
[1]




min max E log D(X) + E log 1 − D(G(Z)) .
(1)
G∈G D∈F

Here Z denotes the generator’s noise input, X represents the random vector for the real data distributed
as PX , and G and F respectively represent the generator and discriminator function sets. Implementing this minimax game using deep neural network classes G and F has lead to the state-of-the-art
generative model for many different tasks.
∗

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

