Multi-Class Learning: From Theory to Algorithm

Jian Li1,2 , Yong Liu1∗ , Rong Yin1,2 , Hua Zhang1 , Lizhong Ding5 , Weiping Wang1,3,4
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
National Engineering Research Center for Information Security
4
National Engineering Laboratory for Information Security Technology
5
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
{lijian9026,liuyong,yinrong,wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn
lizhong.ding@inceptioniai.org

Abstract
In this paper, we study the generalization performance of multi-class classification and obtain a shaper data-dependent generalization error bound with fast
convergence rate, substantially improving the state-of-art bounds in the existing
data-dependent generalization analysis. The theoretical analysis motivates us to devise two effective multi-class kernel learning algorithms with statistical guarantees.
Experimental results show that our proposed methods can significantly outperform
the existing multi-class classification methods.

1

Introduction

Multi-class classification is an important problem in various applications, such as natural language
processing, information retrieval, computer vision, web advertising, etc. The statistical learning
theory of binary classification is by now relatively well developed [19, 20, 21, 23, 27, 34], but there
are still numerous statistical challenges to its multi-class extensions [25].
To understand the existing multi-class classification algorithms and guide the development of new
ones, people have investigated the generalization ability of multi-class classification algorithms. In
recent years, some generalization bounds have been proposed to estimate the ability of multi-class
classification algorithms based on different measures, such as VC-dimension [1], Natarajan dimension
[7], covering Number [9, 11, 37], Rademacher Complexity [5, 14, 27], Stability [10], PAC-Bayesian
[26], etc. Although there have been several recent advances in the studying of generalization bounds
of multi-class classification
algorithms, convergence rates of the existing generalization bounds are
√ 
usually O K 2 / n , where K and n are the number of classes and size of the sample, respectively.
In this paper, we derive a novel data-dependent generalization bound for multi-class classification via
the notion of local Rademacher complexity and further devise two effective multi-class kernel learning

algorithms based on the above theoretical analysis. The rate of this bound is O (log K)2+1/log K /n ,
which substantially improves on the existing data-dependent generalization bounds. Moreover, the
proposed multi-class kernel learning algorithms have statistical guarantees and fast convergence
rates. Experimental results on lots of benchmark datasets show that our proposed methods can
significantly outperform the existing multi-class classification methods. The major contributions
of this paper include: 1) A new local Rademacher complexity based bound with fast convergence
rate for multi-class classification is established. Existing works [16, 27] for multi-class classifiers
with Rademacher complexity does not take into account couplings among different classes. To
obtain sharper bound, we introduce a new structural complexity result on function classes induced
by general classes via the maximum operator, while allowing to preserve the correlations among
∗

Corresponding author

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

