L4: Practical loss-based stepsize adaptation for deep
learning

Michal Rolínek and Georg Martius
Max-Planck-Institute for Intelligent Systems Tübingen, Germany
michal.rolinek@tuebingen.mpg.de and georg.martius@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
We propose a stepsize adaptation scheme for stochastic gradient descent. It operates directly with the loss function and rescales the gradient in order to make fixed
predicted progress on the loss. We demonstrate its capabilities by conclusively
improving the performance of Adam and Momentum optimizers. The enhanced
optimizers with default hyperparameters consistently outperform their constant
stepsize counterparts, even the best ones, without a measurable increase in computational cost. The performance is validated on multiple architectures including
dense nets, CNNs, ResNets, and the recurrent Differential Neural Computer on
classical datasets MNIST, fashion MNIST, CIFAR10 and others.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient methods are the driving force behind the recent boom of deep learning. As a
result, the demand for practical efficiency as well as for theoretical understanding has never been
stronger. Naturally, this has inspired a lot of research and has given rise to new and currently very
popular optimization methods such as Adam [9], AdaGrad [5], or RMSProp [22], which serve as
competitive alternatives to classical stochastic gradient descent (SGD).
However, the current situation still causes huge overhead in implementations. In order to extract
the best performance, one is expected to choose the right optimizer, finely tune its hyperparameters
(sometimes multiple), often also to handcraft a specific stepsize adaptation scheme, and finally
combine this with a suitable regularization strategy. All of this, mostly based on intuition and
experience.
If we put aside the regularization aspects, the holy grail for resolving the optimization issues would
be a widely applicable automatic stepsize adaptation for stochastic gradients. This idea has been
floating in the community for years and different strategies were proposed. One line of work casts the
learning rate as another parameter one can train with a gradient descent (see [2], also for a survey).
Another approach is to make use of (an approximation of) second order information (see [3] and [19]
as examples). Also, an interesting Bayesian approach for probabilistic line search has been proposed
in [13]. Finally, another related research branch is based on the “Learning to learn” paradigm [1]
(possibly using reinforcement learning such as in [12]).
Although some of the mentioned papers claim to “effectively remove the need for learning rate tuning”,
this has not been observed in practice. Whether this is due to conservativism on the implementor’s
side or due to lack of solid experimental evidence, we leave aside. In any case, we also take the
challenge.
Our strategy is performance oriented. Admittedly, this also means, that while our stepsize adaptation
scheme makes sense intuitively (and is related to sound methods), we do not provide or claim any
theoretical guarantees. Instead, we focus on strong reproducible performance against optimized
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

