The Price of Fair PCA: One Extra Dimension
Samira Samadi
Georgia Tech
ssamadi6@gatech.edu

Uthaipon Tantipongpipat
Georgia Tech
tao@gatech.edu

Mohit Singh
Georgia Tech
mohitsinghr@gmail.com

Jamie Morgenstern
Georgia Tech
jamiemmt.cs@gatech.edu

Santosh Vempala
Georgia Tech
vempala@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
We investigate whether the standard dimensionality reduction technique of PCA
inadvertently produces data representations with different fidelity for two different
populations. We show on several real-world data sets, PCA has higher reconstruction error on population A than on B (for example, women versus men or
lower- versus higher-educated individuals). This can happen even when the data
set has a similar number of samples from A and B. This motivates our study of
dimensionality reduction techniques which maintain similar fidelity for A and B.
We define the notion of Fair PCA and give a polynomial-time algorithm for finding
a low dimensional representation of the data which is nearly-optimal with respect
to this measure. Finally, we show on real-world data sets that our algorithm can be
used to efficiently generate a fair low dimensional representation of the data.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the ML community has witnessed an onslaught of charges that real-world machine
learning algorithms have produced “biased” outcomes. The examples come from diverse and
impactful domains. Google Photos labeled African Americans as gorillas [Twitter, 2015; Simonite,
2018] and returned queries for CEOs with images overwhelmingly male and white [Kay et al., 2015],
searches for African American names caused the display of arrest record advertisements with higher
frequency than searches for white names [Sweeney, 2013], facial recognition has wildly different
accuracy for white men than dark-skinned women [Buolamwini and Gebru, 2018], and recidivism
prediction software has labeled low-risk African Americans as high-risk at higher rates than low-risk
white people [Angwin et al., 2018].
The community’s work to explain these observations has roughly fallen into either “biased data” or
“biased algorithm” bins. In some cases, the training data might under-represent (or over-represent)
some group, or have noisier labels for one population than another, or use an imperfect proxy for the
prediction label (e.g., using arrest records in lieu of whether a crime was committed). Separately,
issues of imbalance and bias might occur due to an algorithm’s behavior, such as focusing on accuracy
across the entire distribution rather than guaranteeing similar false positive rates across populations, or
by improperly accounting for confirmation bias and feedback loops in data collection. If an algorithm
fails to distribute loans or bail to a deserving population, the algorithm won’t receive additional data
showing those people would have paid back the loan, but it will continue to receive more data about
the populations it (correctly) believed should receive loans or bail.
Many of the proposed solutions to “biased data” problems amount to re-weighting the training set or
adding noise to some of the labels; for “biased algorithms”, most work has focused on maximizing
accuracy subject to a constraint forbidding (or penalizing) an unfair model. Both of these concerns
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

