Implicit Probabilistic Integrators for ODEs
Onur Teymur⇤ & Ben Calderhead
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London

Han Cheng Lie & T.J. Sullivan
Institute of Mathematics, Freie Universität Berlin;
& Zuse Institut Berlin

Abstract
We introduce a family of implicit probabilistic integrators for initial value problems
(IVPs), taking as a starting point the multistep Adams–Moulton method. The
implicit construction allows for dynamic feedback from the forthcoming timestep, in contrast to previous probabilistic integrators, all of which are based on
explicit methods. We begin with a concise survey of the rapidly-expanding field of
probabilistic ODE solvers. We then introduce our method, which builds on and
adapts the work of Conrad et al. (2016) and Teymur et al. (2016), and provide a
rigorous proof of its well-definedness and convergence. We discuss the problem of
the calibration of such integrators and suggest one approach. We give an illustrative
example highlighting the effect of the use of probabilistic integrators—including
our new method—in the setting of parameter inference within an inverse problem.

1

Set-up, motivation and context

We consider the common statistical problem of inferring model parameters ✓ from data Y . In a
Bayesian setting, the parameter posterior is given by p(✓|Y ) / p(Y |✓)p(✓). Suppose we have a
regression model in which the likelihood term p(Y |✓) requires us to solve an ordinary differential
equation (ODE). Specifically, for each datum, we have Yj = x(tYj ) + "j for some latent function
x(t) satisfying ẋ = f (x, ✓) and vector of measurement errors " with spread parameter .
We can write the full model as p(✓, , x|Y ) / p(Y |x, )p(x|✓)p(✓)p( ). Since x is latent, it is
included as an integral part of the posterior model. This more general decomposition would not need
to be considered explicitly in, say, a linear regression model for which x = ✓1 + ✓2 t; here we would
simply have p(x|✓) = x (✓1 + ✓2 t). In other words, given ✓ there is no uncertainty in x, and the
model would reduce to simply p(✓, |Y ) / p(Y |✓, )p(✓)p( ).

In our case, however, x is defined implicitly through the ODE ẋ = f (x, ✓) and p(x|✓) is therefore
no longer trivial. What we mean by this is that x can only be calculated approximately and thus—
following the central principle of probabilistic numerical methods (Hennig et al., 2015)—we assign
to it a probability distribution representing our lack of knowledge about its true value. Our focus here
is on initial value problems (IVPs) where we assume the initial value X0 ⌘ x(0) is known (though
an extension to unknown X0 is straightforward). We thus have the setup
p(✓, , x|Y, X0 ) / p(Y |x, )p(x|✓, X0 )p(✓)p( ).

(1)

For our purposes, the interesting term on the right-hand side is p(x|✓), where hereafter we omit X0 .
In the broadest sense, our aim is to account as accurately as possible for the numerical error which
is inevitable in the calculation of x, and to do this within a probabilistic framework by describing
p(x|✓). We then wish to consider the effect of this uncertainty as it is propagated through (1), when
performing inference on ✓ in an inverse problem setting. An experimental example in this context is
considered in Section 3.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.
⇤

Corresponding author: o@teymur.uk

