Inferring Latent Velocities from Weather Radar Data
using Gaussian Processes

Rico Angell
University of Massachusetts Amherst
rangell@cs.umass.edu

Daniel Sheldon
University of Massachusetts Amherst
sheldon@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Archived data from the US network of weather radars hold detailed information
about bird migration over the last 25 years, including very high-resolution partial
measurements of velocity. Historically, most of this spatial resolution is discarded
and velocities are summarized at a very small number of locations due to modeling
and algorithmic limitations. This paper presents a Gaussian process (GP) model
to reconstruct high-resolution full velocity fields across the entire US. The GP
faithfully models all aspects of the problem in a single joint framework, including spatially random velocities, partial velocity measurements, station-specific
geometries, measurement noise, and an ambiguity known as aliasing. We develop
fast inference algorithms based on the FFT; to do so, we employ a creative use
of Laplace’s method to sidestep the fact that the kernel of the joint process is
non-stationary.

1

Introduction

Archived data from the US network of weather radars hold valuable information about atmospheric
phenomona across the US for over 25 years [1]. Although these radars were designed to monitor
weather, they also detect flying animals such as birds, bats, and insects [2]. The information
contained in the archive is critical to understanding phenomena ranging from extreme weather to bird
migration [3–5].
This paper is concerned with using radar to measure velocity, with the primary goal of gathering
detailed information about bird migration. Radar is the most comprehensive source of information
about this difficult-to-study phenomenon [5–8], but, historically, most information has gone largely
unused due to the sheer size of the data and the difficulty of interpreting it automatically. Recently,
analytical advances including machine learning [9, 10] are enabling scientists to begin to conduct
larger scale studies [5, 7, 11]. Radar measurements of bird migration density, direction, and speed
are important for understanding the biology of bird migration and to guide conservation [11–15].
Machine learning methods to automate the detailed interpretation of radar data will allow scientists to
answer questions at the scale of the entire continent and over more than two decades.
Doppler radars measure the rate at which objects approach or depart the radar, which gives partial
information about their velocity. By making certain smoothness assumptions, it is possible to
reconstruct full velocity vectors [9, 16]. However, current methods are limited by rigid smoothness
assumptions and summarize all velocity information down to 143 points across the US (the locations
of the radar stations) even though the original data has on the order of half a billion measurements for
one nationwide snapshot.
The goal of this paper is to develop a comprehensive, principled, probabilistic model, together with
fast algorithms, to reconstruct spatially detailed velocity fields across the US. There are three critical
challenges. First, radars only measure radial velocity, the component of velocity in the direction of
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

