The streaming rollout of deep networks - towards
fully model-parallel execution

Volker Fischer
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
Renningen, Germany
volker.fischer@de.bosch.com

Jan Köhler
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
Renningen, Germany
jan.koehler@de.bosch.com

Thomas Pfeil
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
Renningen, Germany
thomas.pfeil@de.bosch.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks, and in particular recurrent networks, are promising candidates to control autonomous agents that interact in real-time with the physical
world. However, this requires a seamless integration of temporal features into the
network’s architecture. For the training of and inference with recurrent neural
networks, they are usually rolled out over time, and different rollouts exist. Conventionally during inference, the layers of a network are computed in a sequential
manner resulting in sparse temporal integration of information and long response
times. In this study, we present a theoretical framework to describe rollouts, the
level of model-parallelization they induce, and demonstrate differences in solving
specific tasks. We prove that certain rollouts, also for networks with only skip and
no recurrent connections, enable earlier and more frequent responses, and show
empirically that these early responses have better performance. The streaming
rollout maximizes these properties and enables a fully parallel execution of the
network reducing runtime on massively parallel devices. Finally, we provide an
open-source toolbox to design, train, evaluate, and interact with streaming rollouts.

1

Introduction

Over the last years, the combination of newly available large datasets, parallel computing power, and
new techniques to implement and train deep neural networks has led to significant improvements
in the fields of vision [1], speech [2], and reinforcement learning [3]. In the context of autonomous
tasks, neural networks usually interact with the physical world in real-time which renders it essential
to integrate the processing of temporal information into the network’s design.
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are one common approach to leverage temporal context and have
gained increasing interest not only for speech [4] but also for vision tasks [5]. RNNs use neural
activations to inform future computations, hence introducing a recursive dependency between neuron
activations. This augments the network with a memory mechanism and allows it, unlike feed-forward
neural networks, to exhibit dynamic behavior integrating a stream or sequence of inputs. For training
and inference, backpropagation through time (BPTT) [6] or its truncated version [6, 7] are used,
where the RNN is rolled out (or unrolled) through time disentangling the recursive dependencies and
transforming the recurrent network into a feed-forward network.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

