Learning and Testing Causal Models with
Interventions
Jayadev Acharya∗
School of ECE
Cornell University
acharya@cornell.edu

Arnab Bhattacharyya∗
National University of Singapore
& Indian Institute of Science
arnabb@iisc.ac.in

Constantinos Daskalakis∗
EECS
MIT
costis@csail.mit.edu

Saravanan Kandasamy∗
STCS
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research
saravan.tuty@gmail.com

Abstract
We consider testing and learning problems on causal Bayesian networks as defined
by Pearl [Pea09]. Given a causal Bayesian network M on a graph with n discrete
variables and bounded in-degree and bounded “confounded components”, we
show that O(log n) interventions on an unknown causal Bayesian network X
on the same graph, and O(n/2 ) samples per intervention, suffice to efficiently
distinguish whether X = M or whether there exists some intervention under
which X and M are farther than  in total variation distance. We also obtain
sample/time/intervention efficient algorithms for: (i) testing the identity of two
unknown causal Bayesian networks on the same graph; and (ii) learning a causal
Bayesian network on a given graph. Although our algorithms are non-adaptive, we
show that adaptivity does not help in general: Ω(log n) interventions are necessary
for testing the identity of two unknown causal Bayesian networks on the same graph,
even adaptively. Our algorithms are enabled by a new subadditivity inequality for
the squared Hellinger distance between two causal Bayesian networks.

1

Introduction

A central task in statistical inference is learning properties of a high-dimensional distribution over
some variables of interest given observational data. However, probability distributions only capture
the association between variables of interest and may not suffice to predict what the consequences
would be of setting some of the variables to particular values. A standard example illustrating the
point is this: From observational data, we may learn that atmospheric air pressure and the readout of
a barometer are correlated. But can we predict whether the atmospheric pressure would stay the same
or go up if the barometer readout was forcefully increased by moving its needle?
Such issues are at the heart of causal inference, where the goal is to learn a causal model over some
variables of interest, which can predict the result of external interventions on the variables. For
example, a causal model on two variables of interest X and Y need not only determine conditional
probabilities of the form Pr[Y | X = x], but also interventional probabilities Pr[Y | do(X = x)]
∗
The authors are arranged in alphabetical ordering. Jayadev Acharya was supported by a Cornell University
startup grant. Arnab Bhattacharyya was partially supported by DST Ramanujan grant DSTO1358 and DRDO
Frontiers Project DRDO0687. Constantinos Daskalakis was supported by NSF awards CCF-1617730 and
IIS-1741137, a Simons Investigator Award, a Google Faculty Research Award, and an MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
research grant. Saravanan Kandasamy was partially supported by DRDO Frontiers Project DRDO0687.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

