FD-GAN: Pose-guided Feature Distilling GAN for
Robust Person Re-identification
Yixiao Ge1∗
Zhuowan Li2,3∗ †
Haiyu Zhao2
Guojun Yin2,4†
2
1
Shuai Yi
Xiaogang Wang
Hongsheng Li1 ‡
1

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
3
SenseTime Research
Johns Hopkins University
4
University of Science and Technology of China
{yxge@link, hsli@ee, xgwang@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk
{zhaohaiyu, yishuai}@sensetime.com
zli110@jhu.edu
gjyin@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Person re-identification (reID) is an important task that requires to retrieve a
person’s images from an image dataset, given one image of the person of interest.
For learning robust person features, the pose variation of person images is one of
the key challenges. Existing works targeting the problem either perform human
alignment, or learn human-region-based representations. Extra pose information
and computational cost is generally required for inference. To solve this issue,
a Feature Distilling Generative Adversarial Network (FD-GAN) is proposed for
learning identity-related and pose-unrelated representations. It is a novel framework
based on a Siamese structure with multiple novel discriminators on human poses
and identities. In addition to the discriminators, a novel same-pose loss is also
integrated, which requires appearance of a same person’s generated images to
be similar. After learning pose-unrelated person features with pose guidance, no
auxiliary pose information and additional computational cost is required during
testing. Our proposed FD-GAN achieves state-of-the-art performance on three
person reID datasets, which demonstrates that the effectiveness and robust feature
distilling capability of the proposed FD-GAN. ‡‡

1

Introduction

Person re-identification (reID) is a challenging task, with the purpose of matching pedestrian images
with the same identity across multiple cameras. With the wide usage of deep learning methods,
reID performances by different algorithms increase rapidly. There are various attempts on learning
representations with deep neural networks, however, posture variations, blur and occlusion still pose
great challenges for learning discriminative features. Two types of methods were used for addressing
the issues, aligning pedestrian images [1] or integrating human pose information by learning bodyregion features [2]. However, these works also require auxiliary pose information in the inference
stage, which limits the generalization of the algorithms to new images without pose information.
Meanwhile, the computational cost increases due to more complicated inference of pose estimation.
∗

The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
This work was done when they were interns at SenseTime Research.
‡
Hongsheng Li is the corresponding author.
‡‡
The code is now available. https://github.com/yxgeee/FD-GAN
†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

