Reward learning from human preferences and
demonstrations in Atari
Borja Ibarz
DeepMind
bibarz@google.com

Jan Leike
DeepMind
leike@google.com

Tobias Pohlen
DeepMind
pohlen@google.com

Geoffrey Irving
OpenAI
irving@openai.com

Shane Legg
DeepMind
legg@google.com

Dario Amodei
OpenAI
damodei@openai.com

Abstract
To solve complex real-world problems with reinforcement learning, we cannot rely
on manually specified reward functions. Instead, we can have humans communicate
an objective to the agent directly. In this work, we combine two approaches to
learning from human feedback: expert demonstrations and trajectory preferences.
We train a deep neural network to model the reward function and use its predicted
reward to train an DQN-based deep reinforcement learning agent on 9 Atari games.
Our approach beats the imitation learning baseline in 7 games and achieves strictly
superhuman performance on 2 games without using game rewards. Additionally,
we investigate the goodness of fit of the reward model, present some reward hacking
problems, and study the effects of noise in the human labels.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has recently been very successful in solving hard problems in domains
with well-specified reward functions (Mnih et al., 2015, 2016; Silver et al., 2016). However, many
tasks of interest involve goals that are poorly defined or hard to specify as a hard-coded reward. In
those cases we can rely on demonstrations from human experts (inverse reinforcement learning, Ng
and Russell, 2000; Ziebart et al., 2008), policy feedback (Knox and Stone, 2009; Warnell et al., 2017),
or trajectory preferences (Wilson et al., 2012; Christiano et al., 2017).
When learning from demonstrations, a policy model is trained to imitate a human demonstrator
on the task (Ho and Ermon, 2016; Hester et al., 2018). If the policy model mimics the human
expert’s behavior well, it can achieve the performance of the human on the task. However, to provide
meaningful demonstrations, the human demonstrator has to have some familiarity with the task and
understand how to perform it. In this sense, imitation learning puts more burden on the human than
just providing feedback on behavior, which only requires the ability to judge outcomes. Moreover,
using this imitation learning approach it is impossible to significantly exceed human performance.
To improve on imitation learning we can learn a reward function directly from human feedback, and
optimize it using reinforcement learning. In this work, we focus on reward learning from trajectory
preferences in the same way as Christiano et al. (2017). However, learning a reward function from
trajectory preferences expressed by a human suffers from two problems:
1. It is hard to obtain a good state space coverage with just random exploration guided by
preferences. If the state space distribution is bad, then the diversity of the trajectory that we
request preferences for is low and thus the human in the loop can’t convey much meaningful
information to the agent.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

