Adversarial Examples that Fool both Computer
Vision and Time-Limited Humans
Gamaleldin F. Elsayed⇤
Google Brain
gamaleldin.elsayed@gmail.com
Nicolas Papernot
Pennsylvania State University

Shreya Shankar
Stanford University

Alexey Kurakin
Google Brain

Brian Cheung
UC Berkeley

Ian Goodfellow
Google Brain

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein
Google Brain
jaschasd@google.com

Abstract
Machine learning models are vulnerable to adversarial examples: small changes
to images can cause computer vision models to make mistakes such as identifying
a school bus as an ostrich. However, it is still an open question whether humans
are prone to similar mistakes. Here, we address this question by leveraging recent
techniques that transfer adversarial examples from computer vision models with
known parameters and architecture to other models with unknown parameters and
architecture, and by matching the initial processing of the human visual system.
We find that adversarial examples that strongly transfer across computer vision
models influence the classifications made by time-limited human observers.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are easily fooled by adversarial examples: inputs optimized by an adversary
to produce an incorrect model classification [39, 3]. In computer vision, an adversarial example is
usually an image formed by making small perturbations to an example image. Many algorithms for
constructing adversarial examples [39, 13, 33, 24, 27] rely on access to both the architecture and the
parameters of the model to perform gradient-based optimization on the input. Without similar access
to the brain, these methods do not seem applicable to constructing adversarial examples for humans.
One interesting phenomenon is that adversarial examples often transfer from one model to another,
making it possible to attack models that an attacker has no access to [39, 26]. This naturally raises
the question of whether humans are susceptible to these adversarial examples. Clearly, humans
are prone to many cognitive biases and optical illusions [17], but these generally do not resemble
small perturbations of natural images, nor are they currently generated by optimization of a ML loss
function. Thus the current understanding is that this class of transferable adversarial examples has no
effect on human visual perception, yet no thorough empirical investigation has yet been performed.
A rigorous investigation of the above question creates an opportunity both for machine learning to
gain knowledge from neuroscience, and for neuroscience to gain knowledge from machine learning.
Neuroscience has often provided existence proofs for machine learning—before we had working
object recognition algorithms, we hypothesized it should be possible to build them because the human
⇤

Work done as a member of the Google AI Residency program (g.co/airesidency).

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

