Group Equivariant Capsule Networks

Jan Eric Lenssen

Matthias Fey

Pascal Libuschewski

TU Dortmund University - Computer Graphics Group
44227 Dortmund, Germany
{janeric.lenssen, matthias.fey, pascal.libuschewski}@udo.edu

Abstract
We present group equivariant capsule networks, a framework to introduce guaranteed equivariance and invariance properties to the capsule network idea. Our
work can be divided into two contributions. First, we present a generic routing by
agreement algorithm defined on elements of a group and prove that equivariance
of output pose vectors, as well as invariance of output activations, hold under
certain conditions. Second, we connect the resulting equivariant capsule networks
with work from the field of group convolutional networks. Through this connection, we provide intuitions of how both methods relate and are able to combine
the strengths of both approaches in one deep neural network architecture. The
resulting framework allows sparse evaluation of the group convolution operator,
provides control over specific equivariance and invariance properties, and can
use routing by agreement instead of pooling operations. In addition, it is able to
provide interpretable and equivariant representation vectors as output capsules,
which disentangle evidence of object existence from its pose.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks heavily rely on equivariance of the convolution operator under
translation. Weights are shared between different spatial positions, which reduces the number
of parameters and pairs well with the often occurring underlying translational transformations in
image data. It naturally follows that a large amount of research is done to exploit other underlying
transformations and symmetries and provide deep neural network models with equivariance or
invariance under those transformations (cf. Figure 1). Further, equivariance and invariance are useful
properties when aiming to produce data representations that disentangle factors of variation: when
transforming a given input example by varying one factor, we usually aim for equivariance in one
representation entry and invariance in the others. One recent line of methods that aim to provide a
relaxed version of such a setting are capsule networks.
Our work focuses on obtaining a formalized version of capsule networks that guarantees those
properties and bringing them together with group equivariant convolutions by Cohen and Welling
[2016], which also provide provable equivariance properties under transformations within a group. In
the following, we will shortly introduce capsule networks, as proposed by Hinton et al. and Sabour
et al., before we outline our contribution in detail.
1.1

Capsule networks

Capsule networks [Hinton et al., 2011] and the recently proposed routing by agreement algorithm [Sabour et al., 2017] represent a different paradigm for deep neural networks for vision
tasks. They aim to hard-wire the ability to disentangle the pose of an object from the evidence of
its existence, also called viewpoint equi- and invariance in the context of vision tasks. This is done
by encoding the output of one layer as a tuple of a pose vector and an activation. Further, they are
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

