Modular Networks:
Learning to Decompose Neural Computation

Louis Kirsch∗
Department of Computer Science
University College London
mail@louiskirsch.com

Julius Kunze
Department of Computer Science
University College London
juliuskunze@gmail.com

David Barber
Department of Computer Science
University College London
david.barber@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Scaling model capacity has been vital in the success of deep learning. For a
typical network, necessary compute resources and training time grow dramatically
with model size. Conditional computation is a promising way to increase the
number of parameters with a relatively small increase in resources. We propose
a training algorithm that flexibly chooses neural modules based on the data to
be processed. Both the decomposition and modules are learned end-to-end. In
contrast to existing approaches, training does not rely on regularization to enforce
diversity in module use. We apply modular networks both to image recognition
and language modeling tasks, where we achieve superior performance compared
to several baselines. Introspection reveals that modules specialize in interpretable
contexts.

1

Introduction

When enough data and training time is available, increasing the number of network parameters
typically improves prediction accuracy [16, 6, 14, 1]. While the largest artificial neural networks
currently only have a few billion parameters [9], the usefulness of much larger scales is suggested
by the fact that human brain has evolved to have an estimated 150 trillion synapses [19] under tight
energy constraints. In deep learning, typically all parts of a network need to be executed for every data
input. Unfortunately, scaling such architectures results in a roughly quadratic explosion in training
time as both more iterations are needed and the cost per sample grows. In contrast, usually only few
regions of the brain are highly active simultaneously [20]. Furthermore, the modular structure of
biological neural connections [28] is hypothesized to optimize energy cost [8, 15], improve adaption
to changing environments and mitigate catastrophic forgetting [26].
Inspired by these observations, we propose a novel way of training neural networks by automatically
decomposing the functionality needed for solving a given task (or set of tasks) into reusable modules.
We treat the choice of module as a latent variable in a probabilistic model and learn both the
decomposition and module parameters end-to-end by maximizing a variational lower bound of the
likelihood. Existing approaches for conditional computation [25, 2, 21] rely on regularization to
avoid a module collapse (the network only uses a few modules repeatedly) that would result in poor
∗

now affiliated with IDSIA, The Swiss AI Lab (USI & SUPSI)

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

