Text-Adaptive Generative Adversarial Networks:
Manipulating Images with Natural Language

Seonghyeon Nam, Yunji Kim, and Seon Joo Kim
Yonsei University
{shnnam,kim_yunji,seonjookim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of manipulating images using natural language
description. Our task aims to semantically modify visual attributes of an object in an
image according to the text describing the new visual appearance. Although existing
methods synthesize images having new attributes, they do not fully preserve textirrelevant contents of the original image. In this paper, we propose the text-adaptive
generative adversarial network (TAGAN) to generate semantically manipulated
images while preserving text-irrelevant contents. The key to our method is the
text-adaptive discriminator that creates word-level local discriminators according to
input text to classify fine-grained attributes independently. With this discriminator,
the generator learns to generate images where only regions that correspond to the
given text are modified. Experimental results show that our method outperforms
existing methods on CUB and Oxford-102 datasets, and our results were mostly
preferred on a user study. Extensive analysis shows that our method is able to
effectively disentangle visual attributes and produce pleasing outputs.

1

Introduction

Taking pictures has become a big part of people’s life ever since the emergence of smartphones as
the everyday device. With this trend, the demand for manipulating or editing images is growing, to
make photos to look better or to meet a user’s need. While one can use commercially available tools
such as the Photoshop to manipulate images, it is difficult for a non-expert user to use those tools for
image manipulation. Additionally, manipulating images on a mobile device would be difficult as the
interface on mobile devices is rather limited.
Automatic image manipulation can remedy this difficulty by automatically changing various aspects
of images from low-level color/texture [1, 2] to high-level semantics [3] without tedious human
operation. With the advance of deep learning and generative models, many techniques have been
developed for image editing including the style transfer [2, 4, 5], the drawing based editing [6, 7],
and the domain/attribute translation [8–10]. While manipulating images using these methods become
easier as most operations are done automatically, editing images specifically per user’s intention
becomes more difficult.
The goal of this paper is to manipulate images using natural language description. We specifically
focus on modifying visual attributes of an object, where the visual attributes are characterized by
the color and the texture of an object. Fig. 1 illustrates our problem. In the examples, the colors of
different parts of an bird are changed according to the given text description. We believe that it is a
more intuitive way to manipulate images and would also be ideal for mobile devices.
Conditional deep generative models have shown great potential in multi-modal generative modeling
of image and text. However, most existing studies concentrate on the text-to-image synthesis [11–
14], which generates images from text descriptions without the original image. Only few works
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

