KDGAN: Knowledge Distillation with
Generative Adversarial Networks
Xiaojie Wang
University of Melbourne
xiaojiew94@gmail.com
Yu Sun
Twitter Inc.
ysun@twitter.com

Rui Zhang∗
University of Melbourne
rui.zhang@unimelb.edu.au
Jianzhong Qi
University of Melbourne
jianzhong.qi@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) aims to train a lightweight classifier suitable to provide
accurate inference with constrained resources in multi-label learning. Instead of
directly consuming feature-label pairs, the classifier is trained by a teacher, i.e., a
high-capacity model whose training may be resource-hungry. The accuracy of the
classifier trained this way is usually suboptimal because it is difficult to learn the
true data distribution from the teacher. An alternative method is to adversarially
train the classifier against a discriminator in a two-player game akin to generative
adversarial networks (GAN), which can ensure the classifier to learn the true data
distribution at the equilibrium of this game. However, it may take excessively long
time for such a two-player game to reach equilibrium due to high-variance gradient
updates. To address these limitations, we propose a three-player game named
KDGAN consisting of a classifier, a teacher, and a discriminator. The classifier and
the teacher learn from each other via distillation losses and are adversarially trained
against the discriminator via adversarial losses. By simultaneously optimizing the
distillation and adversarial losses, the classifier will learn the true data distribution
at the equilibrium. We approximate the discrete distribution learned by the classifier
(or the teacher) with a concrete distribution. From the concrete distribution, we
generate continuous samples to obtain low-variance gradient updates, which speed
up the training. Extensive experiments using real datasets confirm the superiority
of KDGAN in both accuracy and training speed.

1

Introduction

In machine learning, it is common that more resources such as input features [47] or computational
resources [23], which we refer to as privileged provision, are available at the stage of training a model
than those available at the stage of running the deployed model (i.e., the inference stage). Figure 1
shows an example application of image tag recommendation, where more input features (called
privileged information [47]) are available at the training stage than those available at the inference
stage. Specifically, the training stage has access to images as well as image titles and comments
(textual information) as shown in Figure 1a, whereas the inference stage only has access to images
themselves as shown in Figure 1b. After a smart phone user uploads an image and is about to provide
tags for the image, it is inconvenient to type tags on the phone and thinking about tags for the image
also takes time, so it is very useful to recommend tags based on the image as shown in Figure 1b.
Another example application is unlocking mobile phones by face recognition. We usually deploy face
recognition models on mobile phones so that legit users can unlock the phones without depending
∗

Corresponding author

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

