Sparsified SGD with Memory

Sebastian U. Stich

Jean-Baptiste Cordonnier

Martin Jaggi

Machine Learning and Optimization Laboratory (MLO)
EPFL, Switzerland

Abstract
Huge scale machine learning problems are nowadays tackled by distributed optimization algorithms, i.e. algorithms that leverage the compute power of many
devices for training. The communication overhead is a key bottleneck that hinders
perfect scalability. Various recent works proposed to use quantization or sparsification techniques to reduce the amount of data that needs to be communicated,
for instance by only sending the most significant entries of the stochastic gradient
(top-k sparsification). Whilst such schemes showed very promising performance
in practice, they have eluded theoretical analysis so far.
In this work we analyze Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) with k-sparsification or
compression (for instance top-k or random-k) and show that this scheme converges
at the same rate as vanilla SGD when equipped with error compensation (keeping
track of accumulated errors in memory). That is, communication can be reduced
by a factor of the dimension of the problem (sometimes even more) whilst still
converging at the same rate. We present numerical experiments to illustrate the
theoretical findings and the good scalability for distributed applications.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) [29] and variants thereof (e.g. [10, 16]) are among the most
popular optimization algorithms in machine- and deep-learning [5]. SGD consists of iterations of the
form
xt+1 := xt − ηt gt ,

(1)

d

for iterates xt , xt+1 ∈ R , stepsize (or learning rate) ηt > 0, and stochastic gradient gt with the
property E[gt ] = ∇f (xt ), for a loss function f : Rd → R. SGD addresses the computational
bottleneck of full gradient descent, as the stochastic gradients can in general be computed much
more efficiently than a full gradient ∇f (xt ). However, note that in general both gt and ∇f (xt )
are dense vectors1 of size d, i.e. SGD does not address the communication bottleneck of gradient
descent, which occurs as a roadblock both in distributed as well as parallel training. In the setting of
distributed training, communicating the stochastic gradients to the other workers is a major limiting
factor for many large scale (deep) learning applications, see e.g. [3, 21, 33, 44]. The same bottleneck
can also appear for parallel training, e.g. in the increasingly common setting of a single multi-core
machine or device, where locking and bandwidth of memory write operations for the common shared
parameter xt often forms the main bottleneck, see e.g. [14, 18, 25].
A remedy to address these issues seems to enforce applying smaller and more efficient updates
comp(gt ) instead of gt , where comp : Rd → Rd generates a compression of the gradient, such as by
lossy quantization or sparsification. We discuss different schemes below. However, too aggressive
1
Note that the stochastic gradients gt are dense vectors for the setting of training neural networks. The gt
themselves can be sparse for generalized linear models under the additional assumption that the data is sparse.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

