Uncertainty-Aware Attention for
Reliable Interpretation and Prediction

Jay Heo1,2,4∗, Hae Beom Lee1,2∗, Saehoon Kim2 , Juho Lee2,5 , Kwang Joon Kim3 ,
Eunho Yang1,2 , Sung Ju Hwang1,2
KAIST1 , AItrics2 , Yonsei University College of Medicine3 , UNIST4 , South Korea,
University of Oxford5 , United Kingdom,
{jayheo, haebeom.lee, sjhwang82, eunhoy}@kaist.ac.kr
shkim@aitrics.com, preppie@yuhs.ac, juho.lee@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Attention mechanism is effective in both focusing the deep learning models on
relevant features and interpreting them. However, attentions may be unreliable since
the networks that generate them are often trained in a weakly-supervised manner.
To overcome this limitation, we introduce the notion of input-dependent uncertainty
to the attention mechanism, such that it generates attention for each feature with
varying degrees of noise based on the given input, to learn larger variance on
instances it is uncertain about. We learn this Uncertainty-aware Attention (UA)
mechanism using variational inference, and validate it on various risk prediction
tasks from electronic health records on which our model significantly outperforms
existing attention models. The analysis of the learned attentions shows that our
model generates attentions that comply with clinicians’ interpretation, and provide
richer interpretation via learned variance. Further evaluation of both the accuracy
of the uncertainty calibration and the prediction performance with “I don’t know”
decision show that UA yields networks with high reliability as well.

1

Introduction

For many real-world safety-critical tasks, achieving high reliablity may be the most important
objective when learning predictive models for them, since incorrect predictions could potentially
lead to severe consequences. For instance, failure to correctly predict the sepsis risk of a patient in
ICU may cost his/her life. Deep learning models, while having achieved impressive performances
on multitudes of real-world tasks such as visual recognition [17, 10], machine translation [2] and
risk prediction for healthcare [3, 4], may be still susceptible to such critical mistakes since most do
not have any notion of predictive uncertainty, often leading to overconfident models [9, 18] that are
prone to making mistakes. Even worse, they are very difficult to analyze, due to multiple layers of
non-linear transformations that involves large number of parameters.
Attention mechanism [2] is an effective means of guiding the model to focus on a partial set of most
relevant features for each input instance. It works by generating (often sparse) coefficients for the
given features in an input-adaptive manner, to allocate more weights to the features that are found to
be relevant for the given input. Attention mechanism has been shown to significantly improve the
model performance for machine translation [2] and image annotation [28] tasks. Another important
feature of the attention mechanism is that it allows easy interpretation of the model via the generated
attention allocations, and one recent work on healthcare domain [3] is focusing on this aspect.
∗

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

