The Everlasting Database:
Statistical Validity at a Fair Price
Blake Woodworth
Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago

Vitaly Feldman
Google

Saharon Rosset
Tel Aviv University

Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago

Abstract
The problem of handling adaptivity in data analysis, intentional or not, permeates a
variety of fields, including test-set overfitting in ML challenges and the accumulation of invalid scientific discoveries. We propose a mechanism for answering an
arbitrarily long sequence of potentially adaptive statistical queries, by charging a
price for each query and using the proceeds to collect additional samples. Crucially,
we guarantee statistical validity without any assumptions on how the queries are
generated. We also ensure with high probability that the cost for M non-adaptive
queries is O(log M ), while the cost to a potentially
adaptive user who makes M
p
queries that do not depend on any others is O( M ).

1

Introduction

Consider the problem of running a server that provides the test loss of a model on held out data,
e.g. for evaluation in a machine learning challenge. We would like to ensure that all test losses
returned by the server are accurate estimates of the true generalization error of the predictors.
Returning the empirical error on held out test data would initially be a good estimate of the generalization error. However, an analyst can use the empirical errors to adjust their model and improve their
performance on the test data. In fact, with a number of queries only linear in the amount of test data,
one can easily create a predictor that completely overfits, having empirical error on the test data that
is artificially small [5, 12]. Even without such intentional overfitting, sequential querying can lead to
unintentional adaptation since analysts are biased toward tweaks that lead to improved test errors.
If the queries were non-adaptive, i.e. the sequence of predictors is not influenced by previous test
results, then we could handle a much larger number of queries before overfitting–a number exponential
in the size of the dataset. Nevertheless, the test set will eventually be “used up” and estimates of the
test error (specifically those of the best performers) might be over-optimistic.
A similar situation arises in other contexts such as validating potential scientific discoveries. One can
evaluate potential discoveries using set aside validation data, but if analyses are refined adaptively
based on the results, one may again overfit the validation data and arrive at false discoveries [14, 17].
One way to ensure the validity of answers in the face of adaptive querying is to collect all queries
before giving any answers, and answer them all at once, e.g. at the end of a competition. However,
analysts typically want more immediate feedback, both for ML challenges and in scientific research.
Additionally, if we want to answer more queries later, ensuring statistical validity would require
collecting a whole new dataset. This might be unnecessarily expensive if few or none of the queries
are in fact adaptive. It also raises the question of who should bear the cost of collecting new data.
Alternatively, we could try to limit the number or frequency of queries from each user, forbid adaptive
querying, or assume users work independently of each other, remaining oblivious to other users’
queries and answers. However, it is nearly impossible to enforce such restrictions. Determined users
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

