The Physical Systems Behind Optimization
Algorithms

Lin F. Yang ∗
Princeton University
lin.yang@princeton.edu

Raman Arora,
Johns Hopkins University
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Vladimir Braverman
Johns Hopkins University
vova@cs.jhu.edu

Tuo Zhao†
Georgia Institute of Technology
tourzhao@gatech.edu

Abstract
We use differential equations based approaches to provide some physics insights
into analyzing the dynamics of popular optimization algorithms in machine learning.
In particular, we study gradient descent, proximal gradient descent, coordinate
gradient descent, proximal coordinate gradient, and Newton’s methods as well
as their Nesterov’s accelerated variants in a unified framework motivated by a
natural connection of optimization algorithms to physical systems. Our analysis is
applicable to more general algorithms and optimization problems beyond convexity
and strong convexity, e.g. Polyak-Łojasiewicz and error bound conditions (possibly
nonconvex).

1

Introduction

Many machine learning problems can be cast into an optimization problem of the following form:
x∗ = argmin f (x),
(1.1)
x∈X

where X ⊆ Rd and f : X → R is a continuously differentiable function. For simplicity, we assume
that f is convex or approximately convex (more on this later). Perhaps, the earliest algorithm for
solving (1.1) is the vanilla gradient descent (VGD) algorithm, which dates back to Euler and Lagrange.
VGD is simple, intuitive, and easy to implement in practice. For large-scale problems, it is usually
more scalable than more sophisticated algorithms (e.g. Newton).
Existing state-of-the-art analysis shows that VGD achieves an O(1/k) convergence rate for smooth
convex functions and a linear convergence rate for strongly convex functions, where k is the number
of iterations [11]. Recently, a class of Nesterov’s accelerated gradient (NAG) algorithms have gained
popularity in statistical signal processing and machine learning communities. These algorithms combine the vanilla gradient descent algorithm with an additional momentum term at each iteration. Such
a modification, though simple, has a profound impact: the NAG algorithms attain faster convergence
than VGD. Specifically, NAG achieves O(1/k 2 ) convergence for smooth convex functions, and linear
convergence with a better constant term for strongly convex functions [11].
Another closely related class of algorithms is randomized coordinate gradient descent (RCGD)
algorithms. These algorithms conduct a gradient descent-type step in each iteration, but only with
∗

Work was done while the author was at Johns Hopkins University. This work is partially supported by the
National Science Foundation under grant numbers 1546482, 1447639, 1650041 and 1652257, the ONR Award
N00014-18-1-2364, the Israel Science Foundation grant #897/13, a Minerva Foundation grant, and by DARPA
award W911NF1820267.
†
Corresponding author.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

