Adaptive Learning with Unknown Information Flows

Yonatan Gur
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
ygur@stanford.edu

Ahmadreza Momeni
Electrical Engineering Department
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
amomenis@stanford.edu

Abstract
An agent facing sequential decisions that are characterized by partial feedback
needs to strike a balance between maximizing immediate payoffs based on available
information, and acquiring new information that may be essential for maximizing future payoffs. This trade-off is captured by the multi-armed bandit (MAB)
framework that has been studied and applied when at each time epoch payoff observations are collected on the actions that are selected at that epoch. In this paper
we introduce a new, generalized MAB formulation in which additional information
on each arm may appear arbitrarily throughout the decision horizon, and study the
impact of such information flows on the achievable performance and the design
of efficient decision-making policies. By obtaining matching lower and upper
bounds, we characterize the (regret) complexity of this family of MAB problems
as a function of the information flows. We introduce an adaptive exploration policy
that, without any prior knowledge of the information arrival process, attains the
best performance (in terms of regret rate) that is achievable when the information
arrival process is a priori known. Our policy uses dynamically customized virtual
time indexes to endogenously control the exploration rate based on the realized
information arrival process.

1

Introduction

Background and motivation. In the presence of uncertainty and partial feedback on payoffs, an
agent that faces a sequence of decisions needs to strike a balance between maximizing instantaneous
performance and collecting valuable information that is essential for optimizing future decisions. A
well-studied framework that captures this trade-off between new information acquisition (exploration),
and optimizing payoffs based on available information (exploitation) is the one of multi-armed bandits
(MAB) that first emerged in [20] in the context of drug testing, and was later extended by [15] to a
more general setting. In this framework, an agent repeatedly chooses between K arms where at each
trial the agent pulls one arm and then receives a reward. In this formulation (known as the stochastic
MAB setting), rewards are assumed to be identically distributed for each arm and independent across
trails and arms. The objective of the agent is to maximize the cumulative return over a certain time
horizon, and the performance criterion is the so-called regret: the expected difference between the
cumulative reward received by the agent and the reward accumulated by a hypothetical benchmark,
referred to as oracle, who holds prior information about the reward distribution of each arm (and thus
repeatedly selects the arm with the highest expected reward). A sharp regret characterization for this
traditional framework was first established by [13], followed by analysis of important policies such as
-greedy, UCB1, and Thompson sampling; see, e.g., [3], as well as [1]. The MAB framework focuses
on balancing exploration and exploitation, typically under very little assumptions on the distribution
of rewards, but with very specific assumptions on the future information collection process. In
particular, optimal policy design is typically predicated on the assumption that at each period a reward
observation is collected only on the arm that is selected by the policy at that time period (exceptions
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

