Constrained Generation of Semantically Valid
Graphs via Regularizing Variational Autoencoders

Tengfei Ma∗

Jie Chen∗
Cao Xiao
IBM Research
Tengfei.Ma1@ibm.com,
{chenjie,cxiao}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Deep generative models have achieved remarkable success in various data domains,
including images, time series, and natural languages. There remain, however,
substantial challenges for combinatorial structures, including graphs. One of
the key challenges lies in the difficulty of ensuring semantic validity in context.
For example, in molecular graphs, the number of bonding-electron pairs must not
exceed the valence of an atom; whereas in protein interaction networks, two proteins
may be connected only when they belong to the same or correlated gene ontology
terms. These constraints are not easy to be incorporated into a generative model.
In this work, we propose a regularization framework for variational autoencoders
as a step toward semantic validity. We focus on the matrix representation of graphs
and formulate penalty terms that regularize the output distribution of the decoder
to encourage the satisfaction of validity constraints. Experimental results confirm a
much higher likelihood of sampling valid graphs in our approach, compared with
others reported in the literature.

1

Introduction

The recent years have witnessed rapid progress in the development of deep generative models for a
wide variety of data types, including continuous data (e.g., images [39]) and sequences (e.g., time
series [38] and natural language sentences [18]). Representative methods, including generative
adversarial networks (GAN) [16] and variational autoencoders (VAE) [25], learn a distribution
parameterized by deep neural networks from a set of training examples. Amid the tremendous
progress, deep generative models for combinatorial structures, particularly graphs, are less mature.
The difficulty, in part, is owing to the challenge of an efficient parameterization of the graphs while
maintaining semantic validity in context. Whereas there exists a large body of work on learning
an abstract representation of a graph [34, 11, 26, 10, 14], how one decodes it into a valid native
representation is less straightforward.
One natural line of approaches [24, 29] treats the generation process as sequential decision making,
wherein nodes and edges are inserted one by one, conditioned on the graph constructed so far.
Vectorial representations of the graph, nodes, and edges may be simultaneously learned. When the
training graphs are large, however, learning a long sequence of decisions is reportedly challenging [29].
Moreover, existing work is limited to a predefined ordering of the sequence, leaving open the role of
permutation.
Another approach [37, 36] is to build a probabilistic graph model based on the matrix representation.
In the simplest form, the adjacency matrix may encode the probability of the existence of each edge,
with additionally a probability vector indicating the existence of nodes. The challenge of such an
approach, in contrast to the local decisions made in the preceding one, is that global properties (e.g.,
∗

Equal contribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

