Entropy and mutual information in
models of deep neural networks
Marylou Gabrié∗1 , Andre Manoel2,3 , Clément Luneau4 , Jean Barbier1,4,5 , Nicolas Macris4 ,
Florent Krzakala1,6,7 and Lenka Zdeborová3,6
1

Laboratoire de Physique Statistique, École Normale Supérieure, PSL University
Parietal Team, INRIA, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay & Owkin Inc., New York
3
Institut de Physique Théorique, CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay
4
Laboratoire de Théorie des Communications, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
5
International Center for Theoretical Physics, Trieste, Italy
6
Department of Mathematics, Duke University, Durham NC
7
Sorbonne Universités & LightOn Inc., Paris
2

Abstract
We examine a class of stochastic deep learning models with a tractable method to
compute information-theoretic quantities. Our contributions are three-fold: (i) We
show how entropies and mutual informations can be derived from heuristic statistical physics methods, under the assumption that weight matrices are independent
and orthogonally-invariant. (ii) We extend particular cases in which this result is
known to be rigorously exact by providing a proof for two-layers networks with
Gaussian random weights, using the recently introduced adaptive interpolation
method. (iii) We propose an experiment framework with generative models of
synthetic datasets, on which we train deep neural networks with a weight constraint
designed so that the assumption in (i) is verified during learning. We study the behavior of entropies and mutual informations throughout learning and conclude that,
in the proposed setting, the relationship between compression and generalization
remains elusive.
The successes of deep learning methods have spurred efforts towards quantitative modeling of the
performance of deep neural networks. In particular, an information-theoretic approach linking
generalization capabilities to compression has been receiving increasing interest. The intuition behind
the study of mutual informations in latent variable models dates back to the information bottleneck
(IB) theory of [1]. Although recently reformulated in the context of deep learning [2], verifying its
relevance in practice requires the computation of mutual informations for high-dimensional variables,
a notoriously hard problem. Thus, pioneering works in this direction focused either on small network
models with discrete (continuous, eventually binned) activations [3], or on linear networks [4, 5].
In the present paper we follow a different direction, and build on recent results from statistical physics
[6, 7] and information theory [8, 9] to propose, in Section 1, a formula to compute informationtheoretic quantities for a class of deep neural network models. The models we approach, described in
Section 2, are non-linear feed-forward neural networks trained on synthetic datasets with constrained
weights. Such networks capture some of the key properties of the deep learning setting that are
usually difficult to include in tractable frameworks: non-linearities, arbitrary large width and depth,
and correlations in the input data. We demonstrate the proposed method in a series of numerical
experiments in Section 3. First observations suggest a rather complex picture, where the role of
compression in the generalization ability of deep neural networks is yet to be elucidated.
∗

Corresponding author: marylou.gabrie@ens.fr

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

