A Bandit Approach to Multiple Testing with False
Discovery Control
Kevin Jamieson⇤,† , Lalit Jain⇤
{jamieson,lalitj}@cs.washington.edu
⇤
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, and
†
Optimizely, San Francisco, CA

Abstract
We propose an adaptive sampling approach for multiple testing which aims to
maximize statistical power while ensuring anytime false discovery control. We
consider n distributions whose means are partitioned by whether they are below or
equal to a baseline (nulls), versus above the baseline (actual positives). In addition,
each distribution can be sequentially and repeatedly sampled. Inspired by the
multi-armed bandit literature, we provide an algorithm that takes as few samples
as possible to exceed a target true positive proportion (i.e. proportion of actual
positives discovered) while giving anytime control of the false discovery proportion
(nulls predicted as actual positives). Our sample complexity results match known
information theoretic lower bounds and through simulations we show a substantial
performance improvement over uniform sampling and an adaptive elimination style
algorithm. Given the simplicity of the approach, and its sample efficiency, the
method has promise for wide adoption in the biological sciences, clinical testing
for drug discovery, and online A/B/n testing problems.

1

Introduction

Consider n possible treatments, say, drugs in a clinical trial, where each treatment either has a
positive expected effect relative to a baseline (actual positive), or no difference (null), with a goal
of identifying as many actual positive treatments as possible. If evaluating the ith trial results in a
noisy outcome (e.g. due to variance in the actual measurement or just diversity in the population)
then given a total measurement budget of B, it is standard practice to execute and average B/n
measurements of each treatment, and then output a set of predicted actual positives based on the
measured effect sizes. False alarms (i.e. nulls predicted as actual positives) are controlled by either
controlling family-wise error rate (FWER), where one bounds the probability that at least one of the
predictions is null, or false discovery rate (FDR), where one bounds the expected proportion of the
number of predicted nulls to the number of predictions. FDR is a weaker condition than FWER but is
often used in favor of FWER because of its higher statistical power: more actual positives are output
as predictions using the same measurements.
In the pursuit of even greater statistical power, there has recently been increased interest in the
biological sciences to reject the uniform allocation strategy of B/n trials to the n treatments in
favor of an adaptive allocation. Adaptive allocations partition the budget B into sequential rounds
of measurements in which the measurements taken at one round inform which measurements are
taken in the next [1, 2]. Intuitively, if the effect size is relatively large for some treatment, fewer
trials will be necessary to identify that treatment as an actual positive relative to the others, and
that savings of measurements can be allocated towards treatments with smaller effect sizes to boost
the signal. However, both [1, 2] employed ad-hoc heuristics which may not only have sub-optimal
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

