Accelerated Stochastic Matrix Inversion: General
Theory and Speeding up BFGS Rules for Faster
Second-Order Optimization
Robert M. Gower
Télécom ParisTech
Paris, France
robert.gower@telecom-paristech.fr
Peter Richtárik⇤
KAUST
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa

Filip Hanzely
KAUST
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
filip.hanzely@kaust.edu.sa
Sebastian U. Stich
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
sebastian.stich@epfl.ch

Abstract
We present the first accelerated randomized algorithm for solving linear systems
in Euclidean spaces. One essential problem of this type is the matrix inversion
problem. In particular, our algorithm can be specialized to invert positive definite
matrices in such a way that all iterates (approximate solutions) generated by the
algorithm are positive definite matrices themselves. This opens the way for many
applications in the field of optimization and machine learning. As an application of
our general theory, we develop the first accelerated (deterministic and stochastic)
quasi-Newton updates. Our updates lead to provably more aggressive approximations of the inverse Hessian, and lead to speed-ups over classical non-accelerated
rules in numerical experiments. Experiments with empirical risk minimization
show that our rules can accelerate training of machine learning models.

1

Introduction

Consider the optimization problem
min f (w),

w2Rn

(1)

and assume f is sufficiently smooth. A new wave of second order stochastic methods are being
developed with the aim of solving large scale optimization problems. In particular, many of these
new methods are based on stochastic BFGS updates [29, 35, 20, 21, 6, 8, 3]. Here we develop a new
stochastic accelerated BFGS update that can form the basis of new stochastic quasi-Newton methods.
Another approach to scaling up second order methods is to use randomized sketching to reduce the
dimension, and hence the complexity of the Hessian and the updates involving the Hessian [26, 38], or
subsampled Hessian matrices when the objective function is a sum of many loss functions [5, 2, 1, 37].
The starting point for developing second order methods is arguably Newton’s method, which performs
the iterative process
wk+1 = wk
⇤

(r2 f (wk )) 1 rf (wk ),

University of Edinburgh, Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

(2)

