Understanding Regularized Spectral Clustering via
Graph Conductance

Yilin Zhang
Department of Statistics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
yilin.zhang@wisc.edu

Karl Rohe
Department of Statistics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
karl.rohe@wisc.edu

Abstract
This paper uses the relationship between graph conductance and spectral clustering
to study (i) the failures of spectral clustering and (ii) the benefits of regularization.
The explanation is simple. Sparse and stochastic graphs create several “dangling
sets”, or small trees that are connected to the core of the graph by only one edge.
Graph conductance is sensitive to these noisy dangling sets and spectral clustering
inherits this sensitivity. The second part of the paper starts from a previously proposed form of regularized spectral clustering and shows that it is related to the graph
conductance on a “regularized graph”. When graph conductance is computed on
the regularized graph, we call it CoreCut. Based upon previous arguments that relate graph conductance to spectral clustering (e.g. Cheeger inequality), minimizing
CoreCut relaxes to regularized spectral clustering. Simple inspection of CoreCut
reveals why it is less sensitive to dangling sets. Together, these results show that
unbalanced partitions from spectral clustering can be understood as overfitting to
noise in the periphery of a sparse and stochastic graph. Regularization fixes this
overfitting. In addition to this statistical benefit, these results also demonstrate
how regularization can improve the computational speed of spectral clustering. We
provide simulations and data examples to illustrate these results.

1

Introduction

Spectral clustering partitions the nodes of a graph into groups based upon the eigenvectors of the
graph Laplacian [19, 20]. Despite the claims of spectral clustering being “popular”, in applied
research using graph data, spectral clustering (without regularization) often returns a partition of the
nodes that is uninteresting, typically finding a large cluster that contains most of the data and many
smaller clusters, each with only a few nodes. These applications involve brain graphs [2] and social
networks from Facebook [21] and Twitter [22]. One key motivation for spectral clustering is that
it relaxes a discrete optimization problem of minimizing graph conductance. Previous research has
shown that across a wide range of social and information networks, the clusters with the smallest
graph conductance are often rather small [15]. Figure 1 illustrates the leading singular vectors on
a communication network from Facebook during the 2012 French presidential election [21]. The
singular vectors localize on a few nodes, which leads to a highly unbalanced partition.
[1] proposed regularized spectral clustering which adds a weak edge on every pair of nodes with
edge weight τ /N , where N is the number of nodes in the network and τ is a tuning parameter. [5]
proposed a related technique. Figure 1 illustrates how regularization changes the leading singular
vectors in the Facebook example. The singular vectors are more spread across nodes.
Many empirical networks have a core-periphery structure, where nodes in the core of the graph
are more densely connected and nodes in the periphery are sparsely connected [3]. In Figure 1,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

