Probabilistic Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning

Chelsea Finn∗, Kelvin Xu∗, Sergey Levine
UC Berkeley
{cbfinn,kelvinxu,svlevine}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Meta-learning for few-shot learning entails acquiring a prior over previous tasks and
experiences, such that new tasks be learned from small amounts of data. However,
a critical challenge in few-shot learning is task ambiguity: even when a powerful
prior can be meta-learned from a large number of prior tasks, a small dataset
for a new task can simply be too ambiguous to acquire a single model (e.g., a
classifier) for that task that is accurate. In this paper, we propose a probabilistic
meta-learning algorithm that can sample models for a new task from a model
distribution. Our approach extends model-agnostic meta-learning, which adapts
to new tasks via gradient descent, to incorporate a parameter distribution that is
trained via a variational lower bound. At meta-test time, our algorithm adapts via
a simple procedure that injects noise into gradient descent, and at meta-training
time, the model is trained such that this stochastic adaptation procedure produces
samples from the approximate model posterior. Our experimental results show that
our method can sample plausible classifiers and regressors in ambiguous few-shot
learning problems. We also show how reasoning about ambiguity can also be used
for downstream active learning problems.

1

Introduction

Learning from a few examples is a key aspect of human intelligence. One way to make it possible
to acquire solutions to complex tasks from only a few examples is to leverage past experience to
learn a prior over tasks. The process of learning this prior entails discovering the shared structure
across different tasks from the same family, such as commonly occurring visual features or semantic
cues. Structure is useful insofar as it yields efficient learning of new tasks – a mechanism known as
learning-to-learn, or meta-learning [3]. However, when the end goal of few-shot meta-learning is to
learn solutions to new tasks from small amounts of data, a critical issue that must be dealt with is task
ambiguity: even with the best possible prior, there might simply not be enough information in the
examples for a new task to resolve that task with high certainty. It is therefore quite desireable to
develop few-shot meta-learning methods that can propose multiple potential solutions to an ambiguous
few-shot learning problem. Such a method could be used to evaluate uncertainty (by measuring
agreement between the samples), perform active learning, or elicit direct human supervision about
which sample is preferable. For example, in safety-critical applications, such as few-shot medical
image classification, uncertainty is crucial for determining if the learned classifier should be trusted.
When learning from such small amounts of data, uncertainty estimation can also help predict if
additional data would be beneficial for learning and improving the estimate of the rewards. Finally,
while we do not experiment with this in this paper, we expect that modeling this ambiguity will be
helpful for reinforcement learning problems, where it can be used to aid in exploration.
While recognizing and accounting for ambiguity is an important aspect of the few-shot learning problem, it is challenging to model when scaling to high-dimensional data, large function approximators,
and multimodal task structure. Representing distributions over functions is relatively straightforward
∗

First two authors contributed equally.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

