Scalable Hyperparameter Transfer Learning

Valerio Perrone, Rodolphe Jenatton, Matthias Seeger, Cédric Archambeau
Amazon
Berlin, Germany
{vperrone, jenatton, matthis, cedrica}@amazon.com

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a model-based approach for gradient-free black-box
function optimization, such as hyperparameter optimization. Typically, BO relies
on conventional Gaussian process (GP) regression, whose algorithmic complexity
is cubic in the number of evaluations. As a result, GP-based BO cannot leverage
large numbers of past function evaluations, for example, to warm-start related
BO runs. We propose a multi-task adaptive Bayesian linear regression model for
transfer learning in BO, whose complexity is linear in the function evaluations:
one Bayesian linear regression model is associated to each black-box function
optimization problem (or task), while transfer learning is achieved by coupling
the models through a shared deep neural net. Experiments show that the neural
net learns a representation suitable for warm-starting the black-box optimization
problems and that BO runs can be accelerated when the target black-box function
(e.g., validation loss) is learned together with other related signals (e.g., training
loss). The proposed method was found to be at least one order of magnitude faster
than competing methods recently published in the literature.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) is a well-established methodology to optimize expensive black-box
functions [1]. It relies on a probabilistic model of an unknown target f (x) one wishes to optimize and
which is repeatedly queried until one runs out of budget (e.g., time). Queries consist in evaluations
of f at hyperparameter configurations x1 , . . . , xn selected according to an explore-exploit trade-off
criterion or acquisition function [2, 3, 1]. The hyperparameter configuration corresponding to the
best query is then returned. One popular approach is to impose a Gaussian process (GP) prior over
f and, in light of the observed queries f (x1 ), . . . , f (xn ), to compute the posterior GP. The GP
model maintains a posterior mean function and a posterior variance function that are required when
evaluating the acquisition function for each new query of f .
Despite their flexibility and ability to calibrate the predictive uncertainty, standard GPs scale cubically
with the number of observations [4]. Hence, they cannot be applied in situations where f has been or
can be queried a very large number of times. A possible alternative is to consider sparse GPs, which
scale linearly in the number of observations and quadratically in the number of inducing points [5, 6].
However, tractability requires the number of inducing points to be much smaller than the number of
observations, resulting in a severe deterioration of the predictive performance in practice [7].
In this work, we aim to warm-start BO in the context of hyperparameter optimization (HPO). Our
goal is to learn across related black-box optimization problems by transferring information between
them, thus leveraging data from previous BO runs. For example, we warm-start the HPO of a given
classifier when it is applied to a battery of reference data sets. Earlier work adopting this transfer
learning perspective includes [8, 9]. To circumvent the scalability limitation of GPs and enable
transfer learning in HPO at scale, we propose falling back to adaptive Bayesian linear regression
(ABLR) [10], which scales linearly in the number of observations and cubically in the dimension of a
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

