A Bayesian Nonparametric View
on Count-Min Sketch
Diana Cai
Princeton University
dcai@cs.princeton.edu

Michael Mitzenmacher
Harvard University
michaelm@eecs.harvard.edu

Ryan P. Adams
Princeton University
rpa@princeton.edu

Abstract
The count-min sketch is a time- and memory-efficient randomized data structure
that provides a point estimate of the number of times an item has appeared in a data
stream. The count-min sketch and related hash-based data structures are ubiquitous
in systems that must track frequencies of data such as URLs, IP addresses, and
language n-grams. We present a Bayesian view on the count-min sketch, using
the same data structure, but providing a posterior distribution over the frequencies
that characterizes the uncertainty arising from the hash-based approximation. In
particular, we take a nonparametric approach and consider tokens generated from a
Dirichlet process (DP) random measure, which allows for an unbounded number
of unique tokens. Using properties of the DP, we show that it is possible to
straightforwardly compute posterior marginals of the unknown true counts and that
the modes of these marginals recover the count-min sketch estimator, inheriting
the associated probabilistic guarantees. Using simulated data and text data, we
investigate the properties of these estimators. Lastly, we also study a modified
problem in which the observation stream consists of collections of tokens (i.e.,
documents) arising from a random measure drawn from a stable beta process,
which allows for power law scaling behavior in the number of unique tokens.

1

Introduction

Modern software systems often involve large data streams [20] such as text queries, real-time network
traffic, financial data, and social media activity. These systems are often required to detect anomalous
data or report the frequencies of events and patterns in the stream. When processing these highvolume data streams, it is critical to compactly represent the data so that these analyses can be
efficiently extracted. Ideally, it would be possible to estimate useful properties of the data stream in
only a single pass using an amount of memory that is of constant size.
These practical desiderata for large-scale, real-time data analysis have led to the idea of constructing
a sketch: a randomized data structure that can be easily updated and queried for approximate statistics
of the stream. Variants of sketching ideas have found applications in many areas, including machine
learning [1], security [10], and natural language processing [15]. Of particular interest has been the
problem of estimating the frequency of tokens in a data stream (e.g., Misra and Gries [19], Charikar
et al. [4], Cohen and Matias [6], Cormode and Muthukrishnan [8]), and a notable approach to this
problem is the count-min sketch [8] (and its cousins such as the counting Bloom filter [13]), which
uses random hash families to approximate these counts.
The count-min sketch is appealing because it successfully achieves the goal of using a compressed
representation to save space in storing approximate frequency statistics of the data stream, with
provable performance guarantees on the answers returned by those queries. Nevertheless, there are
several aspects of the count-min sketch that might be improved upon by taking a different probabilistic
view. First, the count-min sketch provides only point estimates of the statistics of interest, even
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

