On gradient regularizers for MMD GANs

Michael Arbel∗
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
michael.n.arbel@gmail.com

Danica J. Sutherland∗
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
djs@djsutherland.ml

Mikołaj Bińkowski
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
mikbinkowski@gmail.com

Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a principled method for gradient-based regularization of the critic of
GAN-like models trained by adversarially optimizing the kernel of a Maximum
Mean Discrepancy (MMD). We show that controlling the gradient of the critic
is vital to having a sensible loss function, and devise a method to enforce exact,
analytical gradient constraints at no additional cost compared to existing approximate techniques based on additive regularizers. The new loss function is provably
continuous, and experiments show that it stabilizes and accelerates training, giving
image generation models that outperform state-of-the art methods on 160 × 160
CelebA and 64 × 64 unconditional ImageNet.

1

Introduction

There has been an explosion of interest in implicit generative models (IGMs) over the last few years,
especially after the introduction of generative adversarial networks (GANs) [16]. These models
allow approximate samples from a complex high-dimensional target distribution P, using a model
distribution Qθ , where estimation of likelihoods, exact inference, and so on are not tractable. GANtype IGMs have yielded very impressive empirical results, particularly for image generation, far
beyond the quality of samples seen from most earlier generative models [e.g. 18, 22, 23, 24, 38].
These excellent results, however, have depended on adding a variety of methods of regularization and
other tricks to stabilize the notoriously difficult optimization problem of GANs [38, 42]. Some of
this difficulty is perhaps because when a GAN is viewed as minimizing a discrepancy DGAN (P, Qθ ),
its gradient ∇θ DGAN (P, Qθ ) does not provide useful signal to the generator if the target and model
distributions are not absolutely continuous, as is nearly always the case [2].
An alternative set of losses are the integral probability metrics (IPMs) [36], which can give credit to
models Qθ “near” to the target distribution P [3, 8, Section 4 of 15]. IPMs are defined in terms of a
critic function: a “well behaved” function with large amplitude where P and Qθ differ most. The IPM
is the difference in the expected critic under P and Qθ , and is zero when the distributions agree. The
Wasserstein IPMs, whose critics are made smooth via a Lipschitz constraint, have been particularly
successful in IGMs [3, 14, 18]. But the Lipschitz constraint must hold uniformly, which can be hard
to enforce. A popular approximation has been to apply a gradient constraint only in expectation [18]:
the critic’s gradient norm is constrained to be small on points chosen uniformly between P and Q.
Another class of IPMs used as IGM losses are the Maximum Mean Discrepancies (MMDs) [17],
as in [13, 28]. Here the critic function is a member of a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (except
in [50], who learn a deep approximation to an RKHS critic). Better performance can be obtained,
∗

These authors contributed equally.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

