Differential Properties of Sinkhorn Approximation
for Learning with Wasserstein Distance
Giulia Luise 1

Alessandro Rudi 2

{g.luise.16,m.pontil}@ucl.ac.uk

Massimiliano Pontil 1,3

alessandro.rudi@inria.fr

Carlo Ciliberto 1,4

c.ciliberto@imperial.ac.uk

1

2

Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, UK.
INRIA - Département d’informatique, École Normale Supérieure - PSL Research University, Paris, France.
3
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy.
4
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College, London, UK.

Abstract
Applications of optimal transport have recently gained remarkable attention as
a result of the computational advantages of entropic regularization. However, in
most situations the Sinkhorn approximation to the Wasserstein distance is replaced
by a regularized version that is less accurate but easy to differentiate. In this work
we characterize the differential properties of the original Sinkhorn approximation,
proving that it enjoys the same smoothness of its regularized version and we
explicitly provide an efficient algorithm to compute its gradient. We show that this
result benefits both theory and applications: on one hand, high order smoothness
confers statistical guarantees to learning with Wasserstein approximations. On
the other hand, the gradient formula is used to efficiently solve learning and
optimization problems in practice. Promising preliminary experiments complement
our analysis.

1

Introduction

Applications of optimal transport have been gaining increasing attention in machine learning. This
success is mainly due to the recent introduction of the Sinkhorn distance [1, 2], which offers an
efficient alternative to the heavy cost of evaluating the Wasserstein distance directly. The computational advantages have motivated recent applications in optimization and learning over the space of
probability distributions, where the Wasserstein distance is a natural metric. However, in these settings
adopting the Sinkhorn approximation requires solving a further optimization problem with respect
to the corresponding approximation function rather than only evaluating it in a point. This consists
in a bi-level problem [3] for which it is challenging to derive an optimization approach[4]. As a
consequence, a regularized version of the Sinkhorn approximation is usually considered [5, 6, 7, 8, 9],
for which it is possible to efficiently compute a gradient and thus employ it in first-order optimization
methods [8]. More recently, also efficient automatic differentiation strategies have been proposed
[10], with applications ranging from dictionary learning [11] to GANs [4] and discriminat analysis
[12]. A natural question is whether the easier tractability of this regularization is paid in terms of
accuracy. Indeed, while as a direct consequence of [13] it can be shown that the original Sinkhorn
approach provides a sharp approximation to the Wasserstein distance [13], the same is not guaranteed
for its regularized version.
In this work we recall both theoretically and empirically that in optimization problems the original
Sinkhorn approximation is significantly more favorable than its regularized counterpart, which has
been indeed noticed to have a tendency to find over-smooth solutions [14]. We take this as a motivation
to study the differential properties of the sharp Sinkhorn with the goal of deriving a strategy to address
optimization and learning problems over probability distributions. The principal contributions of this
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

