Differentiable MPC for End-to-end Planning and Control

Brandon Amos1

Ivan Dario Jimenez Rodriguez2 Jacob Sacks2
Byron Boots2 J. Zico Kolter13
1
2
3
Carnegie Mellon University
Georgia Tech
Bosch Center for AI

Abstract
We present foundations for using Model Predictive Control (MPC) as a differentiable policy class for reinforcement learning in continuous state and action spaces.
This provides one way of leveraging and combining the advantages of model-free
and model-based approaches. Specifically, we differentiate through MPC by using
the KKT conditions of the convex approximation at a fixed point of the controller.
Using this strategy, we are able to learn the cost and dynamics of a controller via
end-to-end learning. Our experiments focus on imitation learning in the pendulum
and cartpole domains, where we learn the cost and dynamics terms of an MPC
policy class. We show that our MPC policies are significantly more data-efficient
than a generic neural network and that our method is superior to traditional system
identification in a setting where the expert is unrealizable.

1

Introduction

Model-free reinforcement learning has achieved state-of-the-art results in many challenging domains.
However, these methods learn black-box control policies and typically suffer from poor sample
complexity and generalization. Alternatively, model-based approaches seek to model the environment
the agent is interacting in. Many model-based approaches utilize Model Predictive Control (MPC) to
perform complex control tasks [González et al., 2011, Lenz et al., 2015, Liniger et al., 2014, Kamel
et al., 2015, Erez et al., 2012, Alexis et al., 2011, Bouffard et al., 2012, Neunert et al., 2016]. MPC
leverages a predictive model of the controlled system and solves an optimization problem online in a
receding horizon fashion to produce a sequence of control actions. Usually the first control action is
applied to the system, after which the optimization problem is solved again for the next time step.
Formally, MPC requires that at each time step we solve the optimization problem:
argmin
x1:T ∈X ,u1:T ∈U

T
X

Ct (xt , ut ) subject to xt+1 = f (xt , ut ), x1 = xinit ,

(1)

t=1

where xt , ut are the state and control at time t, X and U are constraints on valid states and controls,
Ct : X × U → R is a (potentially time-varying) cost function, f : X × U → X is a dynamics model,
and xinit is the initial state of the system. The optimization problem in Equation (1) can be efficiently
solved in many ways, for example with the finite-horizon iterative Linear Quadratic Regulator (iLQR)
algorithm [Li and Todorov, 2004]. Although these techniques are widely used in control domains,
much work in deep reinforcement learning or imitation learning opts instead to use a much simpler
policy class such as a linear function or neural network. The advantages of these policy classes is that
they are differentiable and the loss can be directly optimized with respect to them while it is typically
not possible to do full end-to-end learning with model-based approaches.
In this paper, we consider the task of learning MPC-based policies in an end-to-end fashion, illustrated
in Figure 1. That is, we treat MPC as a generic policy class u = π(xinit ; C, f ) parameterized by some
representations of the cost C and dynamics model f . By differentiating through the optimization
problem, we can learn the costs and dynamics model to perform a desired task. This is in contrast to
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

