Explaining Deep Learning Models – A Bayesian
Non-parametric Approach

Wenbo Guo
The Pennsylvania State University
wzg13@ist.psu.edu

Sui Huang
Netflix Inc.
shuang@netflix.com

Xinyu Xing
The Pennsylvania State University
xxing@ist.psu.edu

Yunzhe Tao
Columbia University
y.tao@columbia.edu

Lin Lin
The Pennsylvania State University
llin@psu.edu

Abstract
Understanding and interpreting how machine learning (ML) models make decisions
have been a big challenge. While recent research has proposed various technical
approaches to provide some clues as to how an ML model makes individual
predictions, they cannot provide users with an ability to inspect a model as a
complete entity. In this work, we propose a novel technical approach that augments
a Bayesian non-parametric regression mixture model with multiple elastic nets.
Using the enhanced mixture model, we can extract generalizable insights for a
target model through a global approximation. To demonstrate the utility of our
approach, we evaluate it on different ML models in the context of image recognition.
The empirical results indicate that our proposed approach not only outperforms
the state-of-the-art techniques in explaining individual decisions but also provides
users with an ability to discover the vulnerabilities of the target ML models.

1

Introduction

When comparing with relatively simple learning techniques such as decision trees and K-nearest
neighbors, it is well acknowledged that complex learning models – particularly, deep neural networks
(DNN) – usually demonstrate superior performance in classification and prediction. However, they
are almost completely opaque, even to the engineers that build them [20]. Presumably as such, they
have not yet been widely adopted in critical problem domains, such as diagnosing deadly diseases [13]
and making million-dollar trading decisions [14].
To address this problem, prior research proposes to derive an interpretable explanation for the output
of a DNN. With that, people could understand, trust and effectively manage a deep learning model.
From a technical prospective, this can be interpreted as pinpointing the most important features in the
input of a deep learning model. In the past, the techniques designed and developed primarily focus on
two kinds of methods – (1) whitebox explanation that derives interpretation for a deep learning model
through forward or backward propagation approach [26, 36], and (2) blackbox explanation that infers
explanations for individual decisions through local approximation [21, 23]. While both demonstrate
a great potential to help users interpret an individual decision, they lack an ability to extract insights
from the target ML model that could be generalized to future cases. In other words, existing methods
could not shed lights on the general sensitivity level of a target model to specific input dimensions
and hence fall short in foreseeing when prediction errors might occur for future cases.
In this work, we propose a new technical approach that not only explains an individual decision
but, more importantly, extracts generalizable insights from the target model. As we will show in
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

