Distributed Multi-Player Bandits - a Game of
Thrones Approach

Ilai Bistritz
Stanford University
bistritz@stanford.edu

Amir Leshem
Bar Ilan University
Amir.Leshem@biu.ac.il

Abstract
We consider a multi-armed bandit game where N players compete for K arms
for T turns. Each player has different expected rewards for the arms, and the instantaneous rewards are independent and identically distributed. Performance is
measured using the expected sum of regrets, compared to the optimal assignment
of arms to players. We assume that each player only knows her actions and the
reward she received each turn. Players cannot observe the actions of other players,
and no communication between players is possible. We present a distributed al
gorithm and prove that it achieves an expected sum of regrets of near-O log2 T .
This is the first algorithm to achieve a poly-logarithmic regret in this fully distributed scenario. All other works have assumed that either all players have the
same vector of expected rewards or that communication between players is possible.

1

Introduction

In online learning problems, an agent needs to learn on the run how to behave optimally. The crux
of these problems is the trade-off between exploration and exploitation. This trade-off is well captured by the multi-armed bandit problem, which has attracted enormous attention from the research
community. Recently, there has been a growing interest in the case of the multi-player multi-armed
bandit. In the multi-player scenario, the nature of the interaction between the players can take many
forms. Players may want to solve the problem of finding the best mutual arm as a team [1–6], or
may compete over the arms as resources they all individually require [7–19].
The idea of regret in the competitive multi-player multi-armed bandit problem is the expected sum
of regrets and is defined as the performance loss compared to the optimal assignment of arms to
players. The rationale for this notion of regret is formulated from the designer’s perspective, who
wants the distributed system of individuals to converge to a globally good solution.
Many works have considered a scenario where all the players have the same expectations for the
rewards of all arms. Some of these works assume that communication between players is possible
[10–12, 14, 19], whereas others consider a fully distributed scenario [7, 13, 15].
One of the main reasons for studying resource allocation bandits is their applications in cognitive
radio or wireless networks in general. In these scenarios, the channels are interpreted as arms and
the channel gains as the rewards. However, since users are scattered in space, the physical reality
dictates that different arms have different expected channel gains for different players.
This essential generalization for a matrix of expectations introduces a famous combinatorial optimization problem known as the assignment problem [20]. Achieving a sublinear expected sum of
regrets in a distributed manner requires a distributed solution to the assignment problem, which by
itself has been explored extensively, e.g. [21, 22].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

