Empirical Risk Minimization
Under Fairness Constraints
Michele Donini1 , Luca Oneto 2 ,
Shai Ben-David3 , John Shawe-Taylor4 , Massimiliano Pontil1,4
1
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (Italy) 2 University of Genoa (Italy),
3
University of Waterloo (Canada), 4 University College London (UK)

Abstract
We address the problem of algorithmic fairness: ensuring that sensitive information does not unfairly influence the outcome of a classifier. We present an approach based on empirical risk minimization, which incorporates a fairness constraint into the learning problem. It encourages the conditional risk of the learned
classifier to be approximately constant with respect to the sensitive variable. We
derive both risk and fairness bounds that support the statistical consistency of
our methodology. We specify our approach to kernel methods and observe that
the fairness requirement implies an orthogonality constraint which can be easily
added to these methods. We further observe that for linear models the constraint
translates into a simple data preprocessing step. Experiments indicate that the
method is empirically effective and performs favorably against state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

In recent years there has been a lot of interest on algorithmic fairness in machine learning see,
e.g., [1–13] and references therein. The central question is how to enhance supervised learning
algorithms with fairness requirements, namely ensuring that sensitive information (e.g. knowledge
about the ethnic group of an individual) does not ‘unfairly’ influence the outcome of a learning algorithm. For example if the learning problem is to decide whether a person should be offered a loan
based on her previous credit card scores, we would like to build a model which does not unfairly
use additional sensitive information such as race or sex. Several notions of fairness and associated
learning methods have been introduced in machine learning in the past few years, including Demographic Parity [14], Equal Odds and Equal Opportunities [2], Disparate Treatment, Impact, and
mistreatment [3]. The underlying idea behind such notions is to balance decisions of a classifier
among the different sensitive groups and label sets.
In this paper, we build upon the notion Equal Opportunity (EO) which defines fairness as the requirement that the true positive rate of the classifier is the same across the sensitive groups. In
Section 2 we introduce a generalization of this notion of fairness which constrains the conditional
risk of a classifier, associated to positive labeled samples of a group, to be approximately constant
with respect to group membership. The risk is measured according to a prescribed loss function
and approximation parameter ✏. When the loss is the misclassification error and ✏ = 0 we recover
the notion EO above. We study the problem of minimizing the expected risk within a prescribed
class of functions subject to the fairness constraint. As a natural estimator associated with this problem, we consider a modified version of Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) which we call Fair
ERM (FERM). We derive both risk and fairness bounds, which support that FERM is statistically
consistent, in a certain sense which we explain in the paper in Section 2.2. Since the FERM approach is impractical due to the non-convex nature of the constraint, in the same section we propose
a surrogate convex FERM problem which relates, under a natural condition, to the original goal of
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

