Distributed k-Clustering for Data with Heavy Noise

Xiangyu Guo
University at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY 14260
xiangyug@buffalo.edu

Shi Li
University at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY 14260
shil@buffalo.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the k-center/median/means clustering with outliers
problems (or the (k, z)-center/median/means problems) in the distributed setting.
Most previous distributed algorithms have their communication costs linearly
depending on z, the number of outliers. Recently Guha et al. [10] overcame this
dependence issue by considering bi-criteria approximation algorithms that output
solutions with 2z outliers. For the case where z is large, the extra z outliers
discarded by the algorithms might be too large, considering that the data gathering
process might be costly. In this paper, we improve the number of outliers to
the best possible (1 + )z, while maintaining the O(1)-approximation ratio and
independence of communication cost on z. The problems we consider include the
(k, z)-center problem, and (k, z)-median/means problems in Euclidean metrics.
Implementation of the our algorithm for (k, z)-center shows that it outperforms
many previous algorithms, both in terms of the communication cost and quality of
the output solution.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental problem in unsupervised learning and data analytics. In many real-life
datasets, noises and errors unavoidably exist. It is known that even a few noisy data points can
significantly influence the quality of the clustering results. To address this issue, previous work has
considered the clustering with outliers problem, where we are given a number z on the number of
outliers, and need to find the optimum clustering where we are allowed to discard z points, under
some popular clustering objective such as k-center, k-median and k-means.
Due to the increase in volumes of real-life datasets, and the emergence of modern parallel computation
frameworks such as MapReduce and Hadoop, computing a clustering (with or without outliers) in the
distributed setting has attracted a lot of attention in recent years. The set of points are partitioned into
m parts that are stored on m different machines, who collectively need to compute a good clustering
by sending messages to each other. Often, the time to compute a good solution is dominated by the
communications among machines. Many recent papers on distributed clustering have focused on
designing O(1)-approximation algorithms with small communication cost [2, 13, 10].
Most previous algorithms for clustering with outliers have the communication costs linearly depending
on z, the number of outliers. Such an algorithm performs poorly when data is very noisy. Consider
the scenario where distributed sensory data are collected by a crowd of people equipped with portable
sensory devices. Due to different skill levels of individuals and the quality of devices, it is reasonable
to assume that a small constant fraction of the data points are unreliable.
Recently, Guha et al. [10] overcame the linear dependence issue, by giving distributed O(1)approximation algorithms for k-center/median/means with outliers problems with communication
cost independent of z. However, the solutions produced by their algorithms have 2z outliers. Such
a solution discards z more points compared to the (unknown) optimum one, which may greatly
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

