CatBoost: unbiased boosting with categorical features

Liudmila Prokhorenkova1,2 , Gleb Gusev1,2 , Aleksandr Vorobev1 ,
Anna Veronika Dorogush1 , Andrey Gulin1
1
Yandex, Moscow, Russia
2
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia
{ostroumova-la, gleb57, alvor88, annaveronika, gulin}@yandex-team.ru

Abstract
This paper presents the key algorithmic techniques behind CatBoost, a new gradient
boosting toolkit. Their combination leads to CatBoost outperforming other publicly
available boosting implementations in terms of quality on a variety of datasets.
Two critical algorithmic advances introduced in CatBoost are the implementation
of ordered boosting, a permutation-driven alternative to the classic algorithm, and
an innovative algorithm for processing categorical features. Both techniques were
created to fight a prediction shift caused by a special kind of target leakage present
in all currently existing implementations of gradient boosting algorithms. In this
paper, we provide a detailed analysis of this problem and demonstrate that proposed
algorithms solve it effectively, leading to excellent empirical results.

1

Introduction

Gradient boosting is a powerful machine-learning technique that achieves state-of-the-art results in a
variety of practical tasks. For many years, it has remained the primary method for learning problems
with heterogeneous features, noisy data, and complex dependencies: web search, recommendation
systems, weather forecasting, and many others [5, 26, 29, 32]. Gradient boosting is essentially a
process of constructing an ensemble predictor by performing gradient descent in a functional space.
It is backed by solid theoretical results that explain how strong predictors can be built by iteratively
combining weaker models (base predictors) in a greedy manner [17].
We show in this paper that all existing implementations of gradient boosting face the following
statistical issue. A prediction model F obtained after several steps of boosting relies on the targets
of all training examples. We demonstrate that this actually leads to a shift of the distribution of
F (xk ) | xk for a training example xk from the distribution of F (x) | x for a test example x. This
finally leads to a prediction shift of the learned model. We identify this problem as a special kind of
target leakage in Section 4. Further, there is a similar issue in standard algorithms of preprocessing
categorical features. One of the most effective ways [6, 25] to use them in gradient boosting is
converting categories to their target statistics. A target statistic is a simple statistical model itself, and
it can also cause target leakage and a prediction shift. We analyze this in Section 3.
In this paper, we propose ordering principle to solve both problems. Relying on it, we derive
ordered boosting, a modification of standard gradient boosting algorithm, which avoids target
leakage (Section 4), and a new algorithm for processing categorical features (Section 3). Their
combination is implemented as an open-source library1 called CatBoost (for “Categorical Boosting”),
which outperforms the existing state-of-the-art implementations of gradient boosted decision trees —
XGBoost [8] and LightGBM [16] — on a diverse set of popular machine learning tasks (see Section 6).
1

https://github.com/catboost/catboost

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

