Invertibility of Convolutional Generative
Networks from Partial Measurements
Fangchang Ma*
MIT
fcma@mit.edu

Ulas Ayaz˚
MIT
uayaz@mit.edu
uayaz@lyft.com

Sertac Karaman
MIT
sertac@mit.edu

Abstract
The problem of inverting generative neural networks (i.e., to recover the input latent
code given partial network output), motivated by image inpainting, has recently
been studied by a prior work that focused on fully-connected networks. In this
work, we present new theoretical results on convolutional networks, which are more
widely used in practice. The network inversion problem is highly non-convex, and
hence is typically computationally intractable and without optimality guarantees.
However, we rigorously prove that, for a 2-layer convolutional generative network
with ReLU and Gaussian-distributed random weights, the input latent code can be
deduced from the network output efficiently using simple gradient descent. This
new theoretical finding implies that the mapping from the low-dimensional latent
space to the high-dimensional image space is one-to-one, under our assumptions.
In addition, the same conclusion holds even when the network output is only
partially observed (i.e., with missing pixels). We further demonstrate, empirically,
that the same conclusion extends to networks with multiple layers, other activation
functions (leaky ReLU, sigmoid and tanh), and weights trained on real datasets.

1

Introduction

In recent years, generative models have made significant progress in learning representations for
complex and multi-modal data distributions, such as those of natural images [10, 18]. However,
despite the empirical success, there has been relatively little theoretical understanding into the
mapping itself from the input latent space to the high-dimensional space. In this work, we address the
following question: given a convolutional generative network2 , is it possible to “decode” an output
image and recover the corresponding input latent code? In other words, we are interested in the
invertibility of convolutional generative models.
The impact of the network inversion problem is two-fold. Firstly, the inversion itself can be applied
in image in-painting [21, 17], image reconstruction from sparse measurements [14, 13], and image
manipulation [22] (e.g., vector arithmetic of face images [12]). Secondly, the study of network
inversion provides insight into the mapping from the low-dimensional latent space to the highdimensional image space (e.g., is the mapping one-to-one or many-to-one?). A deeper understanding
of the mapping can potentially help solve the well known mode collapse3 problem [20] during the
training in the generative adversarial network (GAN) [7, 16].
˚

Both authors contributed equally to this work. Ulas Ayaz is presently affiliated with Lyft, Inc.
Deep generative models typically use transposed convolution (a.k.a. “deconvolution”). With a slight abuse
of notation we refer to transposed convolutional generative models as convolutional models.
3
Mode collapse refers to the problem that the Generator characterizes only a few images to fool the
discriminator in GAN. In other words, multiple latent codes are mapped to the same output in the image space.
2

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

