Towards Text Generation with Adversarially Learned
Neural Outlines
Sandeep Subramanian1,2,4∗, Sai Rajeswar1,2,5 , Alessandro Sordoni4 ,
Adam Trischler4 , Aaron Courville1,2,6 , Christopher Pal1,3,5
1
Montréal Institute for Learning Algorithms, 2 Université de Montréal,
3
École Polytechnique de Montréal, 4 Microsoft Research Montréal,
5
Element AI, Montréal, 6 CIFAR Fellow
2
{sandeep.subramanian.1,sai.rajeswar.mudumba,aaron.courville}@umontreal.ca
3
christopher.pal@polymtl.ca
4
{alsordon,adam.trischler}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent progress in deep generative models has been fueled by two paradigms – autoregressive and adversarial models. We propose a combination of both approaches
with the goal of learning generative models of text. Our method first produces a
high-level sentence outline and then generates words sequentially, conditioning on
both the outline and the previous outputs. We generate outlines with an adversarial
model trained to approximate the distribution of sentences in a latent space induced
by general-purpose sentence encoders. This provides strong, informative conditioning for the autoregressive stage. Our quantitative evaluations suggests that
conditioning information from generated outlines is able to guide the autoregressive
model to produce realistic samples, comparable to maximum-likelihood trained
language models, even at high temperatures with multinomial sampling. Qualitative results also demonstrate that this generative procedure yields natural-looking
sentences and interpolations.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are powerful tools for modeling sequential data [36, 54, 24]. Tractable
maximum-likelihood (MLE) training of these models typically involves factorizing the joint distribution over random variables into a product of conditional distributions that models the one-step-ahead
probability in the sequence via the chain rule. Each conditional is then modeled by an expressive
family of functions, such as neural networks. These models have been successful in a variety of tasks.
However, the only source of variation is modeled in the conditional output probability at every step:
there is limited capacity for capturing the higher-level structure likely present in natural text and other
sequential data (e.g., through a hierarchical generation process [46]).
Variational Autoencoders (VAE) [28] provide a tractable method to train hierarchical latent-variable
generative models. In the context of text data, latent variables may assume the role of sentence
representations that govern a lower-level generation process, thus facilitating controlled generation
of text. However, VAEs for text are notoriously hard to train when combined with powerful autoregressive decoders [5, 18, 47]. This is due to the “posterior collapse” problem: the model ends up
relying solely on the auto-regressive properties of the decoder while ignoring the latent variables,
which become uninformative. This phenomenon is partly a consequence of the restrictive assumptions
on the parametric form of the posterior and prior approximations, usually modeled as simple diagonal
Gaussian distributions.
∗

Work done while author was an intern at Microsoft Research Montreal

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

