Are GANs Created Equal? A Large-Scale Study

Mario Lucic? Karol Kurach?

Marcin Michalski
Google Brain

Olivier Bousquet

Sylvain Gelly

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GAN) are a powerful subclass of generative
models. Despite a very rich research activity leading to numerous interesting
GAN algorithms, it is still very hard to assess which algorithm(s) perform better
than others. We conduct a neutral, multi-faceted large-scale empirical study on
state-of-the art models and evaluation measures. We find that most models can
reach similar scores with enough hyperparameter optimization and random restarts.
This suggests that improvements can arise from a higher computational budget and
tuning more than fundamental algorithmic changes. To overcome some limitations
of the current metrics, we also propose several data sets on which precision and
recall can be computed. Our experimental results suggest that future GAN research
should be based on more systematic and objective evaluation procedures. Finally,
we did not find evidence that any of the tested algorithms consistently outperforms
the non-saturating GAN introduced in [9].

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GAN) are a powerful subclass of generative models and were
successfully applied to image generation and editing, semi-supervised learning, and domain adaptation
[22, 27]. In the GAN framework the model learns a deterministic transformation G of a simple
distribution pz , with the goal of matching the data distribution pd . This learning problem may be
viewed as a two-player game between the generator, which learns how to generate samples which
resemble real data, and a discriminator, which learns how to discriminate between real and fake data.
Both players aim to minimize their own cost and the solution to the game is the Nash equilibrium
where neither player can improve their cost unilaterally [9].
Various flavors of GANs have been recently proposed, both purely unsupervised [9, 1, 10, 5] as well
as conditional [20, 21]. While these models achieve compelling results in specific domains, there is
still no clear consensus on which GAN algorithm(s) perform objectively better than others. This is
partially due to the lack of robust and consistent metric, as well as limited comparisons which put all
algorithms on equal footage, including the computational budget to search over all hyperparameters.
Why is it important? Firstly, to help the practitioner choose a better algorithm from a very large set.
Secondly, to make progress towards better algorithms and their understanding, it is useful to clearly
assess which modifications are critical, and which ones are only good on paper, but do not make a
significant difference in practice.
The main issue with evaluation stems from the fact that one cannot explicitly compute the probability
pg (x). As a result, classic measures, such as log-likelihood on the test set, cannot be evaluated.
Consequently, many researchers focused on qualitative comparison, such as comparing the visual
quality of samples. Unfortunately, such approaches are subjective and possibly misleading [8]. As a
remedy, two evaluation metrics were proposed to quantitatively assess the performance of GANs.
Both assume access to a pre-trained classifier. Inception Score (IS) [24] is based on the fact that a
good model should generate samples for which, when evaluated by the classifier, the class distribution
has low entropy. At the same time, it should produce diverse samples covering all classes. In contrast,
?

Indicates equal authorship. Correspondence to {lucic,kkurach}@google.com.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

