Probabilistic Neural Programmed Networks
for Scene Generation
Zhiwei Deng, Jiacheng Chen, Yifang Fu, Greg Mori
Simon Fraser University
{zhiweid, jca348, yifangf}@sfu.ca, mori@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract
In this paper we address the text to scene image generation problem. Generative
models that capture the variability in complicated scenes containing rich semantics
is a grand goal of image generation. Complicated scene images contain varied
visual elements, compositional visual concepts, and complicated relations between
objects. Generative models, as an analysis-by-synthesis process, should encompass
the following three core components: 1) the generation process that composes the
scene; 2) what are the primitive visual elements and how are they composed; 3) the
rendering of abstract concepts into their pixel-level realizations. We propose PNPNet, a variational auto-encoder framework that addresses these three challenges:
it flexibly composes images with a dynamic network structure, learns a set of
distribution transformers that can compose distributions based on semantics, and
decodes samples from these distributions into realistic images.

1

Introduction

Powerful latent data representations should encode abstract, semantic concepts. Accompanying
generative models to decode these rich representations into their varied realizations as data instances,
along with learning of the latent representation directly from data represent a coveted guerdon of AI
research. As such, the search for expressive, learnable latent encodings along with corresponding
generation techniques has been a preoccupation of significant research effort.
Examples of data modeling tasks abound. Specifically in this work we consider that of image
generation. We are particularly interested in the representation of high-level semantic concepts and
hence focus on the depiction of a complex scene x, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Such scenes are composed
of a variable number of objects, with individual properties and relations among them. Effective latent
representations for these images need flexibility and compositionality.
Impressive strides in generative models for images have been made via a number of advances in
continuous stochastic latent variable models under the variational auto-encoder (VAE) formalism
[1, 2, 3]. We work within this formalism, in which a (conditional) prior p(z|y) controls generation
of an output x under condition y via a non-linear mapping pθ (x|z). Recent work (e.g. [3]) has
emphasized that the utility of a VAE hinges on its ability to capture useful information in the latent
representation z, complementary to that in powerful decoder networks pθ (x|z).
On the other hand, renewed interest in programmatic representations in AI have sought modular,
generalized, compositional representations for high-level concepts [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. This line of work
uses dynamically programmable networks and has demonstrated impressive results at question
answering, graphics-based image rendering, and synthesizing programs for computation or image
generation. We build on these approaches to conduct learning of compositional, modular latent
representations for scenes.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

