Learning to Solve SMT Formulas

Mislav Balunović, Pavol Bielik, Martin Vechev
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
Switzerland
bmislav@ethz.ch, {pavol.bielik, martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We present a new approach for learning to solve SMT formulas. We phrase the
challenge of solving SMT formulas as a tree search problem where at each step
a transformation is applied to the input formula until the formula is solved. Our
approach works in two phases: first, given a dataset of unsolved formulas we learn
a policy that for each formula selects a suitable transformation to apply at each step
in order to solve the formula, and second, we synthesize a strategy in the form of
a loop-free program with branches. This strategy is an interpretable representation
of the policy decisions and is used to guide the SMT solver to decide formulas
more efficiently, without requiring any modification to the solver itself and without
needing to evaluate the learned policy at inference time. We show that our approach
is effective in practice – it solves 17% more formulas over a range of benchmarks
and achieves up to 100× runtime improvement over a state-of-the-art SMT solver.

1

Introduction

Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) solvers are a powerful class of automated theorem provers
which can deduce satisfiability and validity of first-order formulas in particular logical theories (e.g.,
real numbers, arrays, bit vectors). SMT solvers are more general than SAT solvers and have been
used in a variety of application domains including verification (e.g., neural networks [28]), program
synthesis, static analysis, scheduling, and others [16].
To efficiently solve complex real world problems, state-of-the-art SMT solvers (e.g., Z3 [15],
Yices [18], CVC4 [4], MathSAT5 [13], Boolector [35]) contain hand-crafted heuristics combining
algorithmic proof methods and satisfiability search techniques. Indeed, crafting the right heuristic
is critical and can be the difference between solving a complex formula in seconds or not at all. To
enable end users to create suitable heuristics, several modern SMT solvers such as Z3 [15] provide a so
called tactic language for expressing heuristics. Typically, such tactics are combined and performed
in a sequence (specified by the user), forming an interpretable program called a strategy. However,
the resulting strategies can often end up being quite complex (e.g., containing loops and conditionals).
Combined with the vast search space, this means that manually finding a well-performing strategy
can be very difficult, even for experts.
Our Contributions We present a new approach, based on a combination of learning and synthesis
techniques, which addresses the problem of automatically finding the right SMT strategy. Given
a dataset of formulas whose solution is initially unknown, we first train a policy that searches for
strategies that are fast at solving the formulas in this dataset. Then, we synthesize a single strategy
(a program with branches) that captures the policy decision making in an interpretable manner. The
resulting strategy is then passed on to the SMT solver which uses it to make more effective decisions
when solving a given formula. We note that our approach does not require any changes to the solver’s
internals and thus can work with any decision procedure which cleanly exports its tactics.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

