Posterior Concentration for Sparse Deep Learning

Nicholas G. Polson and Veronika Ročková
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637

Abstract
We introduce Spike-and-Slab Deep Learning (SS-DL), a fully Bayesian alternative
to dropout for improving generalizability of deep ReLU networks. This new type
of regularization enables provable recovery of smooth input-output maps with
unknown levels of smoothness. Indeed, we show that the posterior distribution
concentrates at the near minimax rate for α-Hölder smooth maps, performing
as well as if we knew the smoothness level α ahead of time. Our result sheds
light on architecture design for deep neural networks, namely the choice of depth,
width and sparsity level. These network attributes typically depend on unknown
smoothness in order to be optimal. We obviate this constraint with the fully Bayes
construction. As an aside, we show that SS-DL does not overfit in the sense that the
posterior concentrates on smaller networks with fewer (up to the optimal number
of) nodes and links. Our results provide new theoretical justifications for deep
ReLU networks from a Bayesian point of view.

1

Introduction

Deep learning constructs are powerful tools for pattern matching and prediction. Their empirical
success has been accompanied by a number of theoretical developments addressing (a) why and when
neural networks generalize well, (b) when do deep networks out-perform shallow ones and (c) which
activation functions and with how many layers. Despite the flurry of research activity, there are still
many theoretical gaps in understanding why deep neural networks work so well. In this paper, we
provide several new insights by studying the speed of posterior concentration around the optimal
predictor, and in doing so we make a contribution to the Bayesian literature on deep learning rates.
Bayesian non-parametric methods are proliferating rapidly in statistics and machine learning, but
their theoretical study has not yet kept pace with their application. Lee (2000) showed consistency
of posterior distributions over single-layer sigmoidal neural networks. Our contribution builds
on this work in three fundamental aspects: (a) we focus on deep rather than single-layer, (b) we
focus on rectified linear units (ReLU) rather than sigmoidal squashing functions, (c) deploying `0
regularization, we show that the posterior converges at an optimal speed beyond the mere fact that it
is consistent. To achieve these goals, we adopt a statistical perspective on deep learning through the
lens of non-parametric regression.
Using deep versus shallow networks can be justified theoretically in many ways. First, while both
shallow and deep neural networks (NNs) are universal approximators (i.e. can approximate any
continuous multivariate function arbitrarily well on a compact domain), Mhaskar et al. (2017) show
that deep nets use exponentially fewer number of parameters to achieve the same level of approximation accuracy for compositional functions. Kolmogorov (1963) provided another motivation for
deep networks by showing that superpositions of univariate semi-affine functions provide a universal
basis for representing multivariate functions. Telgarsky (2016) provides examples of functions that
cannot be represented efficiently with shallow networks and Kawaguchi et al (2017) explains why
deep networks generalize well. In related work, Poggio et al. (2017) show how deep networks can
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

