Stochastic Nested Variance Reduction for
Nonconvex Optimization
Dongruo Zhou
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
drzhou@cs.ucla.edu

Pan Xu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
panxu@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We study finite-sum nonconvex optimization problems, where the objective function is an average of n nonconvex functions. We propose a new stochastic gradient
descent algorithm based on nested variance reduction. Compared with conventional
stochastic variance reduced gradient (SVRG) algorithm that uses two reference
points to construct a semi-stochastic gradient with diminishing variance in each iteration, our algorithm uses K + 1 nested reference points to build a semi-stochastic
gradient to further reduce its variance in each iteration. For smooth nonconvex
functions, the proposed algorithm converges to an ✏-approximate first-order stationary point (i.e., krF (x)k2  ✏) within e
O(n ^ ✏ 2 + ✏ 3 ^ n1/2 ✏ 2 )1 number of
stochastic gradient evaluations. This improves the best known gradient complexity
of SVRG O(n + n2/3 ✏ 2 ) and that of SCSG O(n ^ ✏ 2 + ✏ 10/3 ^ n2/3 ✏ 2 ). For
gradient dominated functions, our algorithm also achieves better gradient complexity than the state-of-the-art algorithms. Thorough experimental results on different
nonconvex optimization problems back up our theory.

1

Introduction

We study the following nonconvex finite-sum problem
n

min F (x) :=

x2Rd

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(1.1)

where each component function fi : Rd ! R has L-Lipschitz continuous gradient but may be
nonconvex. A lot of machine learning problems fall into (1.1) such as empirical risk minimization
(ERM) with nonconvex loss. Since finding the global minimum of (1.1) is general NP-hard [17], we
instead aim at finding an ✏-approximate stationary point x, which satisfies krF (x)k2  ✏, where
rF (x) is the gradient of F (x) at x, and ✏ > 0 is the accuracy parameter.

In this work, we mainly focus on first-order algorithms, which only need the function value and
gradient evaluations. We use gradient complexity, the number of stochastic gradient evaluations,
1e

O(·) hides the logarithmic factors, and a ^ b means min(a, b).

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

