A Stein variational Newton method
Gianluca Detommaso
University of Bath & The Alan Turing Institute
gd391@bath.ac.uk
Alessio Spantini
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
spantini@mit.edu

Tiangang Cui
Monash University
Tiangang.Cui@monash.edu

Youssef Marzouk
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
ymarz@mit.edu

Robert Scheichl
Heidelberg University
r.scheichl@uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) was recently proposed as a general
purpose nonparametric variational inference algorithm [Liu & Wang, NIPS 2016]:
it minimizes the Kullback–Leibler divergence between the target distribution and
its approximation by implementing a form of functional gradient descent on a
reproducing kernel Hilbert space. In this paper, we accelerate and generalize the
SVGD algorithm by including second-order information, thereby approximating
a Newton-like iteration in function space. We also show how second-order information can lead to more effective choices of kernel. We observe significant
computational gains over the original SVGD algorithm in multiple test cases.

1

Introduction

Approximating an intractable probability distribution via a collection of samples—in order to evaluate
arbitrary expectations over the distribution, or to otherwise characterize uncertainty that the distribution encodes—is a core computational challenge in statistics and machine learning. Common features
of the target distribution can make sampling a daunting task. For instance, in a typical Bayesian
inference problem, the posterior distribution might be strongly non-Gaussian (perhaps multimodal)
and high dimensional, and evaluations of its density might be computationally intensive.
There exist a wide range of algorithms for such problems, ranging from parametric variational
inference [4] to Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques [10]. Each algorithm offers a
different computational trade-off. At one end of the spectrum, we find the parametric mean-field
approximation—a cheap but potentially inaccurate variational approximation of the target density.
At the other end, we find MCMC—a nonparametric sampling technique yielding estimators that are
consistent, but potentially slow to converge. In this paper, we focus on Stein variational gradient
descent (SVGD) [17], which lies somewhere in the middle of the spectrum and can be described as a
particular nonparametric variational inference method [4], with close links to the density estimation
approach in [2].
The SVGD algorithm seeks a deterministic coupling between a tractable reference distribution of
choice (e.g., a standard normal) and the intractable target. This coupling is induced by a transport
map T that can transform a collection of reference samples into samples from the desired target
distribution. For a given pair of distributions, there may exist infinitely many such maps [28]; several
existing algorithms (e.g., [27, 24, 21]) aim to approximate feasible transport maps of various forms.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

