Inference in Deep Gaussian Processes using
Stochastic Gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
Marton Havasi
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
mh740@cam.ac.uk

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge,
Microsoft Research,
Alan Turing Institute
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Juan José Murillo-Fuentes
Department of Signal Theory and Communications
University of Sevilla
murillo@us.es

Abstract
Deep Gaussian Processes (DGPs) are hierarchical generalizations of Gaussian Processes that combine well calibrated uncertainty estimates with the high flexibility
of multilayer models. One of the biggest challenges with these models is that exact
inference is intractable. The current state-of-the-art inference method, Variational
Inference (VI), employs a Gaussian approximation to the posterior distribution.
This can be a potentially poor unimodal approximation of the generally multimodal
posterior. In this work, we provide evidence for the non-Gaussian nature of the
posterior and we apply the Stochastic Gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo method
to generate samples. To efficiently optimize the hyperparameters, we introduce the
Moving Window MCEM algorithm. This results in significantly better predictions
at a lower computational cost than its VI counterpart. Thus our method establishes
a new state-of-the-art for inference in DGPs.

1

Introduction

Deep Gaussian Processes (DGP) [Damianou and Lawrence, 2013] are multilayer predictive models
that are highly flexible and can accurately model uncertainty. In particular, they have been shown to
perform well on a multitude of supervised regression tasks ranging from small (∼500 datapoints) to
large datasets (∼500,000 datapoints) [Salimbeni and Deisenroth, 2017, Bui et al., 2016, Cutajar et al.,
2016]. Their main benefit over neural networks is that they are capable of capturing uncertainty in
their predictions. This makes them good candidates for tasks where the prediction uncertainty plays a
crucial role, for example, black-box Bayesian Optimization problems and a variety of safety-critical
applications such as autonomous vehicles and medical diagnostics.
Deep Gaussian Processes introduce a multilayer hierarchy to Gaussian Processes (GP) [Williams and
Rasmussen, 1996]. A GP is a non-parametric model that assumes a jointly Gaussian distribution for
any finite set of inputs. The covariance of any pair of inputs is determined by the covariance function.
GPs can be a robust choice due to being non-parametric and analytically computable, however, one
issue is that choosing the covariance function often requires hand tuning and expert knowledge of
the dataset, which is not possible without prior knowledge of the problem at hand. In a multilayer
hierarchy, the hidden layers overcome this limitation by stretching and warping the input space,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

