Generative Probabilistic Novelty Detection with
Adversarial Autoencoders
Stanislav Pidhorskyi
Ranya Almohsen
Donald A. Adjeroh
Gianfranco Doretto
Lane Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering
West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506
{stpidhorskyi, ralmohse, daadjeroh, gidoretto}@mix.wvu.edu

Abstract
Novelty detection is the problem of identifying whether a new data point is considered to be an inlier or an outlier. We assume that training data is available to
describe only the inlier distribution. Recent approaches primarily leverage deep
encoder-decoder network architectures to compute a reconstruction error that is
used to either compute a novelty score or to train a one-class classifier. While
we too leverage a novel network of that kind, we take a probabilistic approach
and effectively compute how likely it is that a sample was generated by the inlier
distribution. We achieve this with two main contributions. First, we make the
computation of the novelty probability feasible because we linearize the parameterized manifold capturing the underlying structure of the inlier distribution, and
show how the probability factorizes and can be computed with respect to local
coordinates of the manifold tangent space. Second, we improve the training of the
autoencoder network. An extensive set of results show that the approach achieves
state-of-the-art performance on several benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Novelty detection is the problem of identifying whether a new data point is considered to be an inlier
or an outlier. From a statistical point of view this process usually occurs while prior knowledge
of the distribution of inliers is the only information available. This is also the most difficult and
relevant scenario because outliers are often very rare, or even dangerous to experience (e.g., in
industry process fault detection [1]), and there is a need to rely only on inlier training data. Novelty
detection has received significant attention in application areas such as medical diagnoses [2], drug
discovery [3], and among others, several computer vision applications, such as anomaly detection in
images [4, 5], videos [6], and outlier detection [7, 8]. We refer to [9] for a general review on novelty
detection. The most recent approaches are based on learning deep network architectures [10, 11], and
they tend to either learn a one-class classifier [12, 11], or to somehow leverage as novelty score, the
reconstruction error of the encoder-decoder architecture they are based on [13, 7].
In this work, we introduce a new encoder-decoder architecture as well, which is based on adversarial
autoencoders [14]. However, we do not train a one-class classifier, instead, we learn the probability
distribution of the inliers. Therefore, the novelty test simply becomes the evaluation of the probability
of a test sample, and rare samples (outliers) fall below a given threshold. We show that this approach
allows us to effectively use the decoder network to learn the parameterized manifold shaping the inlier
distribution, in conjunction with the probability distribution of the (parameterizing) latent space. The
approach is made computationally feasible because for a given test sample we linearize the manifold,
and show that with respect to the local manifold coordinates the data model distribution factorizes
into a component dependent on the manifold (decoder network plus latent distribution), and another
one dependent on the noise, which can also be learned offline.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

