Deep Generative Models for
Distribution-Preserving Lossy Compression

Michael Tschannen
ETH Zürich
michaelt@nari.ee.ethz.ch

Eirikur Agustsson
Google AI Perception
eirikur@google.com

Mario Lucic
Google Brain
lucic@google.com

Abstract
We propose and study the problem of distribution-preserving lossy compression.
Motivated by recent advances in extreme image compression which allow to maintain artifact-free reconstructions even at very low bitrates, we propose to optimize
the rate-distortion tradeoff under the constraint that the reconstructed samples follow the distribution of the training data. The resulting compression system recovers
both ends of the spectrum: On one hand, at zero bitrate it learns a generative
model of the data, and at high enough bitrates it achieves perfect reconstruction.
Furthermore, for intermediate bitrates it smoothly interpolates between learning
a generative model of the training data and perfectly reconstructing the training
samples. We study several methods to approximately solve the proposed optimization problem, including a novel combination of Wasserstein GAN and Wasserstein
Autoencoder, and present an extensive theoretical and empirical characterization of
the proposed compression systems.

1

Introduction

Data compression methods based on deep neural networks (DNNs) have recently received a great
deal of attention. These methods were shown to outperform traditional compression codecs in image
compression [1–10], speech compression [11], and video compression [12] under several distortion
measures. In addition, DNN-based compression methods are flexible and can be adapted to specific
domains leading to further reductions in bitrate, and promise fast processing thanks to their internal
representations that are amenable to modern data processing pipelines [13].
In the context of image compression, learning-based methods arguably excel at low bitrates by
learning to realistically synthesize local image content, such as texture. While learning-based methods
can lead to larger distortions w.r.t. measures optimized by traditional compression algorithms, such as
peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), they avoid artifacts such as blur and blocking, producing visually
more pleasing results [1–10]. In particular, visual quality can be improved by incorporating generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [14] into the learning process [4, 15]. Work [4] leveraged GANs for
artifact suppression, whereas [15] used them to learn synthesizing image content beyond local texture,
such as facades of buildings, obtaining visually pleasing results at very low bitrates.
In this paper, we propose a formalization of this line of work: A compression system that respects
the distribution of the original data at all rates—a system whose decoder generates i.i.d. samples
from the data distribution at zero bitrate, then gradually produces reconstructions containing more
content of the original image as the bitrate increases, and eventually achieves perfect reconstruction
at high enough bitrate (see Figure 1 for examples). Such a system can be learned from data in a fully
unsupervised fashion by solving what we call the distribution-preserving lossy compression (DPLC)
problem: Optimizing the rate-distortion tradeoff under the constraint that the reconstruction follows
the distribution of the training data. Enforcing this constraint promotes artifact-free reconstructions,
at all rates.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

