Bayesian Alignments of Warped Multi-Output
Gaussian Processes
Markus Kaiser
Siemens AG
Technical University of Munich
markus.kaiser@siemens.com

Clemens Otte
Siemens AG
clemens.otte@siemens.com

Thomas Runkler
Siemens AG
Technical University of Munich
thomas.runkler@siemens.com

Carl Henrik Ek
University of Bristol
carlhenrik.ek@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a novel Bayesian approach to modelling nonlinear alignments of time
series based on latent shared information. We apply the method to the real-world
problem of finding common structure in the sensor data of wind turbines introduced
by the underlying latent and turbulent wind field. The proposed model allows
for both arbitrary alignments of the inputs and non-parametric output warpings
to transform the observations. This gives rise to multiple deep Gaussian process
models connected via latent generating processes. We present an efficient variational approximation based on nested variational compression and show how the
model can be used to extract shared information between dependent time series,
recovering an interpretable functional decomposition of the learning problem. We
show results for an artificial data set and real-world data of two wind turbines.

1

Introduction

Many real-world systems are inherently hierarchical and connected. Ideally, a machine learning
method should model and recognize such dependencies. Take wind power production, which is
one of the major providers for renewable energy today, as an example: To optimize the efficiency
of a wind turbine the speed and pitch have to be controlled according to the local wind conditions
(speed and direction). In a wind farm turbines are typically equipped with sensors for wind speed and
direction. The goal is to use these sensor data to produce accurate estimates and forecasts of the wind
conditions at every turbine in the farm. For the ideal case of a homogeneous and very slowly changing
wind field, the wind conditions at each geometrical position in a wind farm can be estimated using
the propagation times (time warps) computed from geometry, wind speed, and direction [21, 4, 18].
In the real world, however, wind fields are not homogeneous, exhibit global and local turbulences,
and interfere with the turbines and the terrain inside and outside the farm and further, sensor faults
may lead to data loss. This makes it extremely difficult to construct accurate analytical models of
wind propagation in a farm. Also, standard approaches for extracting such information from data,
e.g. generalized time warping [24], fail at this task because they rely on a high signal to noise ratio.
Instead, we want to construct Bayesian nonlinear dynamic data based models for wind conditions
and warpings which handle the stochastic nature of the system in a principled manner.
In this paper, we look at a generalization of this type of problem and propose a novel Bayesian
approach to finding nonlinear alignments of time series based on latent shared information. We view
the power production of different wind turbines as the outputs of a multi-output Gaussian process
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

