Stochastic Spectral and Conjugate Descent Methods

Dmitry Kovalev1,2

Eduard Gorbunov1

Elnur Gasanov1,2

Peter Richtárik2,3,1

1

2

Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
3
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom

Abstract
The state-of-the-art methods for solving optimization problems in big dimensions
are variants of randomized coordinate descent (RCD). In this paper we introduce a
fundamentally new type of acceleration strategy for RCD based on the augmentation of the set of coordinate directions by a few spectral or conjugate directions.
As we increase the number of extra directions to be sampled from, the rate of the
method improves, and interpolates between the linear rate of RCD and a linear rate
independent of the condition number. We develop and analyze also inexact variants
of these methods where the spectral and conjugate directions are allowed to be
approximate only. We motivate the above development by proving several negative
results which highlight the limitations of RCD with importance sampling.

1

Introduction

An increasing array of learning and training tasks reduce to optimization problem in very large
dimensions. The state-of-the-art algorithms in this regime are based on randomized coordinate
descent (RCD). Various acceleration strategies were proposed for RCD in the literature in recent
years, based on techniques such as Nesterov’s momentum [12, 9, 5, 1, 14], heavy ball momentum
[16, 11], importance sampling [13, 19], adaptive sampling [4], random permutations [8], greedy rules
[15], mini-batching [20], and locality breaking [21]. These techniques enable faster rates in theory
and practice.
In this paper we introduce a fundamentally new type of acceleration strategy for RCD which relies
on the idea of enriching the set of (unit) coordinate directions {e1 , e2 , . . . , en } in Rn , which are
used in RCD as directions of descent, via the addition of a few spectral or conjugate directions. The
algorithms we develop and analyze in this paper randomize over this enriched larger set of directions.
For expositional simplicity1 , we focus on quadratic minimization
1
min f (x) := x> Ax − b> x,
(1)
x∈Rn
2
where A is an n × n symmetric and positive definite matrix. The optimal solution is unique, and
equal to x∗ = A−1 b.
1.1

Randomized coordinate descent

Applied to (1), RCD performs the iteration
xt+1 = xt −

A>
:i xt − bi
ei ,
Aii

(2)

1
Many of our results can be extended to convex functions of the form f (x) = φ(Ax) − b> x, where φ is a
smooth and strongly convex function. However, due to space limitations, and the fact that we already have a lot
to say in the special case φ(y) = 12 kyk2 , we leave these more general developments to a follow-up paper.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

