A General Method for
Amortizing Variational Filtering

Joseph Marino, Milan Cvitkovic, Yisong Yue
California Institute of Technology
{jmarino, mcvitkovic, yyue}@caltech.edu

Abstract
We introduce the variational filtering EM algorithm, a simple, general-purpose
method for performing variational inference in dynamical latent variable models
using information from only past and present variables, i.e. filtering. The algorithm
is derived from the variational objective in the filtering setting and consists of an optimization procedure at each time step. By performing each inference optimization
procedure with an iterative amortized inference model, we obtain a computationally
efficient implementation of the algorithm, which we call amortized variational
filtering. We present experiments demonstrating that this general-purpose method
improves performance across several deep dynamical latent variable models.

1

Introduction

Complex tasks with time-series data, like audio comprehension or robotic manipulation, must often
be performed online, where the model can only consider past and present information. Models for
such tasks, e.g. Hidden Markov Models, frequently operate by inferring the hidden state of the world
at each time-step. This type of online inference procedure is known as filtering. Learning filtering
models purely through supervised labels or rewards can be impractical, requiring massive collections
of labeled data or significant efforts at reward shaping. In contrast, generative models can learn
and infer hidden structure and states directly from data. Deep latent variable models [18, 27, 37],
in particular, offer a promising direction; they infer latent representations using expressive deep
networks, commonly using variational methods to perform inference [24]. Recent works have
extended deep latent variable models to the time-series setting, e.g. [7, 12]. However, inference
procedures for these dynamical models have been proposed on the basis of intuition rather than from
a rigorous inference optimization perspective, potentially limiting performance.
We introduce variational filtering EM, an algorithm for performing filtering variational inference and
learning that is rigorously derived from the variational objective. As detailed below, the variational
objective in the filtering setting results in a sequence of inference optimization objectives, with
one at each time-step. By initializing each of these inference optimization procedures from the
corresponding prior distribution, a classic Bayesian prediction-update loop naturally emerges. This
contrasts with existing filtering approaches for deep dynamical models, which use inference models
that do not explicitly account for prior predictions during inference. However, using iterative inference
models [32], which overcome this limitation, we develop a computationally efficient implementation
of the variational filtering EM algorithm, which we refer to as amortized variational filtering (AVF).
The main contributions of this paper are the variational filtering EM algorithm and its amortized
implementation, AVF. This general-purpose filtering algorithm is widely applicable to dynamical
latent variable models, as we demonstrate in our experiments. Moreover, the variational filtering EM
algorithm is derived from the filtering variational objective, providing a solid theoretical framework
for filtering inference. By precisely specifying the inference optimization procedure, this method
takes a simple form compared to previous hand–designed methods. Using several deep dynamical
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

