Training Deep Neural Networks with 8-bit Floating
Point Numbers
Naigang Wang, Jungwook Choi, Daniel Brand, Chia-Yu Chen and Kailash Gopalakrishnan
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
{nwang, choij, danbrand, cchen, kailash}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
The state-of-the-art hardware platforms for training Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
are moving from traditional single precision (32-bit) computations towards 16
bits of precision – in large part due to the high energy efficiency and smaller
bit storage associated with using reduced-precision representations. However,
unlike inference, training with numbers represented with less than 16 bits has been
challenging due to the need to maintain fidelity of the gradient computations during
back-propagation. Here we demonstrate, for the first time, the successful training
of DNNs using 8-bit floating point numbers while fully maintaining the accuracy
on a spectrum of Deep Learning models and datasets. In addition to reducing the
data and computation precision to 8 bits, we also successfully reduce the arithmetic
precision for additions (used in partial product accumulation and weight updates)
from 32 bits to 16 bits through the introduction of a number of key ideas including
chunk-based accumulation and floating point stochastic rounding. The use of these
novel techniques lays the foundation for a new generation of hardware training
platforms with the potential for 2 − 4× improved throughput over today’s systems.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, Deep Learning has emerged as the dominant Machine Learning algorithm
showing remarkable success in a wide spectrum of applications, including image processing [9],
machine translation [20], speech recognition [21] and many others.
In each of these domains, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) achieve superior accuracy through the use
of very large and deep models – necessitating up to 100s of ExaOps of computation during training
and Gigabytes of storage. Approximate computing techniques have been widely studied to minimize
the computational complexity of these algorithms as well as to improve the throughput and energy
efficiency of hardware platforms executing Deep Learning kernels [2]. These techniques trade off the
inherent resilience of Machine Learning algorithms for improved computational efficiency. Towards
this end, exploiting reduced numerical precision for data representation and computation has been
extremely promising – since hardware energy efficiency improves quadratically with bit-precision.
While reduced-precision methods have been studied extensively, recent work has mostly focused on
exploiting them for DNN inference. It has shown that the bit-width for inference computations can
be successfully scaled down to just a few bits (i.e., 2-4 bits) while (mostly) preserving accuracy [3].
However, reduced precision DNN training has been significantly more challenging due to the need to
maintain fidelity of the gradients during the back-propagation step. Recent studies have empirically
shown that at least 16 bits of precision is necessary to train DNNs without impacting model accuracy
[6, 16, 4]. As a result, state-of-the-art training platforms have started to offer 16-bit floating point
training hardware [8, 5] with ≥ 4× performance over equivalent 32-bit systems.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

