Verifiable Reinforcement Learning
via Policy Extraction
Osbert Bastani
MIT
obastani@csail.mit.edu

Yewen Pu
MIT
yewenpu@mit.edu

Armando Solar-Lezama
MIT
asolar@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
While deep reinforcement learning has successfully solved many challenging control tasks, its real-world applicability has been limited by the inability to ensure
the safety of learned policies. We propose an approach to verifiable reinforcement
learning by training decision tree policies, which can represent complex policies
(since they are nonparametric), yet can be efficiently verified using existing techniques (since they are highly structured). The challenge is that decision tree policies
are difficult to train. We propose V IPER, an algorithm that combines ideas from
model compression and imitation learning to learn decision tree policies guided by
a DNN policy (called the oracle) and its Q-function, and show that it substantially
outperforms two baselines. We use V IPER to (i) learn a provably robust decision
tree policy for a variant of Atari Pong with a symbolic state space, (ii) learn a
decision tree policy for a toy game based on Pong that provably never loses, and
(iii) learn a provably stable decision tree policy for cart-pole. In each case, the
decision tree policy achieves performance equal to that of the original DNN policy.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning has proven to be a promising approach for automatically learning
policies for control problems [11, 22, 29]. However, an important challenge limiting real-world
applicability is the difficulty ensuring the safety of deep neural network (DNN) policies learned
using reinforcement learning. For example, self-driving cars must robustly handle a variety of human
behaviors [26], controllers for robotics typically need stability guarantees [2, 20, 8], and air traffic
control should provably satisfy safety properties including robustness [19]. Due to the complexity of
DNNs, verifying these properties is typically very inefficient if not infeasible [6].
Our goal is to learn policies for which desirable properties such as safety, stability, and robustness
can be efficiently verified. We focus on learning decision tree policies for two reasons: (i) they are
nonparametric, so in principle they can represent very complex policies, and (ii) they are highly
structured, making them easy to verify. However, decision trees are challenging to learn even in
the supervised setting; there has been some work learning decision tree policies for reinforcement
learning [13], but we find that they do not even scale to simple problems like cart-pole [5].
To learn decision tree policies, we build on the idea of model compression [10] (or distillation [17]),
which uses high-performing DNNs to guide the training of shallower [4, 17] or more structured [34, 7]
classifiers. Their key insight is that DNNs perform better not because they have better representative
power, but because they are better regularized and therefore easier to train [4]. Our goal is to devise a
policy extraction algorithm that distills a high-performing DNN policy into a decision tree policy.
Our approach to policy extraction is based on imitation learning [27, 1], in particular, DAGGER [25]—
the pretrained DNN policy (which we call the oracle) is used to generate labeled data, and then
supervised learning is used to train a decision tree policy. However, we find that DAGGER learns
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

