Bandit Learning with Implicit Feedback
Yi Qi1 , Qingyun Wu2 , Hongning Wang2 , Jie Tang1 , Maosong Sun1
1
State Key Lab of Intell. Tech. & Sys.,
Institution for Artificial Intelligence,
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia
qi-y16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {jietang, sms}@tsinghua.edu.cn
{qw2ky,hw5x}@virginia.edu

Abstract
Implicit feedback, such as user clicks, although abundant in online information service systems, does not provide substantial evidence on users’ evaluation of system’s
output. Without proper modeling, such incomplete supervision inevitably misleads
model estimation, especially in a bandit learning setting where the feedback is acquired on the fly. In this work, we perform contextual bandit learning with implicit
feedback by modeling the feedback as a composition of user result examination
and relevance judgment. Since users’ examination behavior is unobserved, we
introduce latent variables to model it. We perform Thompson sampling on top
of variational Bayesian inference for arm selection and model update. Our upper
regret bound analysis of the proposed algorithm proves its feasibility of learning
from implicit feedback in a bandit setting; and extensive empirical evaluations on
click logs collected from a major MOOC platform further demonstrate its learning
effectiveness in practice.

1

Introduction

Contextual bandit algorithms [4, 20, 19] provide modern information service systems an effective
solution to adaptively find good mappings between available items and users. This family of
algorithms sequentially select items to serve users using side information about user and item, while
adapting their selection strategies based on the immediate user feedback to maximize users’ long-term
satisfaction. They have been popularly deployed in practical systems for content recommendation
[20, 5, 26] and display advertising [6, 22].
However, the most dominant form of user feedback in such systems is implicit feedback, such as
clicks, which is known to be biased and incomplete about users’ evaluation of system’s output
[16, 11]. For example, a user skips a recommended item might not be because he/she does not like
the item, but he/she just does not examine that display position, i.e., position bias [13]. Unfortunately,
a common practice in contextual bandit applications simply treats no click as a form of negative
feedback [20, 25, 6]. This introduces inconsistency to model update, since the skipped items might
not be truly irrelevant, and it inevitably leads to suboptimal outputs of bandit algorithms over time.
In this work, we focus on learning contextual bandits with user click feedback, and model such
implicit feedback as a composition of user result examination and relevance judgment. Examination
hypothesis [8], which is a fundamental assumption in click modeling, postulates that a user clicks on
a system’s returned result if and only if that result has been examined by the user and it is relevant to
the user’s information need at the moment. Because a user’s examination behavior is unobserved,
we model it as a latent variable, and realize the examination hypothesis in a probabilistic model.
We define the conditional probabilities of result examination and relevance judgment via logistic
functions over the corresponding contextual features. To perform model update, we take a variational
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

