Deep Neural Networks with Box Convolutions

Egor Burkov 1,2

Victor Lempitsky 1,2
1

2

Samsung AI Center
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech)
Moscow, Russia

Abstract
Box filters computed using integral images have been part of the computer vision
toolset for a long time. Here, we show that a convolutional layer that computes
box filter responses in a sliding manner can be used within deep architectures,
whereas the dimensions and the offsets of the sliding boxes in such a layer can be
learned as a part of an end-to-end loss minimization. Crucially, the training process
can make the size of the boxes in such a layer arbitrarily large without incurring
extra computational cost and without the need to increase the number of learnable
parameters. Due to its ability to integrate information over large boxes, the new
layer facilitates long-range propagation of information and leads to the efficient
increase of the receptive fields of network units. By incorporating the new layer
into existing architectures for semantic segmentation, we are able to achieve both
the increase in segmentation accuracy as well as the decrease in the computational
cost and the number of learnable parameters.

1

Introduction

High-accuracy visual recognition requires integrating information from spatially-distant locations in
the visual field in order to discern and to analyze long-range correlations and regularities. Achieving
such long-range integration inside convolutional networks (ConvNets), which lack feedback connections and rely on feedforward mechanisms, is challenging. Modern ConvNets therefore combine
several ideas that facilitate spatial long-range integration and allow to boost the effective size of
receptive fields of the convolutional units. These ideas include stacking a very large number of layers
(so that the local information integration effects of individual convolutional layers are accumulated)
as well as using spatial downsampling of the representations (implemented using pooling or strides)
early in the pipeline.
One particularly useful and natural idea is the use of spatially-large filters inside convolutional
layers. Generally, a naive increase of the spatial filter size leads to the quadratic increase in the
number of learnable parameters and numeric operations, leading to architectures that are both
slow and prone to overfitting. As a result, most current ConvNets rely on small 3 × 3 filters (or
even smaller ones) for most convolutional layers [25]. A highly popular alternative to the naive
enlargement of filters is dilated/“à trous” convolutions [13, 3, 33] that expand filter sizes without
increasing the number of parameters by padding them with zeros. Many popular architectures,
especially semantic segmentation architectures that emphasize efficiency, rely on dilated convolutions
extensively (e.g. [3, 33, 34, 20, 21]).
Here, we present and evaluate a new simple approach for inserting convolutions with large (potentially
very large) spatial filters inside ConvNets. The approach is based on box filtering and relies on
integral images [18], as many classical works in computer vision do [31]. The new convolutional
box layer applies box average filters in a convolutional manner by sliding the 2D axes-aligned boxes
across spatial locations, while performing box averaging at every location. The dimensions and the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

