Fully Neural Network Based Speech Recognition on
Mobile and Embedded Devices
Jinhwan Park
Seoul National University
bnoo@snu.ac.kr
Iksoo Choi
Seoul National University
akacis@snu.ac.kr

Yoonho Boo
Seoul National University
dnsgh@snu.ac.kr

Sungho Shin
Seoul National University
ssh9919@snu.ac.kr

Wonyong Sung
Seoul National University
wysung@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Real-time automatic speech recognition (ASR) on mobile and embedded devices
has been of great interests for many years. We present real-time speech recognition
on smartphones or embedded systems by employing recurrent neural network
(RNN) based acoustic models, RNN based language models, and beam-search
decoding. The acoustic model is end-to-end trained with connectionist temporal
classification (CTC) loss. The RNN implementation on embedded devices can
suffer from excessive DRAM accesses because the parameter size of a neural
network usually exceeds that of the cache memory and the parameters are used
only once for each time step. To remedy this problem, we employ a multi-time step
parallelization approach that computes multiple output samples at a time with the
parameters fetched from the DRAM. Since the number of DRAM accesses can be
reduced in proportion to the number of parallelization steps, we can achieve a high
processing speed. However, conventional RNNs, such as long short-term memory
(LSTM) or gated recurrent unit (GRU), do not permit multi-time step parallelization.
We construct an acoustic model by combining simple recurrent units (SRUs) and
depth-wise 1-dimensional convolution layers for multi-time step parallelization.
Both the character and word piece models are developed for acoustic modeling, and
the corresponding RNN based language models are used for beam search decoding.
We achieve a competitive WER for WSJ corpus using the entire model size of
around 15MB and achieve real-time speed using only a single core ARM without
GPU or special hardware.

1

Introduction

Recently, neural network technology has greatly improved the accuracy of automatic speech recognition (ASR), and many applications are being developed for smartphones and intelligent personal
assistants. Many researches on end-to-end speech recognition are being conducted to replace the
hidden Markov model (HMM) based technique which has been used for many years. The end-to-end
models with neural networks include connectionist temporal classification (CTC)-trained recurrent
neural networks (RNN) [1, 2], encoder-decoder architectures [3, 4], and RNN transducers [5, 6].
Although HMM-based algorithms can be considered arithmetic efficient, they demand many irregular
memory accesses and require a large memory foot-print usually exceeding a few hundred MBs. In
contrast, RNN based ASR has the advantage of low memory footprint; however, it demands many
arithmetic operations for real-time inference. Consequently, server-based ASR implementations are
mostly used for real services, which however has the problem of response delay and user privacy is32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

