Sparse PCA from Sparse Linear Regression
Guy Bresler
MIT
guy@mit.edu

Sung Min Park
MIT
sp765@mit.edu

Mădălina Persu
Two Sigma,⇤ MIT
mpersu@mit.edu

Abstract
Sparse Principal Component Analysis (SPCA) and Sparse Linear Regression (SLR)
have a wide range of applications and have attracted a tremendous amount of
attention in the last two decades as canonical examples of statistical problems in
high dimension. A variety of algorithms have been proposed for both SPCA and
SLR, but an explicit connection between the two had not been made. We show how
to efficiently transform a black-box solver for SLR into an algorithm for SPCA:
assuming the SLR solver satisfies prediction error guarantees achieved by existing
efficient algorithms such as those based on the Lasso, the SPCA algorithm derived
from it achieves near state of the art guarantees for testing and for support recovery
for the single spiked covariance model as obtained by the current best polynomialtime algorithms. Our reduction not only highlights the inherent similarity between
the two problems, but also, from a practical standpoint, allows one to obtain a
collection of algorithms for SPCA directly from known algorithms for SLR. We
provide experimental results on simulated data comparing our proposed framework
to other algorithms for SPCA.

1

Introduction

Principal component analysis (PCA) is a fundamental technique for dimension reduction used widely
in data analysis. PCA projects data along a few directions that explain most of the variance of
observed data. One can also view this as linearly transforming the original set of variables into a
(smaller) set of uncorrelated variables called principal components.
Recent work in high-dimensional statistics has focused on sparse principal component analysis
(SPCA), as ordinary PCA estimates become inconsistent in this regime [22]. In SPCA, we restrict the principal components to be sparse, meaning they have only a few nonzero entries in the
original basis. This has the advantage, among others, that the components are more interpretable
[23, 49], while components may no longer be uncorrelated. We study SPCA under the Gaussian
(single) spiked covariance model introduced by [21]: we observe n samples of a random variable X
distributed according to a Gaussian distribution N (0, Id + ✓uu> ), where ||u||2 = 1 with at most k
nonzero entries,2 Id is the d ⇥ d identity matrix, and ✓ is the signal-to-noise parameter. We study two
settings of the problem, hypothesis testing and support recovery.
Sparsity assumptions have played an important role in a variety of other problems in high-dimensional
statistics, in particular linear regression. Linear regression is also ill-posed in high dimensions, so via
imposing sparsity on the regression vector we recover tractability.
Though the literature on two problems are largely disjoint, there is a striking similarity between
the two problems, in particular when we consider statistical and computational trade-offs. The
⇤
The views expressed herein are solely the views of the author(s) and are not necessarily the views of Two
Sigma Investments, LP or any of its affiliates. They are not intended to provide, and should not be relied upon
for, investment advice.
2
Sometimes we will write this latter condition as u 2 B0 (k) where B0 (k) is the “`0 -ball” of radius k.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

