e-SNLI: Natural Language Inference with
Natural Language Explanations
Oana-Maria Camburu1 Tim Rocktäschel2 Thomas Lukasiewicz1,3 Phil Blunsom1,4
{oana-maria.camburu, thomas.lukasiewicz, phil.blunsom}@cs.ox.ac.uk
t.rocktaschel@ucl.ac.uk
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
2
Department of Computer Science, University College London
3
Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
4
DeepMind, London, UK

Abstract
In order for machine learning to garner widespread public adoption, models must
be able to provide interpretable and robust explanations for their decisions, as
well as learn from human-provided explanations at train time. In this work, we
extend the Stanford Natural Language Inference dataset with an additional layer of
human-annotated natural language explanations of the entailment relations. We
further implement models that incorporate these explanations into their training
process and output them at test time. We show how our corpus of explanations,
which we call e-SNLI, can be used for various goals, such as obtaining full sentence
justifications of a model’s decisions, improving universal sentence representations
and transferring to out-of-domain NLI datasets. Our dataset1 thus opens up a range
of research directions for using natural language explanations, both for improving
models and for asserting their trust.

1

Introduction

Humans do not learn solely from labeled examples supplied by a teacher. Instead, they seek a
conceptual understanding of a task through both demonstrations and explanations. Machine learning
models trained simply to obtain high accuracy on held-out sets often learn to rely heavily on shallow
input statistics, resulting in brittle models susceptible to adversarial attacks. For example, Ribeiro
et al. [24] present a document classifier that distinguishes between Christianity and Atheism with an
accuracy of 94%. However, on close inspection, the model spuriously separates classes based on
words contained in the headers, such as Posting, Host, and Re.
In this work, we introduce a new dataset and models for exploiting and generating explanations for
the task of recognizing textual entailment. We argue for free-form natural language explanations, as
opposed to formal language, for a series of reasons. First, natural language is readily comprehensible
to an end-user who needs to assert a model’s reliability. Secondly, it is also easiest for humans to
provide free-form language, eliminating the additional effort of learning to produce formal language,
thus making it simpler to collect such datasets. Lastly, natural language justifications might eventually
be mined from existing large-scale free-form text.
Despite the potential for free-form justifications to improve both learning and transparency, there is
currently a lack of such datasets in the machine learning community. To address this deficiency, we
have collected a large corpus of human-annotated explanations for the Stanford Natural Language
1

https://github.com/OanaMariaCamburu/e-SNLI

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

