A probabilistic population code based on neural
samples

Sabyasachi Shivkumar∗ , Richard D. Lange∗ , Ankani Chattoraj∗ , Ralf M. Haefner
Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
{sshivkum, rlange, achattor, rhaefne2}@ur.rochester.edu

Abstract
Sensory processing is often characterized as implementing probabilistic inference:
networks of neurons compute posterior beliefs over unobserved causes given
the sensory inputs. How these beliefs are computed and represented by neural
responses is much-debated (Fiser et al. 2010, Pouget et al. 2013). A central debate
concerns the question of whether neural responses represent samples of latent
variables (Hoyer & Hyvarinnen 2003) or parameters of their distributions (Ma et al.
2006) with efforts being made to distinguish between them (Grabska-Barwinska et
al. 2013). A separate debate addresses the question of whether neural responses are
proportionally related to the encoded probabilities (Barlow 1969), or proportional
to the logarithm of those probabilities (Jazayeri & Movshon 2006, Ma et al. 2006,
Beck et al. 2012). Here, we show that these alternatives – contrary to common
assumptions – are not mutually exclusive and that the very same system can be
compatible with all of them. As a central analytical result, we show that modeling
neural responses in area V1 as samples from a posterior distribution over latents
in a linear Gaussian model of the image implies that those neural responses form
a linear Probabilistic Population Code (PPC, Ma et al. 2006). In particular, the
posterior distribution over some experimenter-defined variable like “orientation” is
part of the exponential family with sufficient statistics that are linear in the neural
sampling-based firing rates.

1

Introduction

In order to guide behavior, the brain has to infer behaviorally relevant but unobserved quantities from
observed inputs in the senses. Bayesian inference provides a normative framework to do so; however,
the computations required to compute posterior beliefs about those variables exactly are typically
intractable. As a result, the brain needs to perform these computations in an approximate manner.
The nature of this approximation is unclear with two principal classes having emerged as candidate
hypotheses: parametric (variational) and sampling-based [8, 20].
In the first class, neural responses are interpreted as the parameters of the probability distributions
that the brain computes and represents. The most popular members of this class are Probabilistic
Population Codes (PPCs, [13, 4, 3, 2, 21, 19]). Common PPCs are based on the empirical observation
that neural variability is well-described by an exponential family with linear sufficient statistics.
Applying Bayes’ rule to compute the posterior probability, p(s|r), over some task-relevant scalar
quantity, s, from the neural population response, r, one can write [2]:


p(s|r) ∝ g(s) exp h(s)> r
(1)
where each entry of h(s) represents a stimulus-dependent kernel characterizing the contribution
of each neuron’s response to the distribution, and g(s) is some stimulus-dependent function that
∗

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

