Graph Convolutional Policy Network for
Goal-Directed Molecular Graph Generation

Jiaxuan You1∗
jiaxuan@stanford.edu
Rex Ying1
rexying@stanford.edu
1

Bowen Liu2∗
liubowen@stanford.edu

Vijay Pande3
pande@stanford.edu

Jure Leskovec1
jure@cs.stanford.edu

Department of Computer Science, 2 Department of Chemistry, 3 Department of Bioengineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, 94305

Abstract
Generating novel graph structures that optimize given objectives while obeying
some given underlying rules is fundamental for chemistry, biology and social
science research. This is especially important in the task of molecular graph
generation, whose goal is to discover novel molecules with desired properties such
as drug-likeness and synthetic accessibility, while obeying physical laws such as
chemical valency. However, designing models to find molecules that optimize
desired properties while incorporating highly complex and non-differentiable rules
remains to be a challenging task. Here we propose Graph Convolutional Policy
Network (GCPN), a general graph convolutional network based model for goaldirected graph generation through reinforcement learning. The model is trained
to optimize domain-specific rewards and adversarial loss through policy gradient,
and acts in an environment that incorporates domain-specific rules. Experimental
results show that GCPN can achieve 61% improvement on chemical property
optimization over state-of-the-art baselines while resembling known molecules,
and achieve 184% improvement on the constrained property optimization task.

1

Introduction

Many important problems in drug discovery and material science are based on the principle of
designing molecular structures with specific desired properties. However, this remains a challenging
task due to the large size of chemical space. For example, the range of drug-like molecules has been
estimated to be between 1023 and 1060 [32]. Additionally, chemical space is discrete, and molecular
properties are highly sensitive to small changes in the molecular structure [21]. An increase in
the effectiveness of the design of new molecules with application-driven goals would significantly
accelerate developments in novel medicines and materials.
Recently, there has been significant advances in applying deep learning models to molecule generation
[15, 38, 7, 9, 22, 4, 31, 27, 34, 42]. However, the generation of novel and valid molecular graphs that
can directly optimize various desired physical, chemical and biological property objectives remains to
be a challenging task, since these property objectives are highly complex [37] and non-differentiable.
Furthermore, the generation model should be able to actively explore the vast chemical space, as the
distribution of the molecules that possess those desired properties does not necessarily match the
distribution of molecules from existing datasets.
∗

The two first authors made equal contributions.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

