Processing of missing data by neural networks

Marek Śmieja
marek.smieja@uj.edu.pl

Łukasz Struski
lukasz.struski@uj.edu.pl

Bartosz Zieliński
bartosz.zielinski@uj.edu.pl

Jacek Tabor
jacek.tabor@uj.edu.pl

Przemysław Spurek
przemyslaw.spurek@uj.edu.pl

Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
Jagiellonian University
Łojasiewicza 6, 30-348 Kraków, Poland

Abstract
We propose a general, theoretically justified mechanism for processing missing
data by neural networks. Our idea is to replace typical neuron’s response in the
first hidden layer by its expected value. This approach can be applied for various
types of networks at minimal cost in their modification. Moreover, in contrast to
recent approaches, it does not require complete data for training. Experimental
results performed on different types of architectures show that our method gives
better results than typical imputation strategies and other methods dedicated for
incomplete data.

1

Introduction

Learning from incomplete data has been recognized as one of the fundamental challenges in machine
learning [1]. Due to the great interest in deep learning in the last decade, it is especially important to
establish unified tools for practitioners to process missing data with arbitrary neural networks.
In this paper, we introduce a general, theoretically justified methodology for feeding neural networks
with missing data. Our idea is to model the uncertainty on missing attributes by probability density
functions, which eliminates the need of direct completion (imputation) by single values. In consequence, every missing data point is identified with parametric density, e.g. GMM, which is trained
together with remaining network parameters. To process this probabilistic representation by neural
network, we generalize the neuron’s response at the first hidden layer by taking its expected value
(Section 3). This strategy can be understand as calculating the average neuron’s activation over the
imputations drawn from missing data density (see Figure 1 for the illustration).
The main advantage of the proposed approach is the ability to train neural network on data sets
containing only incomplete samples (without a single fully observable data). This distinguishes our
approach from recent models like context encoder [2, 3], denoising autoencoder [4] or modified
generative adversarial network [5], which require complete data as an output of the network in training.
Moreover, our approach can be applied to various types of neural networks what requires only minimal
modification in their architectures. Our main theoretical result shows that this generalization does not
lead to loss of information when processing the input (Section 4). Experimental results performed on
several types of networks demonstrate practical usefulness of the method (see Section 5 and Figure 2
for sample results) .

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

