Differentially Private Change-Point Detection
Rachel Cummings
Georgia Institute of Technology
rachelc@gatech.edu
Yajun Mei
Georgia Institute of Technology
ymei@gatech.edu

Sara Krehbiel
University of Richmond
krehbiel@richmond.edu

Rui Tuo
Texas A&M University
ruituo@tamu.edu

Wanrong Zhang⇤
Georgia Institute of Technology
wanrongz@gatech.edu

Abstract
The change-point detection problem seeks to identify distributional changes at
an unknown change-point k ⇤ in a stream of data. This problem appears in many
important practical settings involving personal data, including biosurveillance, fault
detection, finance, signal detection, and security systems. The field of differential privacy offers data analysis tools that provide powerful worst-case privacy
guarantees. We study the statistical problem of change-point detection through
the lens of differential privacy. We give private algorithms for both online and
offline change-point detection, analyze these algorithms theoretically, and provide
empirical validation of our results.

1

Introduction

The change-point detection problem seeks to identify distributional changes at an unknown changepoint k ⇤ in a stream of data. The estimated change-point should be consistent with the hypothesis
that the data are initially drawn from pre-change distribution P0 but from post-change distribution P1
starting at the change-point. This problem appears in many important practical settings, including
biosurveillance, fault detection, finance, signal detection, and security systems. For example, the CDC
may wish to detect a disease outbreak based on real-time data about hospital visits, or smart home
IoT devices may want to detect changes in activity within the home. In both of these applications, the
data contain sensitive personal information.
The field of differential privacy offers data analysis tools that provide powerful worst-case privacy
guarantees. Informally, an algorithm that is ✏-differentially private ensures that any particular output
of the algorithm is at most e✏ more likely when a single data entry is changed. In the past decade,
the theoretical computer science community has developed a wide variety of differentially private
algorithms for many statistical tasks. The private algorithms most relevant to this work are based on
the simple output perturbation principle that to produce an ✏-differentially private estimate of some
statistic on the database, we should add to the exact statistic noise proportional to /✏, where
indicates the sensitivity of the statistic, or how much it can be influenced by a single data entry.
We study the statistical problem of change-point problem through the lens of differential privacy. We
give private algorithms for both online and offline change-point detection, analyze these algorithms
theoretically, and then provide empirical validation of these results.
⇤

Primary author. Authors are listed in alphabetical order.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

