Towards Robust Detection of Adversarial Examples

Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Yinpeng Dong, Jun Zhu∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Systems
BNRist Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{pty17, du-c14, dyp17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Although the recent progress is substantial, deep learning methods can be vulnerable to the maliciously generated adversarial examples. In this paper, we present a
novel training procedure and a thresholding test strategy, towards robust detection
of adversarial examples. In training, we propose to minimize the reverse crossentropy (RCE), which encourages a deep network to learn latent representations
that better distinguish adversarial examples from normal ones. In testing, we
propose to use a thresholding strategy as the detector to filter out adversarial examples for reliable predictions. Our method is simple to implement using standard
algorithms, with little extra training cost compared to the common cross-entropy
minimization. We apply our method to defend various attacking methods on the
widely used MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets, and achieve significant improvements
on robust predictions under all the threat models in the adversarial setting.

1

Introduction

Deep learning (DL) has obtained unprecedented progress in various tasks, including image classification, speech recognition, and natural language processing [11]. However, a high-accuracy DL model
can be vulnerable in the adversarial setting [12, 33], where adversarial examples are maliciously
generated to mislead the model to output wrong predictions. Several attacking methods have been
developed to craft such adversarial examples [2, 4, 12, 18, 22, 29, 30]. As DL is becoming ever more
prevalent, it is imperative to improve the robustness, especially in safety-critical applications.
Therefore, various defenses have been proposed attempting to correctly classify adversarial examples [14, 25, 31, 32, 33, 36]. However, most of these defenses are not effective enough, which can be
successfully attacked by more powerful adversaries [2, 3]. There is also new work on verification and
training provably robust networks [5, 6, 35], but these methods can only provide pointwise guarantees,
and they require large extra computation cost. Overall, as adversarial examples even exist for simple
classification tasks [9] and for human eyes [7], it is unlikely for such methods to solve the problem
by preventing adversaries from generating adversarial examples.
Due to the difficulty, detection-based defenses have attracted a lot of attention recently as alternative
solutions. Grosse et al. [13] introduce an extra class in classifiers solely for adversarial examples,
and similarly Gong et al. [10] train an additional binary classifier to decide whether an instance
is adversarial or not. Metzen et al. [26] detect adversarial examples via training a detection neural
network, which takes input from intermediate layers of the classification network. Bhagoji et al. [1]
reduce dimensionality of the input image fed to the classification network, and train a fully-connected
neural network on the smaller input. Li and Li [21] build a cascade classifier where each classifier is
implemented as a linear SVM acting on the PCA of inner convolutional layers of the classification
network. However, these methods all require a large amount of extra computational cost, and some
of them also result in loss of accuracy on normal examples. In contrast, Feinman et al. [8] propose
∗

Corresponding author.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

