Multivariate Convolutional Sparse Coding for
Electromagnetic Brain Signals

Tom Dupré La Tour∗1 , Thomas Moreau∗2 , Mainak Jas1 , Alexandre Gramfort2
1: LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, Paris, France
2: INRIA, Université Paris-Saclay, Saclay, France
*: Both authors contributed equally.

Abstract
Frequency-specific patterns of neural activity are traditionally interpreted as sustained rhythmic oscillations, and related to cognitive mechanisms such as attention,
high level visual processing or motor control. While alpha waves (8–12 Hz) are
known to closely resemble short sinusoids, and thus are revealed by Fourier analysis or wavelet transforms, there is an evolving debate that electromagnetic neural
signals are composed of more complex waveforms that cannot be analyzed by
linear filters and traditional signal representations. In this paper, we propose to
learn dedicated representations of such recordings using a multivariate convolutional sparse coding (CSC) algorithm. Applied to electroencephalography (EEG)
or magnetoencephalography (MEG) data, this method is able to learn not only
prototypical temporal waveforms, but also associated spatial patterns so their origin
can be localized in the brain. Our algorithm is based on alternated minimization
and a greedy coordinate descent solver that leads to state-of-the-art running time
on long time series. To demonstrate the implications of this method, we apply it to
MEG data and show that it is able to recover biological artifacts. More remarkably,
our approach also reveals the presence of non-sinusoidal mu-shaped patterns, along
with their topographic maps related to the somatosensory cortex.

1

Introduction

Neural activity recorded via measurements of the electrical potential over the scalp by electroencephalography (EEG), or magnetic fields by magnetoencephalography (MEG), can be used to
investigate human cognitive processes and certain pathologies. Such recordings consist of dozens to
hundreds of simultaneously recorded signals, for durations going from minutes to hours. In order
to describe and quantify neural activity in such multi-gigabyte data, it is classical to decompose
the signal in predefined representations such as the Fourier or wavelet bases. It leads to canonical
frequency bands such as theta (4–8 Hz), alpha (8–12 Hz), or beta (15–30 Hz) (Buzsaki, 2006), in
which signal power can be quantified. While such linear analyses have had significant impact in
neuroscience, there is now a debate regarding whether neural activity consists more of transient
bursts of isolated events rather than rhythmically sustained oscillations (van Ede et al., 2018). To
study the transient events and the morphology of the waveforms (Mazaheri and Jensen, 2008; Cole
and Voytek, 2017), which matter in cognition and for our understanding of pathologies (Jones,
2016; Cole et al., 2017), there is a clear need to go beyond traditionally employed signal processing
methodologies (Cole and Voytek, 2018). For instance, a classic Fourier analysis fails to distinguish
alpha-rhythms from mu-rhythms, which have the same peak frequency at around 10 Hz, but whose
waveforms are different (Cole and Voytek, 2017; Hari and Puce, 2017).
The key to many modern statistical analyses of complex data such as natural images, sounds or
neural time series is the estimation of data-driven representations. Dictionary learning is one family
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

