Neural Arithmetic Logic Units

Andrew Trask†‡ Felix Hill† Scott Reed† Jack Rae†♭
Chris Dyer† Phil Blunsom†‡
†
‡
DeepMind
University of Oxford ♭ University College London
{atrask,felixhill,reedscot,jwrae,cdyer,pblunsom}@google.com

Abstract
Neural networks can learn to represent and manipulate numerical information, but
they seldom generalize well outside of the range of numerical values encountered
during training. To encourage more systematic numerical extrapolation, we propose
an architecture that represents numerical quantities as linear activations which are
manipulated using primitive arithmetic operators, controlled by learned gates. We
call this module a neural arithmetic logic unit (NALU), by analogy to the arithmetic
logic unit in traditional processors. Experiments show that NALU-enhanced neural
networks can learn to track time, perform arithmetic over images of numbers,
translate numerical language into real-valued scalars, execute computer code, and
count objects in images. In contrast to conventional architectures, we obtain
substantially better generalization both inside and outside of the range of numerical
values encountered during training, often extrapolating orders of magnitude beyond
trained numerical ranges.

1

Introduction

The ability to represent and manipulate numerical quantities is apparent in the behavior of many
species, from insects to mammals to humans, suggesting that basic quantitative reasoning is a general
component of intelligence [5, 7].
While neural networks can successfully represent and manipulate numerical quantities given an
appropriate learning signal, the behavior that they learn does not generally exhibit systematic generalization [6, 20]. Specifically, one frequently observes failures when quantities that lie outside the
numerical range used during training are encountered at test time, even when the target function
is simple (e.g., it depends only on aggregating counts or linear extrapolation). This failure pattern
indicates that the learned behavior is better characterized by memorization than by systematic abstraction. Whether input distribution shifts that trigger extrapolation failures are of practical concern
depends on the environments where the trained models will operate. However, considerable evidence
exists showing that animals as simple as bees demonstrate systematic numerical extrapolation [? 7],
suggesting that systematicity in reasoning about numerical quantities is ecologically advantageous.
In this paper, we develop a new module that can be used in conjunction with standard neural network
architectures (e.g., LSTMs or convnets) but which is biased to learn systematic numerical computation.
Our strategy is to represent numerical quantities as individual neurons without a nonlinearity. To these
single-value neurons, we apply operators that are capable of representing simple functions (e.g., +,
−, ×, etc.). These operators are controlled by parameters which determine the inputs and operations
used to create each output. However, despite this combinatorial character, they are differentiable,
making it possible to learn them with backpropagation [24].
We experiment across a variety of task domains (synthetic, image, text, and code), learning signals
(supervised and reinforcement learning), and structures (feed-forward and recurrent). We find that our
proposed model can learn functions over representations that capture the underlying numerical nature
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

