Learning Temporal Point Processes via Reinforcement Learning

Shuang Li∗1 , Shuai Xiao 2 , Shixiang Zhu1 , Nan Du3 , Yao Xie1 , and Le Song1,2
1

Georgia Institute of Technology
2
Ant Financial
3
Google Brain

Abstract
Social goods, such as healthcare, smart city, and information networks, often produce ordered event data in continuous time. The generative processes of these event
data can be very complex, requiring flexible models to capture their dynamics.
Temporal point processes offer an elegant framework for modeling event data without discretizing the time. However, the existing maximum-likelihood-estimation
(MLE) learning paradigm requires hand-crafting the intensity function beforehand
and cannot directly monitor the goodness-of-fit of the estimated model in the
process of training. To alleviate the risk of model-misspecification in MLE, we
propose to generate samples from the generative model and monitor the quality
of the samples in the process of training until the samples and the real data are
indistinguishable. We take inspiration from reinforcement learning (RL) and treat
the generation of each event as the action taken by a stochastic policy. We parameterize the policy as a flexible recurrent neural network and gradually improve
the policy to mimic the observed event distribution. Since the reward function is
unknown in this setting, we uncover an analytic and nonparametric form of the
reward function using an inverse reinforcement learning formulation. This new RL
framework allows us to derive an efficient policy gradient algorithm for learning
flexible point process models, and we show that it performs well in both synthetic
and real data.

1

Introduction

Many natural and artificial systems produce a large volume of discrete events occurring in continuous
time, for example, the occurrence of crime events, earthquakes, patient visits to hospitals, financial
transactions, and user behavior in mobile applications [5]. It is essential to understand and model these
complex and intricate event dynamics so that accurate prediction, recommendation or intervention
can be carried out subsequently depending on the context.
Temporal point processes offer an elegant mathematical framework for modeling the generative
processes of these event data. Typically, parametric (or semi-parametric) assumptions are made on the
intensity function [11, 9] based on prior knowledge of the processes, and the maximum-likelihoodestimation (MLE) is used to fit the model parameters from data. These models often work well when
the parametric assumptions are correct. However, in many cases where the real event generative
process is unknown, these parametric assumptions may be too restricted and do not reflect the reality.
Thus there emerge some recent efforts in increasing the expressiveness of the intensity function using
nonparametric forms [7] and recurrent neural networks [6, 19]. However, these more sophisticated
models still rely on maximizing the likelihood which now involves intractable integrals and needs to
be approximated. Most recently, [27] proposed to bypass the problem of maximum likelihood by
adopting a generative adversarial network (GAN) framework, where a recurrent neural network is
∗
Correspondence to: Shuang Li <sli370@gatech.edu>, Yao Xie <yao.xie@isye.gatech.edu>, and Le Song
<lsong@cc.gatech.edu>

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

