Unsupervised Learning of View-invariant Action
Representations

Junnan Li
Grad. School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering
National University of Singapore
Singapore
lijunnan@u.nus.edu
Qi Zhao
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, USA
qzhao@cs.umn.edu

Yongkang Wong
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
Singapore
yongkang.wong@nus.edu.sg
Mohan S. Kankanhalli
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
Singapore
mohan@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
The recent success in human action recognition with deep learning methods mostly
adopt the supervised learning paradigm, which requires significant amount of manually labeled data to achieve good performance. However, label collection is an
expensive and time-consuming process. In this work, we propose an unsupervised
learning framework, which exploits unlabeled data to learn video representations.
Different from previous works in video representation learning, our unsupervised
learning task is to predict 3D motion in multiple target views using video representation from a source view. By learning to extrapolate cross-view motions, the
representation can capture view-invariant motion dynamics which is discriminative
for the action. In addition, we propose a view-adversarial training method to
enhance learning of view-invariant features. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
the learned representations for action recognition on multiple datasets.

1

Introduction

Recognizing human action in videos is a long-standing research problem in computer vision. Over
the past years, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have
emerged as the state-of-the-art learning framework for action recognition [3, 6, 35, 51]. However, the
success of existing supervised learning methods is primarily driven by significant amount of manually
labeled data, which is expensive and time-consuming to collect.
To tackle this problem, a stream of unsupervised methods have recently been proposed [8, 23, 33,
34, 53], which leverage free unlabeled data for representation learning. The key idea is to design
a surrogate task that exploits the inherent structure of raw videos, and formulate a loss function
to train the network. Some works design the surrogate task as constructing future frames [53] or
future motion [33], while others use the temporal order of video frames to learn representations in a
self-supervised manner [8, 23, 34]. Although they show promising results, the learned representations
are often view-specific, which makes them less robust to view changes.
Generally, human action can be observed from multiple views, where the same action appears
quite different. Therefore, it is important to learn discriminative view-invariant features, especially
for action recognition from unknown or unseen views. Humans have the ability to visualize what
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

