Binary Rating Estimation
with Graph Side Information

Kwangjun Ahn∗
142nd Military Police Company
Korean Augmentation To the United States Army
kjahnkorea@kaist.ac.kr
Hyunseung Cha
Kakao Brain
tony.cha@kakaobrain.com

Kangwook Lee
School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
kw1jjang@kaist.ac.kr
Changho Suh
School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
chsuh@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Rich experimental evidences show that one can better estimate users’ unknown
ratings with the aid of graph side information such as social graphs. However,
the gain is not theoretically quantified. In this work, we study the binary rating
estimation problem to understand the fundamental value of graph side information.
Considering a simple correlation model between a rating matrix and a graph, we
characterize the sharp threshold on the number of observed entries required to
recover the rating matrix (called the optimal sample complexity) as a function of
the quality of graph side information (to be detailed). To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to reveal how much the graph side information reduces sample
complexity. Further, we propose a computationally efficient algorithm that achieves
the limit. Our experimental results demonstrate that the algorithm performs well
even with real-world graphs.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems provide users with appropriate items based on their revealed preference such
as ratings and like/dislikes. Due to their wide applicability, recommender systems have received
significant attention in machine learning and data mining societies [46, 41, 50, 48, 5, 8, 22, 31]. In
addition to the revealed preferences, modern recommender systems also make use of graph side
information to further improve the performance. For instance, Ma et al. [37] view social networks as
user-to-user similarity graph and propose an algorithm that makes use of both revealed ratings and
graph side information. As a result, they show that the algorithm can achieve superior performances
over those that do not employ social networks. Jamali and Ester [26] demonstrate that an algorithm
with graph information can make recommendations for cold start users, whose lack of available
rating information precludes the traditional approaches. Similarly, Kalofolias et al. [29] construct
an item-to-item similarity graph whose edge weights are computed from the item features, and
demonstrate the benefits of exploiting such information.
Apart from the aforementioned, there have been a lot more works that incorporate social graph
information in recommender systems; however, few works have been devoted to the theoretical
understanding of this problem. In particular, it is widely open as to by how much one can improve
the performance with the aid of graph side information. This precisely sets the goal of this paper: we
∗

This work was done when Kwangjun Ahn was with KAIST as a student.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

