Data Amplification: A Unified and Competitive
Approach to Property Estimation

Yi HAO
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
yih179@eng.ucsd.edu
Ananda T. Suresh
Google Research, New York
New York, NY 10011
theertha@google.com

Alon Orlitsky
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
alon@eng.ucsd.edu
Yihong Wu
Dept. of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511
yihong.wu@yale.edu

Abstract
Estimating properties of discrete distributions is a fundamental problem in statistical learning. We design the first unified, linear-time, competitive, property
estimator that for a wide class of properties and for all underlying distributions uses
just 2n√samples to achieve the performance attained by the empirical estimator
with n log n samples. This provides off-the-shelf, distribution-independent, “amplification” of the amount of data available relative to common-practice estimators.
We illustrate the estimator’s practical advantages by comparing it to existing
estimators for a wide variety of properties and distributions. In most cases, its
performance with n samples is even as good as that of the empirical estimator with
n log n samples, and for essentially all properties, its performance is comparable
to that of the best existing estimator designed specifically for that property.

1

Distribution Properties

Let DX denote the collection of distributions over a countable set X of finite or infinite cardinality k.
A distribution property is a mapping f : DX → R. Many applications call for estimating properties
of an unknown distribution p ∈ DX from its samples. Often these properties are additive, namely can
be written as a sum of functions of the probabilities. Symmetric additive properties can be written as
X
def
f (p) =
f (px ),
x∈X

and arise in many biological, genomic, and language-processing applications:
P
1
Shannon entropy
x∈X px log px , where throughout the paper log is the natural logarithm, is the
fundamental information measure arising in a variety of applications [1].
P
1
Normalized support size
x∈X k 1px >0 plays an important role in population [2] and vocabulary
size estimation [3].
P
1−e−mpx
Normalized support coverage
is the normalized expected number of distinct elex∈X
m
ments observed upon drawing Poi(m) independent samples, it arises in ecological [4], genomic [5],
and database studies [6].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

