Safe Active Learning for Time-Series Modeling
with Gaussian Processes
Christoph Zimmer Mona Meister Duy Nguyen-Tuong
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany
{christoph.zimmer,mona.meister,duy.nguyen-tuong}@de.bosch.com

Abstract
Learning time-series models is useful for many applications, such as simulation and
forecasting. In this study, we consider the problem of actively learning time-series
models while taking given safety constraints into account. For time-series modeling we employ a Gaussian process with a nonlinear exogenous input structure.
The proposed approach generates data appropriate for time series model learning,
i.e. input and output trajectories, by dynamically exploring the input space. The
approach parametrizes the input trajectory as consecutive trajectory sections, which
are determined stepwise given safety requirements and past observations. We analyze the proposed algorithm and evaluate it empirically on a technical application.
The results show the effectiveness of our approach in a realistic technical use case.

1

Introduction

Active model learning deals with the problem of sequential data labeling for learning an unknown
function. Data points are sequentially selected for labeling such that the information required for
approximating the unknown function is maximized, according to some measures. The overall goal is
to create an accurate model without having to supply more data than necessary and, thereby reducing
the annotation effort and measurement costs. Active learning has been well studied for classification
tasks, e.g. for image labeling [12], but in the field of regression, the active learning approach, related
to the optimal experimental design problem [8], is not yet widespread.
For actively learning time-series models representing physical systems, the data has to be generated
such that the relevant dynamics can be captured. In practice, the physical system needs to be excited
by dynamically moving around in the input space using input trajectories, such that the collected
data, i.e. input and output trajectories, contain as much information about the dynamics as possible.
Commonly used input trajectories include sinusoidal functions, ramps and step functions, white noise,
etc. [13, 17]. When employing input excitation on physical systems, however, additional aspects of
safety need to be considered. The excitation must not damage the physical system while dynamically
exploring the input space, making it crucial to identify safe regions where dynamic excitation can be
performed.
In this paper we consider the problem of safe exploration for active learning of time-series models.
The goal is to generate input trajectories and output measurements which are informative for learning
time-series models. To do so, our input trajectories are parametrized in consecutive sections, e.g.
as consecutive piecewise ramps or splines. These consecutive sections of the input trajectory are
determined stepwise in an explorative approach. Given observations, the next trajectory sections are
determined by maximizing an information gain criterion with respect to the model. In this paper,
we employ a Gaussian process with a nonlinear exogenous structure as the time-series model for
which an appropriate exploration criterion is desired. An additional Gaussian process model is
simultaneously used for predicting safe input regions, given safety requirements. The sections of
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

