Measures of distortion for machine learning

Leena Chennuru Vankadara
University of Tübingen
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
leena.chennuru@tuebingen.mpg.de
Ulrike von Luxburg
University of Tübingen
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
luxburg@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Given data from a general metric space, one of the standard machine learning
pipelines is to first embed the data into a Euclidean space and subsequently apply
machine learning algorithms to analyze the data. The quality of such an embedding
is typically described in terms of a distortion measure. In this paper, we show that
many of the existing distortion measures behave in an undesired way, when considered from a machine learning point of view. We investigate desirable properties of
distortion measures and formally prove that most of the existing measures fail to
satisfy these properties. These theoretical findings are supported by simulations,
which for example demonstrate that existing distortion measures are not robust to
noise or outliers and cannot serve as good indicators for classification accuracy. As
an alternative, we suggest a new measure of distortion, called σ-distortion. We can
show both in theory and in experiments that it satisfies all desirable properties and
is a better candidate to evaluate distortion in the context of machine learning.

1

Introduction

Given data from a general metric space, one of the standard machine learning pipelines is to first
embed the data into a Euclidean space (for example using an unsupervised algorithm such as Isomap,
locally linear embedding, maximum variance unfolding, etc) and subsequently apply out of the box
machine learning algorithms to analyze the data. Typically, the quality of such an embedding is
described in terms of a distortion measure that summarizes how the distances between the embedded
points deviate from the original distances. Many distortion measures have been used in the past, the
most prominent ones being worst case distortion, lq -distortion (Abraham, Bartal, and Neiman, 2011),
average distortion(Abraham, Bartal, and Neiman, 2011), -distortion (Abraham, Bartal, Kleinberg, et
al., 2005), k-local distortion (Abraham, Bartal, and Neiman, 2007) and scaling distortion (Abraham,
Bartal, Kleinberg, et al., 2005). Such distortion measures are sometimes evaluated in hindsight
to evaluate the quality of an embedding, and sometimes used directly as objective functions in
embedding algorithms, for example the stress functions that are commonly used in different variants
of Multidimensional scaling (Cox and Cox, 2000). There also exist embedding algorithms with
completely different objectives. For instance, t-SNE (Maaten and Hinton, 2008) employs an objective
function that aims to enhance the cluster structure present in the data. In this paper, however, we
restrict our analysis to distortion measures that evaluate the quality of distance preserving embeddings.
From a theoretical computer science point of view, many aspects of distance preservation of emeddings are well understood. For example, Bourgain’s theorem (Bourgain, 1985) and the Johnson–Lindenstrauss Lemma (Johnson and Lindenstrauss, 1984) state that any finite metric space
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

