Recurrently Controlled Recurrent Networks

Yi Tay1 , Luu Anh Tuan2 , and Siu Cheung Hui3
1,3
Nanyang Technological University
2
Institute for Infocomm Research
ytay017@e.ntu.edu.sg1
at.luu@i2r.a-star.edu.sg2
asschui@ntu.edu.sg3

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) such as long short-term memory and gated
recurrent units are pivotal building blocks across a broad spectrum of sequence
modeling problems. This paper proposes a recurrently controlled recurrent network
(RCRN) for expressive and powerful sequence encoding. More concretely, the key
idea behind our approach is to learn the recurrent gating functions using recurrent
networks. Our architecture is split into two components - a controller cell and a
listener cell whereby the recurrent controller actively influences the compositionality of the listener cell. We conduct extensive experiments on a myriad of tasks in
the NLP domain such as sentiment analysis (SST, IMDb, Amazon reviews, etc.),
question classification (TREC), entailment classification (SNLI, SciTail), answer
selection (WikiQA, TrecQA) and reading comprehension (NarrativeQA). Across all
26 datasets, our results demonstrate that RCRN not only consistently outperforms
BiLSTMs but also stacked BiLSTMs, suggesting that our controller architecture
might be a suitable replacement for the widely adopted stacked architecture.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) live at the heart of many sequence modeling problems. In
particular, the incorporation of gated additive recurrent connections is extremely powerful, leading to
the pervasive adoption of models such as Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) [Cho et al., 2014] or Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997] across many NLP applications
[Bahdanau et al., 2014; Xiong et al., 2016; Rocktäschel et al., 2015; McCann et al., 2017]. In these
models, the key idea is that the gating functions control information flow and compositionality over
time, deciding how much information to read/write across time steps. This not only serves as a
protection against vanishing/exploding gradients but also enables greater relative ease in modeling
long-range dependencies.
There are two common ways to increase the representation capability of RNNs. Firstly, the number
of hidden dimensions could be increased. Secondly, recurrent layers could be stacked on top of
each other in a hierarchical fashion [El Hihi and Bengio, 1996], with each layer’s input being the
output of the previous, enabling hierarchical features to be captured. Notably, the wide adoption of
stacked architectures across many applications [Graves et al., 2013; Sutskever et al., 2014; Wang
et al., 2017; Nie and Bansal, 2017] signify the need for designing complex and expressive encoders.
Unfortunately, these strategies may face limitations. For example, the former might run a risk of
overfitting and/or hitting a wall in performance. On the other hand, the latter might be faced with the
inherent difficulties of going deep such as vanishing gradients or difficulty in feature propagation
across deep RNN layers [Zhang et al., 2016b].
This paper proposes Recurrently Controlled Recurrent Networks (RCRN), a new recurrent architecture
and a general purpose neural building block for sequence modeling. RCRNs are characterized by
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

