Analysis of Krylov Subspace Solutions of Regularized
Nonconvex Quadratic Problems
Yair Carmon
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
yairc@stanford.edu

John C. Duchi
Departments of Statitstics and Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
jduchi@stanford.edu

Abstract
We provide convergence rates for Krylov subspace solutions to the trust-region
and cubic-regularized (nonconvex) quadratic problems. Such solutions may be
efficiently computed by the Lanczos method and haveplong been used in practice.
We prove error bounds of the form 1/t2 and e 4t/  , where  is a condition
number for the problem, and t is the Krylov subspace order (number of Lanczos
iterations). We also provide lower bounds showing that our analysis is sharp.

1

Introduction

Consider the potentially nonconvex quadratic function
1
fA,b (x) := xT Ax + bT x,
2
where A 2 Rd⇥d and b 2 Rd . We wish to solve regularized minimization problems of the form
⇢
3
minimize fA,b (x) subject to kxk  R and minimize fA,b (x) + kxk ,
(1)
x
x
3
where R and ⇢
0 are regularization parameters. These problems arise primarily in the family of trust-region and cubic-regularized Newton methods for general nonlinear optimization problems [11, 29, 18, 9], which optimize a smooth function g by sequentially minimizing local models
of the form
1 T 2
g(xi + ) ⇡ g(xi ) + rg(xi )T +
r g(xi ) = g(xi ) + fr2 g(xi ),rg(xi ) ( ),
2
where xi is the current iterate and 2 Rd is the search direction. Such models tend to be unreliable
for large k k, particularly when r2 g(xi ) ⌥ 0. Trust-region and cubic regularization methods
address this by constraining and regularizing the direction , respectively.
Both classes of methods and their associated subproblems are the subject of substantial ongoing research [19, 21, 5, 1, 25]. In the machine learning community, there is growing interest in using these
methods for minimizing (often nonconvex) training losses, handling the large finite-sum structure of
learning problems by means of sub-sampling [32, 23, 3, 38, 36].
The problems (1) are challenging to solve in high-dimensional settings, where direct decomposition
(or even storage) of the matrix A is infeasible. In some scenarios, however, computing matrix-vector
products v 7! Av is feasible. Such is the case when A is the Hessian of a neural network, where d
may be in the millions and A is dense, and yet we can compute Hessian-vector products efficiently
on batches of training data [31, 33].
In this paper we consider a scalable approach for approximately solving (1), which consists of
minimizing the objective in the Krylov subspace of order t,
Kt (A, b) := span{b, Ab, . . . , At 1 b}.
(2)
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

