A Unified Framework for Extensive-Form Game
Abstraction with Bounds
Christian Kroer
Computer Science Department
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ckroer@cs.cmu.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Abstraction has long been a key component in the practical solving of large-scale
extensive-form games. Despite this, abstraction remains poorly understood. There
have been some recent theoretical results but they have been confined to specific
assumptions on abstraction structure and are specific to various disjoint types of
abstraction, and specific solution concepts, for example, exact Nash equilibria
or strategies with bounded immediate regret. In this paper we present a unified
framework for analyzing abstractions that can express all types of abstractions
and solution concepts used in prior papers with performance guarantees—while
maintaining comparable bounds on abstraction quality. Moreover, our framework
gives an exact decomposition of abstraction error in a much broader class of games,
albeit only in an ex-post sense, as our results depend on the specific strategy
chosen. Nonetheless, we use this ex-post decomposition along with slightly weaker
assumptions than prior work to derive generalizations of prior bounds on abstraction
quality. We also show, via counterexample, that such assumptions are necessary for
some games. Finally, we prove the first bounds for how ✏-Nash equilibria computed
in abstractions perform in the original game. This is important because often one
cannot afford to compute an exact Nash equilibrium in the abstraction. All our
results apply to general-sum n-player games.

1

Introduction

Game-theoretic equilibria have played a key role in several recent advances in the ability to construct
AIs with superhuman performance in games with imperfect information [5, 9, 32]. In particular these
results rely on computing an approximate Nash equilibrium [33] for the game at hand. In typical
real-world situations these games are so large that even approximate equilibria are intractable. Instead,
the dominant paradigm has been to first construct some smaller abstraction of the game, apply an
iterative algorithm for computing a Nash equilibrium in the abstraction, and map the resulting strategy
back to the full game. This approach was used in the recent Libratus agent, which beat four top poker
pros in the game of heads-ups no-limit Texas hold’em [9] (in addition to abstraction and equilibrium
approximation the agent also utilized real-time subgame solving [8] and action abstraction refinement).
Abstraction has also been used in trading-agent competitions [39] and security games [1–3].
In practice, abstractions are generated heuristically with no theoretical guarantees on solution quality [4, 10, 14–16, 18–22, 24, 34, 36]. Ideally, abstraction would be lossless, such that implementing
an equilibrium from the abstract game results in an equilibrium in the full game. Gilpin and Sandholm
[17] study lossless abstraction techniques for a structured class of games. Unfortunately, lossless
abstraction often leads to games that are still too large to solve. Thus, one must turn to lossy
abstraction. However, significant abstraction pathologies (nonmonotonicities) have been shown
in games which cannot exist in single-agent settings: if an abstraction is refined, the equilibrium
strategy from that new abstraction can be worse in the original game than the equilibrium strategy
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

