Deep Generative Markov State Models

1

Hao Wu1,2,∗ , Andreas Mardt1,∗ , Luca Pasquali1,∗, and Frank Noe1,†
Dept. of Mathematics and Computer Science, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Tongji University, Shanghai, 200092, P.R. China

Abstract
We propose a deep generative Markov State Model (DeepGenMSM) learning
framework for inference of metastable dynamical systems and prediction of trajectories. After unsupervised training on time series data, the model contains (i)
a probabilistic encoder that maps from high-dimensional configuration space to a
small-sized vector indicating the membership to metastable (long-lived) states, (ii)
a Markov chain that governs the transitions between metastable states and facilitates analysis of the long-time dynamics, and (iii) a generative part that samples
the conditional distribution of configurations in the next time step. The model
can be operated in a recursive fashion to generate trajectories to predict the system evolution from a defined starting state and propose new configurations. The
DeepGenMSM is demonstrated to provide accurate estimates of the long-time kinetics and generate valid distributions for molecular dynamics (MD) benchmark
systems. Remarkably, we show that DeepGenMSMs are able to make long timesteps in molecular configuration space and generate physically realistic structures
in regions that were not seen in training data.

1

Introduction

Complex dynamical systems that exhibit events on vastly different timescales are ubiquitous in science and engineering. For example, molecular dynamics (MD) of biomolecules involve fast vibrations on the timescales of 10−15 seconds, while their biological function is often related to the rare
switching events between long-lived states on timescales of 10−3 seconds or longer. In weather and
climate systems, local fluctuations in temperature and pressure fields occur within minutes or hours,
while global changes are often subject to periodic motion and drift over years or decades. Primary
goals in the analysis of complex dynamical systems include:
1. Deriving an interpretable model of the essential long-time dynamical properties of these
systems, such as the stationary behavior or lifetimes/cycle times of slow processes.
2. Simulating the dynamical system, e.g., to predict the system’s future evolution or to sample
previously unobserved system configurations.
A state-of-the-art approach for the first goal is to learn a Markovian model from time-series data,
which is theoretically justified by the fact that physical systems are inherently Markovian. In practice, the long-time behavior of dynamical systems can be accurately described in a Markovian model
when suitable features or variables are used, and when the time resolution of the model is sufficiently
coarse such that the time-evolution can be represented with a manageable number of dynamical
modes [24, 11]. In stochastic dynamical systems, such as MD simulation, variants of Markov state
models (MSMs) are commonly used [3, 25, 22]. In MSMs, the configuration space is discretized,
e.g., using a clustering method, and the dynamics between clusters are then described by a matrix
∗
†

H. Wu, A. Mardt and L. Pasquali equally contributed to this work.
Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Electronic mail: frank.noe@fu-berlin.de.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

