Modern Neural Networks Generalize on Small Data
Sets
Matthew Olson
Department of Statistics
Wharton School University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
maolson@wharton.upenn.edu

Abraham J. Wyner
Department of Statistics
Wharton School University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
ajw@wharton.upenn.edu

Richard Berk
Department of Statistics
Wharton School University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
berkr@wharton.upenn.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we use a linear program to empirically decompose fitted neural networks into ensembles of low-bias sub-networks. We show that these sub-networks
are relatively uncorrelated which leads to an internal regularization process, very
much like a random forest, which can explain why a neural network is surprisingly
resistant to overfitting. We then demonstrate this in practice by applying large
neural networks, with hundreds of parameters per training observation, to a collection of 116 real-world data sets from the UCI Machine Learning Repository.
This collection of data sets contains a much smaller number of training examples
than the types of image classification tasks generally studied in the deep learning
literature, as well as non-trivial label noise. We show that even in this setting
deep neural nets are capable of achieving superior classification accuracy without
overfitting.

1

Introduction

A recent focus in the deep learning community has been resolving the “paradox" that extremely large,
high capacity neural networks are able to simultaneously memorize training data and achieve good
generalization error. In a number of experiments, Zhang et al. [24] demonstrated that large neural
networks were capable of both achieving state of the art performance on image classification tasks,
as well as perfectly fitting training data with permuted labels. The apparent consequence of these
observations was to question traditional measures of complexity considered in statistical learning
theory.
A great deal of recent research has aimed to explain the generalization ability of very high capacity
neural networks [14]. A number of different streams have emerged in this literature [18, 16, 17]. The
authors in Zhang et al. [24] suggest that stochastic gradient descent (SGD) may provide implicit
regularization by encouraging low complexity solutions to the neural network optimization problem.
As an analogy, they point out that SGD applied to under-determined least squares problems produces
solutions with minimal `2 norm. Other streams of research have aimed at exploring the effect of
margins on generalization error [1, 16]. This line of thought is similar to the margin-based views of
AdaBoost in the boosting literature that bound test performance in terms of the classifier’s confidence
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

