Transfer of Value Functions via Variational Methods
Andrea Tirinzoni∗
Politecnico di Milano

Rafael Rodriguez Sanchez∗
Politecnico di Milano

Marcello Restelli
Politecnico di Milano

andrea.tirinzoni@polimi.it

rafaelalberto.rodriguez@polimi.it

marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Abstract
We consider the problem of transferring value functions in reinforcement learning.
We propose an approach that uses the given source tasks to learn a prior distribution
over optimal value functions and provide to an efficient variational approximation
of the corresponding posterior in a new target task. We show our approach to be
general, in the sense that it can be combined with complex parametric function
approximators and distribution models, while providing two practical algorithms
based on Gaussians and Gaussian mixtures. We theoretically analyze them by
deriving a finite-sample analysis and provide a comprehensive empirical evaluation
in four different domains.

1

Introduction

Recent advances have allowed reinforcement learning (RL) [34] to achieve impressive results in a
wide variety of complex tasks, ranging from Atari [26] through the game of Go [33] to the control of
sophisticated robotic systems [17, 24, 23]. The main limitation is that these RL algorithms still require
an enormous amount of experience samples before successfully learning such complicated tasks. One
of the most promising solutions to alleviate this problem is transfer learning, which focuses on reusing
past knowledge available to the agent in order to reduce the sample complexity for learning new tasks.
In the typical settings of transfer in RL [36], it is assumed that the agent has already solved a set of
source tasks generated from some unknown distribution. Then, given a target task (which is drawn
from the same distribution, or a slightly different one), the agent can rely on the knowledge from
the source tasks to speed up the learning process. This reuse of knowledge is a significant advantage
over plain RL, in which the agent learns each new task from scratch regardless of any previous
learning experience. Several algorithms have been proposed in the literature to transfer different
elements involved in the learning process: experience samples [22, 35, 37], policies/options [11, 19],
rewards [18], features [6], parameters [10, 16, 12]. We refer the reader to [36, 20] for a thorough
survey on transfer in RL.
Assuming that the tasks follow a specific distribution, an intuitive choice to design a transfer algorithm
is to try to characterize the uncertainty over the target task. Then, an ideal algorithm would leverage
prior knowledge from the source tasks to interact with the target task to reduce uncertainty as quickly
as possible. This simple intuition makes Bayesian methods appealing approaches for transfer in
RL, and many previous works have been proposed in this direction. In [39], the authors assume
that the tasks share similarities in their dynamics and rewards and propose a hierarchical Bayesian
model for the distribution of these two elements. Similarly, in [21], the authors assume that tasks are
similar in their value functions and design a different hierarchical Bayesian model for the transfer
of such information. More recently, [10], and its extension [16], consider tasks whose dynamics
are governed by some hidden parameters and propose efficient Bayesian models to quickly learn
such parameters in new tasks. However, most of these algorithms require specific, and sometimes
restrictive, assumptions (e.g., on the distributions involved or the function approximators adopted),
which might limit their practical applicability. The importance of having transfer algorithms that
∗

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

