Cooperative Holistic Scene Understanding: Unifying
3D Object, Layout, and Camera Pose Estimation
Siyuan Huang 1
huangsiyuan@ucla.edu

Siyuan Qi 2
syqi@cs.ucla.edu

Yinxue Xiao 2
yinxuex@ucla.edu

Yixin Zhu 1
yixin.zhu@ucla.edu

Ying Nian Wu 1
ywu@stat.ucla.edu

Song-Chun Zhu 1,2
sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

1

Dept. of Statistics, UCLA

2

Dept. of Computer Science, UCLA

Abstract
Holistic 3D indoor scene understanding refers to jointly recovering the i) object
bounding boxes, ii) room layout, and iii) camera pose, all in 3D. The existing
methods either are ineffective or only tackle the problem partially. In this paper,
we propose an end-to-end model that simultaneously solves all three tasks in realtime given only a single RGB image. The essence of the proposed method is to
improve the prediction by i) parametrizing the targets (e.g., 3D boxes) instead of
directly estimating the targets, and ii) cooperative training across different modules
in contrast to training these modules individually. Specifically, we parametrize
the 3D object bounding boxes by the predictions from several modules, i.e., 3D
camera pose and object attributes. The proposed method provides two major
advantages: i) The parametrization helps maintain the consistency between the
2D image and the 3D world, thus largely reducing the prediction variances in
3D coordinates. ii) Constraints can be imposed on the parametrization to train
different modules simultaneously. We call these constraints "cooperative losses" as
they enable the joint training and inference. We employ three cooperative losses
for 3D bounding boxes, 2D projections, and physical constraints to estimate a
geometrically consistent and physically plausible 3D scene. Experiments on the
SUN RGB-D dataset shows that the proposed method significantly outperforms
prior approaches on 3D object detection, 3D layout estimation, 3D camera pose
estimation, and holistic scene understanding.

1

Introduction

Holistic 3D scene understanding from a single RGB image is a fundamental yet challenging computer
vision problem, while humans are capable of performing such tasks effortlessly within 200 ms [Potter,
1975, 1976, Schyns and Oliva, 1994, Thorpe et al., 1996]. The primary difficulty of the holistic 3D
scene understanding lies in the vast, but ambiguous 3D information attempted to recover from a
single RGB image. Such estimation includes three essential tasks:
• The estimation of the 3D camera pose that captures the image. This component helps to maintain
the consistency between the 2D image and the 3D world.
• The estimation of the 3D room layout. Combining with the estimated 3D camera pose, it recovers a
global geometry.
• The estimation of the 3D bounding boxes for each object in the scene, recovering the local details.
Most current methods either are inefficient or only tackle the problem partially. Specifically,
• Traditional methods [Gupta et al., 2010, Zhao and Zhu, 2011, 2013, Choi et al., 2013, Schwing et al.,
2013, Zhang et al., 2014, Izadinia et al., 2017, Huang et al., 2018] apply sampling or optimization
methods to infer the geometry and semantics of indoor scenes. However, those methods are
computationally expensive; it usually takes a long time to converge and could be easily trapped in
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

