Latent Gaussian Activity Propagation: Using
Smoothness and Structure to Separate and Localize
Sounds in Large Noisy Environments
Daniel D. Johnson, Daniel Gorelik, Ross Mawhorter, Kyle Suver, Weiqing Gu
Department of Mathematics
Harvey Mudd College
Claremont, CA 91711
{ddjohnson, dgorelik, rmawhorter, ksuver, gu}@hmc.edu
Steven Xing, Cody Gabriel, Peter Sankhagowit
Intel Corporation
Hillsboro, OR 97124
{steven.xing, cody.gabriel, peter.sankhagowit}@intel.com

Abstract
We present an approach for simultaneously separating and localizing multiple
sound sources using recorded microphone data. Inspired by topic models, our
approach is based on a probabilistic model of inter-microphone phase differences,
and poses separation and localization as a Bayesian inference problem. We assume
sound activity is locally smooth across time, frequency, and location, and use
the known position of the microphones to obtain a consistent separation. We
compare the performance of our method against existing algorithms on simulated
anechoic voice data and find that it obtains high performance across a variety of
input conditions.

1

Introduction

Traditional playback of real-world events is usually constrained to the viewpoints of the original
cameras and microphones, which limits the immersion of the experience. In contrast, if those events
are reconstructed in virtual space, they can be played back from perspectives without a corresponding
source recording and explored interactively. Such technology would enable users to experience events
in virtual reality with full freedom of motion.
Realistically reproducing the audio of a physical event in virtual space requires that sounds be both
faithfully separated from each other and accurately localized. Furthermore, in order to capture
events that happen over a large region in space, it is necessary to place microphones far away from
each other, which introduces non-negligible delays into the audio signals. As such, we focus on
the task of performing blind separation and localization in the presence of noise, where relatively
few microphones are placed far away from each other to cover a large area. This situation poses
difficulties for some existing separation and localization algorithms, which often assume large
numbers of microphones [Dorfan et al., 2015], an array of closely spaced microphones [Mandel et al.,
2009, Lewis, 2012], or known sound characteristics [Oldfield et al., 2015, Wang and Chen, 2017].
Specifically, we examine the situation of sound sources in a large, known, anechoic two-dimensional
space, with pairs of two omni-directional microphones placed at arbitrary points and orientations.
The presence of noise, as well as the potentially large distances between microphone pairs, means
that sources may not perfectly correspond across recordings, making separation an ill-posed problem.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

