Implicit Reparameterization Gradients
Michael Figurnov Shakir Mohamed Andriy Mnih
DeepMind, London, UK
{mfigurnov,shakir,amnih}@google.com

Abstract
By providing a simple and efficient way of computing low-variance gradients of
continuous random variables, the reparameterization trick has become the technique
of choice for training a variety of latent variable models. However, it is not
applicable to a number of important continuous distributions. We introduce an
alternative approach to computing reparameterization gradients based on implicit
differentiation and demonstrate its broader applicability by applying it to Gamma,
Beta, Dirichlet, and von Mises distributions, which cannot be used with the classic
reparameterization trick. Our experiments show that the proposed approach is faster
and more accurate than the existing gradient estimators for these distributions.

1

Introduction

Pathwise gradient estimators are a core tool for stochastic estimation in machine learning and
statistics [12, 15, 26, 42, 51]. In machine learning, we now commonly introduce these estimators
using the “reparameterization trick”, in which we replace a probability distribution with an equivalent
parameterization of it, using a deterministic and differentiable transformation of some fixed base
distribution. This reparameterization is a powerful tool for learning because it makes backpropagation
possible in computation graphs with certain types of continuous random variables, e.g. with Normal,
Logistic, or Concrete distributions [23, 30]. Many of the recent advances in machine learning were
made possible by this ability to backpropagate through stochastic nodes. They include variational
autoenecoders (VAEs), automatic variational inference [26, 28, 42], Bayesian learning in neural
networks [7, 14], and principled regularization in deep networks [13, 34].
The reparameterization trick is easily used with distributions that have location-scale parameterizations or tractable inverse cumulative distribution functions (CDFs), or are expressible as deterministic
transformations of such distributions. These seemingly modest requirements are still fairly restrictive
as they preclude a number of standard distributions, such as truncated, mixture, Gamma, Beta,
Dirichlet, or von Mises, from being used with reparameterization gradients. This paper provides a
general tool for reparameterization in these important cases.
The limited applicability of reparameterization has often been addressed by using a different class
of gradient estimators, the score-function estimators [12, 16, 53]. While being more general, they
typically result in high-variance gradients which require problem-specific variance reduction techniques to be practical. Generalized reparameterizations involve combining the reparameterization
and score-function estimators [36, 44]. Another approach is to approximate the intractable derivative
of the inverse CDF [27].
Following Graves [17], we use implicit differentiation to differentiate the CDF rather than its inverse.
While the method of Graves [17] is only practical for distributions with analytically tractable CDFs
and has been used solely with mixture distributions, we leverage automatic differentiation to handle
distributions with numerically tractable CDFs, such as Gamma and von Mises. We review the
standard reparameterization trick in Section 2 and then make the following contributions:
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

