Coordinate Descent with Bandit Sampling
Farnood Salehi1

Patrick Thiran2

L. Elisa Celis3
School of Computer and Communication Sciences
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
firstname.lastname@epfl.ch

1,2,3

Abstract
Coordinate descent methods usually minimize a cost function by updating a random
decision variable (corresponding to one coordinate) at a time. Ideally, we would
update the decision variable that yields the largest decrease in the cost function.
However, finding this coordinate would require checking all of them, which would
effectively negate the improvement in computational tractability that coordinate
descent is intended to afford. To address this, we propose a new adaptive method
for selecting a coordinate. First, we find a lower bound on the amount the cost
function decreases when a coordinate is updated. We then use a multi-armed
bandit algorithm to learn which coordinates result in the largest lower bound by
interleaving this learning with conventional coordinate descent updates except
that the coordinate is selected proportionately to the expected decrease. We show
that our approach improves the convergence of coordinate descent methods both
theoretically and experimentally.

1

Introduction

Most supervised learning algorithms minimize an empirical risk cost function over a dataset. Designing fast optimization algorithms for these cost functions is crucial, especially as the size of datasets
continues to increase. (Regularized) empirical risk cost functions can often be written as
F (x) = f (Ax) +

d
X

gi (xi ),

(1)

i=1

where f (·) : Rn ! R is a smooth convex function, d is the number of decision variables (coordinates) on which the cost function is minimized, which are gathered in vector x 2 Rd , gi (·) : R ! R
are convex functions for all i 2 [d], and A 2 Rn⇥d is the data matrix. As a running example, consider
Lasso: if Y 2 Rn are the labels, f (Ax) = 1/2nkY
Axk2 , where k · k stands for the Euclidean
norm, and gi (xi ) = |xi |. When Lasso is minimized, d is the number of features, whereas when the
dual of Lasso is minimized, d is the number of datapoints.
The gradient descent method is widely used to minimize (1). However, computing the gradient of the
cost function F (·) can be computationally prohibitive. To bypass this problem, two approaches have
been developed: (i) Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) selects one datapoint to compute an unbiased
estimator for the gradient at each time step, and (ii) Coordinate Descent (CD) selects one coordinate
to optimize over at each time step. In this paper, we focus on improving the latter technique.
When CD was first introduced, algorithms did not differentiate between coordinates; each coordinate
i 2 [d] was selected uniformly at random at each time step (see, e.g., [19, 20]). However, recent
works (see, e.g., [10, 24, 15]) have shown that exploiting the structure of the data and sampling the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

