Regularizing by the Variance of the
Activations’ Sample-Variances

1

Etai Littwin1 Lior Wolf 12
Tel Aviv University 2 Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Normalization techniques play an important role in supporting efficient and often
more effective training of deep neural networks. While conventional methods explicitly normalize the activations, we suggest to add a loss term instead. This new
loss term encourages the variance of the activations to be stable and not vary from
one random mini-batch to the next. As we prove, this encourages the activations
to be distributed around a few distinct modes. We also show that if the inputs
are from a mixture of two Gaussians, the new loss would either join the two together, or separate between them optimally in the LDA sense, depending on the
prior probabilities. Finally, we are able to link the new regularization term to the
batchnorm method, which provides it with a regularization perspective. Our experiments demonstrate an improvement in accuracy over the batchnorm technique
for both CNNs and fully connected networks.

1

Introduction

We propose a novel regularization technique that is applied before the activation of all neurons in the
neural network. The new regularization term encourages the distribution of the individual activations
to have a few distinct modes. This property is achieved implicitly by computing the variance of the
activation of each neuron in each minibatch and by penalizing for variations of this variance, i.e.,
we encourage the variances to be the same across the mini-batches.
We provide a theoretical link between the variance-based regularization term and the resulting
peaked activation distributions, which we also observe experimentally, see Fig. 1. In addition, we
also provide experimental evidence that the new term leads to improved accuracy and can replace,
during training, normalization techniques such as the batch-norm technique.
The link between the new regularization term and batch-norm is further explored theoretically. A
distribution with few modes would lead to more stable batches and, for example, the representation
of a given sample would not vary along different batches. In other words, it is desirable that a
sample, if repeated twice in multiple batches, would produce the same network activations postnormalization. This is an indirect way in which batchnorm benefits from few-modes. In our method
it is encouraged more explicitly.
The new regularization term is adaptive, in the sense that it can lead to a few distinct outcomes.
When applied to a mixture of two Gaussians, the regularization leads, in an unsupervised way, to
one of two possible projections: either the LDA projection that maximally separates between the
two Gaussians, or the orthogonal projection that is least sensitive to their differences.
Interestingly, the amount of variance in each activation is controlled by a parameter β. In order to
avoid searching over a wide range of hyper-parameters, we optimize for this term during training
and allow each neuron to adapt to a different level of variance.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

