On preserving non-discrimination when combining
expert advice

Avrim Blum
TTI-Chicago
avrim@ttic.edu

Suriya Gunasekar
TTI-Chicago
suriya@ttic.edu

Thodoris Lykouris
Cornell University
teddlyk@cs.cornell.edu

Nathan Srebro
TTI-Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We study the interplay between sequential decision making and avoiding discrimination against protected groups, when examples arrive online and do not follow
distributional assumptions. We consider the most basic extension of classical online
learning: Given a class of predictors that are individually non-discriminatory with
respect to a particular metric, how can we combine them to perform as well as the
best predictor, while preserving non-discrimination? Surprisingly we show that this
task is unachievable for the prevalent notion of equalized odds that requires equal
false negative rates and equal false positive rates across groups. On the positive
side, for another notion of non-discrimination, equalized error rates, we show that
running separate instances of the classical multiplicative weights algorithm for
each group achieves this guarantee. Interestingly, even for this notion, we show
that algorithms with stronger performance guarantees than multiplicative weights
cannot preserve non-discrimination.

1

Introduction

The emergence of machine learning in the last decade has given rise to an important debate regarding
the ethical and societal responsibility of its offspring. Machine learning has provided a universal
toolbox enhancing the decision making in many disciplines from advertising and recommender
systems to education and criminal justice. Unfortunately, both the data and their processing can be
biased against specific population groups (even inadvertently) in every single step of the process [4].
This has generated societal and policy interest in understanding the sources of this discrimination and
interdisciplinary research has attempted to mitigate its shortcomings.
Discrimination is commonly an issue in applications where decisions need to be made sequentially.
The most prominent such application is online advertising where platforms need to sequentially
select which ad to display in response to particular query searches. This process can introduce
discrimination against protected groups in many ways such as filtering particular alternatives [12, 2]
and reinforcing existing stereotypes through search results [38, 25]. Another canonical example
of sequential decision making is medical trials where underexploration on female groups often
leads to significantly worse treatments for them [31]. Similar issues occur in image classification
as stressed by “gender shades” [7]. The reverse (overexploration in minority populations) can also
cause concerns especially if conducted in a non-transparent fashion [5].
In these sequential settings, the assumption that data are i.i.d. is often violated. Online advertising,
recommender systems, medical trials, image classification, loan decisions, criminal recidivism all
require decisions to be made sequentially. The corresponding labels are not identical across time and
can be affected by the economy, recent events, etc. Similarly labels are also not independent across
rounds – if a bank offers a loan then this decision can affect whether the loanee or their environment
will be able to repay future loans thereby affecting future labels as discussed by Liu et al. [32]. As a
result, it is important to understand the effect of this adaptivity on non-discrimination.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

