How to Start Training:
The Effect of Initialization and Architecture
Boris Hanin
Department of Mathematics
Texas A& M University
College Station, TX, USA
bhanin@math.tamu.edu

David Rolnick
Department of Mathematics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, USA
drolnick@mit.edu

Abstract
We identify and study two common failure modes for early training in deep ReLU
nets. For each, we give a rigorous proof of when it occurs and how to avoid it, for
fully connected, convolutional, and residual architectures. We show that the first
failure mode, exploding or vanishing mean activation length, can be avoided by
initializing weights from a symmetric distribution with variance 2/fan-in and, for
ResNets, by correctly scaling the residual modules. We prove that the second failure
mode, exponentially large variance of activation length, never occurs in residual
nets once the first failure mode is avoided. In contrast, for fully connected nets, we
prove that this failure mode can happen and is avoided by keeping constant the sum
of the reciprocals of layer widths. We demonstrate empirically the effectiveness
of our theoretical results in predicting when networks are able to start training.
In particular, we note that many popular initializations fail our criteria, whereas
correct initialization and architecture allows much deeper networks to be trained.

1

Introduction

Despite the growing number of practical uses for deep learning, training deep neural networks remains
a challenge. Among the many possible obstacles to training, it is natural to distinguish two kinds:
problems that prevent a given neural network from ever achieving better-than-chance performance
and problems that have to do with later stages of training, such as escaping flat regions and saddle
points [12, 27], reaching spurious local minima [5, 15], and overfitting [2, 34]. This paper focuses
specifically on two failure modes related to the first kind of difficulty:
(FM1): The mean length scale in the final layer increases/decreases exponentially with the depth.
(FM2): The empirical variance of length scales across layers grows exponentially with the depth.
Our main contributions and conclusions are:
• The mean and variance of activations in a neural network are both important in determining whether training begins. If both failure modes FM1 and FM2 are avoided, then
a deeper network need not take longer to start training than a shallower network.
• FM1 is dependent on weight initialization. Initializing weights with the correct variance
(in fully connected and convolutional networks) and correctly weighting residual modules
(in residual networks) prevents the mean size of activations from becoming exponentially
large or small as a function of the depth, allowing training to start for deeper architectures.
• For fully connected and convolutional networks, FM2 is dependent on architecture.
Wider layers prevent FM2, again allowing training to start for deeper architectures. In the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

