Differential Privacy for Growing Databases
Rachel Cummings⇤
Georgia Institute of Technology
rachelc@gatech.edu

Sara Krehbiel⇤
University of Richmond
krehbiel@richmond.edu

Kevin A. Lai⇤
Georgia Institute of Technology
kevinlai@gatech.edu

Uthaipon Tantipongpipat⇤
Georgia Institute of Technology
tao@gatech.edu

Abstract
The large majority of differentially private algorithms focus on the static setting,
where queries are made on an unchanging database. This is unsuitable for the
myriad applications involving databases that grow over time. To address this gap
in the literature, we consider the dynamic setting, in which new data arrive over
time. Previous results in this setting have been limited to answering a single nonadaptive query repeatedly as the database grows [DNPR10, CSS11]. In contrast, we
provide tools for richer and more adaptive analysis of growing databases. Our first
contribution is a novel modification of the private multiplicative weights algorithm
of [HR10], which provides accurate analysis of exponentially many adaptive linear
queries (an expressive query class including all counting queries) for a static
database. Our modification maintains the accuracy guarantee of the static setting
even as the database grows without bound. Our second contribution is a set of
general results which show that many other private and accurate algorithms can
be immediately extended to the dynamic setting by rerunning them at appropriate
points of data growth with minimal loss of accuracy, even when data growth is
unbounded.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy is a well-studied framework for data privacy. First defined by [DMNS06],
differential privacy gives a mathematically rigorous worst-case bound on the maximum amount of
information that can be learned about any one individual’s data from the output of an algorithm.
The theoretical computer science community has been prolific in designing differentially private
algorithms that provide accuracy guarantees for a wide variety of machine learning problems (see
[JLE14] for a survey). Differentially private algorithms have also begun to be implemented in practice
by major organizations such as Apple, Google, Uber, and the United Status Census Bureau.
The large majority of work in differential privacy focuses on the static setting, in which adaptive
or non-adaptive queries are made on an unchanging database. However, this is unsuitable for the
myriad applications involving databases that grow over time. For example, a hospital may want to
publish updated statistics on its growing database of patients, or a company may want to maintain an
up-to-date classifier for its expanding user base. To harness the value of growing databases and keep
up with data analysis needs, guarantees of private machine learning algorithms and other statistical
tools must apply not just to fixed databases but also to dynamic databases.
To address this gap in the literature, we consider the dynamic setting, in which new data arrive over
time. Previous results in this setting have been limited to answering a single non-adaptive query
⇤

Author order is alphabetical and all authors contributed equally.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

