Data center cooling using model-predictive control

Nevena Lazic, Tyler Lu, Craig Boutilier, Moonkyung Ryu
Google Research
{nevena, tylerlu, cboutilier, mkryu}@google.com
Eehern Wong, Binz Roy, Greg Imwalle
Google Cloud
{ejwong, binzroy, gregi}@google.com

Abstract
Despite the impressive recent advances in reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms,
their deployment to real-world physical systems is often complicated by unexpected
events, limited data, and the potential for expensive failures. In this paper, we
describe an application of RL “in the wild” to the task of regulating temperatures
and airflow inside a large-scale data center (DC). Adopting a data-driven, modelbased approach, we demonstrate that an RL agent with little prior knowledge is
able to effectively and safely regulate conditions on a server floor after just a few
hours of exploration, while improving operational efficiency relative to existing
PID controllers.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen considerable research advances in reinforcement learning (RL), with algorithms achieving impressive performance on game playing and simple robotic tasks [24, 29, 27].
However, applying RL to the control of real-world physical systems is complicated by unexpected
events, safety constraints, limited observations and the potential for expensive or even catastrophic
failures. In this paper, we describe an application of RL to the task of data center (DC) cooling.
DC cooling is a test bed that is well-suited for RL deployment because it involves control of a complex, large-scale dynamical system, non-trivial safety constraints and the potential for considerable
improvements in energy efficiency.
Cooling is a critical part of DC infrastructure, since multiple servers operating in close proximity
produce a considerable amount of heat and high temperatures may lead to lower IT performance
or equipment damage. There has been considerable progress in improving cooling efficiency, and
best-practice physical designs are now commonplace in large-scale DCs [7]. However, on the
software side, designing resource-efficient control strategies is still quite challenging, due to complex
interactions between multiple non-linear mechanical and electrical systems. Most existing controllers
tend to be fairly simple, somewhat conservative, and hand-tuned to specific equipment architectures,
layouts, and configurations. This leaves potential for efficiency improvement and automation using
more adaptive, data-driven techniques.
As the number of DCs increases with the adoption of cloud-based services, data growth, and hardware
affordability, power management is becoming an important challenge in scaling up. In 2014, DCs
accounted for about 1.8% of the total power usage in the U.S. and about 626 billion liters of water
were consumed by DC operations [28]. There has been increased pressure to improve operational
efficiency due to rising energy costs and environmental concerns. This includes cooling, which
constitutes a non-trivial part of the DC power overhead.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

