Adversarially Robust Generalization
Requires More Data

Ludwig Schmidt
UC Berkeley
ludwig@berkeley.edu

Shibani Santurkar
MIT
shibani@mit.edu

Kunal Talwar
Google Brain
kunal@google.com

Dimitris Tsipras
MIT
tsipras@mit.edu

Aleksander M ˛
adry
MIT
madry@mit.edu

Abstract
Machine learning models are often susceptible to adversarial perturbations of their
inputs. Even small perturbations can cause state-of-the-art classifiers with high
“standard” accuracy to produce an incorrect prediction with high confidence. To
better understand this phenomenon, we study adversarially robust learning from the
viewpoint of generalization. We show that already in a simple natural data model,
the sample complexity of robust learning can be significantly larger than that of
“standard” learning. This gap is information theoretic and holds irrespective of the
training algorithm or the model family. We complement our theoretical results with
experiments on popular image classification datasets and show that a similar gap
exists here as well. We postulate that the difficulty of training robust classifiers
stems, at least partially, from this inherently larger sample complexity.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning models achieve high accuracy on a broad range of datasets, yet can easily
be misled by small perturbations of their input. While such perturbations are often simple noise to a
human or even imperceptible, they cause state-of-the-art models to misclassify their input with high
confidence. This phenomenon has first been studied in the context of secure machine learning for
spam filters and malware classification [7, 16, 35]. More recently, researchers have demonstrated
the phenomenon under the name of adversarial examples in image classification [21, 51], question
answering [28], voice recognition [12, 13, 49, 62], and other domains (for instance, see [2, 4, 14,
22, 25, 26, 32, 60]). Overall, the existence of such adversarial examples raises concerns about the
robustness of current classifiers. As we increasingly deploy machine learning systems in safety- and
security-critical environments, it is crucial to understand the robustness properties of our models in
more detail.
A growing body of work is exploring this robustness question from the security perspective by
proposing attacks (methods for crafting adversarial examples) and defenses (methods for making
classifiers robust to such perturbations). Often, the focus is on deep neural networks, e.g., see [11, 24,
36, 37, 41, 47, 53, 59]. While there has been success with robust classifiers on simple datasets [31,
36, 44, 48], more complicated datasets still exhibit a large gap between “standard” and robust
accuracy [3, 11]. An implicit assumption underlying most of this work is that the same training
dataset that enables good standard accuracy also suffices to train a robust model. However, it is
unclear if this assumption is valid.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

