A Deep Bayesian Policy Reuse Approach Against
Non-Stationary Agents

Yan Zheng1 ,

Zhaopeng Meng1 , Jianye Hao1∗, Zongzhang Zhang2 ,
Tianpei Yang1 , Changjie Fan3
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China
3
NetEase Fuxi Lab, NetEase, Inc., Hangzhou, China
{yanzheng, mengzp, jianye.hao}@tju.edu.cn, zzzhang@suda.edu.cn
tpyang@tju.edu.cn, fanchangjie@netease.com

Abstract
In multiagent domains, coping with non-stationary agents that change behaviors
from time to time is a challenging problem, where an agent is usually required
to be able to quickly detect the other agent’s policy during online interaction,
and then adapt its own policy accordingly. This paper studies efficient policy
detecting and reusing techniques when playing against non-stationary agents in
Markov games. We propose a new deep BPR+ algorithm by extending the recent
BPR+ algorithm with a neural network as the value-function approximator. To
detect policy accurately, we propose the rectified belief model taking advantage of
the opponent model to infer the other agent’s policy from reward signals and its
behaviors. Instead of directly storing individual policies as BPR+, we introduce
distilled policy network that serves as the policy library in BPR+, using policy
distillation to achieve efficient online policy learning and reuse. Deep BPR+ inherits
all the advantages of BPR+ and empirically shows better performance in terms
of detection accuracy, cumulative rewards and speed of convergence compared to
existing algorithms in complex Markov games with raw visual inputs.

1

Introduction

With recent advance of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) techniques [17, 18, 22, 24, 25], a large
number of DRL algorithms have been successfully applied to solve challenging problems such as
game playing [18], robotics [14] and recommendation [26]. Yet, most of these algorithms focus on
single-agent domains, without explicitly considering the coexisting agents in the environments.
There also exist many application scenarios involving multiagent interactions, commonly known
as multiagent systems (MAS). A few multiagent DRL algorithms [5, 19, 23] have been proposed
that focus on directly searching an optimal policy, without explicitly considering coexisting agent’s
behaviors. However, in MAS, it is critically essential for agents to learn to cope with each other
by taking the other agent’s behaviors into account [2, 6, 13, 15, 16]. But none of the these works
explicitly categorizes the other agent’s policy. Without such an explication, a learned policy cannot
be directly exploited to achieve higher cumulative reward, a.k.a., return.
In this work, we study the problem of playing against non-stationary agents, the second most
sophisticated problem categorized in [9], by explicitly identifying their categorized policies, and then
reusing learned strategies against them. When an agent uses an unknown policy, the optimal policy
against it can be efficiently learned using a starting policy built with a distilled policy network. The
∗

Corresponding author: Jianye Hao.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

