Practical Methods for Graph Two-Sample Testing

Debarghya Ghoshdastidar
Department of Computer Science
University of Tübingen
ghoshdas@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de

Ulrike von Luxburg
Department of Computer Science
University of Tübingen
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
luxburg@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Hypothesis testing for graphs has been an important tool in applied research fields
for more than two decades, and still remains a challenging problem as one often
needs to draw inference from few replicates of large graphs. Recent studies in
statistics and learning theory have provided some theoretical insights about such
high-dimensional graph testing problems, but the practicality of the developed
theoretical methods remains an open question.
In this paper, we consider the problem of two-sample testing of large graphs. We
demonstrate the practical merits and limitations of existing theoretical tests and
their bootstrapped variants. We also propose two new tests based on asymptotic
distributions. We show that these tests are computationally less expensive and, in
some cases, more reliable than the existing methods.

1

Introduction

Hypothesis testing is one of the most commonly encountered statistical problems that naturally arises
in nearly all scientific disciplines. With the widespread use of networks in bioinformatics, social
sciences and other fields since the turn of the century, it was obvious that the hypothesis testing of
graphs would soon become a key statistical tool in studies based on network analysis. The problem
of testing for differences in networks arises quite naturally in various situations. For instance, Bassett
et al. (2008) study the differences in anatomical brain networks of schizophrenic patients and healthy
individuals, whereas Zhang et al. (2009) test for statistically significant topological changes in gene
regulatory networks arising from two different treatments of breast cancer. As Clarke et al. (2008)
and Hyduke et al. (2013) point out, the statistical challenge associated with network testing is the
curse of dimensionality as one needs to test large graphs based on few independent samples. Ginestet
et al. (2014) show that complications can also arise due to the widespread use of multiple testing
principles that rely on performing independent tests for every edge.
Although network analysis has been a primary research topic in statistics and machine learning,
theoretical developments related to testing random graphs have been rather limited until recent times.
Property testing of graphs has been well studied in computer science (Goldreich et al., 1998), but
probably the earliest instances of the theory of random graph testing are the works on community
detection, which use hypothesis testing to detect if a network has planted communities or to determine
the number of communities in a block model (Arias-Castro and Verzelen, 2014, Bickel and Sarkar,
2016, Lei, 2016). In the present work, we are interested in the more general and practically important
problem of two-sample testing: Given two populations of random graphs, decide whether both
populations are generated from the same distribution or not. While there have been machine learning
approaches to quantify similarities between graphs for the purpose of classification, clustering
etc. (Borgwardt et al., 2005, Shervashidze et al., 2011), the use of graph distances for the purpose of
hypothesis testing is more recent (Ginestet et al., 2017). Most approaches for graph testing based
on classical two-sample tests are applicable in the relatively low-dimensional setting, where the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

