Learning Attentional Communication for
Multi-Agent Cooperation
Jiechuan Jiang
Peking University
jiechuan.jiang@pku.edu.cn

Zongqing Lu⇤
Peking University
zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Communication could potentially be an effective way for multi-agent cooperation.
However, information sharing among all agents or in predefined communication
architectures that existing methods adopt can be problematic. When there is a
large number of agents, agents cannot differentiate valuable information that helps
cooperative decision making from globally shared information. Therefore, communication barely helps, and could even impair the learning of multi-agent cooperation.
Predefined communication architectures, on the other hand, restrict communication
among agents and thus restrain potential cooperation. To tackle these difficulties,
in this paper, we propose an attentional communication model that learns when
communication is needed and how to integrate shared information for cooperative
decision making. Our model leads to efficient and effective communication for
large-scale multi-agent cooperation. Empirically, we show the strength of our
model in a variety of cooperative scenarios, where agents are able to develop more
coordinated and sophisticated strategies than existing methods.

1

Introduction

Biologically, communication is closely related to and probably originated from cooperation. For
example, vervet monkeys can make different vocalizations to warn other members of the group
about different predators [3]. Similarly, communication can be crucially important in multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) for cooperation, especially for the scenarios where a large number
of agents work in a collaborative way, such as autonomous vehicles planning [1], smart grid control
[20], and multi-robot control [15].
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in a series of challenging
problems, such as game playing [17, 22, 9] and robotics [13, 12, 6]. MARL can be simply seen
as independent RL, where each learner treats the other agents as part of its environment. However,
the strategies of other agents are uncertain and changing as training progresses, so the environment
becomes unstable from the perspective of any individual agent and thus it is hard for agents to
collaborate. Moreover, policies learned using independent RL can easily overfit to the other agents’
policies [10].
We argue one of the keys to solve this problem is communication, which could enhance strategy
coordination. There are several approaches for learning communication in MARL including DIAL [4]
, CommNet [23], BiCNet [19], and Master-Slave [8]. However, information sharing among all agents
or in predefined communication architectures these methods adopt can be problematic. When there
is a large number of agents, agents cannot differentiate valuable information that helps cooperative
decision making from globally shared information, and hence communication barely helps and could
even jeopardize the learning of cooperation. Moreover, in real-world applications, it is costly that all
⇤

Corresponding author

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

