Efficient nonmyopic batch active search

Shali Jiang
CSE, WUSTL
St. Louis, MO 63130
jiang.s@wustl.edu

Gustavo Malkomes
CSE, WUSTL
St. Louis, MO 63130
luizgustavo@wustl.edu

Benjamin Moseley
Tepper School of Business, CMU and
Relational AI
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
moseleyb@andrew.cmu.edu

Matthew Abbott
CSE, WUSTL
St. Louis, MO 63130
mbabbott@wustl.edu
Roman Garnett
CSE, WUSTL
St. Louis, MO 63130
garnett@wustl.edu

Abstract
Active search is a learning paradigm for actively identifying as many members of
a given class as possible. A critical target scenario is high-throughput screening
for scientific discovery, such as drug or materials discovery. In these settings,
specialized instruments can often evaluate multiple points simultaneously; however,
all existing work on active search focuses on sequential acquisition. We bridge this
gap, addressing batch active search from both the theoretical and practical perspective. We first derive the Bayesian optimal policy for this problem, then prove a
lower bound on the performance gap between sequential and batch optimal policies:
the “cost of parallelization.” We also propose novel, efficient batch policies inspired
by state-of-the-art sequential policies, and develop an aggressive pruning technique
that can dramatically speed up computation. We conduct thorough experiments on
data from three application domains: a citation network, material science, and drug
discovery, testing all proposed policies with a wide range of batch sizes. Our results
demonstrate that the empirical performance gap matches our theoretical bound,
that nonmyopic policies usually significantly outperform myopic alternatives, and
that diversity is an important consideration for batch policy design.

1

Introduction

In active search (AS), we seek to sequentially inspect data to discover as many members of a desired
class as possible with a limited budget. Formally, suppose we are given a finite domain of n elements
X = {xi }ni=1 , among which there is a rare, valuable subset R ⊂ X . We call the members of this class
targets or positive items. The identities of the targets are unknown a priori, but can be determined by
querying an expensive oracle that can compute y = 1{x ∈ R} for any x ∈ X . Given a budget T on
the number of queries we can provide the oracle, we wish to design a policy that
P sequentially queries
items {xt } = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xT } to maximize the number of targets identified, yt . Many real-world
problems can be naturally posed in terms of active search; drug discovery [7, 17, 18], fraud detection,
and product recommendation [21] are a few examples.
Previous work [6] has developed Bayesian optimal policies for active search with a natural utility
function. Not surprisingly, this policy is computationally intractable, requiring cost that grows
exponentially with the horizon. Therefore the optimal policy must be approximated in practice.
Several approximation schemes for active search have been proposed and studied, including simple
myopic lookahead approximations [6]. Jiang et al. [12] recently proposed an efficient, nonmyopic
search (ENS) policy, and demonstrated this policy yields remarkable empirical performance on search
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

