Learning with SGD and Random Features
Luigi Carratino⇤
University of Genoa,
Genoa, Italy

Alessandro Rudi
INRIA – Sierra Project-team,
École Normale Supérieure, Paris

Lorenzo Rosasco
University of Genoa,
LCSL – IIT & MIT

Abstract
Sketching and stochastic gradient methods are arguably the most common techniques to derive efficient large scale learning algorithms. In this paper, we investigate their application in the context of nonparametric statistical learning. More
precisely, we study the estimator defined by stochastic gradient with mini batches
and random features. The latter can be seen as form of nonlinear sketching and used
to define approximate kernel methods. The considered estimator is not explicitly
penalized/constrained and regularization is implicit. Indeed, our study highlights
how different parameters, such as number of features, iterations, step-size and
mini-batch size control the learning properties of the solutions. We do this by
deriving optimal finite sample bounds, under standard assumptions. The obtained
results are corroborated and illustrated by numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

The interplay between statistical and computational performances is key for modern machine learning
algorithms [1]. On the one hand, the ultimate goal is to achieve the best possible prediction error. On
the other hand, budgeted computational resources need be factored in, while designing algorithms.
Indeed, time and especially memory requirements are unavoidable constraints, especially in largescale problems.
In this view, stochastic gradient methods [2] and sketching techniques [3] have emerged as fundamental algorithmic tools. Stochastic gradient methods allow to process data points individually, or
in small batches, keeping good convergence rates, while reducing computational complexity [4].
Sketching techniques allow to reduce data-dimensionality, hence memory requirements, by random
projections [3]. Combining the benefits of both methods is tempting and indeed it has attracted much
attention, see [5] and references therein.
In this paper, we investigate these ideas for nonparametric learning. Within a least squares framework, we consider an estimator defined by mini-batched stochastic gradients and random features
[6]. The latter are typically defined by nonlinear sketching: random projections followed by a
component-wise nonlinearity [3]. They can be seen as shallow networks with random weights [7],
but also as approximate kernel methods [8]. Indeed, random features provide a standard approach
to overcome the memory bottleneck that prevents large-scale applications of kernel methods. The
theory of reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces [9] provides a rigorous mathematical framework to study
the properties of stochastic gradient method with random features. The approach we consider is not
based on penalizations or explicit constraints; regularization is implicit and controlled by different
parameters. In particular, our analysis shows how the number of random features, iterations, step-size
and mini-batch size control the stability and learning properties of the solution. By deriving finite
sample bounds, we investigate how optimal learning rates can be achieved with different parameter
choices. In particular, we show that similarly to ridge regression [10], a number
of random features
p
proportional to the square root of the number of samples suffices for O(1/ n) error bounds.
⇤

Email: luigi.carratino@dibris.unige.it

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

