Policy-Conditioned Uncertainty Sets for
Robust Markov Decision Processes
Andrea Tirinzoni
Politecnico di Milano

Xiangli Chen
Amazon Robotics

andrea.tirinzoni@polimi.it

cxiangli@amazon.com

Marek Petrik
University of New Hampshire

Brian D. Ziebart
University of Illinois at Chicago

mpetrik@cs.unh.edu

bziebart@uic.edu

Abstract
What policy should be employed in a Markov decision process with uncertain
parameters? Robust optimization’s answer to this question is to use rectangular
uncertainty sets, which independently reflect available knowledge about each state,
and then to obtain a decision policy that maximizes the expected reward for the
worst-case decision process parameters from these uncertainty sets. While this
rectangularity is convenient computationally and leads to tractable solutions, it
often produces policies that are too conservative in practice, and does not facilitate
knowledge transfer between portions of the state space or across related decision
processes. In this work, we propose non-rectangular uncertainty sets that bound
marginal moments of state-action features defined over entire trajectories through
a decision process. This enables generalization to different portions of the state
space while retaining appropriate uncertainty of the decision process. We develop
algorithms for solving the resulting robust decision problems, which reduce to
finding an optimal policy for a mixture of decision processes, and demonstrate the
benefits of our approach experimentally.

1

Introduction

Policies with high expected reward are often desired for uncertain decision processes with which little
experience exists. Specifically, we consider the setting in which only a limited number of trajectories
from a sub-optimal control policy through a decision process are available. Robust control approaches
for this task [1, 2, 3, 4] define uncertainty sets for the decision process based on the limited outcome
samples and seek the policy that maximizes this expected reward for the worst possible choice of
decision process parameters in these sets.
When the uncertainty sets relating to different decision process states are jointly constrained in
seemingly natural ways, the robust control problem becomes NP-hard (e.g., [5, 6]). To avoid these
computationally intractable robust control problems, uncertainty sets have often been independently
constructed for parameters associated with a particular state-action pair or particular state—s, arectangularity or s-rectangularity [7, 8, 4], respectively. Unfortunately, independently assuming the
worst-case in every encountered state is often too conservative in practice to be useful [9].
Leveraging ideas from distributionally robust optimization [10, 11, 12], we construct policyconditioned marginal uncertainty sets for robustly learning a decision policy that optimizes the
reward given trajectory samples produced by a sub-optimal policy. State transition dynamics under
our formulation are estimated based on two competing objectives. First, the estimated dynamics must
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

