Attacks Meet Interpretability:
Attribute-steered Detection of Adversarial Samples
Guanhong Tao∗, Shiqing Ma∗, Yingqi Liu, Xiangyu Zhang
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
{taog, ma229, liu1751, xyzhang}@cs.purdue.edu

Abstract
Adversarial sample attacks perturb benign inputs to induce DNN misbehaviors.
Recent research has demonstrated the widespread presence and the devastating
consequences of such attacks. Existing defense techniques either assume prior
knowledge of specific attacks or may not work well on complex models due to
their underlying assumptions. We argue that adversarial sample attacks are deeply
entangled with interpretability of DNN models: while classification results on
benign inputs can be reasoned based on the human perceptible features/attributes,
results on adversarial samples can hardly be explained. Therefore, we propose a
novel adversarial sample detection technique for face recognition models, based on
interpretability. It features a novel bi-directional correspondence inference between
attributes and internal neurons to identify neurons critical for individual attributes.
The activation values of critical neurons are enhanced to amplify the reasoning
part of the computation and the values of other neurons are weakened to suppress
the uninterpretable part. The classification results after such transformation are
compared with those of the original model to detect adversaries. Results show that
our technique can achieve 94% detection accuracy for 7 different kinds of attacks
with 9.91% false positives on benign inputs. In contrast, a state-of-the-art feature
squeezing technique can only achieve 55% accuracy with 23.3% false positives.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success in a wide range of applications such as
natural language processing [1], scene recognition [2], objection detection [3], anomaly detection
[4], etc. Despite their success, the wide adoption of DNNs in real world missions is hindered by
the security concerns of DNNs. It was shown in [5] that slight imperceptible perturbations are
capable of causing incorrect behaviors of DNNs. Since then, various attacks on DNNs have been
demonstrated [6–9]. Detailed discussion of these attacks can be found in §2. The consequences could
be devastating, e.g., an adversary could use a crafted road sign to divert an auto-driving car to go
offtrack [10, 11]; a human uninterpretable picture may fool a face ID system to unlock a smart device.
Existing defense techniques either harden a DNN model so that it becomes less vulnerable to
adversarial samples [5, 6, 12–14] or detect such samples during operation [15–17]. However, many
these techniques work by additionally training on adversarial samples [5, 6, 12], and hence require
prior knowledge of possible attacks. A state-of-the-art detection technique, feature squeezing [18],
reduces the feature space (e.g., by reducing color depth and smoothing images) so that the features
that adversaries rely on are corrupted. However, according to our experiment in §4.2, since the
technique may squeeze features that the normal functionalities of a DNN depend on, it leads to
degradation of accuracy on both detecting adversarial samples and classifying benign inputs.
Our hypothesis is that adversarial sample attacks are deeply entangled with interpretability of DNN
classification outputs. Specifically, in a fully connected network, all neurons are directly/transitively
influencing the final output. Many neurons denote abstract features/attributes that are difficult for
humans to perceive. An adversarial sample hence achieves its goal by leveraging these neurons. As
∗

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

