Horizon-Independent Minimax Linear Regression

Alan Malek
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA amalek@mit.edu
Peter L. Bartlett
Department of EECS and Statistics
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1776, USA
bartlett@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We consider online linear regression: at each round, an adversary reveals a covariate
vector, the learner predicts a real value, the adversary reveals a label, and the learner
suffers the squared prediction error. The aim is to minimize the difference between
the cumulative loss and that of the linear predictor that is best in hindsight. Previous
work demonstrated that the minimax optimal strategy is easy to compute recursively
from the end of the game; this requires the entire sequence of covariate vectors in
advance. We show that, once provided with a measure of the scale of the problem,
we can invert the recursion and play the minimax strategy without knowing the
future covariates. Further, we show that this forward recursion remains optimal even
against adaptively chosen labels and covariates, provided that the adversary adheres
to a set of constraints that prevent misrepresentation of the scale of the problem.
This strategy is horizon-independent in that the regret and minimax strategies
depend on the size of the constraint set and not on the time-horizon, and hence it
incurs no more regret than the optimal strategy that knows in advance the number
of rounds of the game. We also provide an interpretation of the minimax algorithm
as a follow-the-regularized-leader strategy with a data-dependent regularizer and
obtain an explicit expression for the minimax regret.

1

Introduction

Linear regression is a fundamental prediction problem in machine learning and statistics. In this
paper, we study a sequential version: on round t, the adversary chooses and reveals a covariate vector
xt ∈ Rd , the learner makes a real-valued prediction ŷt , the adversary chooses and reveals the true
outcome yt ∈ R, and finally the learner is penalized by the square loss, (ŷt − yt )2 .
Since it is hopeless to guarantee a small loss (the adversary can always cause constant loss per round),
we instead aim to guarantee that we are able to predict almost as well as the best fixed linear predictor
in hindsight. Letting xts and yst denote xs , . . . , xt and ys , . . . , yt , respectively, define the regret of a
strategy that predicts ŷ1T as
RT ŷ1T , xT1 , y1T



:=

T
X
t=1

(ŷt − yt )2 − min

θ∈Rd

T
X
(θ> xt − yt )2 .
t=1

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

