Learning Optimal Reserve Price against Non-myopic
Bidders
Zhiyi Huang∗

Jinyan Liu

Xiangning Wang

Department of Computer Science
The University of Hong Kong
{zhiyi, jyliu, xnwang}@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning optimal reserve price in repeated auctions
against non-myopic bidders, who may bid strategically in order to gain in future
rounds even if the single-round auctions are truthful. Previous algorithms, e.g.,
empirical pricing, do not provide non-trivial regret rounds in this setting in general.
We introduce algorithms that obtain a small regret against non-myopic bidders
either when the market is large, i.e., no single bidder appears in more than a
small constant fraction of the rounds, or when the bidders are impatient, i.e.,
they discount future utility by some factor mildly bounded away from one. Our
approach carefully controls what information is revealed to each bidder, and builds
on techniques from differentially private online learning as well as the recent line
of works on jointly differentially private algorithms.

1

Introduction

The problem of designing revenue-optimal auctions based on data has drawn much attention in the
algorithmic game theory community lately. Various models have been studied, notably, the sample
complexity model [10, 13, 23, 32, 31, 36, 12, 18, 8] and the online learning model [7]. However,
these existing works all implicitly assume that bidders are myopic in the sense that they will faithfully
report their valuations as long as the mechanism used in each round is truthful, without considering
how their bids may affect 1) the choices of mechanisms and 2) the behaviors of other bidders in future
rounds in which they may also participate. What happens in the presence of non-myopic bidders?
Example. Suppose a seller has a fresh copy of the good for sale every day, where its value for
any bidder is bounded between 0 and 1. The seller sets a price at the beginning of each day.
Then, a bidder (say, randomly chosen from a large yet finite pool of potential bidders) arrives and
submits a bid: If the bid is higher than the price of the day, he gets the item and pays the price.
Further, suppose the seller adopts the solution proposed by the sample complexity literature and
decides to set the price at 0.5 on day 1, and in each of the following days to use the empirical
price, i.e., the best fixed price w.r.t. the bids in previous days.
If bidders are myopic, bidding truthfully is a dominant strategy since the mechanism on each day is
effectively posting a take-it-or-leave-it price. As a result, the seller will be able to converge to the
optimal fixed price w.r.t. to the pool of potential bidders.
If bidders are non-myopic, however, their strategies are more intriguing. A bidder may underbid
whenever the empirical price of the day (which is deterministic) is higher than his value, inducing
the same result of not winning in the current round but leads to lower future prices compared with
∗

Supported in part by an RGC grant HKU17257516E.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

