Escaping Saddle Points in Constrained Optimization
Aryan Mokhtari
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
aryanm@mit.edu

Asuman Ozdaglar
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
asuman@mit.edu

Ali Jadbabaie
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
jadbabai@mit.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of escaping from saddle points in smooth
nonconvex optimization problems subject to a convex set C. We propose a generic
framework that yields convergence to a second-order stationary point of the problem, if the convex set C is simple for a quadratic objective function. Specifically,
our results hold if one can find a ⇢-approximate solution of a quadratic program
subject to C in polynomial time, where ⇢ < 1 is a positive constant that depends
on the structure of the set C. Under this condition, we show that the sequence
of iterates generated by the proposed framework reaches an (✏, )-second order
stationary point (SOSP) in at most O(max{✏ 2 , ⇢ 3 3 }) iterations. We further
characterize the overall complexity of reaching an SOSP when the convex set C
can be written as a set of quadratic constraints and the objective function Hessian
has a specific structure over the convex set C. Finally, we extend our results to the
stochastic setting and characterize the number of stochastic gradient and Hessian
evaluations to reach an (✏, )-SOSP.

1

Introduction

There has been a recent revival of interest in non-convex optimization, due to obvious applications
in machine learning. While the modern history of the subject goes back six or seven decades, the
recent attention to the topic stems from new applications as well as availability of modern analytical
and computational tools, providing a new perspective on classical problems. Following this trend, in
this paper we focus on the problem of minimizing a smooth nonconvex function over a convex set as
follows:
minimize f (x),
subject to x 2 C,
(1)

where x 2 Rd is the decision variable, C ⇢ Rd is a closed convex set, and f : Rd ! R is a twice
continuously differentiable function over C. It is well known that finding a global minimum of
Problem (1) is hard. Equally well-known is the fact that for certain nonconvex problems, all local
minimizers are global. These include, for example, matrix completion [24], phase retrieval [42], and
dictionary learning [43]. For such problems, finding a global minimum of Problem (1) reduces to the
problem of finding one of its local minima.
Given the well-known hardness results in finding stationary points, recent focus has shifted in
characterizing approximate stationary points. When the objective function f is convex, finding an
✏-first-order stationary point is often sufficient since it leads to finding an approximate local (and
hence global) minimum. However, in the nonconvex setting, even when the problem is unconstrained,
i.e., C = Rd , convergence to a first-order stationary point (FOSP) is not enough as the critical point
to which convergence is established might be a saddle point. It is therefore natural to look at higher
order derivatives and search for a second-order stationary points. Indeed, under the assumption that
all the saddle points are strict (formally defined later), in both unconstrained and constrained settings,
convergence to a second-order stationary point (SOSP) implies convergence to a local minimum.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

