Neighbourhood Consensus Networks

Ignacio Rocco†

Mircea Cimpoi‡

Relja Arandjelović§

Tomas Pajdla‡
†

Inria

‡

CIIRC, CTU in Prague

Akihiko Torii∗

Josef Sivic†,‡
§

DeepMind

∗

Tokyo Institute of Technology

Abstract
We address the problem of finding reliable dense correspondences between a pair
of images. This is a challenging task due to strong appearance differences between
the corresponding scene elements and ambiguities generated by repetitive patterns.
The contributions of this work are threefold. First, inspired by the classic idea
of disambiguating feature matches using semi-local constraints, we develop an
end-to-end trainable convolutional neural network architecture that identifies sets
of spatially consistent matches by analyzing neighbourhood consensus patterns
in the 4D space of all possible correspondences between a pair of images without
the need for a global geometric model. Second, we demonstrate that the model
can be trained effectively from weak supervision in the form of matching and
non-matching image pairs without the need for costly manual annotation of point
to point correspondences. Third, we show the proposed neighbourhood consensus
network can be applied to a range of matching tasks including both category- and
instance-level matching, obtaining the state-of-the-art results on the PF Pascal
dataset and the InLoc indoor visual localization benchmark.

1

Introduction

Finding visual correspondences is one of the fundamental image understanding problems with applications in 3D reconstruction [2], visual localization [32, 42] or object recognition [21]. In recent
years, significant effort has gone into developing trainable image representations for finding correspondences between images under strong appearance changes caused by viewpoint or illumination
variations [3, 4, 10, 13, 17, 37, 38, 44, 45]. However, unlike in other visual recognition tasks, such as
image classification or object detection, where trainable image representations have become the de
facto standard, the performance gains obtained by trainable features over the classic hand-crafted
ones have been only modest at best [36].
One of the reasons for this plateauing performance could be the currently dominant approach for
finding image correspondence based on matching individual image features. While we have now better
local patch descriptors, the matching is still performed by variants of the nearest neighbour assignment
in a feature space followed by separate disambiguation stages based on geometric constraints. This
approach has, however, fundamental limitations. Imagine a scene with textureless regions or repetitive
patterns, such as a corridor with almost textureless walls and only few distinguishing features. A
small patch of an image, depicting a repetitive pattern or a textureless area, is indistinguishable from
†

WILLOW project, Département d’informatique de l’École normale supérieure, ENS/INRIA/CNRS UMR
8548, PSL Research University, Paris, France.
‡
CIIRC – Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the Czech Technical University in
Prague, Czechia.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

