A Unified View of Piecewise Linear Neural Network Verification

Rudy Bunel
University of Oxford

Ilker Turkaslan
University of Oxford

Philip H.S. Torr
University of Oxford

rudy@robots.ox.ac.uk

ilker.turkaslan@lmh.ox.ac.uk

philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

Pushmeet Kohli
Deepmind

M. Pawan Kumar
University of Oxford
Alan Turing Institute

pushmeet@google.com

pawan@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The success of Deep Learning and its potential use in many safety-critical applications has motivated research on formal verification of Neural Network (NN) models.
Despite the reputation of learned NN models to behave as black boxes and the
theoretical hardness of proving their properties, researchers have been successful in
verifying some classes of models by exploiting their piecewise linear structure and
taking insights from formal methods such as Satisifiability Modulo Theory. These
methods are however still far from scaling to realistic neural networks. To facilitate
progress on this crucial area, we make two key contributions. First, we present a
unified framework that encompasses previous methods. This analysis results in
the identification of new methods that combine the strengths of multiple existing
approaches, accomplishing a speedup of two orders of magnitude compared to the
previous state of the art. Second, we propose a new data set of benchmarks which
includes a collection of previously released testcases. We use the benchmark to
provide the first experimental comparison of existing algorithms and identify the
factors impacting the hardness of verification problems.

1

Introduction

Despite their success in a wide variety of applications, Deep Neural Networks have seen limited
adoption in safety-critical settings. The main explanation for this lies in their reputation for being
black-boxes whose behaviour can not be predicted. Current approaches to evaluate trained models
mostly rely on testing using held-out data sets. However, as Edsger W. Dijkstra said [3], “testing shows
the presence, not the absence of bugs”. If deep learning models are to be deployed to applications
such as autonomous driving cars, we need to be able to verify safety-critical behaviours.
To this end, some researchers have tried to use formal methods. To the best of our knowledge,
Zakrzewski [20] was the first to propose a method to verify simple, one hidden layer neural networks.
However, only recently were researchers able to work with non-trivial models by taking advantage of
the structure of ReLU-based networks [4, 11]. Even then, these works are not scalable to the large
networks encountered in most real world problems.
This paper advances the field of NN verification by making the following key contributions:
1. We reframe state of the art verification methods as special cases of Branch-and-Bound
optimization, which provides us with a unified framework to compare them.
2. We gather a data set of test cases based on the existing literature and extend it with new
benchmarks. We provide the first experimental comparison of verification methods.
3. Based on this framework, we identify algorithmic improvements in the verification process,
specifically in the way bounds are computed, the type of branching that are considered, as
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

