SEGA: Variance Reduction via Gradient Sketching

1

Filip Hanzely1
Konstantin Mishchenko1
Peter Richtárik1,2,3
2
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, University of Edinburgh,
3
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology

Abstract
We propose a randomized first order optimization method—SEGA (SkEtched
GrAdient)—which progressively throughout its iterations builds a variancereduced estimate of the gradient from random linear measurements (sketches) of
the gradient. In each iteration, SEGA updates the current estimate of the gradient through a sketch-and-project operation using the information provided by the
latest sketch, and this is subsequently used to compute an unbiased estimate of
the true gradient through a random relaxation procedure. This unbiased estimate
is then used to perform a gradient step. Unlike standard subspace descent methods, such as coordinate descent, SEGA can be used for optimization problems with
a non-separable proximal term. We provide a general convergence analysis and
prove linear convergence for strongly convex objectives. In the special case of
coordinate sketches, SEGA can be enhanced with various techniques such as importance sampling, minibatching and acceleration, and its rate is up to a small
constant factor identical to the best-known rate of coordinate descent.

1

Introduction

Consider the optimization problem
def

(1)

min F (x) = f (x) + R(x),

x2Rn

where f : Rn ! R is smooth and µ–strongly convex, and R : Rn ! R [ {+1} is a closed convex
regularizer. In some applications, R is either the indicator function of a convex set or a sparsity
inducing non-smooth penalty such as `1 -norm. We assume that the proximal operator of R, defined
def
1
by prox↵R (x) = argminy2Rn R(y) + 2↵
ky xk2B , is easily computable (e.g., in closed form).
def

1/2

def

Above we use the weighted Euclidean norm kxkB = hx, xiB , where hx, yiB = hBx, yi is a
weighted inner product associated with a positive definite weight matrix B 0. Strong convexity
of f is defined with respect to the same product and norm1 .
1.1

Gradient sketching

In this paper we design proximal gradient-type methods for solving (1) without assuming that the
true gradient of f is available. Instead, we assume that an oracle provides a random linear transformation (i.e., a sketch) of the gradient, which is the information available to drive the iterative
1

f is µ–strongly convex if f (x)

f (y) + hrf (y), x

yiB + µ2 kx

yk2B for all x, y 2 Rn .

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

