Learning to Repair Software Vulnerabilities
with Generative Adversarial Networks
Jacob A. Harer1,2 , Onur Ozdemir1 , Tomo Lazovich3∗, Christopher P. Reale1 ,
Rebecca L. Russell1 , Louis Y. Kim1 , Peter Chin2
1
Draper, Cambridge, MA
2
Department of Computer Science, Boston University, Boston, MA
3
Lightmatter, Boston, MA
{jharer,oozdemir,creale,rrussell,lkim}@draper.com,
tomo@lightmatter.ai, spchin@cs.bu.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the problem of automated repair of software vulnerabilities,
we propose an adversarial learning approach that maps from one discrete
source domain to another target domain without requiring paired labeled
examples or source and target domains to be bijections. We demonstrate
that the proposed adversarial learning approach is an effective technique for
repairing software vulnerabilities, performing close to seq2seq approaches
that require labeled pairs. The proposed Generative Adversarial Network
approach is application-agnostic in that it can be applied to other problems
similar to code repair, such as grammar correction or sentiment translation.

1

Introduction

Security vulnerabilities in software programs pose serious risks to computer systems. Malicious
users can compromise programs through their vulnerabilities to force them to behave in
undesirable ways (e.g. crash, expose sensitive user information, etc.). Thousands of such
vulnerabilities are reported publicly to the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures database
(CVE) each year, and many more are discovered internally in proprietary code and patched
[1, 2]. These vulnerabilities are often the result of errors made by programmers, and, due to
the prevalence of open source software and code re-use, can propagate quickly.
In this paper, we address the problem of learning to automatically repair the source code
of software containing security vulnerabilities. This problem is analogous to grammatical
error correction, in which a grammatically incorrect sentence is translated into a correct one.
In our case, bad source code (that contains a vulnerability) takes the place of an incorrect
sentence and is repaired into good source code.
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) systems have recently achieved the state-of-the-art
performance on language translation and correction tasks [3, 4, 5, 6]. These models use an
encoder-decoder approach to transform an input sequence x = (x0 , x1 ...xT ) into an output
sequence y = (y0 , y1 ...yT 0 ), e.g., translating a sequence of words forming a sentence in English
to one in German. By far the most common method of training NMT systems is to use
labeled pairs of examples to compare the likelihood of network output to a desired version,
necessitating a one-to-one mapping between input and desired output data. This can be
difficult to obtain as in most cases it requires costly hand annotation.
In many sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) applications, it is much easier to obtain unpaired
data, i.e., data from both source and target domains without any matching pairs, since this
∗

Work done while author was affiliated with Draper.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

