Causal Discovery from Discrete Data using Hidden
Compact Representation
1

1

2

3

1, 4

Ruichu Cai , Jie Qiao , Kun Zhang , Zhenjie Zhang , Zhifeng Hao
1
School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, China
2
Department of philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University
3
Singapore R&D, Yitu Technology Ltd.
4
School of Mathematics and Big Data, Foshan University, China
cairuichu@gdut.edu.cn, qiaojie.chn@gmail.com, kunz1@andrew.cmu.edu,
zhenjie.zhang@yitu-inc.com, zfhao@gdut.edu.cn

Abstract
Causal discovery from a set of observations is one of the fundamental problems
across several disciplines. For continuous variables, recently a number of causal
discovery methods have demonstrated their effectiveness in distinguishing the cause
from effect by exploring certain properties of the conditional distribution, but causal
discovery on categorical data still remains to be a challenging problem, because it
is generally not easy to find a compact description of the causal mechanism for the
true causal direction. In this paper we make an attempt to find a way to solve this
problem by assuming a two-stage causal process: the first stage maps the cause to
a hidden variable of a lower cardinality, and the second stage generates the effect
from the hidden representation. In this way, the causal mechanism admits a simple
yet compact representation. We show that under this model, the causal direction is
identifiable under some weak conditions on the true causal mechanism. We also
provide an effective solution to recover the above hidden compact representation
within the likelihood framework. Empirical studies verify the effectiveness of the
proposed approach on both synthetic and real-world data.

1

Introduction

Because randomized controlled experiments are usually infeasible and generally too expensive,
observational data-based causal discovery, has been a focus of recent research in this area [Spirtes et
al., 2000; Pearl, 2009]. Various observational-based causal discovery methods have been proposed by
exploring certain properties of the conditional distribution. For example, constraint-based methods
exploit conditional independence relations between the variables in order to estimate the Markov
equivalence class of the underlying causal graph [Spirtes et al., 2000; Pearl and Verma, 1995]. On
linear non-Gaussian acyclic data, the Linear, Non-Gaussian, Acyclic Model (LiNGAM) [Shimizu et
al., 2006, 2011] has been used to reconstruct the causal network by maximizing the independence
among the noises. On nonlinear data, additive noise model [Hoyer et al., 2009] and post-nonlinear
model [Zhang and Chan, 2006; Zhang and Hyvärinen, 2009] can be used to distinguish the cause from
effect by considering the independence between the noise and the cause. Recently, the likelihood
embedded with various constraints and models among the variables are conducted for score-based
methods [Cai et al., 2018].
Though the additive noise model (Y = g(X) + E, X ⫫ E) has been extended to handle discrete data
[Peters et al., 2010], causal discovery on categorical data still remains to be a challenging problem.
Note that it is usually hard to justify the additive noise assumptions for discrete data, especially for
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

