Inference Aided Reinforcement Learning for
Incentive Mechanism Design in Crowdsourcing

Zehong Hu
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
HUZE0004@e.ntu.edu.sg

Yitao Liang
University of California, Los Angeles
yliang@cs.ucla.edu

Jie Zhang
Nanyang Technological University
ZhangJ@ntu.edu.sg

Zhao Li
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
lizhao.lz@alibaba-inc.com

Yang Liu
University of California, Santa Cruz/Harvard University
yangliu@ucsc.edu

Abstract
Incentive mechanisms for crowdsourcing are designed to incentivize financially
self-interested workers to generate and report high-quality labels. Existing mechanisms are often developed as one-shot static solutions, assuming a certain level
of knowledge about worker models (expertise levels, costs of exerting efforts,
etc.). In this paper, we propose a novel inference aided reinforcement mechanism
that learns to incentivize high-quality data sequentially and requires no such prior
assumptions. Specifically, we first design a Gibbs sampling augmented Bayesian
inference algorithm to estimate workers’ labeling strategies from the collected
labels at each step. Then we propose a reinforcement incentive learning (RIL)
method, building on top of the above estimates, to uncover how workers respond
to different payments. RIL dynamically determines the payment without accessing
any ground-truth labels. We theoretically prove that RIL is able to incentivize
rational workers to provide high-quality labels. Empirical results show that our
mechanism performs consistently well under both rational and non-fully rational
(adaptive learning) worker models. Besides, the payments offered by RIL are more
robust and have lower variances compared to the existing one-shot mechanisms.

1

Introduction

The ability to quickly collect large-scale and high-quality labeled datasets is crucial for Machine
Learning (ML). Among all proposed solutions, one of the most promising options is crowdsourcing [7,
19, 4, 18]. Nonetheless, it has been noted that crowdsourced data often suffers from quality issue, due
to its salient feature of no monitoring and no ground-truth verification of workers’ contribution. This
quality control challenge has been attempted by two relatively disconnected research communities.
From the more ML side, quite a few inference techniques have been developed to infer true labels
from crowdsourced and potentially noisy labels [16, 11, 24, 23]. These solutions often work as
one-shot, post-processing procedures facing a static set of workers, whose labeling accuracy is
fixed and informative. Despite their empirical success, the aforementioned methods ignore the
effects of incentives when dealing with human inputs. It has been observed both in theory and
practice that, without appropriate incentive, selfish and rational workers tend to contribute low quality,
uninformative, if not malicious data [17, 12]. Existing inference algorithms are very vulnerable to
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

