The promises and pitfalls of Stochastic Gradient
Langevin Dynamics

Nicolas Brosse, Éric Moulines
Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées, UMR 7641,
Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France.
nicolas.brosse@polytechnique.edu, eric.moulines@polytechnique.edu
Alain Durmus
Ecole Normale Supérieure CMLA,
61 Av. du Président Wilson 94235 Cachan Cedex, France.
alain.durmus@cmla.ens-cachan.fr

Abstract
Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) has emerged as a key MCMC
algorithm for Bayesian learning from large scale datasets. While SGLD with
decreasing step sizes converges weakly to the posterior distribution, the algorithm
is often used with a constant step size in practice and has demonstrated successes
in machine learning tasks. The current practice is to set the step size inversely
proportional to N where N is the number of training samples. As N becomes
large, we show that the SGLD algorithm has an invariant probability measure
which significantly departs from the target posterior and behaves like Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD). This difference is inherently due to the high variance of
the stochastic gradients. Several strategies have been suggested to reduce this effect;
among them, SGLD Fixed Point (SGLDFP) uses carefully designed control variates
to reduce the variance of the stochastic gradients. We show that SGLDFP gives
approximate samples from the posterior distribution, with an accuracy comparable
to the Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC) algorithm for a computational cost sublinear
in the number of data points. We provide a detailed analysis of the Wasserstein
distances between LMC, SGLD, SGLDFP and SGD and explicit expressions of
the means and covariance matrices of their invariant distributions. Our findings are
supported by limited numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Most MCMC algorithms have not been designed to process huge sample sizes, a typical setting in
machine learning. As a result, many classical MCMC methods fail in this context, because the mixing
time becomes prohibitively long and the cost per iteration increases proportionally to the number of
training samples N . The computational cost in standard Metropolis-Hastings algorithm comes from
1) the computation of the proposals, 2) the acceptance/rejection step. Several approaches to solve
these issues have been recently proposed in machine learning and computational statistics.
Among them, the stochastic gradient langevin dynamics (SGLD) algorithm, introduced in [33], is
a popular choice. This method is based on the Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC) algorithm proposed
in [16, 17]. Standard versions of LMC require to compute the gradient of the log-posterior at the
current fit of the parameter, but avoid the accept/reject step. The LMC algorithm is a discretization
of a continuous-time process, the overdamped Langevin diffusion, which leaves invariant the target
distribution π. To further reduce the computational cost, SGLD uses unbiased estimators of the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

