Porcupine Neural Networks:
Approximating Neural Network Landscapes

Soheil Feizi
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park
sfeizi@cs.umd.edu

Hamid Javadi
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Rice University
hrhakim@rice.edu

Jesse Zhang
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
jessez@stanford.edu

David Tse
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
dntse@stanford.edu

Abstract
Neural networks have been used prominently in several machine learning and
statistics applications. In general, the underlying optimization of neural networks
is non-convex which makes analyzing their performance challenging. In this
paper, we take another approach to this problem by constraining the network
such that the corresponding optimization landscape has good theoretical properties
without significantly compromising performance. In particular, for two-layer neural
networks we introduce Porcupine Neural Networks (PNNs) whose weight vectors
are constrained to lie over a finite set of lines. We show that most local optima
of PNN optimizations are global while we have a characterization of regions
where bad local optimizers may exist. Moreover, our theoretical and empirical
results suggest that an unconstrained neural network can be approximated using a
polynomially-large PNN.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have been used in several machine learning and statistical inference problems
including regression and classification tasks. Some successful applications of neural networks and
deep learning include speech recognition [1], natural language processing [2], and image classification
[3]. The underlying neural network optimization is non-convex in general which makes its training
NP-complete even for small networks [4]. In practice, however, different variants of local search
methods such as the gradient descent algorithm show excellent performance. Understanding the
reason behind the success of such local search methods is still an open problem in the general case.
There have been several recent works in the theoretical literature aiming to study risk landscapes of
neural networks and deep learning under various modeling assumptions. For example, references [5, 6,
7, 8] have studied the convergence of the local search algorithms for the neural network optimization
with zero hidden neurons and a single output. Other works have studied the risk landscapes of neural
network optimizations for more complex structures under various model assumptions [9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. In particular, references [13, 14, 15] consider a two-layer neural
network with Gaussian inputs under a matched (realizable) model where the output is generated from
a network with planted weights. Over-parameterized networks where the number of parameters are
larger than the number of training samples have been studied in [20, 21]. In addition, reference [22]
makes the argument (through a visualization scheme) that the loss landscape of reduced-capacity
networks such as resnets has fewer bad locals than that of unconstrained ones. Further, [23] presents
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

