Deepcode: Feedback Codes via Deep Learning
Hyeji Kim⇤, Yihan Jiang†, Sreeram Kannan† , Sewoong Oh‡, Pramod Viswanath‡
Samsung AI Centre Cambridge*, University of Washington† , University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign‡

Abstract
The design of codes for communicating reliably over a statistically well defined
channel is an important endeavor involving deep mathematical research and wideranging practical applications. In this work, we present the first family of codes
obtained via deep learning, which significantly beats state-of-the-art codes designed
over several decades of research. The communication channel under consideration
is the Gaussian noise channel with feedback, whose study was initiated by Shannon;
feedback is known theoretically to improve reliability of communication, but no
practical codes that do so have ever been successfully constructed.
We break this logjam by integrating information theoretic insights harmoniously
with recurrent-neural-network based encoders and decoders to create novel codes
that outperform known codes by 3 orders of magnitude in reliability. We also
demonstrate several desirable properties in the codes: (a) generalization to larger
block lengths; (b) composability with known codes; (c) adaptation to practical constraints. This result also presents broader ramifications to coding theory: even when
the channel has a clear mathematical model, deep learning methodologies, when
combined with channel-specific information-theoretic insights, can potentially beat
state-of-the-art codes, constructed over decades of mathematical research.

1

Introduction

The ubiquitous digital communication enabled via wireless (e.g. WiFi, mobile, satellite) and wired
(e.g. ethernet, storage media, computer buses) media has been the plumbing underlying the current
information age. The advances of reliable and efficient digital communication have been primarily
driven by the design of codes which allow the receiver to recover messages reliably and efficiently
under noisy environments. The discipline of coding theory has made significant progresses in the past
seven decades since Shannon’s celebrated work in 1948 [1]. As a result, we now have near optimal
codes in a canonical setting, namely, Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel. However,
several channel models of great practical interest lack efficient and practical coding schemes.
Channels with feedback (from the receiver to the transmitter) is an example of a long-standing
open problem and with significant practical importance. Modern wireless communication includes
feedback, in one form or the other; for example, the feedback can be the received value itself or
quantization of the received value or an automatic repeat request (ARQ) [2]. Accordingly, there
are different models for channels with feedback, and among them, the AWGN channel with output
feedback is a model that captures the essence of channels with feedback; this model is also classical,
introduced by Shannon in 1956 [3]. In this channel model, the received value is fed back (with
⇤

H. Kim is with Samsung AI Centre Cambridge, UK. Email: hkim1505@gmail.com
Y. Jiang and S. Kannan are with the Department of Electrical Engineering at University of Washington.
Email: yihanrogerjiang@gmail.com and ksreeram@uw.edu.
‡
S. Oh and P. Viswanath are with the Coordinated Science Lab at University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
(UIUC). S. Oh is with the Department of Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering at UIUC. P. Viswanath
is with the Department of Electrical Engineering at UIUC. Email: {swoh,pramodv}@illinois.edu
†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

