Insights on representational similarity in neural
networks with canonical correlation
Ari S. Morcos∗ ‡
DeepMind†
arimorcos@gmail.com

Maithra Raghu∗‡
Google Brain, Cornell University
maithrar@gmail.com

Samy Bengio
Google Brain
bengio@google.com

Abstract
Comparing different neural network representations and determining how representations evolve over time remain challenging open questions in our understanding of the function of neural networks. Comparing representations in neural networks is fundamentally difficult as the structure of representations varies greatly,
even across groups of networks trained on identical tasks, and over the course
of training. Here, we develop projection weighted CCA (Canonical Correlation
Analysis) as a tool for understanding neural networks, building off of SVCCA,
a recently proposed method [22]. We first improve the core method, showing
how to differentiate between signal and noise, and then apply this technique to
compare across a group of CNNs, demonstrating that networks which generalize converge to more similar representations than networks which memorize, that
wider networks converge to more similar solutions than narrow networks, and that
trained networks with identical topology but different learning rates converge to
distinct clusters with diverse representations. We also investigate the representational dynamics of RNNs, across both training and sequential timesteps, finding
that RNNs converge in a bottom-up pattern over the course of training and that
the hidden state is highly variable over the course of a sequence, even when accounting for linear transforms. Together, these results provide new insights into
the function of CNNs and RNNs, and demonstrate the utility of using CCA to
understand representations.

1

Introduction

As neural networks have become more powerful, an increasing number of studies have sought to decipher their internal representations [26, 16, 4, 2, 11, 25, 21]. Most of these have focused on the role
of individual units in the computations performed by individual networks. Comparing population
representations across networks has proven especially difficult, largely because networks converge
to apparently distinct solutions in which it is difficult to find one-to-one mappings of units [16].
Recently, [22] applied Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) as a tool to compare representations
across networks. CCA had previously been used for tasks such as computing the similarity between
modeled and measured brain activity [23], and training multi-lingual word embeddings in language
models [5]. Because CCA is invariant to linear transforms, it is capable of finding shared structure
across representations which are superficially dissimilar, making CCA an ideal tool for comparing
the representations across groups of networks and for comparing representations across time in
RNNs.
Using CCA to investigate the representations of neural networks, we make three main contributions:
∗

equal contribution, in alphabetical order
Work done while at DeepMind; currently at Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
‡
To whom correspondence should be addressed: arimorcos@gmail.com, maithrar@gmail.com
†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

