Sigsoftmax: Reanalysis of the Softmax Bottleneck

Sekitoshi Kanai
NTT Software Innovation Center, Keio Univ.
kanai.sekitoshi@lab.ntt.co.jp
Yuki Yamanaka
NTT Secure Platform Laboratories
yamanaka.yuki@lab.ntt.co.jp

Yasuhiro Fujiwara
NTT Software Innovation Center
fujiwara.yasuhiro@lab.ntt.co.jp
Shuichi Adachi
Keio Univ.
adachi.shuichi@appi.keio.ac.jp

Abstract
Softmax is an output activation function for modeling categorical probability distributions in many applications of deep learning. However, a recent study revealed
that softmax can be a bottleneck of representational capacity of neural networks in
language modeling (the softmax bottleneck). In this paper, we propose an output
activation function for breaking the softmax bottleneck without additional parameters. We re-analyze the softmax bottleneck from the perspective of the output set
of log-softmax and identify the cause of the softmax bottleneck. On the basis of
this analysis, we propose sigsoftmax, which is composed of a multiplication of an
exponential function and sigmoid function. Sigsoftmax can break the softmax bottleneck. The experiments on language modeling demonstrate that sigsoftmax and
mixture of sigsoftmax outperform softmax and mixture of softmax, respectively.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are used in many recent applications such as image recognition [17, 13],
speech recognition [12], and natural language processing [24, 32, 7]. High representational capacity
and generalization performance of deep neural networks are achieved by many layers, activation
functions and regularization methods [26, 13, 31, 14, 10]. Although various model architectures
are built in the above applications, softmax is commonly used as an output activation function for
modeling categorical probability distributions [4, 10, 13, 24, 32, 7, 12]. For example, in language
modeling, softmax is employed for representing the probability of the next word over the vocabulary
in a sentence. When using softmax, we train the model by minimizing negative log-likelihood with a
gradient-based optimization method. We can easily calculate the gradient of negative log-likelihood
with softmax, and it is numerically stable [3, 4].
Even though softmax is widely used, few studies have attempted to improve its modeling performance
[6, 8]. This is because deep neural networks with softmax are believed to have a universal approximation property. However, Yang et al. [34] recently revealed that softmax can be a bottleneck of
representational capacity in language modeling. They showed that the representational capacity of the
softmax-based model is restricted by the length of the hidden vector in the output layer. In language
modeling, the length of the hidden vector is much smaller than the vocabulary size. As a result, the
softmax-based model cannot completely learn the true probability distribution, and this is called
the softmax bottleneck. For breaking the softmax bottleneck, Yang et al. [34] proposed mixture of
softmax (MoS) that mixes the multiple softmax outputs. However, this analysis of softmax does not
explicitly show why softmax can be a bottleneck. Furthermore, MoS is an additional layer or mixture
model rather than an alternative activation function to softmax: MoS has learnable parameters and
hyper-parameters.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

