Bilevel Learning of the Group Lasso Structure

1

Jordan Frecon∗,1
Saverio Salzo∗ ,1
Massimiliano Pontil1,2
Computational Statistics and Machine Learning, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (Italy)
2
Department of Computer Science, University College London (UK)

Abstract
Regression with group-sparsity penalty plays a central role in high-dimensional
prediction problems. However, most existing methods require the group structure
to be known a priori. In practice, this may be a too strong assumption, potentially
hampering the effectiveness of the regularization method. To circumvent this issue,
we present a method to estimate the group structure by means of a continuous
bilevel optimization problem where the data is split into training and validation sets.
Our approach relies on an approximation scheme where the lower level problem is
replaced by a smooth dual forward-backward algorithm with Bregman distances.
We provide guarantees regarding the convergence of the approximate procedure to
the exact problem and demonstrate the well behaviour of the proposed method on
synthetic experiments. Finally, a preliminary application to genes expression data
is tackled with the purpose of unveiling functional groups.

1

Introduction

With recent technological advances, high-dimensional datasets have become massively widespread in
numerous applications ranging from social sciences to computational biology [20, 25, 1]. In addition,
in many statistical problems, the number of unknown parameters can be significantly larger than the
number of data samples, thus leading to underdetermined and computationally intractable problems.
Nonetheless, many classes of datasets exhibit a sparse representation when expressed as a linear
combination of suitable dictionary elements. This has led, over the past decades, to the development
of sparsity inducing norms and regularizers to unveil structure in the data. However, beyond the
sparsity patterns of the data, there might also be a more complex structure, which is widely referred
to as structured sparsity [16, 22, 23, 29]. In this line of research, a lot of work has been devoted to
encode a priori structure of the data in (possibly overlapping) groups or hierarchical trees [31, 15, 17].
In the present paper, we restrict our study to the popular Group Lasso problem [30]. Given a vector
of outputs y ∈ RN and a design matrix X ∈ RN ×P , the Group Lasso problem amounts in finding
L

X
1
ŵ ∈ argmin ky − Xwk2 + λ
kwGl k2 ,
w∈RP 2

(1)

l=1

for some regularization parameter λ > 0 and a non-overlapping group structure, i.e., an unordered
partition of the features in L groups {G1 , . . . , GL } such that ∪L
l=1 Gl = {1, . . . , P } and (∀l 6=
l0 ), Gl ∩ Gl0 = ∅. The specific form of the regularizer permits to enforce sparsity at the group-level,
thus often leading to a better interpretability of the features than standard Lasso.
However, in many applications, we might have hundreds or thousands of features whose groupstructure {G1 , . . . , GL } may be unknown, or only partially known. In addition, the number of groups
L itself might not be known. Nonetheless, the prior knowledge of the group structure is crucial
in order to achieve a lower prediction error [19]. Note that this problem can be seen as purely
∗

Equal contribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

