The Convergence of Sparsified Gradient Methods
Dan Alistarh⇤
IST Austria

Torsten Hoefler
ETH Zurich

Mikael Johansson
KTH

Sarit Khirirat
KTH

dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at

htor@inf.ethz.ch

mikaelj@kth.se

sarit@kth.se

Nikola Konstantinov
IST Austria

Cédric Renggli
ETH Zurich

nikola.konstantinov@ist.ac.at

cedric.renggli@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) has become the standard tool for distributed
training of massive machine learning models, in particular deep neural networks.
Several families of communication-reduction methods, such as quantization, largebatch methods, and gradient sparsification, have been proposed to reduce the
overheads of distribution. To date, gradient sparsification methods–where each
node sorts gradients by magnitude, and only communicates a subset of the components, accumulating the rest locally–are known to yield some of the largest practical
gains. Such methods can reduce the amount of communication per step by up to
three orders of magnitude, while preserving model accuracy. Yet, this family of
methods currently has no theoretical justification.
This is the question we address in this paper. We prove that, under analytic
assumptions, sparsifying gradients by magnitude with local error correction provides convergence guarantees, for both convex and non-convex smooth objectives,
for data-parallel SGD. The main insight is that sparsification methods implicitly
maintain bounds on the maximum impact of stale updates, thanks to selection
by magnitude. Our analysis also reveals that these methods do require analytical
conditions to converge well, justifying and complementing existing heuristics.

1

Introduction

The proliferation of massive datasets has led to renewed focus on distributed machine learning
computation. In this context, tremendous effort has been dedicated to scaling the classic stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) algorithm, the tool of choice for training a wide variety of machine learning
models. In a nutshell, SGD works as follows. Given a function f : Rn ! R to minimize and given
access to stochastic gradients G̃ of this function, we apply the iteration
xt+1 = xt

↵G̃(xt ),

(1)

where xt is our current set of parameters, and ↵ is the step size.
The standard way to scale SGD to multiple nodes is via data-parallelism: given a set of P nodes,
we split the dataset into P partitions. Nodes process samples in parallel, but each node maintains
a globally consistent copy of the parameter vector xt . In each iteration, each node computes a
new stochastic gradient with respect to this parameter vector, based on its local data. Nodes then
aggregate all of these gradients locally, and update their iterate to xt+1 . Ideally, this procedure
would enable us to process P times more samples per unit of time, equating to linear scalability.
⇤

Authors ordered alphabetically. The full version can be found at https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.10505.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

