Randomized Prior Functions
for Deep Reinforcement Learning
Ian Osband
DeepMind
iosband@google.com

John Aslanides
DeepMind
jaslanides@google.com

Albin Cassirer
DeepMind
cassirer@google.com

Abstract
Dealing with uncertainty is essential for efficient reinforcement learning.
There is a growing literature on uncertainty estimation for deep learning
from fixed datasets, but many of the most popular approaches are poorlysuited to sequential decision problems. Other methods, such as bootstrap
sampling, have no mechanism for uncertainty that does not come from the
observed data. We highlight why this can be a crucial shortcoming and
propose a simple remedy through addition of a randomized untrainable
‘prior’ network to each ensemble member. We prove that this approach
is efficient with linear representations, provide simple illustrations of its
efficacy with nonlinear representations and show that this approach scales
to large-scale problems far better than previous attempts.

1

Introduction

Deep learning methods have emerged as the state of the art approach for many challenging
problems [30, 70]. This is due to the statistical flexibility and computational scalability
of large and deep neural networks, which allows them to harness the information in large
and rich datasets. Deep reinforcement learning combines deep learning with sequential
decision making under uncertainty. Here an agent takes actions inside an environment in
order to maximize some cumulative reward [63]. This combination of deep learning with
reinforcement learning (RL) has proved remarkably successful [67, 42, 60].
At the same time, elementary decision theory shows that the only admissible decision rules
are Bayesian [12, 71]. Colloquially, this means that any decision rule that is not Bayesian
can be improved (or even exploited) by some Bayesian alternative [14]. Despite this fact,
the majority of deep learning research has evolved outside of Bayesian (or even statistical)
analysis [55, 32]. This disconnect extends to deep RL, where the majority of state of the art
algorithms have no concept of uncertainty [42, 41] and can fail spectacularly even in simple
problems where success requires its consideration [40, 45].
There is a long history of research in Bayesian neural networks that never quite became
mainstream practice [37, 43]. Recently, Bayesian deep learning has experienced a resurgence
of interest with a myriad of approaches for uncertainty quantification in fixed datasets and
also sequential decision problems [29, 11, 20, 47]. In this paper we highlight the surprising
fact that many of these well-cited and popular methods for uncertainty estimation in deep
learning can be poor choices for sequential decision problems. We show that this disconnect
is more than a technical detail, but a serious shortcoming that can lead to arbitrarily poor
performance. We support our claims by a series of simple lemmas for simple environments,
together with experimental evidence in more complex settings.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

