Fast greedy algorithms for dictionary selection
with generalized sparsity constraints

Kaito Fujii
Graduate School of Information Sciences and Technology
The University of Tokyo
kaito_fujii@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Tasuku Soma
Graduate School of Information Sciences and Technology
The University of Tokyo
tasuku_soma@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
In dictionary selection, several atoms are selected from finite candidates that successfully approximate given data points in the sparse representation. We propose
a novel efficient greedy algorithm for dictionary selection. Not only does our
algorithm work much faster than the known methods, but it can also handle more
complex sparsity constraints, such as average sparsity. Using numerical experiments, we show that our algorithm outperforms the known methods for dictionary
selection, achieving competitive performances with dictionary learning algorithms
in a smaller running time.

1

Introduction

Learning sparse representations of data and signals has been extensively studied for the past decades in
machine learning and signal processing [16]. In these methods, a specific set of basis signals (atoms),
called a dictionary, is required and used to approximate a given signal in a sparse representation. The
design of a dictionary is highly nontrivial, and many studies have been devoted to the construction of
a good dictionary for each signal domain, such as natural images and sounds. Recently, approaches
to construct a dictionary from data have shown the state-of-the-art results in various domains. The
standard approach is called dictionary learning [3, 32, 1]. Although many studies have been devoted
to dictionary learning, it is usually difficult to solve, requiring a non-convex optimization problem
that often suffers from local minima. Also, standard dictionary learning methods (e.g., MOD [14] or
k-SVD [2]) require a heavy time complexity.
Krause and Cevher [22] proposed a combinatorial analogue of dictionary learning, called dictionary
selection. In dictionary selection, given a finite set of candidate atoms, a dictionary is constructed
by selecting a few atoms from the set. Dictionary selection could be faster than dictionary learning
due to its discrete nature. Another advantage of dictionary selection is that the approximation
guarantees hold even in agnostic settings, i.e., we do not need stochastic generating models of the
data. Furthermore, dictionary selection algorithms can be used for media summarization, in which
the atoms must be selected from given data points [8, 9].
The basic dictionary selection is formalized as follows. Let V be a finite set of candidate atoms and
n = |V |. Throughout the paper, we assume that the atoms are unit vectors in Rd without loss of
generality. We represent the candidate atoms as a matrix A ∈ Rd×n whose columns are the atoms in
V . Let yt ∈ Rd (t ∈ [T ]) be data points, where [T ] = {1, . . . , T }, and k and s be positive integers
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

