Policy Regret in Repeated Games
Raman Arora
Dept. of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21204
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Michael Dinitz
Dept. of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21204
mdinitz@cs.jhu.edu

Teodor V. Marinov
Dept. of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21204
tmarino2@jhu.edu

Mehryar Mohri
Courant Institute and Google Research
New York, NY 10012
mohri@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
The notion of policy regret in online learning is a well defined performance measure
for the common scenario of adaptive adversaries, which more traditional quantities
such as external regret do not take into account. We revisit the notion of policy
regret and first show that there are online learning settings in which policy regret
and external regret are incompatible: any sequence of play that achieves a favorable
regret with respect to one definition must do poorly with respect to the other. We
then focus on the game-theoretic setting where the adversary is a self-interested
agent. In that setting, we show that external regret and policy regret are not in
conflict and, in fact, that a wide class of algorithms can ensure a favorable regret
with respect to both definitions, so long as the adversary is also using such an
algorithm. We also show that the sequence of play of no-policy regret algorithms
converges to a policy equilibrium, a new notion of equilibrium that we introduce.
Relating this back to external regret, we show that coarse correlated equilibria,
which no-external regret players converge to, are a strict subset of policy equilibria.
Thus, in game-theoretic settings, every sequence of play with no external regret
also admits no policy regret, but the converse does not hold.

1

Introduction

Learning in dynamically evolving environments can be described as a repeated game between a
player, an online learning algorithm, and an adversary. At each round of the game, the player selects
an action, e.g. invests in a specific stock, the adversary, which may be the stock market, chooses a
utility function, and the player gains the utility value of its action. The player observes the utility
value and uses it to update its strategy for subsequent rounds. The player’s goal is to accumulate the
largest possible utility over a finite number of rounds of play.1
The standard measure of the performance of a player is its regret, that is the difference between the
utility achieved by the best offline solution from some restricted class and the utility obtained by
the online player, when utilities are revealed incrementally. Formally, we can model learning as the
following problem. Consider an action set A. The player selects an action at at round t, the adversary
picks a utility function ut , and the player gains the utility value ut (at ). While in a full observation
setting the player observes the entire utility function ut , in a bandit setting the player only observes

1
Such games can be equivalently described in terms of minimizing losses rather than maximizing utilities.
All our results can be equivalently expressed in terms of losses instead of utilities.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

