The Lingering of Gradients:
How to Reuse Gradients over Time
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu∗
Microsoft Research AI
Redmond, WA 98052
zeyuan@csail.mit.edu

David Simchi-Levi∗
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
dslevi@mit.edu

Xinshang Wang∗
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
xinshang@mit.edu

Abstract
Classically, the time complexity of a first-order method is estimated by its number
of gradient computations. In this paper, we study a more refined complexity by
taking into account the “lingering” of gradients: once a gradient is computed at
xk , the additional time to compute gradients at xk+1 , xk+2 , . . . may be reduced.
We show how this improves the running time of gradient descent and SVRG. For
instance, if the “additional time” scales linearly with respect to the traveled distance, then the “convergence rate” of gradient descent can be improved from 1/T
to exp(−T 1/3 ). On the empirical side, we solve a hypothetical revenue management problem on the Yahoo! Front Page Today Module application with 4.6m
users to 10−6 error (or 10−12 dual error) using 6 passes of the dataset.

1

Introduction

First-order methods play a fundamental role in large-scale machine learning and optimization tasks.
In most scenarios, the performance of a first-order method is represented by its convergence rate:
the relationship between ε (the optimization error) versus T (the number of gradient computations).
This is meaningful because in most applications, the time complexities for evaluating gradients at
different points are of the same magnitude. In other words, the worse-case time complexities of
first-order methods are usually proportional to a fixed parameter times T .
In large-scale settings, however, if we have already spent time computing the (full) gradient at x,
perhaps we can use such information to reduce the time complexity to compute full gradients at
other points near x. We call this the “lingering” of gradients, because the gradient at x may be
partially reused for future consideration, but will eventually fade away once we are far from x.
Formally, consider the (finite-sum) stochastic convex minimization problem:
n
o
Pn
def
minx∈Rd f (x) = n1 i=1 fi (x) .

(1.1)

Then, could it be possible that whenever x is sufficiently close to y, for at least a large fraction of
indices i ∈ [n], we have ∇fi (x) ≈ ∇fi (y)? In other words, if ∇f1 (x), . . . , ∇fn (x) are already
calculated at some point x, can we reuse a large fraction of them to approximate ∇f (y)?
Example 1. In classification problems, fi (x) represents the loss value for “how well training
sample i is classified under predictor x”. For any sample i that has a large margin under predictor x,
its gradient ∇fi (x) may stay close to ∇fi (y) whenever x is close to y.
Formally, let fi (x) = max{0, 1 − hx, ai i} be the hinge loss (or its smoothed variant if needed) with
respect to the i-th sample ai ∈ Rd . If the margin |1 − hx, ai i| is sufficiently large, then moving
∗
Authors sorted in alphabetical order. Full version of this paper (containing additional theoretical results,
additional experiments, and missing proofs) available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.02871.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

