Large Scale computation of Means and Clusters for
Persistence Diagrams using Optimal Transport

Théo Lacombe
Datashape
Inria Saclay
theo.lacombe@inria.fr

Marco Cuturi
Google Brain, and
CREST, ENSAE
cuturi@google.com

Steve Oudot
Datashape
Inria Saclay
steve.oudot@inria.fr

Abstract
Persistence diagrams (PDs) are now routinely used to summarize the underlying
topology of complex data. Despite several appealing properties, incorporating
PDs in learning pipelines can be challenging because their natural geometry is not
Hilbertian. Indeed, this was recently exemplified in a string of papers which show
that the simple task of averaging a few PDs can be computationally prohibitive.
We propose in this article a tractable framework to carry out standard tasks on
PDs at scale, notably evaluating distances, estimating barycenters and performing
clustering. This framework builds upon a reformulation of PD metrics as optimal
transport (OT) problems. Doing so, we can exploit recent computational advances:
the OT problem on a planar grid, when regularized with entropy, is convex can be
solved in linear time using the Sinkhorn algorithm and convolutions. This results in
scalable computations that can stream on GPUs. We demonstrate the efficiency of
our approach by carrying out clustering with diagrams metrics on several thousands
of PDs, a scale never seen before in the literature.

1

Introduction

Topological data analysis (TDA) has been used successfully in a wide array of applications, for
instance in medical (Nicolau et al., 2011) or material (Hiraoka et al., 2016) sciences, computer
vision (Li et al., 2014) or to classify NBA players (Lum et al., 2013). The goal of TDA is to
exploit and account for the complex topology (connectivity, loops, holes, etc.) seen in modern data.
The tools developed in TDA are built upon persistent homology theory (Edelsbrunner et al., 2000;
Zomorodian & Carlsson, 2005; Edelsbrunner & Harer, 2010) whose main output is a descriptor called
a persistence diagram (PD) which encodes in a compact form—roughly speaking, a point cloud in
the upper triangle of the square [0, 1]2 —the topology of a given space or object at all scales.
Statistics on PDs. Persistence diagrams have appealing properties: in particular they have been
shown to be stable with respect to perturbations of the input data (Cohen-Steiner et al., 2007;
Chazal et al., 2009, 2014). This stability is measured either in the so called bottleneck metric or
in the p-th diagram distance, which are both distances that compute optimal partial matchings.
While theoretically motivated and intuitive, these metrics are by definition very costly to compute.
Furthermore, these metrics are not Hilbertian, preventing a faithful application of a large class of
standard machine learning tools (k-means, PCA, SVM) on PDs.
Related work. To circumvent the non-Hilbertian nature of the space of PDs, one can of course map
diagrams onto simple feature vectors. Such features can be either finite dimensional (Carrière et al.,
2015; Adams et al., 2017), or infinite through kernel functions (Reininghaus et al., 2015; Bubenik,
2015; Carrière et al., 2017). A known drawback of kernel approaches on a rich geometric space such
as that formed by PDs is that once PDs are mapped as feature vectors, any ensuing analysis remains in
the space of such features (the “inverse image” problem inherent to kernelization). They are therefore
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

