Towards Understanding Learning Representations:
To What Extent Do Different Neural Networks Learn
the Same Representation

Liwei Wang1,2 Lunjia Hu3 Jiayuan Gu1 Yue Wu1
Zhiqiang Hu1 Kun He4 John Hopcroft5
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing Institute of Big Data Research
3
Computer Science Department, Stanford University
4
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
5
Cornell University
wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn lunjia@stanford.edu
{gujiayuan, frankwu, huzq}@pku.edu.cn
brooklet60@hust.edu.cn, jeh17@cornell.edu

Abstract
It is widely believed that learning good representations is one of the main reasons
for the success of deep neural networks. Although highly intuitive, there is a lack of
theory and systematic approach quantitatively characterizing what representations
do deep neural networks learn. In this work, we move a tiny step towards a
theory and better understanding of the representations. Specifically, we study a
simpler problem: How similar are the representations learned by two networks
with identical architecture but trained from different initializations. We develop
a rigorous theory based on the neuron activation subspace match model. The
theory gives a complete characterization of the structure of neuron activation
subspace matches, where the core concepts are maximum match and simple match
which describe the overall and the finest similarity between sets of neurons in two
networks respectively. We also propose efficient algorithms to find the maximum
match and simple matches. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments using our
algorithms. Experimental results suggest that, surprisingly, representations learned
by the same convolutional layers of networks trained from different initializations
are not as similar as prevalently expected, at least in terms of subspace match.

1

Introduction

It is widely believed that learning good representations is one of the main reasons for the success of
deep neural networks [Krizhevsky et al., 2012, He et al., 2016]. Taking CNN as an example, filters,
shared weights, pooling and composition of layers are all designed to learn good representations of
images. Although highly intuitive, it is still illusive what representations do deep neural networks
learn.
In this work, we move a tiny step towards a theory and a systematic approach that characterize
the representations learned by deep nets. In particular, we consider a simpler problem: How
similar are the representations learned by two networks with identical architecture but trained from
different initializations. It is observed that training the same neural network from different random
initializations frequently yields similar performance [Dauphin et al., 2014]. A natural question arises:
do the differently-initialized networks learn similar representations as well, or do they learn totally
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

