Visual Object Networks: Image Generation with
Disentangled 3D Representation

Jun-Yan Zhu
MIT CSAIL
Antonio Torralba
MIT CSAIL

Zhoutong Zhang
MIT CSAIL

Chengkai Zhang
MIT CSAIL

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT CSAIL

Jiajun Wu
MIT CSAIL

William T. Freeman
MIT CSAIL, Google

Abstract
Recent progress in deep generative models has led to tremendous breakthroughs in
image generation. However, while existing models can synthesize photorealistic
images, they lack an understanding of our underlying 3D world. We present
a new generative model, Visual Object Networks (VON), synthesizing natural
images of objects with a disentangled 3D representation. Inspired by classic
graphics rendering pipelines, we unravel our image formation process into three
conditionally independent factors—shape, viewpoint, and texture—and present an
end-to-end adversarial learning framework that jointly models 3D shapes and 2D
images. Our model first learns to synthesize 3D shapes that are indistinguishable
from real shapes. It then renders the object’s 2.5D sketches (i.e., silhouette and
depth map) from its shape under a sampled viewpoint. Finally, it learns to add
realistic texture to these 2.5D sketches to generate natural images. The VON
not only generates images that are more realistic than state-of-the-art 2D image
synthesis methods, but also enables many 3D operations such as changing the
viewpoint of a generated image, editing of shape and texture, linear interpolation in
texture and shape space, and transferring appearance across different objects and
viewpoints.

1

Introduction

Modern deep generative models learn to synthesize realistic images. Figure 1a shows several cars
generated by a recent model [Gulrajani et al., 2017]. However, most methods have only focused
on generating images in 2D, ignoring the 3D nature of the world. As a result, they are unable to
answer some questions that would be effortless for a human, for example: what will a car look like
from a different angle? What if we apply its texture to a truck? Can we mix different 3D designs?
Therefore, a 2D-only perspective inevitably limits a model’s practical application in fields such as
robotics, virtual reality, and gaming.
In this paper, we present an end-to-end generative model that jointly synthesizes 3D shapes and 2D
images via a disentangled object representation. Specifically, we decompose our image generation
model into three conditionally independent factors: shape, viewpoint, and texture, borrowing ideas
from classic graphics rendering engines [Kajiya, 1986]. Our model first learns to synthesize 3D
shapes that are indistinguishable from real shapes. It then computes its 2.5D sketches [Barrow and
Tenenbaum, 1978, Marr, 1982] with a differentiable projection module from a sampled viewpoint.
Finally, it learns to add diverse, realistic texture to 2.5D sketches and produce 2D images that are
indistinguishable from real photos. We call our model Visual Object Networks (VON).
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

