Learning to Optimize Tensor Programs

Tianqi Chen1 Lianmin Zheng2 Eddie Yan1 Ziheng Jiang1 Thierry Moreau1
Luis Ceze1 Carlos Guestrin1 Arvind Krishnamurthy1
1

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
We introduce a learning-based framework to optimize tensor programs for deep
learning workloads. Efficient implementations of tensor operators, such as matrix
multiplication and high dimensional convolution, are key enablers of effective
deep learning systems. However, current systems rely on manually optimized
libraries, e.g., cuDNN, that support only a narrow range of server class GPUs.
Such reliance limits the applicability of high-level graph optimizations and incurs
significant engineering costs when deploying to new hardware targets. We use
learning to remove this engineering burden. We learn domain-specific statistical
cost models to guide the search of tensor operator implementations over billions
of possible program variants. We further accelerate the search using effective
model transfer across workloads. Experimental results show that our framework
delivers performance that is competitive with state-of-the-art hand-tuned libraries
for low-power CPUs, mobile GPUs, and server-class GPUs.

1

Introduction

Deep learning (DL) has become ubiquitous in our daily lives. DL models can now recognize
images [23], understand natural language [38], play games [27], and automate system decisions (e.g.,
device placement [26] and indexing [21]). Tensor operators, such as matrix multiplication and high
dimensional convolution, are basic building blocks of DL models. Scalable learning systems [1, 4, 8,
2] rely on manually optimized, high-performance tensor operation libraries, such as cuDNN, that
are optimized for a narrow range of hardware devices. To optimize a tensor operator, programmers
must choose from many implementations that are logically equivalent but differ dramatically in
performance due to differences in threading, memory reuse, pipelining and other hardware factors.
Supporting diverse hardware back-ends therefore requires tremendous engineering effort. Even
on currently supported hardware, developing DL frameworks and models is limited by the set of
optimized operators in libraries, preventing optimizations (such as operator fusion) that can produce
unsupported operators.
This research explores the following question: can we use learning to alleviate this engineering
burden and automatically optimize tensor operator programs for a given hardware platform? Our
affirmative answer is based on statistical cost models we built that predict program run time using a
given low-level program. These cost models, which guide our exploration of the space of possible
programs, use transferable representations that generalize across different workloads to accelerate
search. We make the following contributions:
• We formalize the new problem of learning to optimize tensor programs and summarize its key
characteristics.
• We propose a machine learning framework to solve this problem.
• We further accelerate the optimization by 2× to 10× using transfer learning.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

