Efficient Online Portfolio with Logarithmic Regret

Chen-Yu Wei
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
chenyu.wei@usc.edu

Haipeng Luo
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Kai Zheng
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing Institute of Big Data Research
zhengk92@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We study the decades-old problem of online portfolio management and propose
the first algorithm with logarithmic regret that is not based on Cover’s Universal
Portfolio algorithm and admits much faster implementation. Specifically Universal
Portfolio enjoys optimal regret O(N ln T ) for N financial instruments over T
rounds, but requires log-concave sampling and has a large polynomial running time.
Our algorithm, on the other hand, ensures a slightly larger but still logarithmic
regret of O(N 2 (ln T )4 ), and is based on the well-studied Online Mirror Descent
framework with a novel regularizer that can be implemented via standard optimization methods in time O(T N 2.5 ) per round. The regret of all other existing works
is either polynomial in T or has a potentially unbounded factor such as the inverse
of the smallest price relative.

1

Introduction

We consider the well-known online portfolio management problem [8], where a learner has to
sequentially decide how to allocate her wealth over a set of N financial instruments in order to
maximize her return, importantly under no assumptions at all on how the market behaves. Specifically,
for each trading period t = 1, . . . , T , the learner first decides the proportion of her wealth to invest
on each stock, and then by the end of the period observes the return of each stock and continues to
invest with her total wealth. The goal of the learner is to maximize the ratio between her total wealth
after T rounds and the total wealth of the best constant-rebalanced portfolio (CRP) which always
rebalances the wealth to ensure a fixed proportion of investment for each stock. Equivalently, the
learner aims to minimize her regret, which is the negative logarithm of the aforementioned ratio.
The minimax optimal regret for this problem is O(N ln T ), achieved by Cover’s Universal Portfolio
algorithm [8]. This algorithm requires sampling from a log-concave distribution and all known
efficient implementations have large polynomial (in N and T ) running time, such as O(T 14 N 4 ) [15].1
Online Newton Step (ONS) [12], on the other hand, follows the well-studied framework of Online
Mirror Descent (OMD) with a simple time-varying regularizer and admits much faster implementation
via standard optimization methods. The regret of ONS is O(GN ln T ) where G is the largest gradient
`∞ -norm encountered over T rounds (formally defined in Section 1.1) and can be arbitrarily large
making the bound meaningless. A typical way to prevent unbounded gradient is to mix the output
1
Recent improvements on log-concave sampling such as [7, 16, 17] may lead to improved running time, but
it is still a large polynomial.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

