Adapted Deep Embeddings: A Synthesis of Methods
for k-Shot Inductive Transfer Learning

Tyler R. Scott, Karl Ridgeway, Michael C. Mozer
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado, Boulder
{tysc7237,karl.ridgeway,mozer}@colorado.edu

Abstract
The focus in machine learning has branched beyond training classifiers on a single
task to investigating how previously acquired knowledge in a source domain can
be leveraged to facilitate learning in a related target domain, known as inductive
transfer learning. Three active lines of research have independently explored
transfer learning using neural networks. In weight transfer, a model trained on the
source domain is used as an initialization point for a network to be trained on the
target domain. In deep metric learning, the source domain is used to construct an
embedding that captures class structure in both the source and target domains. In
few-shot learning, the focus is on generalizing well in the target domain based on a
limited number of labeled examples. We compare state-of-the-art methods from
these three paradigms and also explore hybrid adapted-embedding methods that
use limited target-domain data to fine tune embeddings constructed from sourcedomain data. We conduct a systematic comparison of methods in a variety of
domains, varying the number of labeled instances available in the target domain
(k), as well as the number of target-domain classes. We reach three principal
conclusions: (1) Deep embeddings are far superior, compared to weight transfer, as
a starting point for inter-domain transfer or model re-use (2) Our hybrid methods
robustly outperform every few-shot learning and every deep metric learning method
previously proposed, with a mean error reduction of 34% over state-of-the-art. (3)
Among loss functions for discovering embeddings, the histogram loss (Ustinova &
Lempitsky, 2016) is most robust. We hope our results will motivate a unification of
research in weight transfer, deep metric learning, and few-shot learning.

1

Introduction

Since the introduction of backpropagation, researchers in neural networks have investigated inductive
transfer learning [3, 24]. Inductive transfer learning refers to the use of labeled data from a source
domain to improve generalization accuracy on a related target domain with limited labeled data
[23]. The notion of ‘related’ is not formally defined, though the existence of shared features across
domains is presumed. With the deep learning movement, there has been a resurgence of interest in
inductive transfer learning (ITL) for classification, which we will refer to as k-ITL, where k denotes
the number of labeled examples available for each class in the target domain. Of particular interest
has been the case with small k, due to the fact that deep learning is typically data hungry, in contrast
to human learners who often generalize well from a single example [16].
Three independent lines of research have tackled the k-ITL problem, either explicitly or implicitly.
First, the deep metric learning literature [2, 4, 18, 20, 21, 26, 28, 32, 34, 35, 38] uses the source
domain to construct a nonlinear embedding in which instances of the same class are clustered together
and well separated from instances of different classes. The quality of an embedding is evaluated by
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

