Boosting Black Box Variational Inference
Francesco Locatello⇤1,2 , Gideon Dresdner⇤2 , Rajiv Khanna3 , Isabel Valera1 , and Gunnar Rätsch2
2

1
Max-Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Germany
Dept. for Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Universitätsstrasse 6, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland.
3
The University of Texas at Austin, USA

Abstract
Approximating a probability density in a tractable manner is a central task in
Bayesian statistics. Variational Inference (VI) is a popular technique that achieves
tractability by choosing a relatively simple variational approximation. Borrowing
ideas from the classic boosting framework, recent approaches attempt to boost
VI by replacing the selection of a single density with an iteratively constructed
mixture of densities. In order to guarantee convergence, previous works impose
stringent assumptions that require significant effort for practitioners. Specifically,
they require a custom implementation of the greedy step (called the LMO) for every
probabilistic model with respect to an unnatural variational family of truncated
distributions. Our work fixes these issues with novel theoretical and algorithmic
insights. On the theoretical side, we show that boosting VI satisfies a relaxed
smoothness assumption which is sufficient for the convergence of the functional
Frank-Wolfe (FW) algorithm. Furthermore, we rephrase the LMO problem and
propose to maximize the Residual ELBO (RELBO) which replaces the standard
ELBO optimization in VI. These theoretical enhancements allow for black box
implementation of the boosting subroutine. Finally, we present a stopping criterion
drawn from the duality gap in the classic FW analyses and exhaustive experiments
to illustrate the usefulness of our theoretical and algorithmic contributions.

1

Introduction

Approximating probability densities is a core problem in Bayesian statistics, where inference translates
to the computation of a posterior distribution. Posterior distributions depend on the modeling
assumptions and can rarely be computed exactly. Variational Inference (VI) is a technique to
approximate posterior distributions through optimization. It involves choosing a set of tractable
densities, a.k.a. variational family, out of which the final approximation is to be chosen. The
approximation is done by selecting a density in the candidate set that is close to the true posterior in
terms of Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence [1]. There is an inherent trade-off involved in fixing the
set of tractable densities. Increasing the capacity of the variational family to approximate the posterior
also increases the complexity of the optimization problem. Consider a degenerate case where the
variational family contains just a single density. The optimization problem is trivial and runs in
constant time, but the quality of the solution is poor and stands in no relation to the true posterior.
This contrived example is clearly too restrictive, and in practice, the mean field approximation offers
a good trade-off between expressivity and tractability [2]. However, in many real-world applications,
mean field approximations are lacking in their ability to accurately approximate the posterior.
Imagine a practitioner that, after designing a Bayesian model and using a VI algorithm to approximate
the posterior, finds that the approximation is too poor to be useful. Standard VI does not give the
*

Authors contributed equally

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

