Query Complexity of Bayesian Private Learning
Kuang Xu
Stanford Graduate School of Business
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
kuangxu@stanford.edu

Abstract
We study the query complexity of Bayesian Private Learning: a learner wishes to
locate a random target within an interval by submitting queries, in the presence
of an adversary who observes all of her queries but not the responses. How many
queries are necessary and sufficient in order for the learner to accurately estimate
the target, while simultaneously concealing the target from the adversary?
Our main result is a query complexity lower bound that is tight up to the first
order. We show that if the learner wants to estimate the target within an error of ✏,
while ensuring that no adversary estimator can achieve a constant additive error
with probability greater than 1/L, then the query complexity is on the order of
L log(1/✏) as ✏ ! 0. Our result demonstrates that increased privacy, as captured
by L, comes at the expense of a multiplicative increase in query complexity. The
proof builds on Fano’s inequality and properties of certain proportional-sampling
estimators.

1

Introduction

How to learn, while ensuring that a spying adversary does not learn? Enabled by rapid advancements
in the Internet, surveillance technologies and machine learning, companies and governments alike
have become increasingly capable of monitoring the behavior of individuals or competitors, and
use such data for inference and prediction. Motivated by these developments, the present paper
investigates the extent to which it is possible for a learner to protect her knowledge from an adversary
who observes, completely or partially, her actions.
We will approach these questions by studying the query complexity of Bayesian Private Learning,
a framework proposed by [17] and [13] to investigate the privacy-efficiency trade-off in sequential
learning. Our main result is a tight lower bound on query complexity, showing that there will be a
price to pay for the learner in exchange for improved privacy, whose magnitude scales multiplicatively
with respect to the level of privacy desired. In addition, we provide a family of inference algorithms
for the adversary, based on proportional sampling, which is provably effective in estimating the target
against any learner who does not employ a large number of queries.
1.1

The Model: Bayesian Private Learning

We begin by describing the Bayesian Private Learning model formulated by [17] and [13]. A
learner is trying to accurately identify the location of a random target, X ⇤ , up to some constant
additive error, ✏, where X ⇤ is uniformly distributed in the unit interval, [0, 1). The learner gathers
information about X ⇤ by submitting n queries, (Q1 , . . . , Qn ) 2 [0, 1)n , for some n 2 N. For
each query, Qi , she receives a binary response, indicating the target’s location relative to the query:
Ri = I(X ⇤  Qi ), i = 1, 2, . . . , n, where I(·) denotes the indicator function.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

