Revisiting Multi-Task Learning with ROCK: a Deep
Residual Auxiliary Block for Visual Detection
Taylor Mordan(1, 2)
taylor.mordan@lip6.fr

Nicolas Thome(3)
nicolas.thome@cnam.fr

Gilles Henaff(2)
gilles.henaff@fr.thalesgroup.com

Matthieu Cord(1)
matthieu.cord@lip6.fr

(1) Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Laboratoire d’Informatique de Paris 6, LIP6
F-75005 Paris, France
(2) Thales Land and Air Systems
2 Avenue Gay-Lussac, 78990 Élancourt, France
(3) CEDRIC, Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers
292 Rue St Martin, 75003 Paris, France

Abstract
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) is appealing for deep learning regularization. In this
paper, we tackle a specific MTL context denoted as primary MTL, where the ultimate goal is to improve the performance of a given primary task by leveraging
several other auxiliary tasks. Our main methodological contribution is to introduce
ROCK, a new generic multi-modal fusion block for deep learning tailored to the
primary MTL context. ROCK architecture is based on a residual connection, which
makes forward prediction explicitly impacted by the intermediate auxiliary representations. The auxiliary predictor’s architecture is also specifically designed to
our primary MTL context, by incorporating intensive pooling operators for maximizing complementarity of intermediate representations. Extensive experiments
on NYUv2 dataset (object detection with scene classification, depth prediction,
and surface normal estimation as auxiliary tasks) validate the relevance of the
approach and its superiority to flat MTL approaches. Our method outperforms
state-of-the-art object detection models on NYUv2 dataset by a large margin, and
is also able to handle large-scale heterogeneous inputs (real and synthetic images)
with missing annotation modalities.

1

Introduction

The outstanding success of ConvNets for image classification in the ILSVRC challenge [26] has
heralded a new era for deep learning. A key element of this success is the availability of large-scale
annotated datasets such as ImageNet [40]. When dealing with smaller-scale datasets, however,
training such big ConvNets is not viable, due to strong overfitting issues. In some applications
where images themselves are difficult to obtain, e.g. medical or military domains, getting additional
annotations on available images can be easier than collecting more examples, as a way to get more data
to feed the networks. An appealing option to limit overfitting is then to rely on Transfer Learning (TL),
which aims at leveraging different objectives and datasets for improving predictive performances. The
most popular strategy for tackling small datasets in vision is certainly Fine-Tuning (FT) [1], which
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

