Efficient High Dimensional Bayesian Optimization
with Additivity and Quadrature Fourier Features

Mojmír Mutný
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
mojmir.mutny@inf.ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
krausea@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We develop an efficient and provably no-regret Bayesian optimization (BO) algorithm for optimization of black-box functions in high dimensions. We assume a
generalized additive model with possibly overlapping variable groups. When the
groups do not overlap, we are able to provide the first provably no-regret polynomial time (in the number of evaluations of the acquisition function) algorithm for
solving high dimensional BO. To make the optimization efficient and feasible, we
introduce a novel deterministic Fourier Features approximation based on numerical integration with detailed analysis for the squared exponential kernel. The error
of this approximation decreases exponentially with the number of features, and allows for a precise approximation of both posterior mean and variance. In addition,
the kernel matrix inversion improves in its complexity from cubic to essentially
linear in the number of data points measured in basic arithmetic operations.

1

Introduction

Bayesian Optimization (BO) is a versatile method for global optimization of a black-box function
using noisy point-wise observations. BO has been employed in selection of chemical compounds
[21], online marketing [44], reinforcement learning problems [15, 29], and in search for hyperparameters of machine learning algorithms [25]. BO requires a probabilistic model that reliably models
the uncertainty in the unexplored part of the domain of the black-box function. This model is used
to define an acquisiton function whose maximum determines the next sequential query of black-box
function. A popular choice for a probabilistic model is a Gaussian process (GP), a generalization of
Gaussian random vector to the space of functions.
BO is very successful when applied to functions of a low dimension. However already problems with
5 and more dimensions can be challenging for general BO if they need to be optimized efficiently
and to a high accuracy. Practical high dimensional BO with GPs usually incorporates an assumption
on the covariance structure of a GP, or the black-box function. In this work, we focus on BO
with additive GPs [13], and generalized additive GPs [40] with possibly overlapping variable groups
allowing cross group interference. Even with the additive models assumption, BO in high dimension
remains a daunting task. There are two main problems associated with high dimensional BO with
generalized additive GPs, namely, optimization of the acquisition function, and efficient handling of
many data points - large-scale BO.
To alleviate the two problems, using a generalized additive model assumption, and a popular acquisition function - Thompson sampling [51], we design efficient no-regret algorithms for solving
high dimensional BO problems. Thompson sampling has an acquisition function which leads to
a natural block coordinate decomposition in the variable groups when used with additive models
without overlapping groups, which reduces the complexity of the acquisition function. In fact, with
this assumption, we show that the number of evaluations of the acquisition function are polynomial
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

