Stochastic Chebyshev Gradient Descent
for Spectral Optimization

1

Insu Han1 , Haim Avron2 and Jinwoo Shin1,3
School of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
2
Department of Applied Mathematics, Tel Aviv University
3
AItrics
{insu.han,jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr
haimav@post.tau.ac.il

Abstract
A large class of machine learning techniques requires the solution of optimization
problems involving spectral functions of parametric matrices, e.g. log-determinant
and nuclear norm. Unfortunately, computing the gradient of a spectral function
is generally of cubic complexity, as such gradient descent methods are rather
expensive for optimizing objectives involving the spectral function. Thus, one
naturally turns to stochastic gradient methods in hope that they will provide a way
to reduce or altogether avoid the computation of full gradients. However, here
a new challenge appears: there is no straightforward way to compute unbiased
stochastic gradients for spectral functions. In this paper, we develop unbiased
stochastic gradients for spectral-sums, an important subclass of spectral functions.
Our unbiased stochastic gradients are based on combining randomized trace estimators with stochastic truncation of the Chebyshev expansions. A careful design
of the truncation distribution allows us to offer distributions that are varianceoptimal, which is crucial for fast and stable convergence of stochastic gradient
methods. We further leverage our proposed stochastic gradients to devise stochastic
methods for objective functions involving spectral-sums, and rigorously analyze
their convergence rate. The utility of our methods is demonstrated in numerical
experiments.

1

Introduction

A large class of machine learning techniques involves spectral optimization problems of the form,
min F (A(θ)) + g(θ),
θ∈C

(1)

where C is some finite-dimensional parameter space, A is a function that maps a parameter vector
θ to a symmetric matrix A(θ), F is a spectral function (i.e., a real-valued function on symmetric
matrices that depends only on the eigenvalues of the input matrix), and g : C → R. Examples include
hyperparameter learning in Gaussian process
regression with F (X) = log det X [22], nuclear norm

regularization with F (X) = tr X 1/2 [20], phase retrieval with F (X) = tr (X) [8], and quantum
state tomography with F (X) = tr (X log X) [15]. In the aforementioned applications, the main
difficulty in solving problems of the form (1) is in efficiently addressing the spectral component
F (A(·)). While explicit formulas for the gradients of spectral functions can be derived [17], it is
typically computationally expensive. For example, for F (X) = log det X and A(θ) ∈ Rd×d , the
exact computation of ∇θ F (A(θ)) can take as much as O(d3 k), where k is the number of parameters
in θ. Therefore, it is desirable to avoid computing, or at the very least reduce the number of times we
compute, the gradient of F (A(θ)) exactly.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

