Online Reciprocal Recommendation with Theoretical
Performance Guarantees
Fabio Vitale
Department of Computer Science
Sapienza University of Rome (Italy) & University of Lille (France) & INRIA Lille Nord Europe
Rome, Italy & Lille, France
fabio.vitale@inria.fr
Nikos Parotsidis
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy
nikos.parotsidis@uniroma2.it

Claudio Gentile
INRIA Lille & Google New York
Lille, France & New York, USA
cla.gentile@gmail.com

Abstract
A reciprocal recommendation problem is one where the goal of learning is not
just to predict a user’s preference towards a passive item (e.g., a book), but to
recommend the targeted user on one side another user from the other side such that
a mutual interest between the two exists. The problem thus is sharply different from
the more traditional items-to-users recommendation, since a good match requires
meeting the preferences at both sides. We initiate a rigorous theoretical investigation of the reciprocal recommendation task in a specific framework of sequential
learning. We point out general limitations, formulate reasonable assumptions
enabling effective learning and, under these assumptions, we design and analyze
a computationally efficient algorithm that uncovers mutual likes at a pace comparable to that achieved by a clairvoyant algorithm knowing all user preferences
in advance. Finally, we validate our algorithm against synthetic and real-world
datasets, showing improved empirical performance over simple baselines.

1

Introduction

Recommendation Systems are at the core of many successful online businesses, from e-commerce, to
online streaming, to computational advertising, and beyond. These systems have extensively been
investigated by both academic and industrial researchers by following the standard paradigm of
items-to-users preference prediction/recommendation. In this standard paradigm, a targeted user
is presented with a list of items that s/he may prefer according to a preference profile that the
system has learned based on both explicit user features (item data, demographic data, explicitly
declared preferences, etc.) and past user activity. In more recent years, due to their hugely increasing
interest in the online dating and the job recommendation domains, a special kind of recommendation
systems called Reciprocal Recommendation Systems (RRS) have gained big momentum. The
reciprocal recommendation problem is sharply different from the more traditional items-to-users
recommendation, since recommendations must satisfy both parties, i.e., both parties can express their
likes and dislikes and a good match requires meeting the preferences of both. Examples of RRS
include, for instance: online recruitment systems (e.g., LinkedIn), 1 where a job seeker searches for
jobs matching his/her preferences, say salary and expectations, and a recruiter who seeks suitable
candidates to fulfil the job requirements; heterosexual online dating systems (e.g., Tinder), 2 where
people have the common goal of finding a partner of the opposite gender; roommate matching systems
1
2

https://www.linkedin.com/.
https://tinder.com.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

