Solving Non-smooth Constrained Programs with
Lower Complexity than O(1/"): A Primal-Dual
Homotopy Smoothing Approach
Xiaohan Wei
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA, USA, 90089
xiaohanw@usc.edu
Qing Ling
School of Data and Computer Science
Sun Yat-Sen University
Guangzhou, China, 510006
lingqing556@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Hao Yu
Alibaba Group (U.S.) Inc.
Bellevue, WA, USA, 98004
hao.yu@alibaba-inc.com

Michael J. Neely
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA, USA, 90089
mikejneely@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a new primal-dual homotopy smoothing algorithm for a linearly
constrained convex program, where neither the primal nor the dual function has
to be smooth or strongly convex. The best known iteration complexity solving
such a non-smooth problem is O(" 1 ). In this paper, we show that by leveraging
a local error bound condition on the dual function, the proposed algorithm can
achieve a better primal convergence time of O " 2/(2+ ) log2 (" 1 ) , where 2
(0, 1] is a local error bound parameter. As an example application of the general
algorithm, we show that the distributed geometric median problem, which can be
formulated as a constrained convex program, has its dual function non-smooth but
satisfying the aforementioned local error bound condition with = 1/2, therefore
enjoying a convergence time of O " 4/5 log2 (" 1 ) . This result improves upon
the O(" 1 ) convergence time bound achieved by existing distributed optimization
algorithms. Simulation experiments also demonstrate the performance of our
proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

We consider the following linearly constrained convex optimization problem:
min f (x)
s.t. Ax b = 0, x 2 X ,

(1)
(2)

where X ✓ Rd is a compact convex set, f : Rd ! R is a convex function, A 2 RN ⇥d , b 2 RN .
Such an optimization problem has been studied in numerous works under various application scenarios
such as machine learning (Yurtsever et al. (2015)), signal processing (Ling and Tian (2010)) and
communication networks (Yu and Neely (2017a)). The goal of this work is to design new algorithms
for (1-2) achieving an " approximation with better convergence time than O(1/").
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

