M-Walk: Learning to Walk over Graphs
using Monte Carlo Tree Search
⇤

Yelong Shen1 , ⇤ Jianshu Chen1 , ⇤ Po-Sen Huang2? , Yuqing Guo2 , and Jianfeng Gao2
1
Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue, WA, USA.
{yelongshen, jianshuchen}@tencent.com
2
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA
{yuqguo, jfgao}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Learning to walk over a graph towards a target node for a given query and a source
node is an important problem in applications such as knowledge base completion
(KBC). It can be formulated as a reinforcement learning (RL) problem with a
known state transition model. To overcome the challenge of sparse rewards, we
develop a graph-walking agent called M-Walk, which consists of a deep recurrent
neural network (RNN) and Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS). The RNN encodes
the state (i.e., history of the walked path) and maps it separately to a policy and
Q-values. In order to effectively train the agent from sparse rewards, we combine
MCTS with the neural policy to generate trajectories yielding more positive rewards.
From these trajectories, the network is improved in an off-policy manner using
Q-learning, which modifies the RNN policy via parameter sharing. Our proposed
RL algorithm repeatedly applies this policy-improvement step to learn the model.
At test time, MCTS is combined with the neural policy to predict the target node.
Experimental results on several graph-walking benchmarks show that M-Walk is
able to learn better policies than other RL-based methods, which are mainly based
on policy gradients. M-Walk also outperforms traditional KBC baselines.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of learning to walk over a graph in order to find a target node for a given
source node and a query. Such problems appear in, for example, knowledge base completion (KBC)
[38, 16, 31, 19, 7]. A knowledge graph is a structured representation of world knowledge in the form
of entities and their relations (e.g., Figure 1(a)), and has a wide range of downstream applications
such as question answering. Although a typical knowledge graph may contain millions of entities
and billions of relations, it is usually far from complete. KBC aims to predict the missing relations
between entities using information from the existing knowledge graph. More formally, let G = (N , E)
denote a graph, which consists of a set of nodes, N = {ni }, and a set of edges, E = {eij }, that
connect the nodes, and let q denote an input query. The problem is stated as using the graph G, the
source node nS 2 N and the query q as inputs to predict the target node nT 2 N . In KBC tasks, G
is a given knowledge graph, N is a collection of entities (nodes), and E is a set of relations (edges)
that connect the entities. In the example in Figure 1(a), the objective of KBC is to identify the target
node nT = USA for the given head entity nS = Obama and the given query q = C ITIZENSHIP.
⇤
Yelong Shen, Jianshu Chen, and Po-Sen Huang contributed equally to the paper. The work was done when
Yelong Shen and Jianshu Chen were with Microsoft Research. ? Po-Sen Huang is now at DeepMind (Email:
posenhuang@google.com).

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

