Gamma-Poisson Dynamic Matrix Factorization
Embedded with Metadata Influence
Longbing Cao ∗
Advanced Analytics Institute
University of Technology Sydney
longbing.cao@gmail.com

Trong Dinh Thac Do
Advanced Analytics Institute
University of Technology Sydney
thacdtd@gmail.com

Abstract
A conjugate Gamma-Poisson model for Dynamic Matrix Factorization incorporated with metadata influence (mGDMF for short) is proposed to effectively and
efficiently model massive, sparse and dynamic data in recommendations. Modeling
recommendation problems with a massive number of ratings and very sparse or
even no ratings on some users/items in a dynamic setting is very demanding and
poses critical challenges to well-studied matrix factorization models due to the
large-scale, sparse and dynamic nature of the data. Our proposed mGDMF tackles
these challenges by introducing three strategies: (1) constructing a stable GammaMarkov chain model that smoothly drifts over time by combining both static and
dynamic latent features of data; (2) incorporating the user/item metadata into the
model to tackle sparse ratings; and (3) undertaking stochastic variational inference
to efficiently handle massive data. mGDMF is conjugate, dynamic and scalable.
Experiments show that mGDMF significantly (both effectively and efficiently)
outperforms the state-of-the-art static and dynamic models on large, sparse and
dynamic data.

1

Introduction

An increasing amount of research [8, 21, 13, 25, 3, 16, 34] focuses on the significant real-life
recommendation challenges of modeling massive and evolving ratings (e.g., a girl likes cartoon
movies in her childhood but this may change to romantic movies when she is older) but some users
(or items) have only a few or or even no ratings (forming sparse or cold-start user/item ratings). For
example, Netflix data have 97.5M ratings, 225K users, 14K movies, and 98.8% missing ratings.
The intensively-studied collaborative filtering models, in particular matrix factorization (MF) models,
fail to model such massive, dynamic and sparse recommendation problems as they usually model
static data, assume certain user/item rating similarity, and are too costly to estimate missing ratings in
massive data.
Several Poisson-based MF models were proposed recently to model large and sparse static ratings,
e.g., Poisson Factorization (PF) [25], and collaborative topic PF for modeling content-based recommendations [27]; and dynamic data, e.g., dynamic PF (dPF) [16], dynamic compound PF (DCPF)
[34], and deep dynamic PF [24]. However, none of these can effectively and efficiently handle
massive, dynamic and sparse ratings simultaneously (see more analysis in Section 2).
To effectively model sparse, dynamic and massive ratings, we propose a Gamma-Poisson Dynamic
Matrix Factorization model incorporated with metadata influence (mGDMF). mGDMF has three builtin mechanisms to jointly address user/item rating sparsity, large-scale ratings, and rating dynamics.
First, mGDMF is a factorization model that uses a Gamma-Poisson structure to model massive,
∗

Corresponding author

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

