Autoconj: Recognizing and Exploiting Conjugacy
Without a Domain-Specific Language

Matthew D. Hoffman∗
Google AI
mhoffman@google.com

Matthew J Johnson*
Google Brain
mattjj@google.com

Dustin Tran
Google Brain
trandustin@google.com

Abstract
Deriving conditional and marginal distributions using conjugacy relationships can
be time consuming and error prone. In this paper, we propose a strategy for automating such derivations. Unlike previous systems which focus on relationships
between pairs of random variables, our system (which we call Autoconj) operates directly on Python functions that compute log-joint distribution functions.
Autoconj provides support for conjugacy-exploiting algorithms in any Pythonembedded PPL. This paves the way for accelerating development of novel inference algorithms and structure-exploiting modeling strategies.1

1

Introduction

Some models enjoy a property called conjugacy that makes computation easier. Conjugacy lets us
compute complete conditional distributions, that is, the distribution of some variable conditioned
on all other variables in the model. Complete conditionals are at the heart of many classical statistical inference algorithms such as Gibbs sampling (Geman and Geman, 1984), coordinate-ascent
variational inference (Jordan et al., 1999), and even the venerable expectation-maximization (EM)
algorithm (Dempster et al., 1977). Conjugacy also makes it possible to marginalize out some variables, which makes many algorithms faster and/or more accurate (e.g.; Griffiths and Steyvers, 2004).
Many popular models in the literature enjoy some form of conjugacy, and these models can often be
extended in ways that preserve conjugacy.
For experienced researchers, deriving conditional and marginal distributions using conjugacy relationships is straightforward. But it is also time consuming and error prone, and diagnosing bugs in
these derivations can require significant effort (Cook et al., 2006).
These considerations motivated specialized systems such as BUGS (Spiegelhalter et al., 1995),
VIBES (Winn and Bishop, 2005), and their many successors. In these systems, one specifies a
model in a probabilistic programming language (PPL), provides observed values for some of the
model’s variables, and lets the system automatically translate the model specification into an algorithm (typically Gibbs sampling or variational inference) that approximates the model’s posterior
conditioned on the observed variables.
These systems are useful, but their monolithic design imposes a major limitation: they are difficult
to compose with other systems. For example, a user who wants to interleave Gibbs sampling steps
with some customized Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) kernel will find it very difficult to take
advantage of BUGS’ Gibbs sampler.
In this paper, we propose a different strategy for exploiting conditional conjugacy relationships.
Unlike previous approaches (which focus on relationships between pairs of random variables) our
∗
1

equal contribution
Autoconj (including experiments) is available at https://github.com/google-research/autoconj.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

