Bandit Learning in Concave N -Person Games

Mario Bravo
Universidad de Santiago de Chile
Departamento de Matemática y Ciencia de la Computación
mario.bravo.g@usach.cl
David Leslie
Lancaster University & PROWLER.io
d.leslie@lancaster.ac.uk

Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP
LIG 38000 Grenoble, France.
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Abstract
This paper examines the long-run behavior of learning with bandit feedback in
non-cooperative concave games. The bandit framework accounts for extremely lowinformation environments where the agents may not even know they are playing a
game; as such, the agents’ most sensible choice in this setting would be to employ
a no-regret learning algorithm. In general, this does not mean that the players’
behavior stabilizes in the long run: no-regret learning may lead to cycles, even
with perfect gradient information. However, if a standard monotonicity condition
is satisfied, our analysis shows that no-regret learning based on mirror descent with
bandit feedback converges to Nash equilibrium with probability 1. We also derive
an upper bound for the convergence rate of the process that nearly matches the best
attainable rate for single-agent bandit stochastic optimization.

1

Introduction

The bane of decision-making in an unknown environment is regret: noone wants to realize in
hindsight that the decision policy they employed was strictly inferior to a plain policy prescribing
the same action throughout. For obvious reasons, this issue becomes considerably more intricate
when the decision-maker is subject to situational uncertainty and the “fog of war”: when the only
information at the optimizer’s disposal is the reward obtained from a given action (the so-called
“bandit” framework), is it even possible to design a no-regret policy? Especially in the context of
online convex optimization (repeated decision problems with continuous action sets and convex
costs), this problem becomes even more challenging because the decision-maker typically needs to
infer gradient information from the observation of a single scalar. Nonetheless, despite this extra
degree of difficulty, this question has been shown to admit a positive answer: regret minimization is
possible, even with bandit feedback (Flaxman et al., 2005; Kleinberg, 2004).
In this paper, we consider a multi-agent extension of this framework where, at each stage n = 1, 2, . . . ,
of a repeated decision process, the reward of an agent is determined by the actions of all agents via a
fixed mechanism: a non-cooperative N -person game. In general, the agents – or players – might
be completely oblivious to this mechanism, perhaps even ignoring its existence: for instance, when
choosing how much to bid for a good in an online auction, an agent is typically unaware of who
the other bidders are, what are their specific valuations, etc. Hence, lacking any knowledge about
the game, it is only natural to assume that agents will at least seek to achieve a minimal worst-case
guarantee and minimize their regret. As a result, a fundamental question that arises is a) whether the
agents’ sequence of actions stabilizes to a rationally admissible state under no-regret learning; and
b) if it does, whether convergence is affected by the information available to the agents.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

