Predict Responsibly: Improving Fairness and
Accuracy by Learning to Defer

David Madras, Toniann Pitassi & Richard Zemel
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
{madras,toni,zemel}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
In many machine learning applications, there are multiple decision-makers involved,
both automated and human. The interaction between these agents often goes
unaddressed in algorithmic development. In this work, we explore a simple version
of this interaction with a two-stage framework containing an automated model
and an external decision-maker. The model can choose to say PASS, and pass the
decision downstream, as explored in rejection learning. We extend this concept by
proposing learning to defer, which generalizes rejection learning by considering
the effect of other agents in the decision-making process. We propose a learning
algorithm which accounts for potential biases held by external decision-makers
in a system. Experiments demonstrate that learning to defer can make systems
not only more accurate but also less biased. Even when working with inconsistent
or biased users, we show that deferring models still greatly improve the accuracy
and/or fairness of the entire system.

1

Introduction

Can humans and machines make decisions jointly? A growing use of automated decision-making in
complex domains such as loan approvals [5], medical diagnosis [14], and criminal justice [26], has
raised questions about the role of machine learning in high-stakes decision-making, and the role of
humans in overseeing and applying machine predictions. Consider a black-box model which outputs
risk scores to assist a judge presiding over a bail case [19]. How does a risk score factor into the
decision-making process of an external agent such as a judge? How should this influence how the
score is learned? The model producing the score may be state-of-the-art in isolation, but its true
impact comes as an element of the judge’s decision-making process.
We argue that since these models are often used as part of larger systems e.g. in tandem with another
decision maker (like a judge), they should learn to predict responsibly: the model should predict
only if its predictions are reliably aligned with the system’s objectives, which often include accuracy
(predictions should mostly indicate ground truth) and fairness (predictions should be unbiased with
respect to different subgroups).
Rejection learning [8, 10] proposes a solution: allow models to reject (not make a prediction) when
they are not confidently accurate. However, this approach is inherently nonadaptive: both the model
and the decision-maker act independently of one another. When a model is working in tandem
with some external decision-maker, the decision to reject should depend not only on the model’s
confidence, but also on the decision-maker’s expertise and weaknesses. For example, if the judge’s
black-box is uncertain about some subgroup, but the judge is very inaccurate or biased towards that
subgroup, we may prefer the model make a prediction despite its uncertainty.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

