Batch-Instance Normalization for Adaptively
Style-Invariant Neural Networks

Hyeonseob Nam
Lunit Inc.
Seoul, South Korea
hsnam@lunit.io

Hyo-Eun Kim
Lunit Inc.
Seoul, South Korea
hekim@lunit.io

Abstract
Real-world image recognition is often challenged by the variability of visual styles
including object textures, lighting conditions, filter effects, etc. Although these variations have been deemed to be implicitly handled by more training data and deeper
networks, recent advances in image style transfer suggest that it is also possible to
explicitly manipulate the style information. Extending this idea to general visual
recognition problems, we present Batch-Instance Normalization (BIN) to explicitly
normalize unnecessary styles from images. Considering certain style features
play an essential role in discriminative tasks, BIN learns to selectively normalize
only disturbing styles while preserving useful styles. The proposed normalization
module is easily incorporated into existing network architectures such as Residual
Networks, and surprisingly improves the recognition performance in various scenarios. Furthermore, experiments verify that BIN effectively adapts to completely
different tasks like object classification and style transfer, by controlling the tradeoff between preserving and removing style variations. BIN can be implemented
with only a few lines of code using popular deep learning frameworks.1

1

Introduction

Information described by an image generally consists of spatial and style information, such as object
shape and texture, respectively. While the spatial information usually represents the key contents of
the image, the style information often involves extraneous details that complicate recognition tasks.
Typical examples include the discrepancies in object textures caused by different camera settings and
light conditions, which disturb object classification. Despite the quantum leap of deep learning in
computer vision, visual recognition in real-world applications still suffers from these style variations
inherent in images.
Moderating the variability of image styles has been studied recently to enhance the quality of images
generated from neural networks. Instance Normalization (IN) [22] is a representative approach which
was introduced to discard instance-specific contrast information from an image during style transfer.
Inspired by this, Huang et al. [10] provided a rational interpretation that IN performs a form of style
normalization, showing simply adjusting the feature statistics—namely the mean and variance—of
a generator network can control the style of the generated image. Due to this nature, IN has been
widely adopted as an alternative to Batch Normalization (BN) in style transfer [14, 3] and generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [13, 27].
It is a reasonable assumption that IN would be beneficial not only in generative tasks but also in
discriminative tasks for addressing unnecessary style variations. However, directly applying IN to a
classification problem degrades the performance [22], probably because styles often serve as useful
1

https://github.com/hyeonseob-nam/Batch-Instance-Normalization

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

