Autowarp: Learning a Warping Distance from
Unlabeled Time Series Using Sequence Autoencoders

Abubakar Abid
Stanford University
a12d@stanford.edu

James Zou
Stanford University
jamesz@stanford.edu

Abstract
Measuring similarities between unlabeled time series trajectories is an important
problem in domains as diverse as medicine, astronomy, finance, and computer
vision. It is often unclear what is the appropriate metric to use because of the
complex nature of noise in the trajectories (e.g. different sampling rates or outliers).
Domain experts typically hand-craft or manually select a specific metric, such as
dynamic time warping (DTW), to apply on their data. In this paper, we propose
Autowarp, an end-to-end algorithm that optimizes and learns a good metric given
unlabeled trajectories. We define a flexible and differentiable family of warping
metrics, which encompasses common metrics such as DTW, Euclidean, and edit
distance. Autowarp then leverages the representation power of sequence autoencoders to optimize for a member of this warping distance family. The output is a
metric which is easy to interpret and can be robustly learned from relatively few
trajectories. In systematic experiments across different domains, we show that
Autowarp often outperforms hand-crafted trajectory similarity metrics.

1

Introduction

A time series, also known as a trajectory, is a sequence of observed data t = (t1 , t2 , ...tn ) measured
over time. A large number of real world data in medicine [1], finance [2], astronomy [3] and computer
vision [4] are time series. A key question that is often asked about time series data is: "How similar
are two given trajectories?" A notion of trajectory similarity allows one to do unsupervised learning,
such as clustering and visualization, of time series data, as well as supervised learning, such as
classification [5]. However, measuring the distance between trajectories is complex, because of the
temporal correlation between data in a time series and the complex nature of the noise that may be
present in the data (e.g. different sampling rates) [6].
In the literature, many methods have been proposed to measure the similarity between trajectories. In
the simplest case, when trajectories are all sampled at the same frequency and are of equal length,
Euclidean distance can be used [7]. When comparing trajectories with different sampling rates,
dynamic time warping (DTW) is a popular choice [7]. Because the choice of distance metric can
have a significant effect on downstream analysis [5, 6, 8], a plethora of other distances have been
hand-crafted based on the specific characteristics of the data and noise present in the time series.
However, a review of five of the most popular trajectory distances found that no one trajectory
distance is more robust than the others to all of the different kinds of noise that are commonly present
in time series data [8]. As a result, it is perhaps not surprising that many distances have been manually
designed for different time series domains and datasets. In this work, we propose an alternative to
hand-crafting a distance: we develop an end-to-end framework to learn a good similarity metric
directly from unlabeled time series data.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

