First-order Stochastic Algorithms for Escaping From
Saddle Points in Almost Linear Time
Yi Xu† , Rong Jin‡ , Tianbao Yang†
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52246, USA
‡
Machine Intelligence Technology, Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{yi-xu, tianbao-yang}@uiowa.edu, jinrong.jr@alibaba-inc.com
†

Abstract
In this paper, we consider first-order methods for solving stochastic non-convex
optimization problems. The key building block of the proposed algorithms is firstorder procedures to extract negative curvature from the Hessian matrix through a
principled sequence starting from noise, which are referred to NEgative-curvatureOriginated-from-Noise or NEON and are of independent interest. Based on this
building block, we design purely first-order stochastic algorithms for escaping
from non-degenerate saddle points with a much better time complexity (almost
linear time in the problem’s dimensionality) under a bounded variance condition of
stochastic gradients than previous first-order stochastic algorithms. In particular,
we develop a general framework of first-order stochastic algorithms with a secondorder convergence guarantee based on our new technique and existing algorithms
that may only converge to a first-order stationary point. For finding a nearly
√
second-order stationary point x such that k∇F (x)k ≤  and ∇2 F (x) ≥ − I
(in high probability), the best time complexity of the presented algorithms is
3.5
e
O(d/
), where F (·) denotes the objective function and d is the dimensionality
of the problem. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first theoretical result of
first-order stochastic algorithms with an almost linear time in terms of problem’s
dimensionality for finding second-order stationary points, which is even competitive
with existing stochastic algorithms hinging on the second-order information.

1

Introduction

The problem of interest in this paper is Stochastic Non-Convex Optimization given by
min F (x) , Eξ [f (x; ξ)],

x∈Rd

(1)

where ξ is a random variable and f (x; ξ) is a random smooth non-convex function of x. The only
information available of F (x) to us is sampled stochastic functions f (x; ξ) and their gradients.
A popular choice of algorithms for solving (1) is (mini-batch) stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
method and its variants [6]. However, these algorithms do not necessarily guarantee to escape from a
saddle point (more precisely a non-degenerate saddle point) x satisfying that: ∇F (x) = 0 and the
minimum eigen-value of ∇2 F (x)) is less than 0. Recently, new variants of SGD by adding isotropic
noise into the stochastic gradient were proposed (noisy SGD [5], stochastic gradient Langevin
dynamics (SGLD) [23]). These two works provide rigorous analyses of the noise-injected update for
escaping from a saddle point. Unfortunately, both variants suffer from a polynomial time complexity
with a super-linear dependence on the dimensionality d (at least a power of 4), which renders them
not practical for optimizing problems of high dimension.
On the other hand, second-order information carried by the Hessian has been utilized to escape from
a saddle point, which usually yields an almost linear time complexity in terms of the dimensionality
d under the assumption that the Hessian-vector product (HVP) can be performed in a linear time. In
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

