Community Exploration: From Offline Optimization
to Online Learning

Xiaowei Chen1 , Weiran Huang2 , Wei Chen3 , John C.S. Lui1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 3 Microsoft Research
1
{xwchen, cslui}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, 2 huang.inbox@outlook.com
3
weic@microsoft.com

Abstract
We introduce the community exploration problem that has many real-world applications such as online advertising. In the problem, an explorer allocates limited
budget to explore communities so as to maximize the number of members he could
meet. We provide a systematic study of the community exploration problem, from
offline optimization to online learning. For the offline setting where the sizes of
communities are known, we prove that the greedy methods for both of non-adaptive
exploration and adaptive exploration are optimal. For the online setting where the
sizes of communities are not known and need to be learned from the multi-round
explorations, we propose an “upper confidence” like algorithm that achieves the
logarithmic regret bounds. By combining the feedback from different rounds, we
can achieve a constant regret bound.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we introduce the community exploration problem, which is abstracted from many
real-world applications. Consider the following hypothetical scenario. Suppose that John just entered
the university as a freshman. He wants to explore different student communities or study groups at
the university to meet as many new friends as possible. But he only has a limited time to spend on
exploring different communities, so his problem is how to allocate his time and energy to explore
different student communities to maximize the number of people he would meet.
The above hypothetical community exploration scenario can also find similar counterparts in serious
business and social applications. One example is online advertising. In this application, an advertiser
wants to promote his products via placing advertisements on different online websites. The website
would show the advertisements on webpages, and visitors to the websites may click on the advertisements when they view these webpages. The advertiser wants to reach as many unique customers as
possible, but he only has a limited budget to spend. Moreover, website visitors come randomly, so it
is not guaranteed that all visitors to the same website are unique customers. So the advertiser needs
to decide how to spend the budget on each website to reach his customers. Of course, intuitively he
should spend more budget on larger communities, but how much? And what if he does not know the
user size of every website? In this case, each website is a community, consisting of all visitors to this
website, and the problem can be modeled as a community exploration problem. Another example
could be a social worker who wants to reach a large number of people from different communities to
do social studies or improve the social welfare for a large population, while he also needs to face the
budget constraint and uncertainty about the community.
In this paper, we abstract the common features of these applications and define the following
community exploration problem that reflects the common core of the problem. We model the problem
with m disjoint communities C1 , . . . , Cm with C = ∪m
i=1 Ci , where each community Ci has di
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

