H OUDINI: Lifelong Learning as Program Synthesis

Lazar Valkov
University of Edinburgh
L.Valkov@sms.ed.ac.uk

Dipak Chaudhari
Rice University
dipakc@rice.edu

Charles Sutton
University of Edinburgh,
The Alan Turing Institute, and Google Brain
charlessutton@google.com

Akash Srivastava
University of Edinburgh
Akash.Srivastava@ed.ac.uk
Swarat Chaudhuri
Rice University
swarat@rice.edu

Abstract
We present a neurosymbolic framework for the lifelong learning of algorithmic
tasks that mix perception and procedural reasoning. Reusing high-level concepts
across domains and learning complex procedures are key challenges in lifelong
learning. We show that a program synthesis approach that combines gradient
descent with combinatorial search over programs can be a more effective response
to these challenges than purely neural methods. Our framework, called H OUDINI,
represents neural networks as strongly typed, differentiable functional programs
that use symbolic higher-order combinators to compose a library of neural functions. Our learning algorithm consists of: (1) a symbolic program synthesizer that
performs a type-directed search over parameterized programs, and decides on the
library functions to reuse, and the architectures to combine them, while learning a
sequence of tasks; and (2) a neural module that trains these programs using stochastic gradient descent. We evaluate H OUDINI on three benchmarks that combine
perception with the algorithmic tasks of counting, summing, and shortest-path
computation. Our experiments show that H OUDINI transfers high-level concepts
more effectively than traditional transfer learning and progressive neural networks,
and that the typed representation of networks significantly accelerates the search.

1

Introduction

Differentiable programming languages [25, 29, 8, 15, 10, 39, 34] have recently emerged as a powerful
approach to the task of engineering deep learning systems. These languages are syntactically similar
to, and often direct extensions of, traditional programming languages. However, programs in these
languages are differentiable in their parameters, permitting gradient-based parameter learning. The
framework of differentiable languages has proven especially powerful for representing architectures
that have input-dependent structure, such as deep networks over trees [35, 2] and graphs [23, 19].
A recent paper by Gaunt et al. [14] points to another key appeal of high-level differentiable languages:
they facilitate transfer across learning tasks. The paper gives a language called N EURAL T ERPRET
(NTPT) in which programs can invoke a library of trainable neural networks as subroutines. The
parameters of these “library functions” are learned along with the code that calls them. The modularity
of the language allows knowledge transfer, as a library function trained on a task can be reused in
later tasks. In contrast to standard methods for transfer learning in deep networks, which re-use the
first few layers of the network, neural libraries have the potential to enable reuse of higher, more
abstract levels of the network, in what could be called high-level transfer. In spite of its promise,
though, inferring the structure of differentiable programs is a fundamentally hard problem. While
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

