Answerer in Questioner’s Mind:
Information Theoretic Approach to
Goal-Oriented Visual Dialog

Sang-Woo Lee1∗ , Yu-Jung Heo2 , and Byoung-Tak Zhang2,3
Clova AI Research, Naver Corp1
Seoul National University2
Surromind Robotics3

Abstract
Goal-oriented dialog has been given attention due to its numerous applications in
artificial intelligence. Goal-oriented dialogue tasks occur when a questioner asks
an action-oriented question and an answerer responds with the intent of letting
the questioner know a correct action to take. To ask the adequate question, deep
learning and reinforcement learning have been recently applied. However, these
approaches struggle to find a competent recurrent neural questioner, owing to the
complexity of learning a series of sentences. Motivated by theory of mind, we
propose “Answerer in Questioner’s Mind” (AQM), a novel information theoretic
algorithm for goal-oriented dialog. With AQM, a questioner asks and infers based
on an approximated probabilistic model of the answerer. The questioner figures out
the answerer’s intention via selecting a plausible question by explicitly calculating
the information gain of the candidate intentions and possible answers to each
question. We test our framework on two goal-oriented visual dialog tasks: “MNIST
Counting Dialog” and “GuessWhat?!”. In our experiments, AQM outperforms
comparative algorithms by a large margin.

1

Introduction

Goal-oriented dialog is a classical artificial intelligence problem that needs to be addressed for digital
personal assistants, order-by-phone tools, and online customer service centers. Goal-oriented dialog
occurs when a questioner asks an action-oriented question and an answerer responds with the intent
of letting the questioner know a correct action to take. Significant research on goal-oriented dialog
has tackled this problem using from the rule-based approach to the end-to-end neural approach [1–3].
Motivated by the achievement of neural chit-chat dialog research [4], recent studies on goal-oriented
dialogs have utilized deep learning, using massive data to train their neural networks in self-play
environments. In this setting, two machine agents are trained to make a dialog to achieve the goal
of the task in a cooperative way [5–7]. Many researchers attempted to solve goal-oriented dialog
tasks by using the deep supervised learning (deep SL) approach [8] based on seq2seq models [9]
or the deep reinforcement learning (deep RL) approach utilizing rewards obtained from the result
of the dialog [10, 11]. However, these methods struggle to find a competent RNN model that uses
back-propagation, owing to the complexity of learning a series of sentences. These algorithms tend to
generate redundant sentences, making generated dialogs inefficient [12, 13].
∗

Work carried out at Seoul National University

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

