Tangent: Automatic differentiation using source-code
transformation for dynamically typed array
programming

Bart van Merriënboer
MILA, Google Brain
bartvm@google.com

Dan Moldovan
Google Brain
mdan@google.com

Alexander B Wiltschko
Google Brain
alexbw@google.com

Abstract
The need to efficiently calculate first- and higher-order derivatives of increasingly
complex models expressed in Python has stressed or exceeded the capabilities of
available tools. In this work, we explore techniques from the field of automatic
differentiation (AD) that can give researchers expressive power, performance and
strong usability. These include source-code transformation (SCT), flexible gradient
surgery, efficient in-place array operations, and higher-order derivatives. We
implement and demonstrate these ideas in the Tangent software library for Python,
the first AD framework for a dynamic language that uses SCT.

1

Introduction

Many applications in machine learning rely on gradient-based optimization, or at least the efficient
calculation of derivatives of models expressed as computer programs. Researchers have a wide
variety of tools from which they can choose, particularly if they are using the Python language
[21, 16, 24, 2, 1]. These tools can generally be characterized as trading off research or production use
cases, and can be divided along these lines by whether they implement automatic differentiation using
operator overloading (OO) or SCT. SCT affords more opportunities for whole-program optimization,
while OO makes it easier to support convenient syntax in Python, like data-dependent control flow, or
advanced features such as custom partial derivatives. We show here that it is possible to offer the
programming flexibility usually thought to be exclusive to OO-based tools in an SCT framework.
Tangent is the first AD framework using SCT in a dynamically typed language. We produce efficient
derivatives using a novel combination of multiple dispatch, lazy evaluation, and static optimizations.
Further, Tangent has mutable multidimensional arrays as first class objects, implemented using
persistent data structures for performance in the context of reverse mode AD. By operating directly
on Python source code, Tangent is able to achieve a separation of concerns that other AD libraries do
not. Specifically, we achieve compositionality with tools in the Python ecosystem, such as debuggers,
profilers and other compilers. Tangent makes it easy and efficient to express machine learning models,
and is open source 1 .

2

Background

Automatic differentiation (AD) is a set of techniques to evaluate derivatives of mathematical functions
defined as programs [10], and is heavily used in machine learning [3]. It is based on the insight that
the chain rule can be applied to the elementary arithmetic operations (primitives) performed by the
program. This allows derivatives to be calculated up to machine precision [17] with only a constant
1

Source code and documentation available at https://github.com/google/tangent

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

