Robust Learning of Fixed-Structure
Bayesian Networks

Yu Cheng
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
yucheng@cs.duke.edu

Ilias Diakonikolas
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
ilias.diakonikolas@gmail.com

Daniel M. Kane
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
dakane@ucsd.edu

Alistair Stewart
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
stewart.al@gmail.com

Abstract
We investigate the problem of learning Bayesian networks in a robust model where
an -fraction of the samples are adversarially corrupted. In this work, we study
the fully observable discrete case where the structure of the network is given.
Even in this basic setting, previous learning algorithms either run in exponential
time or lose dimension-dependent factors in their error guarantees. We provide
the first computationally efficient robust learning algorithm for this problem with
dimension-independent error guarantees. Our algorithm has near-optimal sample
complexity, runs in polynomial time, and achieves error that scales nearly-linearly
with the fraction of adversarially corrupted samples. Finally, we show on both
synthetic and semi-synthetic data that our algorithm performs well in practice.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic graphical models [KF09] provide an appealing and unifying formalism to succinctly
represent structured high-dimensional distributions. The general problem of inference in graphical models is of fundamental importance and arises in many applications across several scientific
disciplines, see [WJ08] and references therein. In this work, we study the problem of learning
graphical models from data [Nea03, DSA11]. There are several variants of this general learning
problem depending on: (i) the precise family of graphical models considered (e.g., directed, undirected), (ii) whether the data is fully or partially observable, and (iii) whether the structure of the
underlying graph is known a priori or not (parameter estimation versus structure learning). This
learning problem has been studied extensively along these axes during the past five decades, (see,
e.g., [CL68, Das97, AKN06, WRL06, AHHK12, SW12, LW12, BMS13, BGS14, Bre15]) resulting
in a beautiful theory and a collection of algorithms in various settings.
The main vulnerability of all these algorithmic techniques is that they crucially rely on the assumption
that the samples are precisely generated by a graphical model in the given family. This simplifying
assumption is inherent for known guarantees in the following sense: if there exists even a very small
fraction of arbitrary outliers in the dataset, the performance of known algorithms can be totally
compromised. It is important to explore the natural setting when the aforementioned assumption
holds only in an approximate sense. Specifically, we study the following broad question:
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

