Incorporating Context into Language Encoding
Models for fMRI
Shailee Jain1 Alexander G Huth1,2
Departments of 1 Computer Science & 2 Neuroscience
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78751
{shailee, huth}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Language encoding models help explain language processing in the human
brain by learning functions that predict brain responses from the language
stimuli that elicited them. Current word embedding-based approaches treat
each stimulus word independently and thus ignore the influence of context on
language understanding. In this work, we instead build encoding models using rich
contextual representations derived from an LSTM language model. Our models
show a significant improvement in encoding performance relative to state-of-the-art
embeddings in nearly every brain area. By varying the amount of context used
in the models and providing the models with distorted context, we show that
this improvement is due to a combination of better word embeddings learned by
the LSTM language model and contextual information. We are also able to use
our models to map context sensitivity across the cortex. These results suggest
that LSTM language models learn high-level representations that are related to
representations in the human brain.

1

Introduction

To extract meaning from natural speech, the human brain combines information about each word
with previous words, or context. Without context, humans would be unable to understand homonyms,
parse phrases, or resolve coreferences. Contextual information must thus be represented in the
human cortex. One powerful tool for mapping cortical representations is encoding models, which use
features extracted from stimuli to predict brain responses recorded with fMRI. Previous language
encoding studies have successfully mapped word-level semantic representations using embedding
vectors (15; 22; 9; 8), but this approach neglects the effect of context by assuming that the response to
each word is independent. Overcoming this limitation would require extracting language features that
incorporate context. However, no existing hand-designed feature space is well-suited for this task.
Several recent studies have overcome the limitations of hand-designed feature spaces by instead
using representations discovered by supervised deep neural networks. These networks are trained to
perform tasks that the human brain performs: recognize objects in visual scenes (2; 7; 5) or words and
musical genres in sounds (11). Stimuli from fMRI experiments are fed into the pretrained networks
and activations from each layer are treated as separate feature spaces for encoding models. These
representations prove highly effective at modeling brain responses in the visual and auditory cortex,
suggesting that the networks discover representations similar to those in the brain. However, in
both cases, representations at both the lowest-level (images, sound spectrograms) and highest-level
(image categories, words, music genres) are known a priori, and the networks are used to discover
intermediate ones. In contrast, for language the highest-level representation is unknown, making this
supervised approach inapplicable.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

