Q-learning with Nearest Neighbors
Devavrat Shah ⇤
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
devavrat@mit.edu

Qiaomin Xie ⇤
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
qxie@mit.edu

Abstract

1

We consider model-free reinforcement learning for infinite-horizon discounted
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) with a continuous state space and unknown
transition kernel, when only a single sample path under an arbitrary policy of
the system is available. We consider the Nearest Neighbor Q-Learning (NNQL)
algorithm to learn the optimal Q function using nearest neighbor regression method.
As the main contribution, we provide tight finite sample analysis of the convergence
rate. In particular, for MDPs with a d-dimensional state space and the discounted
factor 2 (0, 1), given an arbitrary sample path with “covering time” L, we
establish that the algorithm is guaranteed to output an "-accurate estimate of the
e L/("3 (1
optimal Q-function using O
)7 ) samples. For instance, for a wellbehaved MDP, the covering time of the sample path under the purely random policy
e 1/"d , so the sample complexity scales as O
e 1/"d+3 . Indeed, we
scales as O
e 1/"d+2 is necessary.
establish a lower bound that argues that the dependence of ⌦

Introduction

Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are natural models for a wide variety of sequential decisionmaking problems. It is well-known that the optimal control problem in MDPs can be solved, in
principle, by standard algorithms such as value and policy iterations. These algorithms, however, are
often not directly applicable to many practical MDP problems for several reasons. First, they do not
scale computationally as their complexity grows quickly with the size of the state space and especially
for continuous state space. Second, in problems with complicated dynamics, the transition kernel of
the underlying MDP is often unknown, or an accurate model thereof is lacking. To circumvent these
difficulties, many model-free Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms have been proposed, in which
one estimates the relevant quantities of the MDPs (e.g., the value functions or the optimal policies)
from observed data generated by simulating the MDP.
A popular model-free Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithm is the so called Q-learning [47], which
directly learns the optimal action-value function (or Q function) from the observations of the system
trajectories. A major advantage of Q-learning is that it can be implemented in an online, incremental
fashion, in the sense that Q-learning can be run as data is being sequentially collected from the system
operated/simulated under some policy, and continuously refines its estimates as new observations
become available. The behaviors of standard Q-learning in finite state-action problems have by now
been reasonably understood; in particular, both asymptotic and finite-sample convergence guarantees
have been established [43, 22, 41, 18].
In this paper, we consider the general setting with continuous state spaces. For such problems,
existing algorithms typically make use of a parametric function approximation method, such as a
linear approximation [27], to learn a compact representation of the action-value function. In many of
⇤
Both authors are affiliated with Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems (LIDS). DS is with the
Department of EECS as well as Statistics and Data Science Center at MIT.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

