Clustering Redemption–Beyond
the Impossibility of Kleinberg’s Axioms

Vincent Cohen-Addad˚
Sorbonne Universités,
UPMC Univ Paris 06,
CNRS, LIP6
vincent.cohen-addad@lip6.fr

Varun Kanade:
University of Oxford
varunk@cs.ox.ac.uk

Frederik Mallmann-Trenn;
MIT
mallmann@mit.edu

Abstract
Kleinberg [20] stated three axioms that any clustering procedure should satisfy and
showed there is no clustering procedure that simultaneously satisfies all three. One
of these, called the consistency axiom, requires that when the data is modified in a
helpful way, i.e. if points in the same cluster are made more similar and those in
different ones made less similar, the algorithm should output the same clustering. To
circumvent this impossibility result, research has focused on considering clustering
procedures that have a clustering quality measure (or a cost) and showing that a
modification of Kleinberg’s axioms that takes cost into account lead to feasible
clustering procedures. In this work, we take a different approach, based on the
observation that the consistency axiom fails to be satisfied when the “correct”
number of clusters changes. We modify this axiom by making use of cost functions
to determine the correct number of clusters, and require that consistency holds only
if the number of clusters remains unchanged. We show that single linkage satisfies
the modified axioms, and if the input is well-clusterable, some popular procedures
such as k-means also satisfy the axioms, taking a step towards explaining the
success of these objective functions for guiding the design of algorithms.
1

Introduction

In a highly influential paper, Kleinberg [20] showed that clustering is impossible in the following
sense: there exists no clustering function, i.e. a function that takes a point-set and a pairwise
dis-similarity function4 defined on them as input, and outputs a partition of the point-set, that
simultaneously fulfills three simple and “reasonable” axioms—scale invariance, richness and
consistency. Scale invariance requires that scaling all the dis-similarities by the same positive number
should not change the output partition. Richness requires that for any partition of the point-set, there
should be a way to define pairwise dis-similarities such that the clustering function will produce
said partition as output. Finally, consistency requires the following: if a clustering function outputs
a certain partition of a point-set, given a certain dis-similarity function, then applying this clustering
function to a transformed dis-similarity function that makes points within the same part more similar
and points in different parts less similar, should yield the same partition.
While seemingly very natural in the context of clustering, the last of these axioms, consistency,
is somewhat questionable as has been discussed by researchers over the years (see e.g. [30] and
˚
Ce projet a bénéficié d’une aide de l’État gérée par l’Agence Nationale de la Recherche au titre du
Programme FOCAL portant la référence suivante : ANR-18-CE40-0004-01.
:
This work was supported in part by the Alan Turing Institute through the EPSRC grant EP/N510129/1.
;
This work was supported in part by NSF Award Numbers CCF-1461559, CCF-0939370, and CCF-1810758.
4
We use dis-similarity rather than distance, as for the most part we don’t require the point-set and the
associated dis-similarity function to form a metric space.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

