The emergence of multiple retinal cell types through
efficient coding of natural movies
Samuel A. Ocko⇤ †, Jack Lindsey⇤, Surya Ganguli1 , Stephane Deny†
Department of Applied Physics, Stanford and 1 Google Brain, Mountain View, CA

Abstract
One of the most striking aspects of early visual processing in the retina is the immediate parcellation of visual information into multiple parallel pathways, formed
by different retinal ganglion cell types each tiling the entire visual field. Existing
theories of efficient coding have been unable to account for the functional advantages of such cell-type diversity in encoding natural scenes. Here we go beyond
previous theories to analyze how a simple linear retinal encoding model with
different convolutional cell types efficiently encodes naturalistic spatiotemporal
movies given a fixed firing rate budget. We find that optimizing the receptive
fields and cell densities of two cell types makes them match the properties of the
two main cell types in the primate retina, midget and parasol cells, in terms of
spatial and temporal sensitivity, cell spacing, and their relative ratio. Moreover,
our theory gives a precise account of how the ratio of midget to parasol cells
decreases with retinal eccentricity. Also, we train a nonlinear encoding model with
a rectifying nonlinearity to efficiently encode naturalistic movies, and again find
emergent receptive fields resembling those of midget and parasol cells that are now
further subdivided into ON and OFF types. Thus our work provides a theoretical
justification, based on the efficient coding of natural movies, for the existence of
the four most dominant cell types in the primate retina that together comprise 70%
of all ganglion cells.

1

Introduction

The time honored principle that the visual system evolved to efficiently encode the structure of
our visual world opens up the tantalizing possibility that we can predict, ab initio, the functional
organization of visual circuitry simply in terms of the statistical structure of natural scenes. Indeed,
efficient coding theory has achieved several successes in the retina by simply considering coding
of static spatial scenes [1, 2, 3] or mostly temporal sequences [4]. However, such theories have not
yet accounted for one of the most salient aspects of retinal computation, namely the existence of a
diversity of retinal ganglion cell types, each forming a mosaic that uniformly tiles the visual field [5].
A few theoretical studies have suggested reasons for different cell types. One suggestion is the
feature detector hypothesis [6, 7, 8], or the need to detect highly specialized, behaviorally relevant
environmental cues. However, many cell types respond broadly to general classes of stimuli whose
direct behavioral relevance remains unclear [9, 10, 11]. Another line of argument involves metabolic
efficiency. In particular the division of ganglion cells into rectifying ON and OFF populations is
more metabolically efficient than linear encoding with a single population [12], and the asymmetry
between ON and OFF cells can be related to the asymmetric distribution of light intensity in natural
spatial scenes [13]. Another efficient coding argument explains why two populations with similar
receptive fields (RFs) have different activation thresholds in the salamander retina [14].
⇤
†

Equal contribution. All code available at https://github.com/ganguli-lab/RetinalCellTypes.
Corresponding authors: samocko@gmail.com and stephane.deny.pro@gmail.com.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

