Learning to Decompose and Disentangle
Representations for Video Prediction

Jun-Ting Hsieh
Stanford University
junting@stanford.edu

Bingbin Liu
Stanford University
bingbin@stanford.edu

Li Fei-Fei
Stanford University
feifeili@cs.stanford.edu

De-An Huang
Stanford University
dahuang@cs.stanford.edu

Juan Carlos Niebles
Stanford University
jniebles@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Our goal is to predict future video frames given a sequence of input frames. Despite
large amounts of video data, this remains a challenging task because of the highdimensionality of video frames. We address this challenge by proposing the
Decompositional Disentangled Predictive Auto-Encoder (DDPAE), a framework
that combines structured probabilistic models and deep networks to automatically
(i) decompose the high-dimensional video that we aim to predict into components,
and (ii) disentangle each component to have low-dimensional temporal dynamics
that are easier to predict. Crucially, with an appropriately specified generative
model of video frames, our DDPAE is able to learn both the latent decomposition
and disentanglement without explicit supervision. For the Moving MNIST dataset,
we show that DDPAE is able to recover the underlying components (individual
digits) and disentanglement (appearance and location) as we intuitively would do.
We further demonstrate that DDPAE can be applied to the Bouncing Balls dataset
involving complex interactions between multiple objects to predict the video frame
directly from the pixels and recover physical states without explicit supervision.

1

Introduction

Our goal is to build intelligent systems that are capable of visually predicting and forecasting what
will happen in video sequences. Visual prediction is a core problem in computer vision that has been
studied in several contexts, including activity prediction and early recognition [20, 30], human pose
and trajectory forecasting [1, 18], and future frame prediction [22, 31, 39, 44]. In particular, the ability
to visually hallucinate future frames has enabled applications in robotics [8] and healthcare [26].
However, despite the availability of a large amount of video data, visual frame prediction remains a
challenging task because of the high-dimensionality of video frames.
Our key insight into this high-dimensional, continuous sequence prediction problem is to decompose
it into sub-problems that can be more easily predicted. Consider the example of predicting digit movements of Moving MNIST in Figure 1: the transformation that converts an entire frame containing two
digits into the next frame is high-dimensional and non-linear. Directly learning such transformation is
challenging. On the other hand, if we decompose and understand this video correctly, the underlying
dynamics that we must predict are simply the x, y coordinates of each individual digit, which are
low-dimensional and easy to model and predict in this case (constant velocity translation).
The main technical challenge is thus: How do we decompose the high-dimensional video sequence
into sub-problems with lower-dimensional temporal dynamics? While the decomposition is seemingly
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

