Hamiltonian Variational Auto-Encoder
Anthony L. Caterini1 , Arnaud Doucet1,2 , Dino Sejdinovic1,2
1
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford
2
Alan Turing Institute for Data Science
{anthony.caterini, doucet, dino.sejdinovic}@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs) have become very popular techniques to perform inference and learning in latent variable models: they allow us to leverage the
rich representational power of neural networks to obtain ﬂexible approximations of
the posterior of latent variables as well as tight evidence lower bounds (ELBOs).
Combined with stochastic variational inference, this provides a methodology scaling to large datasets. However, for this methodology to be practically efﬁcient,
it is necessary to obtain low-variance unbiased estimators of the ELBO and its
gradients with respect to the parameters of interest. While the use of Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) has
been previously suggested to achieve this [25, 28], the proposed methods require
specifying reverse kernels which have a large impact on performance. Additionally,
the resulting unbiased estimator of the ELBO for most MCMC kernels is typically
not amenable to the reparameterization trick. We show here how to optimally
select reverse kernels in this setting and, by building upon Hamiltonian Importance
Sampling (HIS) [19], we obtain a scheme that provides low-variance unbiased
estimators of the ELBO and its gradients using the reparameterization trick. This allows us to develop a Hamiltonian Variational Auto-Encoder (HVAE). This method
can be re-interpreted as a target-informed normalizing ﬂow [22] which, within our
context, only requires a few evaluations of the gradient of the sampled likelihood
and trivial Jacobian calculations at each iteration.

1

Introduction

Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs), introduced by Kingma and Welling [15] and Rezende et al.
[23], are popular techniques to carry out inference and learning in complex latent variable models.
However, the standard mean-ﬁeld parametrization of the approximate posterior distribution can limit
its ﬂexibility. Recent work has sought to augment the VAE approach by sampling from the VAE
posterior approximation and transforming these samples through mappings with additional trainable
parameters to achieve richer posterior approximations. The most popular application of this idea
is the Normalizing Flows (NFs) approach [22] in which the samples are deterministically evolved
through a series of parameterized invertible transformations called a ﬂow. NFs have demonstrated
success in various domains [2, 16], but the ﬂows do not explicitly use information about the target
posterior. Therefore, it is unclear whether the improved performance is caused by an accurate posterior
approximation or simply a result of overparametrization. The related Hamiltonian Variational
Inference (HVI) [25] instead stochastically evolves the base samples according to Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo (HMC) [20] and thus uses target information, but relies on deﬁning reverse dynamics in the
ﬂow, which, as we will see, turns out to be unnecessary and suboptimal.
One of the key components in the formulation of VAEs is the maximization of the evidence lower
bound (ELBO). The main idea put forward in Salimans et al. [25] is that it is possible to use K
MCMC iterations to obtain an unbiased estimator of the ELBO and its gradients. This estimator
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

