Amortized Inference Regularization
Rui Shu
Stanford University
ruishu@stanford.edu

Hung H. Bui
DeepMind
buih@google.com

Mykel J. Kochenderfer
Stanford University
mykel@stanford.edu

Shengjia Zhao
Stanford University
sjzhao@stanford.edu

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
The variational autoencoder (VAE) is a popular model for density estimation and
representation learning. Canonically, the variational principle suggests to prefer
an expressive inference model so that the variational approximation is accurate.
However, it is often overlooked that an overly-expressive inference model can be
detrimental to the test set performance of both the amortized posterior approximator
and, more importantly, the generative density estimator. In this paper, we leverage
the fact that VAEs rely on amortized inference and propose techniques for amortized
inference regularization (AIR) that control the smoothness of the inference model.
We demonstrate that, by applying AIR, it is possible to improve VAE generalization
on both inference and generative performance. Our paper challenges the belief that
amortized inference is simply a mechanism for approximating maximum likelihood
training and illustrates that regularization of the amortization family provides a
new direction for understanding and improving generalization in VAEs.

1

Introduction

Variational autoencoders are a class of generative models with widespread applications in density
estimation, semi-supervised learning, and representation learning [1, 2, 3, 4]. A popular approach for
the training of such models is to maximize the log-likelihood of the training data. However, maximum
likelihood is often intractable due to the presence of latent variables. Variational Bayes resolves this
issue by constructing a tractable lower bound of the log-likelihood and maximizing the lower bound
instead. Classically, Variational Bayes introduces per-sample approximate proposal distributions that
need to be optimized using a process called variational inference. However, per-sample optimization
incurs a high computational cost. A key contribution of the variational autoencoding framework is the
observation that the cost of variational inference can be amortized by using an amortized inference
model that learns an efficient mapping from samples to proposal distributions. This perspective
portrays amortized inference as a tool for efficiently approximating maximum likelihood training.
Many techniques have since been proposed to expand the expressivity of the amortized inference
model in order to better approximate maximum likelihood training [5, 6, 7, 8].
In this paper, we challenge the conventional role that amortized inference plays in variational
autoencoders. For datasets where the generative model is prone to overfitting, we show that having
an amortized inference model actually provides a new and effective way to regularize maximum
likelihood training. Rather than making the amortized inference model more expressive, we propose
instead to restrict the capacity of the amortization family. Through amortized inference regularization
(AIR), we show that it is possible to reduce the inference gap and increase the log-likelihood
performance on the test set. We propose several techniques for AIR and provide extensive theoretical
and empirical analyses of our proposed techniques when applied to the variational autoencoder and the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

