Found Graph Data and Planted Vertex Covers

Austin R. Benson
Cornell University
arb@cs.cornell.edu

Jon Kleinberg
Cornell University
kleinber@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
A typical way in which network data is recorded is to measure all interactions
involving a specified set of core nodes, which produces a graph containing this
core together with a potentially larger set of fringe nodes that link to the core.
Interactions between nodes in the fringe, however, are not present in the resulting
graph data. For example, a phone service provider may only record calls in which at
least one of the participants is a customer; this can include calls between a customer
and a non-customer, but not between pairs of non-customers. Knowledge of which
nodes belong to the core is crucial for interpreting the dataset, but this metadata
is unavailable in many cases, either because it has been lost due to difficulties
in data provenance, or because the network consists of “found data” obtained in
settings such as counter-surveillance. This leads to an algorithmic problem of
recovering the core set. Since the core is a vertex cover, we essentially have a
planted vertex cover problem, but with an arbitrary underlying graph. We develop
a framework for analyzing this planted vertex cover problem, based on the theory
of fixed-parameter tractability, together with algorithms for recovering the core.
Our algorithms are fast, simple to implement, and out-perform several baselines
based on core-periphery structure on various real-world datasets.

1

Partially measured graphs, data provenance, and planted structure

Datasets that take the form of graphs are ubiquitous throughout the sciences [4, 23, 49], but the graph
data that we work with is generally incomplete in certain systematic ways [28, 33, 34, 36, 39]. A
common type of incompleteness comes from the way in which graph data is generally measured:
we observe a set of nodes C and record all the interactions involving this set of nodes. The result
is a measured graph G consisting of this core set C together with a a potentially larger set of
additional fringe nodes—the nodes outside of C that interact with some node in C. For example, in
constructing a social network dataset, we might study the employees of a company and record all of
their friendships [54]. From this information, we now have a graph that contains all the employees
together with all of their friends, including friends who do not work for the company. This latter
group constitutes the set of fringe nodes in the graph. The edge set of the graph G reflects the
construction: each edge involves at least one core node, but if two nodes in the fringe have interacted,
it is invisible to us and hence not recorded in the data.
E-mail and other communication datasets typically have this core-fringe structure. For example, the
widely-studied Enron email graph [24, 37, 43, 55] contains tens of thousands of nodes; however, this
graph was constructed from the email inboxes of fewer than 150 employees [35]. The vast majority
of the nodes in the graph, therefore, belong to the fringe, and their direct communications are not
part of the data. The issue comes up in much larger network datasets as well. For example, a phone
service provider has data on calls and messages that its customers make both to each other and to
non-customers, but it does not have data on communication between pairs of non-customers. Another
example would be a massive online social network may get some information about the contacts of
its users with a fringe set comprised of of people not on the system—often including entire countries
that do not participate in the platform—but generally not about the interactions taking place in this
fringe set. Similarly, Internet measurements at the IP-layer from individual service providers give
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

