Scalable End-to-End Autonomous Vehicle
Testing via Rare-event Simulation

Matthew O’Kelly∗
University of Pennsylvania
mokelly@seas.upenn.edu
John Duchi
Stanford University
jduchi@stanford.edu

Aman Sinha∗
Stanford University
amans@stanford.edu

Hongseok Namkoong∗
Stanford University
hnamk@stanford.edu

Russ Tedrake
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
russt@mit.edu

Abstract
While recent developments in autonomous vehicle (AV) technology highlight
substantial progress, we lack tools for rigorous and scalable testing. Real-world
testing, the de facto evaluation environment, places the public in danger, and, due
to the rare nature of accidents, will require billions of miles in order to statistically
validate performance claims. We implement a simulation framework that can test
an entire modern autonomous driving system, including, in particular, systems
that employ deep-learning perception and control algorithms. Using adaptive
importance-sampling methods to accelerate rare-event probability evaluation, we
estimate the probability of an accident under a base distribution governing standard
traffic behavior. We demonstrate our framework on a highway scenario, accelerating system evaluation by 2-20 times over naive Monte Carlo sampling methods
and 10-300P times (where P is the number of processors) over real-world testing.

1

Introduction

Recent breakthroughs in deep learning have accelerated the development of autonomous vehicles
(AVs); many research prototypes now operate on real roads alongside human drivers. While advances
in computer-vision techniques have made human-level performance possible on narrow perception
tasks such as object recognition, several fatal accidents involving AVs underscore the importance of
testing whether the perception and control pipeline—when considered as a whole system—can safely
interact with humans. Unfortunately, testing AVs in real environments, the most straightforward
validation framework for system-level input-output behavior, requires prohibitive amounts of time
due to the rare nature of serious accidents [49]. Concretely, a recent study [29] argues that AVs need
to drive “hundreds of millions of miles and, under some scenarios, hundreds of billions of miles
to create enough data to clearly demonstrate their safety.” Alteratively, formally verifying an AV
algorithm’s “correctness” [34, 2, 47, 37] is difficult since all driving policies are subject to crashes
caused by other drivers [49]. It is unreasonable to ask that the policy be safe under all scenarios.
Unfortunately, ruling out scenarios where the AV should not be blamed is a task subject to logical
inconsistency, combinatorial growth in specification complexity, and subjective assignment of fault.
Motivated by the challenges underlying real-world testing and formal verification, we consider
a probabilistic paradigm—which we call a risk-based framework—where the goal is to evaluate
the probability of an accident under a base distribution representing standard traffic behavior. By
assigning learned probability values to environmental states and agent behaviors, our risk-based
∗

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

