C O L A: Decentralized Linear Learning
Lie He⇤
EPFL
lie.he@epfl.ch

An Bian⇤
ETH Zurich
ybian@inf.ethz.ch

Martin Jaggi
EPFL
martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Abstract
Decentralized machine learning is a promising emerging paradigm in view of
global challenges of data ownership and privacy. We consider learning of linear
classification and regression models, in the setting where the training data is
decentralized over many user devices, and the learning algorithm must run ondevice, on an arbitrary communication network, without a central coordinator. We
propose C O L A, a new decentralized training algorithm with strong theoretical
guarantees and superior practical performance. Our framework overcomes many
limitations of existing methods, and achieves communication efficiency, scalability,
elasticity as well as resilience to changes in data and allows for unreliable and
heterogeneous participating devices.

1

Introduction

With the immense growth of data, decentralized machine learning has become not only attractive but
a necessity. Personal data from, for example, smart phones, wearables and many other mobile devices
is sensitive and exposed to a great risk of data breaches and abuse when collected by a centralized
authority or enterprise. Nevertheless, many users have gotten accustomed to giving up control over
their data in return for useful machine learning predictions (e.g. recommendations), which benefits
from joint training on the data of all users combined in a centralized fashion.
In contrast, decentralized learning aims at learning this same global machine learning model, without
any central server. Instead, we only rely on distributed computations of the devices themselves, with
each user’s data never leaving its device of origin. While increasing research progress has been made
towards this goal, major challenges in terms of the privacy aspects as well as algorithmic efficiency,
robustness and scalability remain to be addressed. Motivated by aforementioned challenges, we make
progress in this work addressing the important problem of training generalized linear models in a
fully decentralized environment.
Existing research on decentralized optimization, minx2Rn F (x), can be categorized into two main
directions. The seminal line of work started by Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis in the 1980s, cf. [Tsitsiklis
et al., 1986], tackles this problem by splitting the parameter vector x by coordinates/components
among the devices. A second more recent line of work including e.g. [Nedic and Ozdaglar, 2009,
Duchi et al., 2012, Shi P
et al., 2015, Mokhtari and Ribeiro, 2016, Nedic et al., 2017] addresses
sum-structured F (x) = k Fk (x) where Fk is the local cost function of node k. This structure is
closely related to empirical risk minimization in a learning setting. See e.g. [Cevher et al., 2014]
for an overview of both directions. While the first line of work typically only provides convergence
guarantees for smooth objectives F , the second approach often suffers from a “lack of consensus”,
that is, the minimizers of {Fk }k are typically different since the data is not distributed i.i.d. between
devices in general.
⇤

These two authors contributed equally

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

