How Much Restricted Isometry is Needed In
Nonconvex Matrix Recovery?

Richard Y. Zhang
University of California, Berkeley
ryz@alum.mit.edu

Cédric Josz
University of California, Berkeley
cedric.josz@gmail.com

Somayeh Sojoudi
University of California, Berkeley
sojoudi@berkeley.edu

Javad Lavaei
University of California, Berkeley
lavaei@berkeley.edu

Abstract
When the linear measurements of an instance of low-rank matrix recovery satisfy a restricted isometry property (RIP)—i.e. they are approximately normpreserving—the problem is known to contain no spurious local minima, so exact
recovery is guaranteed. In this paper, we show that moderate RIP is not enough to
eliminate spurious local minima, so existing results can only hold for near-perfect
RIP. In fact, counterexamples are ubiquitous: we prove that every x is the spurious local minimum of a rank-1 instance of matrix recovery that satisfies RIP.
One specific counterexample has RIP constant δ = 1/2, but causes randomly
initialized stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to fail 12% of the time. SGD is frequently able to avoid and escape spurious local minima, but this empirical result
shows that it can occasionally be defeated by their existence. Hence, while exact
recovery guarantees will likely require a proof of no spurious local minima, arguments based solely on norm preservation will only be applicable to a narrow set
of nearly-isotropic instances.

1

Introduction

Recently, several important nonconvex problems in machine learning have been shown to contain no
spurious local minima [19, 4, 21, 8, 20, 34, 30]. These problems are easily solved using local search
algorithms despite their nonconvexity, because every local minimum is also a global minimum, and
every saddle-point has sufficiently negative curvature to allow escape. Formally, the usual first- and
second-order necessary conditions for local optimality (i.e. zero gradient and a positive semidefinite
Hessian) are also sufficient for global optimality; satisfying them to -accuracy will yield a point
within an -neighborhood of a globally optimal solution.
Many of the best-understood nonconvex problems with no spurious local minima are variants of the
low-rank matrix recovery problem. The simplest version (known as matrix sensing) seeks to recover
an n×n positive semidefinite matrix Z of low rank r  n, given measurement matrices A1 , . . . , Am
and noiseless data bi = hAi , Zi. The usual, nonconvex approach is to solve the following
minimize kA(xxT ) − bk2
x∈Rn×r

where

A(X) = [hA1 , Xi

···

hAm , Xi]

T

(1)

to second-order optimality, using a local search algorithm like (stochastic) gradient descent [19, 24]
and trust region Newton’s method [16, 7], starting from a random initial point.
Exact recovery of the ground truth Z is guaranteed under the assumption that A satisfies the restricted isometry property [14, 13, 31, 11] with a sufficiently small constant. The original result is
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

