Online Improper Learning with an Approximation
Oracle⇤
Elad Hazan
Princeton University & Google AI Princeton
ehazan@cs.princeton.edu
Yuanzhi Li
Stanford University
yuanzhil@stanford.edu

Wei Hu
Princeton University
huwei@cs.princeton.edu

Zhiyuan Li
Princeton University
zhiyuanli@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
We study the following question: given an efficient approximation algorithm for an
optimization problem, can we learn efficiently in the same setting? We give a formal
affirmative answer to this question in the form of a reduction from online learning
to offline approximate optimization using an efficient algorithm that guarantees
near optimal regret. The algorithm is efficient in terms of the number of oracle calls
to a given approximation oracle – it makes only logarithmically many such calls
per iteration. This resolves an open question by Kalai and Vempala, and by Garber.
Furthermore, our result applies to the more general improper learning problems.

1

Introduction

A fundamental question in learning theory is whether one can efficiently learn a given problem using
an optimization oracle. Namely, does efficient offline optimization for a certain problem imply
efficient learning algorithm for the same setting?
For online learning in games, it was shown by Kalai and Vempala (2005) that an optimization oracle
giving the best decision in hindsight is sufficient for attaining optimal regret. However, in many
non-convex settings, such an optimization oracle is either unavailable or NP-hard to compute. In the
face of NP-hardness, algorithm designers resort to approximation algorithms that are guaranteed to
return a solution within a certain multiplicative factor of the optimum. We give numerous examples
in Section 1.2.
Kakade et al. (2009) considered the question of whether such an approximation algorithm is sufficient
to obtain vanishing regret compared with an approximation to the best solution in hindsight. They
gave an algorithm for this offline-to-online conversion. However, their reduction is inefficient in
the number of per-iteration queries to the approximation oracle, which grows linearly with time.
Ideally, an efficient reduction should call the oracle only a constant number of times per iteration and
guarantee optimal regret at the same time, and this was considered an open question in the literature.
Various authors have improved upon this original online-to-offline reduction under certain cases,
as we survey below. Recently, Garber (2017) made significant progress by giving a more efficient
reduction, which improves the number of oracle calls in both full information and bandit settings. He
explicitly asked whether a near-optimal reduction with only logarithmically many calls per iteration
exists.
⇤

The full version of this paper can be found on https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.07837.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

