On the Convergence and Robustness of Training
GANs with Regularized Optimal Transport
Maziar Sanjabi
University of Southern California
sanjabi@usc.edu
Meisam Razaviyayn
University of Southern California
razaviya@usc.edu

Jimmy Ba
University of Toronto
jimmy@cs.toronto.edu
Jason D. Lee
University of Southern California
jasonlee@marshall.usc.edu

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are one of the most practical methods
for learning data distributions. A popular GAN formulation is based on the use of
Wasserstein distance as a metric between probability distributions. Unfortunately,
minimizing the Wasserstein distance between the data distribution and the generative model distribution is a computationally challenging problem as its objective is
non-convex, non-smooth, and even hard to compute. In this work, we show that obtaining gradient information of the smoothed Wasserstein GAN formulation, which
is based on regularized Optimal Transport (OT), is computationally effortless and
hence one can apply first order optimization methods to minimize this objective.
Consequently, we establish theoretical convergence guarantee to stationarity for a
proposed class of GAN optimization algorithms. Unlike the original non-smooth
formulation, our algorithm only requires solving the discriminator to approximate
optimality. We apply our method to learning MNIST digits as well as CIFAR-10
images. Our experiments show that our method is computationally efficient and
generates images comparable to the state of the art algorithms given the same
architecture and computational power.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have gained popularity for unsupervised learning due to
their unique ability to learn the generation of realistic samples. In the absence of labels, GANs aims
at finding the mapping from a known distribution, e.g. Gaussian, to an unknown data distribution,
which is only represented by empirical samples. In order to measure the mapping quality, various
metrics between the probability distributions have been proposed. While the original work on
GANs proposed Jensen-Shannon distance [21], other works have proposed other metrics such as f divergences [37, 16]. Recently, a seminal work by [4] re-surged Wasserstein distance [44] as a metric
for measuring the distance between the distributions. One major advantage of Wasserstein distance,
compared to Jensen-Shannon, is its continuity. In addition, Wasserstein distance is differentiable
with respect to the generator parameters almost everywhere [4]. As a result, it is more appealing
from optimization perspective. From the generator perspective, this objective function is not smooth
with respect to the generator parameters. As we will see in this paper, this non-smoothness results
in difficulties for optimization algorithms. Hence, we propose to use a smooth surrogate for the
Wasserstein distance.
The introduction of Wasserstein distance as a metric for GANs re-surged the interest in the field
of optimal transport [44]. [4] provided a game-representation for their proposed Wasserstein GAN
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

