Information-based Adaptive Stimulus Selection to
Optimize Communication Efficiency in
Brain-Computer Interfaces

Boyla O. Mainsah,1 Dmitry Kalika,2 Leslie M. Collins,1,∗
Siyuan Liu,1 Chandra S. Throckmorton1
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
2
Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD, USA
∗
Corresponding author: leslie.collins@duke.edu

Abstract
Stimulus-driven brain-computer interfaces (BCIs), such as the P300 speller, rely
on using a sequence of sensory stimuli to elicit specific neural responses as control signals, while a user attends to relevant target stimuli that occur within the
sequence. In current BCIs, the stimulus presentation schedule is typically generated in a pseudo-random fashion. Given the non-stationarity of brain electrical
signals, a better strategy could be to adapt the stimulus presentation schedule in
real-time by selecting the optimal stimuli that will maximize the signal-to-noise
ratios of the elicited neural responses and provide the most information about
the user’s intent based on the uncertainties of the data being measured. However, the high-dimensional stimulus space limits the development of algorithms
with tractable solutions for optimized stimulus selection to allow for real-time
decision-making within the stringent time requirements of BCI processing. We
derive a simple analytical solution of an information-based objective function for
BCI stimulus selection by transforming the high-dimensional stimulus space into a
one-dimensional space that parameterizes the objective function - the prior probability mass of the stimulus under consideration, irrespective of its contents. We
demonstrate the utility of our adaptive stimulus selection algorithm in improving
BCI performance with results from simulation and real-time human experiments.

1

Introduction

Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) acquire brain signals in real-time, process the signals to extract
relevant neural information and translate this information into commands that convey a user’s state
or intent to control external devices [1]. BCIs are typically defined by the specific neural signal
components that are used to control the BCI [2]. The generation of these neural signals can either
be self-initiated, such as with motor imagery, or elicited with sensory stimuli, such as is the case
with BCIs based on event-related potentials (ERPs). BCIs can replace or restore control abilities
in individuals with severe motor disabilities such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or spinal
cord injury [3]. The P300 ERP-based BCI speller [4] is one of the most widely researched BCIs for
communication for individuals whose severe neuromuscular limitations preclude their use of most
commercially available assistive technologies, such as individuals with late stage ALS [1, 5]. The
P300 speller relies on eliciting and detecting ERP responses embedded in electroencephalography
(EEG) data while a user attends to relevant target visual, tactile or auditory stimuli occurring within
a sequence of non-relevant (background) stimuli. In a typical visual P300 speller, a user focuses
on a desired character displayed on an interface with M possible options, such as in Figure 1(a),
while groups of characters, termed flash groups, are sequentially illuminated on the screen. Ideally,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

