Smoothed analysis of the low-rank approach
for smooth semidefinite programs

Thomas Pumir∗
ORFE Department
Princeton University
tpumir@princeton.edu

Samy Jelassi∗
ORFE Department
Princeton University
sjelassi@princeton.edu

Nicolas Boumal
Department of Mathematics
Princeton University
nboumal@math.princeton.edu

Abstract
We consider semidefinite programs (SDPs) of size n with equality constraints. In
order to overcome scalability issues, Burer and Monteiro proposed a factorized
approach based on optimizing over a matrix Y of size n × k such that X = Y Y ∗ is
the SDP variable. The advantages of such formulation are twofold: the dimension
of the optimization variable is reduced, and positive semidefiniteness is naturally
enforced. However, optimization in Y is non-convex. In prior work, it has been
shown that, when the constraints on the factorized variable regularly define a
smooth manifold, provided k is large enough, for almost all cost matrices, all
second-order stationary points (SOSPs) are optimal. Importantly, in practice,
one can only compute points which approximately satisfy necessary optimality
conditions, leading to the question: are such points also approximately optimal?
To answer it, under similar assumptions, we use smoothed analysis to show that
approximate SOSPs for a randomly perturbed objective function are approximate
global optima, with k scaling like the square root of the number of constraints (up
to log factors). Moreover, we bound the optimality gap at the approximate solution
of the perturbed problem with respect to the original problem. We particularize our
results to an SDP relaxation of phase retrieval.

1

Introduction

We consider semidefinite programs (SDP) over K = R or C of the form:
min
hC, Xi
n×n
X∈S

subject to A(X) = b,
X  0,

(SDP)

with hA, Bi = Re[Tr(A∗ B)] the Frobenius inner product (A∗ is the conjugate-transpose of A), Sn×n
the set of self-adjoint matrices of size n (real symmetric for R, or Hermitian for C), C ∈ Sn×n
the cost matrix, and A : Sn×n → Rm a linear operator capturing m equality constraints with right
hand side b ∈ Rm : for each i, A(X)i = hAi , Xi = bi for given matrices A1 , . . . , Am ∈ Sn×n . The
optimization variable X is positive semidefinite. We let C be the feasible set of (SDP):

C = X ∈ Sn×n : A(X) = b and X  0 .
(1)
∗

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

