Rest-Katyusha: Exploiting the Solution’s Structure
via Scheduled Restart Schemes
Mohammad Golbabaee
Department of Computer Science
University of Bath, UK
M.Golbabaee@bath.ac.uk

Junqi Tang
School of Engineering
University of Edinburgh, UK
J.Tang@ed.ac.uk
Francis Bach
INRIA - ENS
PSL Research University, France
Francis.Bach@inria.fr

Mike Davies
School of Engineering
University of Edinburgh, UK
Mike.Davies@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a structure-adaptive variant of a state-of-the-art stochastic variancereduced gradient algorithm Katyusha for regularized empirical risk minimization.
The proposed method is able to exploit the intrinsic low-dimensional structure
of the solution, such as sparsity or low rank which is enforced by a non-smooth
regularization, to achieve even faster convergence rate. This provable algorithmic
improvement is done by restarting the Katyusha algorithm according to restricted
strong-convexity (RSC) constants. We also propose an adaptive-restart variant
which is able to estimate the RSC on the fly and adjust the restart period automatically. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach via numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Many applications in supervised machine learning and signal processing share the same
Pngoal, which
is to estimate the minimizer of a population risk via minimizing the empirical risk n1 i=1 fi (ai , x),
where ai , x ∈ Rd , each fi is a convex and smooth function [1]. In supervised machine learning, ai is
often referred to as the training data sample, while in signal/image processing applications it is the
representation of measurements. In practice the number of data samples or measurements is limited,
and from them we attempt to infer x† ∈ Rd which is the unique minimizer of the population risk:
x† = arg min Ea f¯(a, x).
(1)
x

The ultimate goal is to get a vector x? which is a good approximation of x† from the empirical risk.
Since in many interesting applications, the dimension of parameter space d is of the same order or
even larger than the number of data samples n, minimizing the empirical risk alone will introduce
overfitting and hence leads to poor estimation of the true parameter x† [2, 3]. In general, avoiding
overfitting is a key issue in both machine learning and signal processing, and the most common
approach is to add some regularization while minimizing the empirical risk [4, 5, 6]:


n
1X
?
x ∈ arg min F (x) := f (x) + λg(x) , f (x) :=
fi (x),
(2)
n i=1
x∈Rd
where for the sake of compactness of notation, we denote fi (x) := fi (ai , x). Each fi is assumed to
be convex and have L-Lipschitz continuous gradient, while the regularization term g(x) is assumed
to be a simple convex function and possibly non-smooth.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

