The Spectrum of the Fisher Information Matrix of a
Single-Hidden-Layer Neural Network
Jeffrey Pennington
Google Brain
jpennin@google.com

Pratik Worah
Google Research
pworah@google.com

Abstract
An important factor contributing to the success of deep learning has been the
remarkable ability to optimize large neural networks using simple first-order optimization algorithms like stochastic gradient descent. While the efficiency of
such methods depends crucially on the local curvature of the loss surface, very
little is actually known about how this geometry depends on network architecture
and hyperparameters. In this work, we extend a recently-developed framework
for studying spectra of nonlinear random matrices to characterize an important
measure of curvature, namely the eigenvalues of the Fisher information matrix.
We focus on a single-hidden-layer neural network with Gaussian data and weights
and provide an exact expression for the spectrum in the limit of infinite width.
We find that linear networks suffer worse conditioning than nonlinear networks
and that nonlinear networks are generically non-degenerate. We also predict and
demonstrate empirically that by adjusting the nonlinearity, the spectrum can be
tuned so as to improve the efficiency of first-order optimization methods.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the success of deep learning has spread from classical problems in image recognition [1], audio synthesis [2], translation [3], and speech recognition [4] to more diverse applications
in unexpected areas such as protein structure prediction [5], quantum chemistry [5] and drug discovery [6]. These empirical successes continue to outpace the development of a concrete theoretical
understanding of how and in what contexts deep learning works. A central difficulty in analyzing
deep learning systems stems from the complexity of neural network loss surfaces, which are highly
non-convex functions, often of millions or even billions [7] of parameters.
Optimization in such high-dimensional spaces poses many challenges. For most problems in deep
learning, second-order methods are too costly to perform exactly. Despite recent developments on
efficient approximations of these methods, such as the Neumann optimizer [8] and K-FAC [9], most
practitioners use gradient descent and its variants [10], [11]. Despite their widespread use, it is not
obvious why first-order methods are often successful in deep learning since it is known that first-order
methods perform poorly in the presence of pathological curvature. An important open question in this
direction is to what extent pathological curvature pervades deep learning and how it can be mitigated.
More broadly, in order to continue improving neural network models and performance, we aim to
better understand the conditions under which first-order methods will work well, and how those
conditions depend on model design choices and hyperparameters.
Among the variety of objects that may be used to quantify the geometry of the loss surface, two
matrices have elevated importance: the Hessian matrix and the Fisher information matrix. From the
perspective of Euclidean coordinate space, the Hessian matrix is the natural object with which to
quantify the local geometry of the loss surface. It is also the fundamental object underlying many
second-order optimization schemes and its spectrum provides insights as to the nature of critical
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

