Online Structure Learning for Feed-Forward and
Recurrent Sum-Product Networks
Agastya Kalra∗, Abdullah Rashwan∗, Wilson Hsu, Pascal Poupart
Cheriton School of Computer Science, Waterloo AI Institute, University of Waterloo, Canada
Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada
agastya.kalra@gmail.com,{arashwan,wwhsu,ppoupart}@uwaterloo.ca
Prashant Doshi
Department of Computer Science
University of Georgia, USA
pdoshi@cs.uga.edu

George Trimponias
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Hong Kong
g.trimponias@huawei.com

Abstract
Sum-product networks have recently emerged as an attractive representation due
to their dual view as a special type of deep neural network with clear semantics
and a special type of probabilistic graphical model for which marginal inference is
always tractable. These properties follow from the conditions of completeness and
decomposability, which must be respected by the structure of the network. As a
result, it is not easy to specify a valid sum-product network by hand and therefore
structure learning techniques are typically used in practice. This paper describes
a new online structure learning technique for feed-forward and recurrent SPNs.
The algorithm is demonstrated on real-world datasets with continuous features and
sequence datasets of varying length for which the best network architecture is not
obvious.

1

Introduction

Sum-product networks (SPNs) were introduced as a new type of deep representation [13] equivalent
to arithmetic circuits [3]. They distinguish themselves from other types of neural networks by
several desirable properties: 1) The quantities computed by each node can be clearly interpreted as
(un-normalized) probabilities. 2) SPNs can represent the same discrete distributions as Bayesian and
Markov networks [19] while ensuring that exact inference2 has linear complexity with respect to
the size of the network. 3) SPNs are generative models that naturally handle arbitrary queries with
missing data while allowing the inputs and outputs to vary.
There is a catch: these nice properties arise only when the structure of the network satisfies the
conditions of decomposability and completeness [13]. Hence, it is not easy to specify sum-product
networks by hand. In particular, fully connected networks typically violate those conditions. While
this may seem like a major drawback, the benefit is that researchers have been forced to develop
structure learning techniques to obtain valid SPNs that satisfy those conditions [4, 7, 12, 9, 16, 1, 18,
14, 10]. In deep learning, feature engineering has been replaced by architecture engineering, however
this is a tedious process that many practitioners would like to automate. Hence, there is a need for
scalable structure learning techniques.
∗
2

Equal contribution, first author was selected based on a coin flip
Most types of inference are tractable except for marginal MAP inference, which is still intractable for SPNs.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

