A Statistical Recurrent Model on the Manifold of
Symmetric Positive Definite Matrices∗

Rudrasis Chakraborty†
Derek Archer†

Chun-Hao Yang†]

Xingjian Zhen‡]

Monami Banerjee†

David Vaillancourt† Vikas Singh‡
Baba C. Vemuri†
†
University of Florida, Gainesville, USA
‡
University of Wisconsin Madison, USA
]

Equal contribution

Abstract
In a number of disciplines, the data (e.g., graphs, manifolds) to be analyzed are
non-Euclidean in nature. Geometric deep learning corresponds to techniques that
generalize deep neural network models to such non-Euclidean spaces. Several
recent papers have shown how convolutional neural networks (CNNs) can be
extended to learn with graph-based data. In this work, we study the setting where
the data (or measurements) are ordered, longitudinal or temporal in nature and live
on a Riemannian manifold – this setting is common in a variety of problems in
statistical machine learning, vision and medical imaging. We show how recurrent
statistical network models can be defined in such spaces. Then, we present an
efficient algorithm and conduct a rigorous analysis of its statistical properties.
We perform numerical experiments demonstrating competitive performance with
state of the art methods but with significantly fewer parameters. We also show
applications to a statistical analysis task in brain imaging, a regime where deep
neural network models have only been utilized in limited ways.

1

Introduction

In the last decade or so, deep neural network models have been very successful in learning complicated patterns from data such as images, videos and speech [41, 39] – this has led to a number of
breakthroughs as well as deployments in turnkey applications. A popular neural network architecture
that has contributed to these advancements is convolutional neural networks (CNNs). In the classical
definition of convolution, one often assumes that the data correspond to discrete measurements,
acquired at equally spaced intervals (i.e., Euclidean space), of a scalar (or vector) valued function.
Clearly, for images, the Euclidean lattice grid assumption makes sense and the use of convolutional
architectures is appropriate – as described in [11], a number of properties such as stationarity, locality
and compositionality follow. While the assumption that the underlying data satisfies the Euclidean
structure is explicit or implicit in an overwhelming majority of models, recently there has been a
growing interest in applying or extending deep learning models for non-Euclidean data. This line of
work is called Geometric deep learning and typically deals with data such as manifolds and graphs
[11]. Existing results describe strategies for leveraging the mathematical properties of such geometric
or structured data, specifically, lack of (a) global linear structure, (b) global coordinate system,
(c) shift invariance/equivariance, by incorporating these ideas explicitly into deep networks used to
model them [13, 37, 18, 31, 30, 19].
Separate from the evolving body of work at the interface of convolutional neural networks and
structured data, there is a mature literature in statistical machine learning [40] and computer vision
∗
This research was funded in part by the NSF grant IIS-1525431 and IIS-1724174 to BCV, R01 NS052318
to DV and NSF CAREER award 1252725 and R01 EB022883 to VS. XZ and VS were also supported by UW
CPCP (U54 AI117924).

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

