Practical Deep Stereo (PDS): Toward
applications-friendly deep stereo matching.

Stepan Tulyakov
Space Engineering Center at
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
stepan.tulyakov@epfl.ch

Anton Ivanov
Space Engineering Center at
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
anton.ivanov@epfl.ch

Francois Fleuret
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
and Idiap Research Institute
francois.fleuret@idiap.ch

Abstract
End-to-end deep-learning networks recently demonstrated extremely good performance for stereo matching. However, existing networks are difficult to use for
practical applications since (1) they are memory-hungry and unable to process even
modest-size images, (2) they have to be trained for a given disparity range.
The Practical Deep Stereo (PDS) network that we propose addresses both issues:
First, its architecture relies on novel bottleneck modules that drastically reduce
the memory footprint in inference, and additional design choices allow to handle
greater image size during training. This results in a model that leverages large
image context to resolve matching ambiguities. Second, a novel sub-pixel crossentropy loss combined with a MAP estimator make this network less sensitive to
ambiguous matches, and applicable to any disparity range without re-training.
We compare PDS to state-of-the-art methods published over the recent months, and
demonstrate its superior performance on FlyingThings3D and KITTI sets.

1

Introduction

Stereo matching consists in matching every point from an image taken from one viewpoint to
its physically corresponding one in the image taken from another viewpoint. The problem has
applications in robotics [22], medical imaging [23], remote sensing [32], virtual reality and 3D
graphics and computational photography [37, 1].
Recent developments in the field have been focused on stereo for hard / uncontrolled environments (wide-baseline, low-lighting, complex lighting, blurry, foggy, non-lambertian) [36, 11, 3, 5, 27],
usage of high-order priors and cues [9, 8, 14, 17, 34], and data-driven, and in particular, deep neural
network based, methods [25, 3, 39, 40, 19, 33, 30, 16, 31, 7, 13, 20, 24, 2, 18, 43]. This work
improves on this latter line of research.
The first successes of neural networks for stereo matching were achieved by substitution of handcrafted similarity measures with deep metrics [3, 39, 40, 19, 33] inside a legacy stereo pipeline for the
post-processing (often [21]). Besides deep metrics, neural networks were also used in other subtasks
such as predicting a smoothness penalty in a CRF model from a local intensity pattern [30, 16]. In [31]
a “global disparity” network smooth the matching cost volume and predicts matching confidences,
and in [7] a network detects and fixes incorrect disparities.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

