HitNet: Hybrid Ternary Recurrent Neural Network
Peiqi Wang1,2,4 , Xinfeng Xie4 , Lei Deng4 , Guoqi Li3 , Dongsheng Wang1,2∗ , Yuan Xie4
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
3
Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara
wpq14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {liguoqi, wds}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
{xinfeng, leideng, yuanxie}@ucsb.edu
2

Abstract
Quantization is a promising technique to reduce the model size, memory footprint,
and computational cost of neural networks for the employment on embedded
devices with limited resources. Although quantization has achieved impressive
success in convolutional neural networks (CNNs), it still suffers from large accuracy
degradation on recurrent neural networks (RNNs), especially in the extremely lowbit cases. In this paper, we first investigate the accuracy degradation of RNNs
under different quantization schemes and visualize the distribution of tensor values
in the full precision models. Our observation reveals that due to the different
distributions of weights and activations, different quantization methods should be
used for each part. Accordingly, we propose HitNet, a hybrid ternary RNN, which
bridges the accuracy gap between the full precision model and the quantized model
with ternary weights and activations. In HitNet, we develop a hybrid quantization
method to quantize weights and activations. Moreover, we introduce a sloping
factor into the activation functions to address the error-sensitive problem, further
closing the mentioned accuracy gap. We test our method on typical RNN models,
such as Long-Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU).
Overall, HitNet can quantize RNN models into ternary values of {-1, 0, 1} and
significantly outperform the state-of-the-art methods towards extremely quantized
RNNs. Specifically, we improve the perplexity per word (PPW) of a ternary LSTM
on Penn Tree Bank (PTB) corpus from 126 to 110.3 and a ternary GRU from 142
to 113.5.

1

Introduction

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) yield great results across many natural language processing
applications, including speech recognition, machine translation, language modeling, and question
answering [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. The emergence of various RNN architectures, such as Long-Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) [6] and Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) [7], has achieved state-of-the-art accuracy in
these applications. In order to further improve the model accuracy, researchers always build deeper
internal recurrence by increasing the number of recurrent sequence length, hidden units, or layers.
However, these methods usually introduce large models resulting in practical hardness, especially on
embedded devices due to inferior resources for computation and memory. Model compression is a
promising method to alleviate aforementioned problems. There exist several techniques to reduce the
amount of model weights, such as low-rank approximation [8], sparsity utilization [9, 10, 11], and
∗

Corresponding Author

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

