A Likelihood-Free Inference Framework for
Population Genetic Data using Exchangeable Neural
Networks
Jeffrey Chan
University of California, Berkeley
chanjed@berkeley.edu

Valerio Perrone
University of Warwick
v.perrone@warwick.ac.uk

Jeffrey P. Spence
University of California, Berkeley
spence.jeffrey@berkeley.edu

Paul A. Jenkins
University of Warwick
p.jenkins@warwick.ac.uk

Sara Mathieson
Swarthmore College
smathie1@swarthmore.edu

Yun S. Song
University of California, Berkeley
yss@berkeley.edu

Abstract
An explosion of high-throughput DNA sequencing in the past decade has led to
a surge of interest in population-scale inference with whole-genome data. Recent work in population genetics has centered on designing inference methods
for relatively simple model classes, and few scalable general-purpose inference
techniques exist for more realistic, complex models. To achieve this, two inferential
challenges need to be addressed: (1) population data are exchangeable, calling
for methods that efficiently exploit the symmetries of the data, and (2) computing
likelihoods is intractable as it requires integrating over a set of correlated, extremely
high-dimensional latent variables. These challenges are traditionally tackled by
likelihood-free methods that use scientific simulators to generate datasets and
reduce them to hand-designed, permutation-invariant summary statistics, often
leading to inaccurate inference. In this work, we develop an exchangeable neural
network that performs summary statistic-free, likelihood-free inference. Our framework can be applied in a black-box fashion across a variety of simulation-based
tasks, both within and outside biology. We demonstrate the power of our approach
on the recombination hotspot testing problem, outperforming the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Statistical inference in population genetics aims to quantify the evolutionary events and parameters
that led to the genetic diversity we observe today. Population genetic models are typically based
on the coalescent [1], a stochastic process describing the distribution over genealogies of a random
exchangeable set of DNA sequences from a large population. Inference in such complex models
is challenging. First, standard coalescent-based likelihoods require integrating over a large set
of correlated, high-dimensional combinatorial objects, rendering classical inference techniques
inapplicable. Instead, likelihoods are implicitly defined via scientific simulators (i.e., generative
models), which draw a sample of correlated trees and then model mutation as Poisson point processes
on the sampled trees to generate sequences at the leaves. Second, inference demands careful treatment
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

