Unsupervised Cross-Modal Alignment of Speech and
Text Embedding Spaces

Yu-An Chung, Wei-Hung Weng, Schrasing Tong, and James Glass
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
{andyyuan,ckbjimmy,st9,glass}@mit.edu

Abstract
Recent research has shown that word embedding spaces learned from text corpora
of different languages can be aligned without any parallel data supervision. Inspired
by the success in unsupervised cross-lingual word embeddings, in this paper we
target learning a cross-modal alignment between the embedding spaces of speech
and text learned from corpora of their respective modalities in an unsupervised
fashion. The proposed framework learns the individual speech and text embedding
spaces, and attempts to align the two spaces via adversarial training, followed by
a refinement procedure. We show how our framework could be used to perform
spoken word classification and translation, and the experimental results on these two
tasks demonstrate that the performance of our unsupervised alignment approach
is comparable to its supervised counterpart. Our framework is especially useful
for developing automatic speech recognition (ASR) and speech-to-text translation
systems for low- or zero-resource languages, which have little parallel audio-text
data for training modern supervised ASR and speech-to-text translation models,
but account for the majority of the languages spoken across the world.

1

Introduction

Word embeddings—continuous-valued vector representations of words—are almost ubiquitous in
recent natural language processing research. Most successful methods for learning word embeddings [1, 2, 3] rely on the distributional hypothesis [4], i.e., words occurring in similar contexts tend
to have similar meanings. Exploiting word co-occurrence statistics in a text corpus leads to word
vectors that reflect semantic similarities and dissimilarities: similar words are geometrically close in
the embedding space, and conversely, dissimilar words are far apart.
Continuous word embedding spaces have been shown to exhibit similar structures across languages [5].
The intuition is that most languages share similar expressive power and are used to describe similar
human experiences across cultures; hence, they should share similar statistical properties. Inspired by
the notion, several studies have focused on designing algorithms that exploit this similarity to learn a
cross-lingual alignment between the embedding spaces of two languages, where the two embedding
spaces are trained from independent text corpora [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. In particular, recent research
has shown that such cross-lingual alignments can be learned without relying on any form of bilingual
supervision [13, 14, 15], and has been applied to training neural machine translation (NMT) systems
in a completely unsupervised fashion [16, 17]. This eliminates the need for a large parallel training
corpus to train NMT systems.
Speech, as another form of language, is rarely considered as a source for learning semantics, compared
to text. Although there is work that explores the concept of learning vector representations from
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

