Forecasting Treatment Responses Over Time Using
Recurrent Marginal Structural Networks

Bryan Lim
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford
bryan.lim@eng.ox.ac.uk

Ahmed Alaa
Electrical Engineering Department
University of California, Los Angeles
ahmedmalaa@ucla.edu

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Oxford
and The Alan Turing Institute
mschaar@turing.ac.uk

Abstract
Electronic health records provide a rich source of data for machine learning methods to learn dynamic treatment responses over time. However, any direct estimation
is hampered by the presence of time-dependent confounding, where actions taken
are dependent on time-varying variables related to the outcome of interest. Drawing
inspiration from marginal structural models, a class of methods in epidemiology
which use propensity weighting to adjust for time-dependent confounders, we
introduce the Recurrent Marginal Structural Network - a sequence-to-sequence
architecture for forecasting a patient’s expected response to a series of planned treatments. Using simulations of a state-of-the-art pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic
(PK-PD) model of tumor growth [12], we demonstrate the ability of our network
to accurately learn unbiased treatment responses from observational data – even
under changes in the policy of treatment assignments – and performance gains over
benchmarks.

1

Introduction

With the increasing prevalence of electronic health records, there has been much interest in the use
of machine learning to estimate treatment effects directly from observational data [13, 41, 44, 2].
These records, collected over time as part of regular follow-ups, provide a more cost-effective method
to gather insights on the effectiveness of past treatment regimens. While the majority of previous
work focuses on the effects of interventions at a single point in time, observational data also captures
information on complex time-dependent treatment scenarios, such as where the efficacy of treatments
changes over time (e.g. drug resistance in cancer patients [40]), or where patients receive multiple
interventions administered at different points in time (e.g. joint prescriptions of chemotherapy and
radiotherapy [12]). As such, the ability to accurately estimate treatment effects over time would allow
doctors to determine both the treatments to prescribe and the optimal time at which to administer
them.
However, straightforward estimation in observational studies is hampered by the presence of timedependent confounders, arising in cases where interventions are contingent on biomarkers whose
value are affected by past treatments. For examples, asthma rescue drugs provide short-term rapid
improvements to lung function measures, but are usually prescribed to patients with reduced lung
function scores. As such, naïve methods can lead to the incorrect conclusion that the medication
reduces lung function scores, contrary to the actual treatment effect [26]. Furthermore, [23] show
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

