Loss Surfaces, Mode Connectivity,
and Fast Ensembling of DNNs
Timur Garipov∗1,2 Pavel Izmailov∗3 Dmitrii Podoprikhin∗4
Dmitry Vetrov5 Andrew Gordon Wilson3
1

Samsung AI Center in Moscow, 2 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology,
3
Cornell University,
4
Samsung-HSE Laboratory, National Research University Higher School of Economics,
5
National Research University Higher School of Economics

Abstract
The loss functions of deep neural networks are complex and their geometric
properties are not well understood. We show that the optima of these complex
loss functions are in fact connected by simple curves over which training and test
accuracy are nearly constant. We introduce a training procedure to discover these
high-accuracy pathways between modes. Inspired by this new geometric insight,
we also propose a new ensembling method entitled Fast Geometric Ensembling
(FGE). Using FGE we can train high-performing ensembles in the time required to
train a single model. We achieve improved performance compared to the recent
state-of-the-art Snapshot Ensembles, on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet.

1

Introduction

The loss surfaces of deep neural networks (DNNs) are highly non-convex and can depend on millions
of parameters. The geometric properties of these loss surfaces are not well understood. Even for
simple networks, the number of local optima and saddle points is large and can grow exponentially in
the number of parameters [1, 2, 3]. Moreover, the loss is high along a line segment connecting two
optima [e.g., 7, 13]. These two observations suggest that the local optima are isolated.
In this paper, we provide a new training procedure which can in fact find paths of near-constant
accuracy between the modes of large deep neural networks. Furthermore, we show that for a wide
range of architectures we can find these paths in the form of a simple polygonal chain of two line
segments. Consider, for example, Figure 1, which illustrates the ResNet-164 `2 -regularized crossentropy train loss on CIFAR-100, through three different planes. We form each two dimensional
plane by all affine combinations of three weight vectors.1 The left panel shows a plane defined
by three independently trained networks. In this plane, all optima are isolated, which corresponds
to the standard intuition. However, the middle and right panels show two different paths of nearconstant loss between the modes in weight space, discovered by our proposed training procedure.
The endpoints of these paths are the two independently trained DNNs corresponding to the two lower
modes on the left panel.
∗

Equal contribution.
Suppose we have three weight vectors w1 , w2 , w3 . We set u = (w2 − w1 ), v = (w3 − w1 ) −
hw3 − w1 , w2 − w1 i/kw2 − w1 k2 · (w2 − w1 ). Then the normalized vectors û = u/kuk, v̂ = v/kvk
form an orthonormal basis in the plane containing w1 , w2 , w3 . To visualize the loss in this plane, we define a
Cartesian grid in the basis û, v̂ and evaluate the networks corresponding to each of the points in the grid. A point
P with coordinates (x, y) in the plane would then be given by P = w1 + x · û + y · v̂.
1

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

