Computationally and statistically efficient learning of
causal Bayes nets using path queries

Kevin Bello
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
kbellome@purdue.edu

Jean Honorio
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
jhonorio@purdue.edu

Abstract
Causal discovery from empirical data is a fundamental problem in many scientific domains. Observational data allows for identifiability only up to Markov
equivalence class. In this paper we first propose a polynomial time algorithm
for learning the exact correctly-oriented structure of the transitive reduction of
any causal Bayesian network with high probability, by using interventional path
queries. Each path query takes as input an origin node and a target node, and
answers whether there is a directed path from the origin to the target. This is done
by intervening on the origin node and observing samples from the target node. We
theoretically show the logarithmic sample complexity for the size of interventional
data per path query, for continuous and discrete networks. We then show how
to learn the transitive edges using also logarithmic sample complexity (albeit in
time exponential in the maximum number of parents for discrete networks), which
allows us to learn the full network. We further extend our work by reducing the
number of interventional path queries for learning rooted trees. We also provide an
analysis of imperfect interventions.

1

Introduction

Motivation. Scientists in diverse areas (e.g., epidemiology, economics, etc.) aim to unveil causal
relationships within variables from collected data. For instance, biologists try to discover the causal
relationships between genes. By providing a specific treatment to a particular gene (origin), one can
observe whether there is an effect in another gene (target). This effect can be either direct (if the two
genes are connected with a directed edge) or indirect (if there is a directed path from the origin to the
target gene).
Bayesian networks (BNs) are powerful representations of joint probability distributions. BNs are also
used to describe causal relationships among variables [14]. The structure of a causal BN (CBN) is
represented by a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where nodes represent random variables, and an edge
between two nodes X and Y (i.e., X → Y ) represents that the former (X) is a direct cause of the
latter (Y ). Learning the DAG structure of a CBN is of much relevance in several domains, and is a
problem that has long been studied during the last decades.
From observational data alone (i.e., passively observed data from an undisturbed system), DAGs
are only identifiable up to Markov equivalence.1 However, since our goal is causal discovery, this
is inadequate as two BNs might be Markov equivalent and yet make different predictions about the
1

Two graphs are Markov equivalent if they imply the same set of (conditional) independences. In general,
two graphs are Markov equivalent iff they have the same structure ignoring arc directions, and have the same vstructures [31]. (A v-structure consists of converging directed edges into the same node, such as X → Y ← Z.)
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

