Provably Correct Automatic Subdifferentiation
for Qualified Programs

Sham M. Kakade
University of Washington
sham@cs.washington.edu

Jason D. Lee
University of Southern California
jasonlee@marshall.usc.edu

Abstract
The Cheap Gradient Principle [Griewank and Walther, 2008] — the computational cost of computing the gradient of a scalar-valued function is nearly the
same (often within a factor of 5) as that of simply computing the function itself
— is of central importance in optimization; it allows us to quickly obtain (high
dimensional) gradients of scalar loss functions which are subsequently used in
black box gradient-based optimization procedures. The current state of affairs is
markedly different with regards to computing subderivatives: widely used ML
libraries, including TensorFlow and PyTorch, do not correctly compute (generalized) subderivatives even on simple examples. This work considers the question:
is there a Cheap Subgradient Principle? Our main result shows that, under certain
restrictions on our library of nonsmooth functions (standard in nonlinear programming), provably correct generalized subderivatives can be computed at a computational cost that is within a (dimension-free) factor of 6 of the cost of computing
the scalar function itself.

1

Introduction

The widespread implementation of Automatic Differentiation (AD) methods [Baydin et al., 2015]
has had a transformative effect on applied machine learning; these methods have eased the difficulty for practitioners, across a range of disciplines, to learn sophisticated machine learning models
(including deep neural architectures and richer inferential models). The paradigm is: one simply
writes a program to compute the function of interest, say a scalar (loss) function f pxq : Rd Ñ R,
and then a correctly implemented AD method will return both f pxq and all d of its partial derivatives
when provided with x as an input. These partial derivatives are often used in conjunction with some
(stochastic) gradient-based optimization approach.
Underlying the effectiveness of this general black-box approach is the Cheap Gradient Principle
[Griewank and Walther, 2008]: the computational cost of computing the vector of partial derivatives pB f {B x1 , B f {B x2 , . . . B f {B xd q is often nearly the same as that of simply computing the scalar
function f pxq itself. In fact, for all rational functions, the striking Baur-Strassen theorem [Baur and
Strassen, 1983, Griewank, 1989] shows that this increase in computational complexity is a (dimension free) factor of 5.

In many settings, our underlying function f pxq is a nonsmooth function, and we resort to subgradient
methods. This work considers the question: is there a Cheap Subgradient Principle? Specifically,
given a program that computes a (locally Lipschitz) function f and given a point x, can we automatically compute an element of the (Clarke) subdifferential B f pxq [Clarke, 1975], and can we do this
at a cost which is comparable to computing the function f pxq itself? Informally, the set B f pxq is the
convex hull of limits of gradients at nearby differentiable points. It can be thought of as generalizing
the gradient (for smooth functions) and the subgradient (for convex functions).
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

