Fairness Through Computationally-Bounded
Awareness
Michael P. Kim⇤
Stanford University
mpk@cs.stanford.edu

Omer Reingold⇤
Stanford University
reingold@stanford.edu

Guy N. Rothblum†
Weizmann Institute of Science
rothblum@alum.mit.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of fair classification within the versatile framework of
Dwork et al. [6], which assumes the existence of a metric that measures similarity
between pairs of individuals. Unlike earlier work, we do not assume that the
entire metric is known to the learning algorithm; instead, the learner can query
this arbitrary metric a bounded number of times. We propose a new notion of
fairness called metric multifairness and show how to achieve this notion in our
setting. Metric multifairness is parameterized by a similarity metric d on pairs of
individuals to classify and a rich collection C of (possibly overlapping) “comparison
sets" over pairs of individuals. At a high level, metric multifairness guarantees that
similar subpopulations are treated similarly, as long as these subpopulations are
identified within the class C.

1

Introduction

More and more, machine learning systems are being used to make predictions about people. Algorithmic predictions are now being used to answer questions of significant personal consequence; for
instance, Is this person likely to repay a loan? [24] or Is this person likely to recommit a crime?
[1]. As these classification systems have become more ubiquitous, concerns have also grown that
classifiers obtained via machine learning might discriminate based on sensitive attributes like race,
gender, or sexual orientation. Indeed, machine-learned classifiers run the risk of perpetuating or
amplifying historical biases present in the training data. Examples of discrimination in classification
have been well-illustrated [24, 1, 5, 19, 13, 3]; nevertheless, developing a systematic approach to
fairness has been challenging. Often, it feels that the objectives of fair classification are at odds with
obtaining high-utility predictions.
In an influential work, Dwork et al. [6] proposed a framework to resolve the apparent conflict
between utility and fairness, which they call “fairness through awareness." This framework takes the
perspective that a fair classifier should treat similar individuals similarly. The work formalizes this
abstract goal by assuming access to a task-specific similarity metric d on pairs of individuals. The
proposed notion of fairness requires that if the distance between two individuals is small, then the
predictions of a fair classifier cannot be very different. More formally, for some small constant ⌧ 0,
we say a hypothesis f : X ! [ 1, 1] satisfies (d, ⌧ )-metric fairness1 if the following (approximate)
Lipschitz condition holds for all pairs of individuals from the population X .
8x, x0 2 X ⇥ X : |f (x) f (x0 )|  d(x, x0 ) + ⌧
(1)
Subject to these intuitive similarity constraints, the classifier may be chosen to maximize utility. Note
that, in general, the metric may be designed externally (say, by a regulatory agency) to address legal
⇤

Supported by NSF Grant CCF-1763299.
Supported by ISF grant No. 5219/17.
1
Note the definition given in [6] is slightly different; in particular, they propose a more general Lipschitz
condition, but fix ⌧ = 0.
†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

