Synaptic Strength For Convolutional Neural Network

Chen Lin
SenseTime Research
linchen@sensetime.com

Wei Wu
SenseTime Research
wuwei@sensetime.com

Zhao Zhong ∗
NLPR, CASIA
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
zhao.zhong@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Junjie Yan
SenseTime Research
yanjunjie@sensetime.com

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks(CNNs) are both computation and memory intensive which hindered their deployment in mobile devices. Inspired by the relevant
concept in neural science literature, we propose Synaptic Pruning: a data-driven
method to prune connections between input and output feature maps with a newly
proposed class of parameters called Synaptic Strength. Synaptic Strength is designed to capture the importance of a connection based on the amount of information it transports. Experiment results show the effectiveness of our approach. On
CIFAR-10, we prune connections for various CNN models with up to 96% , which
results in significant size reduction and computation saving. Further evaluation on
ImageNet demonstrates that synaptic pruning is able to discover efficient models
which is competitive to state-of-the-art compact CNNs such as MobileNet-V2 and
NasNet-Mobile. Our contribution is summarized as following: (1) We introduce
Synaptic Strength, a new class of parameters for CNNs to indicate the importance
of each connections. (2) Our approach can prune various CNNs with high compression without compromising accuracy. (3) Further investigation shows, the
proposed Synaptic Strength is a better indicator for kernel pruning compared with
the previous approach in both empirical result and theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Convolutional Neural Networks(CNNs) gradually become dominant in the computer
vision community. Despite their good performance, CNNs have a huge number of parameters,
resulting in high resource demand for storage and computation. Modern CNNs can reach hundreds
of millions of parameters and billions of operations, which makes it difficult to deploy. To alleviate aforementioned problem, various methods have been proposed to increase the efficiency of
CNNs. These include knowledge distillation [12, 28], low-rank decomposition [24, 7], network
quantization/binarization [38, 5, 4, 27] and weight pruning [9]. Recent work shows that there exists
large amount of redundancy in CNNs[9, 13]. Accordingly, we can reduce the model size without
compromising accuracy with some appropriate schemes.
Meanwhile, in neural science literature, tremendous redundancy is believed to exist in human
brain [2]. A process of synapse elimination called synaptic pruning removes unnecessary neuronal
structures occurs from birth to adolescence. The pruning process is believed essential to the flexibility
required for the adaptive capabilities of the developing mind [6]. The key element of the brain’s
pruning procedure is the synaptic strength. Synaptic pruning in brain follows a "use it or lose it"
∗

This work is done when Zhao Zhong is intern at SenseTime Research

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

