DifNet: Semantic Segmentation by Diffusion
Networks
Peng Jiang 1

Fanglin Gu 1

Changhe Tu 1
1

Yunhai Wang 1

Baoquan Chen 2,1

Shandong University, China

2

Peking University, China

sdujump@gmail.com, fanglin.gu@gmail.com, cloudseawang@gmail.com
chtu@sdu.edu.cn, baoquan.chen@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have recently shown state of the art performance
on semantic segmentation tasks, however, they still suffer from problems of poor
boundary localization and spatial fragmented predictions. The difficulties lie in
the requirement of making dense predictions from a long path model all at once,
since details are hard to keep when data goes through deeper layers. Instead, in
this work, we decompose this difficult task into two relative simple sub-tasks: seed
detection which is required to predict initial predictions without the need of wholeness and preciseness, and similarity estimation which measures the possibility of
any two nodes belong to the same class without the need of knowing which class
they are. We use one branch network for one sub-task each, and apply a cascade of
random walks base on hierarchical semantics to approximate a complex diffusion
process which propagates seed information to the whole image according to the
estimated similarities.
The proposed DifNet consistently produces improvements over the baseline models with the same depth and with the equivalent number of parameters, and also
achieves promising performance on Pascal VOC and Pascal Context dataset. Our
DifNet is trained end-to-end without complex loss functions.

1

Introduction

Semantic Segmentation who aims to give dense label predictions for pixels in an image is one of the
fundamental topics in computer vision. Recently, Fully convolutional networks (FCNs) proposed
in [1] have proved to be much more powerful than schemes which rely on hand-crafted features.
Following FCNs, subsequent works [2–16] have get promoted by further introducing atrous convolution, shortcut between layers and CRFs post-processing.
Even with these refinements, current FCNs based semantic segmentation methods still suffer from
the problems of poor boundary localization and spatial fragmented predictions, because of following
challenges: First, to abstract invariant high level feature representations, deeper models are preferred,
however, the invariance character of features and increasing depth of layers may lead detailed spatial
information lost. Second, given this long path model, the requirement of making dense predictions
all at once makes these problems more severe. Third, the lack of ability to capturing long-range
dependencies causes model hard to generate accuracy and uniform predictions [17].
To address these challenges, we relieve the burden of semantic segmentation model by decomposing
semantic segmentation task into two relative simple sub-tasks, seed detection and similarity estimation, then diffuse seed information to the whole image according to the estimated similarities. For
each sub-task, we train one branch network respectively and simultaneously, therefore our model
has two branches: seed branch and similarity branch. The simplicity and motivation lie in these
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

