Byzantine Stochastic Gradient Descent
Dan Alistarh⇤
IST Austria
dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu⇤
Microsoft Research AI
zeyuan@csail.mit.edu

Jerry Li⇤
Simons Institute
jerryzli@berkeley.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of distributed stochastic optimization in an adversarial setting where, out of m machines which allegedly compute stochastic
gradients every iteration, an ↵-fraction are Byzantine, and may behave adversarially. Our main result is a variant of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) which finds
e 21 + ↵22 iterations.
"-approximate minimizers of convex functions in T = O
" m
"
In contrast, traditional mini-batch SGD needs T = O "21m iterations, but cannot
tolerate Byzantine failures. Further, we provide a lower bound showing that, up
to logarithmic factors, our algorithm is information-theoretically optimal both in
terms of sample complexity and time complexity.

1

Introduction

Machine learning applications are becoming increasingly decentralized, either because data is naturally distributed—in applications such as federated learning [17]—or because data is partitioned
across machines to parallelize computation, e.g. [2]. Fault-tolerance is a critical concern in such
distributed settings. Machines in a data center may crash, or fail in unpredictable ways; even worse,
in some settings one must be able to tolerate a fraction of adversarial/faulty workers, sending corrupted or even malicious data. This Byzantine failure model—where a small fraction of bad workers
are allowed to behave arbitrarily—has a rich history in distributed computing [19]. By contrast, the
design of machine learning algorithms which are robust to such Byzantine failures is a relatively recent topic, but is rapidly becoming a major research direction at the intersection of machine learning,
distributed computing, and security.
We measure algorithms in this setting against two fundamental criteria: sample complexity, which
requires high accuracy from few data samples, and computational complexity, i.e. preserving the
runtime speedups achieved by distributing computation. These criteria should hold even under adversarial conditions. Another important consideration in the design of these algorithms is that they
should remain useful in high dimensions.
System Model. We study stochastic optimization in the Byzantine setting. We assume an unknown
distribution D over functions Rd ! R, and wish to minimize f (x) := Es⇠D [fs (x)].
We consider a standard setting with m workers and a master (coordinator), where an ↵-fraction of
the workers may be Byzantine, with ↵ < 1/2. Each worker has access to T sample functions from
the distribution D. We proceed in iterations, structured as follows: workers first perform some local
computation, then synchronously send information to the master, which compiles the information
and sends new information to the workers. At the end, the master should output an approximate
minimizer of the function f .
While our negative results will apply for this general setting, our algorithms will be expressed in
the standard framework of distributed stochastic gradient methods: in each iteration k, the master
broadcasts the current iterate xk 2 Rd to worker machines, and each worker is supposed to compute
a stochastic gradient at xk and return it to the master. A good worker returns returns rfs (xk ) for a
⇤

Authors in alphabetical order. Full version can be found on https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.08917.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

