Neural Voice Cloning with a Few Samples

Sercan Ö. Arık∗
sercanarik@baidu.com

Jitong Chen∗
chenjitong01@baidu.com

Kainan Peng∗
pengkainan@baidu.com

Yanqi Zhou
yanqiz@baidu.com

Wei Ping∗
pingwei01@baidu.com

Baidu Research
1195 Bordeaux Dr. Sunnyvale, CA 94089

Abstract
Voice cloning is a highly desired feature for personalized speech interfaces. We
introduce a neural voice cloning system that learns to synthesize a person’s voice
from only a few audio samples. We study two approaches: speaker adaptation
and speaker encoding. Speaker adaptation is based on fine-tuning a multi-speaker
generative model. Speaker encoding is based on training a separate model to
directly infer a new speaker embedding, which will be applied to a multi-speaker
generative model. In terms of naturalness of the speech and similarity to the original
speaker, both approaches can achieve good performance, even with a few cloning
audios. 2 While speaker adaptation can achieve slightly better naturalness and
similarity, cloning time and required memory for the speaker encoding approach
are significantly less, making it more favorable for low-resource deployment.

1

Introduction

Generative models based on deep neural networks have been successfully applied to many domains
such as image generation [e.g., Oord et al., 2016b, Karras et al., 2017], speech synthesis [e.g., Oord
et al., 2016a, Arik et al., 2017a, Wang et al., 2017], and language modeling [e.g., Jozefowicz et al.,
2016]. Deep neural networks are capable of modeling complex data distributions and can be further
conditioned on external inputs to control the content and style of generated samples.
In speech synthesis, generative models can be conditioned on text and speaker identity [e.g., Arik
et al., 2017b]. While text carries linguistic information and controls the content of the generated
speech, speaker identity captures characteristics such as pitch, speech rate and accent. One approach
for multi-speaker speech synthesis is to jointly train a generative model and speaker embeddings
on triplets of text, audio and speaker identity [e.g., Ping et al., 2018]. The idea is to encode the
speaker-dependent information with low-dimensional embeddings, while sharing the majority of the
model parameters across all speakers. One limitation of such methods is that they can only generate
speech for observed speakers during training. An intriguing task is to learn the voice of an unseen
speaker from a few speech samples, a.k.a. voice cloning, which corresponds to few-shot generative
modeling of speech conditioned on the speaker identity. While a generative model can be trained
from scratch with a large amount of audio samples 3 , we focus on voice cloning of a new speaker
with a few minutes or even few seconds data. It is challenging as the model has to learn the speaker
characteristics from very limited amount of data, and still generalize to unseen texts.
Equal contribution
Cloned audio samples can be found in https://audiodemos.github.io
3
A single speaker model can require ∼20 hours of training data [e.g., Arik et al., 2017a, Wang et al., 2017],
while a multi-speaker model for 108 speakers [Arik et al., 2017b] requires about ∼20 minutes data per speaker.
∗

2

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

