Monte-Carlo Tree Search for Constrained POMDPs
Jongmin Lee1 , Geon-Hyeong Kim1 , Pascal Poupart2 , Kee-Eung Kim1,3
1
School of Computing, KAIST, Republic of Korea
2
University of Waterloo, Waterloo AI Institute and Vector Institute
3
PROWLER.io
{jmlee,ghkim}@ai.kaist.ac.kr, ppoupart@uwaterloo.ca, kekim@cs.kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) has been successfully applied to very large
POMDPs, a standard model for stochastic sequential decision-making problems.
However, many real-world problems inherently have multiple goals, where multiobjective formulations are more natural. The constrained POMDP (CPOMDP) is
such a model that maximizes the reward while constraining the cost, extending
the standard POMDP model. To date, solution methods for CPOMDPs assume an
explicit model of the environment, and thus are hardly applicable to large-scale realworld problems. In this paper, we present CC-POMCP (Cost-Constrained POMCP),
an online MCTS algorithm for large CPOMDPs that leverages the optimization of
LP-induced parameters and only requires a black-box simulator of the environment.
In the experiments, we demonstrate that CC-POMCP converges to the optimal
stochastic action selection in CPOMDP and pushes the state-of-the-art by being
able to scale to very large problems.

1

Introduction

Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) [4, 5, 12] is a generic online planning algorithm that effectively
combines random sampling and tree search, and has shown great promise in many areas such as
online Bayesian reinforcement learning [8, 10] and computer Go [7, 20]. MCTS efficiently explores
the search space by investing more search effort in promising states and actions while balancing
exploration and exploitation in the direction of maximizing the cumulative (scalar) rewards. Due to
its outstanding performance without relying on any prior domain knowledge or heuristic function,
MCTS has become the de-facto standard method for solving very large sequential decision making
problems, commonly formulated as Markov decision processes (MDPs) and partially observable
MDPs (POMDPs).
However in many situations, it is not straightforward to formulate the objective with the reward
maximization alone, as in the following examples. For spoken dialogue systems [24], it is common to
optimize the dialogue strategy towards minimizing the number of turns while maintaining the success
rate of dialogue tasks above a certain level. For UAVs under search and rescue mission, the main goal
would be to find as many targets as possible, while avoiding threats that may endanger the mission
itself. The constrained POMDP (CPOMDP) [9] is an appealing framework for dealing with this kind
of multi-objective sequential decision making problems when the environment is partially observable.
The model assumes that the action incurs not only rewards, but also K different types of costs, and
the goal is to find an optimal policy that maximizes the expected cumulative rewards while bounding
each of K expected cumulative costs below certain levels.
Although the CPOMDP is a very expressive model, it is known to be very difficult to solve due to the
PSPACE-complete nature of solving POMDP [16] originating from the two main challenges: the
curse of dimensionality and the curse of history. Partially observable Monte-Carlo Planner (POMCP)
[19] tames these two curses of POMDP by using Monte-Carlo sampling both in the root belief-state
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

