Learning to Navigate in Cities Without a Map

Piotr Mirowski, Matthew Koichi Grimes, Mateusz Malinowski, Karl Moritz Hermann,
Keith Anderson, Denis Teplyashin, Karen Simonyan, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
Andrew Zisserman, Raia Hadsell
DeepMind
London, United Kingdom
{piotrmirowski, mkg, mateuszm, kmh, keithanderson, }@google.com
{teplyashin, simonyan, korayk, zisserman, raia}@google.com

Abstract
Navigating through unstructured environments is a basic capability of intelligent
creatures, and thus is of fundamental interest in the study and development of
artificial intelligence. Long-range navigation is a complex cognitive task that relies on developing an internal representation of space, grounded by recognisable
landmarks and robust visual processing, that can simultaneously support continuous self-localisation (“I am here”) and a representation of the goal (“I am going
there”). Building upon recent research that applies deep reinforcement learning to
maze navigation problems, we present an end-to-end deep reinforcement learning
approach that can be applied on a city scale. Recognising that successful navigation relies on integration of general policies with locale-specific knowledge,
we propose a dual pathway architecture that allows locale-specific features to be
encapsulated, while still enabling transfer to multiple cities. A key contribution of
this paper is an interactive navigation environment that uses Google Street View
for its photographic content and worldwide coverage. Our baselines demonstrate
that deep reinforcement learning agents can learn to navigate in multiple cities and
to traverse to target destinations that may be kilometres away. The project webpage
http://streetlearn.cc contains a video summarizing our research and showing the trained agent in diverse city environments and on the transfer task, the form
to request the StreetLearn dataset and links to further resources. The StreetLearn environment code is available at https://github.com/deepmind/streetlearn.

1

Introduction

The subject of navigation is attractive to various research disciplines and technology domains alike,
being at once a subject of inquiry from the point of view of neuroscientists wishing to crack the code
of grid and place cells [2, 12], as well as a fundamental aspect of robotics research. The majority
of algorithms involve building an explicit map during an exploration phase and then planning and
acting via that representation. In this work, we are interested in pushing the limits of end-to-end
deep reinforcement learning for navigation by proposing new methods and demonstrating their
performance in large-scale, real-world environments. Just as humans can learn to navigate a city
without relying on maps, GPS localisation, or other aids, it is our aim to show that a neural network
agent can learn to traverse entire cities using only visual observations. In order to realise this aim, we
designed an interactive environment that uses the images and underlying connectivity information
from Google Street View, and propose a dual pathway agent architecture that can navigate within the
environment (see Fig. 1a).
Learning to navigate directly from visual inputs has been shown to be possible in some domains, by
using deep reinforcement learning (RL) approaches that can learn from task rewards – for instance,
navigating to a destination. Recent research has demonstrated that RL agents can learn to navigate
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

