Explanations based on the Missing: Towards
Contrastive Explanations with Pertinent Negatives

Amit Dhurandhar∗
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
adhuran@us.ibm.com
Chun-Chen Tu
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
timtu@umich.edu

Pin-Yu Chen∗
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

Paishun Ting
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
paishun@umich.edu

Ronny Luss
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
rluss@us.ibm.com

Karthikeyan Shanmugam
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
karthikeyan.shanmugam2@ibm.com

Payel Das
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
daspa@us.ibm.com

Abstract
In this paper we propose a novel method that provides contrastive explanations
justifying the classification of an input by a black box classifier such as a deep
neural network. Given an input we find what should be minimally and sufficiently
present (viz. important object pixels in an image) to justify its classification
and analogously what should be minimally and necessarily absent (viz. certain
background pixels). We argue that such explanations are natural for humans and are
used commonly in domains such as health care and criminology. What is minimally
but critically absent is an important part of an explanation, which to the best of
our knowledge, has not been explicitly identified by current explanation methods
that explain predictions of neural networks. We validate our approach on three
real datasets obtained from diverse domains; namely, a handwritten digits dataset
MNIST, a large procurement fraud dataset and a brain activity strength dataset.
In all three cases, we witness the power of our approach in generating precise
explanations that are also easy for human experts to understand and evaluate.

1

Introduction

Steve is the tall guy with long hair who does not wear glasses. Explanations as such are used frequently
by people to identify other people or items of interest. We see in this case that characteristics such
as being tall and having long hair help describe the person, although incompletely. The absence of
glasses is important to complete the identification and help distinguish him from, for instance, Bob
who is tall, has long hair and wears glasses. It is common for us humans to state such contrastive
facts when we want to accurately explain something. These contrastive facts are by no means a list of
all possible characteristics that should be absent in an input to distinguish it from all other classes
that it does not belong to, but rather a minimal set of characteristics/features that help distinguish it
from the "closest" class that it does not belong to.
∗

First two authors have equal contribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

