Densely Connected Attention Propagation
for Reading Comprehension

∗

Yi Tay1 , ∗ Luu Anh Tuan2 , Siu Cheung Hui3 and Jian Su4
1,3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2,4
Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore
ytay017@e.ntu.edu.sg1
at.luu@i2r.a-star.edu.sg2
asschui@ntu.edu.sg3
sujian@i2r.a-star.edu.sg4

Abstract
We propose D ECA P ROP (Densely Connected Attention Propagation), a new
densely connected neural architecture for reading comprehension (RC). There
are two distinct characteristics of our model. Firstly, our model densely connects
all pairwise layers of the network, modeling relationships between passage and
query across all hierarchical levels. Secondly, the dense connectors in our network
are learned via attention instead of standard residual skip-connectors. To this end,
we propose novel Bidirectional Attention Connectors (BAC) for efficiently forging
connections throughout the network. We conduct extensive experiments on four
challenging RC benchmarks. Our proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art
results on all four, outperforming existing baselines by up to 2.6% − 14.2% in
absolute F1 score.

1

Introduction

The dominant neural architectures for reading comprehension (RC) typically follow a standard
‘encode-interact-point’ design [Wang and Jiang, 2016; Seo et al., 2016; Xiong et al., 2016; Wang et al.,
2017c; Kundu and Ng, 2018]. Following the embedding layer, a compositional encoder typically
encodes Q (query) and P (passage) individually. Subsequently, an (bidirectional) attention layer
is then used to model interactions between P/Q. Finally, these attended representations are then
reasoned over to find (point to) the best answer span. While, there might be slight variants of this
architecture, this overall architectural design remains consistent across many RC models.
Intuitively, the design of RC models often possess some depth, i.e., every stage of the network easily
comprises several layers. For example, the R-NET [Wang et al., 2017c] architecture adopts three
BiRNN layers as the encoder and two additional BiRNN layers at the interaction layer. BiDAF [Seo
et al., 2016] uses two BiLSTM layers at the pointer layer, etc. As such, RC models are often relatively
deep, at the very least within the context of NLP.
Unfortunately, the depth of a model is not without implications. It is well-established fact that
increasing the depth may impair gradient flow and feature propagation, making networks harder
to train [He et al., 2016; Srivastava et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2017]. This problem is prevalent
in computer vision, where mitigation strategies that rely on shortcut connections such as Residual
networks [He et al., 2016], GoogLeNet [Szegedy et al., 2015] and DenseNets [Huang et al., 2017]
were incepted. Naturally, many of the existing RC models already have some built-in designs to
workaround this issue by shortening the signal path in the network. Examples include attention flow
∗

Denotes equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

