Deep, complex, invertible networks for inversion of
transmission effects in multimode optical fibres

Oisín Moran,1 Piergiorgio Caramazza,2 Daniele Faccio,2 Roderick Murray-Smith1,*
1
School of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, Scotland.
oisin@inscribe.ai, Roderick.Murray-Smith@glasgow.ac.uk,
2
School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Glasgow, Scotland.
piergiorgio.caramazza@gmail.com, Daniele.Faccio@glasgow.ac.uk

Abstract
We use complex-weighted, deep networks to invert the effects of multimode optical
fibre distortion of a coherent input image. We generated experimental data based
on collections of optical fibre responses to greyscale input images generated with
coherent light, by measuring only image amplitude (not amplitude and phase as is
typical) at the output of 1 m and 10 m long, 105 µm diameter multimode fibre. This
data is made available as the Optical fibre inverse problem Benchmark collection.
The experimental data is used to train complex-weighted models with a range
of regularisation approaches. A unitary regularisation approach for complexweighted networks is proposed which performs well in robustly inverting the fibre
transmission matrix, which is compatible with the physical theory. A benefit of
the unitary constraint is that it allows us to learn a forward unitary model and
analytically invert it to solve the inverse problem. We demonstrate this approach,
and outline how it has the potential to improve performance by incorporating
knowledge of the phase shift induced by the spatial light modulator.

1

Introduction

The ability to better transmit images over multimode fibre (MMF) has applications in medicine,
cryptography and communications in general. However, as pointed out by Stasio [2017], MMFs are
not normally utilised for imaging because they do not act as a relay optical element. This makes their
use for focussing and imaging impractical, without sophisticated compensation for their transmission
properties. In this paper we demonstrate that a deep network combining multiple complex dense
layers with orthogonal regularisation and conventional autoencoders can successfully invert speckle
images generated over a 10 m long distorted 105 µm MMF without phase information. Previous work
has either required phase information, or been limited to short (e.g. 30 cm) and straight fibres.
1.1

Deep learning challenges

This particular imaging application has a number of features which are potentially challenging for the
machine learning community. The speckle images used as inputs have a non-local relationship with
the pixels in the inverted image, making local patch-based approaches impossible, and leading to
challenging memory problems. The statistics of speckle images are very different from typical images,
meaning that ‘off-the-shelf’ deep convolutional network approaches—which assume locally-spatial
structure—cannot be applied directly. There are clear circular correlations in the images, but finding
these requires solving the inversion, leading to a chicken-and-egg problem. The non-locality also
means that position-invariant approaches like convolution layers and max-pooling should not be
applied before having brought the image back to an appropriate spatial arrangement
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

