Critical initialisation for deep signal propagation in
noisy rectifier neural networks

Arnu Pretorius∗
Computer Science Division
CAIR†
Stellenbosch University

Elan Van Biljon
Computer Science Division
Stellenbosch University

Steve Kroon
Computer Science Division
Stellenbosch University

Herman Kamper
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Stellenbosch University

Abstract
Stochastic regularisation is an important weapon in the arsenal of a deep learning
practitioner. However, despite recent theoretical advances, our understanding of
how noise influences signal propagation in deep neural networks remains limited.
By extending recent work based on mean field theory, we develop a new framework
for signal propagation in stochastic regularised neural networks. Our noisy signal
propagation theory can incorporate several common noise distributions, including
additive and multiplicative Gaussian noise as well as dropout. We use this framework to investigate initialisation strategies for noisy ReLU networks. We show that
no critical initialisation strategy exists using additive noise, with signal propagation
exploding regardless of the selected noise distribution. For multiplicative noise
(e.g. dropout), we identify alternative critical initialisation strategies that depend
on the second moment of the noise distribution. Simulations and experiments on
real-world data confirm that our proposed initialisation is able to stably propagate
signals in deep networks, while using an initialisation disregarding noise fails to do
so. Furthermore, we analyse correlation dynamics between inputs. Stronger noise
regularisation is shown to reduce the depth to which discriminatory information
about the inputs to a noisy ReLU network is able to propagate, even when initialised
at criticality. We support our theoretical predictions for these trainable depths with
simulations, as well as with experiments on MNIST and CIFAR-10.‡

1

Introduction

Over the last few years, advances in network design strategies have made it easier to train large
networks and have helped to reduce overfitting. These advances include improved weight initialisation
strategies (Glorot and Bengio, 2010; Saxe et al., 2014; Sussillo and Abbott, 2014; He et al., 2015;
Mishkin and Matas, 2016), non-saturating activation functions (Glorot et al., 2011) and stochastic
regularisation techniques (Srivastava et al., 2014). Authors have noted, for instance, the critical
dependence of successful training on noise-based methods such as dropout (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Dahl et al., 2013).
∗

Correspondence: arnupretorius@gmail.com
CSIR/SU Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research.
‡
Code to reproduce all the results is available at https://github.com/ElanVB/noisy_signal_prop

†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

