Learning Loop Invariants for Program Verification

Xujie Si∗
University of Pennsylvania
xsi@cis.upenn.edu

Hanjun Dai ∗
Georgia Tech
hanjundai@gatech.edu

Mayur Naik
University of Pennsylvania
mhnaik@cis.upenn.edu

Mukund Raghothaman
University of Pennsylvania
rmukund@cis.upenn.edu

Le Song
Georgia Tech and Ant Financial
lsong@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
A fundamental problem in program verification concerns inferring loop invariants.
The problem is undecidable and even practical instances are challenging. Inspired
by how human experts construct loop invariants, we propose a reasoning framework
C ODE 2I NV that constructs the solution by multi-step decision making and querying
an external program graph memory block. By training with reinforcement learning,
C ODE 2I NV captures rich program features and avoids the need for ground truth
solutions as supervision. Compared to previous learning tasks in domains with
graph-structured data, it addresses unique challenges, such as a binary objective
function and an extremely sparse reward that is given by an automated theorem
prover only after the complete loop invariant is proposed. We evaluate C ODE 2I NV on
a suite of 133 benchmark problems and compare it to three state-of-the-art systems.
It solves 106 problems compared to 73 by a stochastic search-based system, 77 by
a heuristic search-based system, and 100 by a decision tree learning-based system.
Moreover, the strategy learned can be generalized to new programs: compared to
solving new instances from scratch, the pre-trained agent is more sample efficient
in finding solutions.

1

Introduction

The growing ubiquity and complexity of software has led to a dramatic increase in software bugs and
security vulnerabilities that pose enormous costs and risks. Program verification technology enables
programmers to prove the absence of such problems at compile-time before deploying their program.
One of the main activities underlying this technology involves inferring a loop invariant—a logical
formula that constitutes an abstract specification of a loop—for each loop in the program. Obtaining
loop invariants enables a broad and deep range of correctness and security properties to be proven
automatically by a variety of program verification tools spanning type checkers, static analyzers, and
theorem provers. Notable examples include Microsoft Code Contracts for .NET programs [1] and
the Verified Software Toolchain spanning C source code to machine language [2].
Many different approaches have been proposed in the literature to infer loop invariants. The problem
is undecidable, however, and even practical instances are challenging, which greatly limits the
benefits of program verification technology. Existing approaches suffer from key drawbacks: they
are purely search-based, or they use hand-crafted features, or they are based on supervised learning.
The performance of search-based approaches is greatly hindered by their inability to learn from past
mistakes. Hand-crafted features limit the space of possible invariants, e.g., Garg et al. [3] is limited
to features of the form x±y ≤ c where c is a constant, and thus cannot handle invariants that involve
x+y ≤ z for program variables x,y,z. Finally, obtaining ground truth solutions needed by supervised
learning is hindered by the undecidability of the loop invariant generation problem.
In this paper, we propose C ODE 2I NV, an end-to-end learning-based approach to infer loop invariants.
C ODE 2I NV has the ability to automatically learn rich latent representations of desirable invariants,
∗

Both authors contributed equally to the paper.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

