Greedy Hash: Towards Fast Optimization for
Accurate Hash Coding in CNN

Shupeng Su1
Chao Zhang1∗
Kai Han1,3
Yonghong Tian1,2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
2
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, School of EECS, Peking University
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{sushupeng, c.zhang, hankai, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn
1

Abstract
To convert the input into binary code, hashing algorithm has been widely used for
approximate nearest neighbor search on large-scale image sets due to its computation and storage efficiency. Deep hashing further improves the retrieval quality by
combining the hash coding with deep neural network. However, a major difficulty
in deep hashing lies in the discrete constraints imposed on the network output,
which generally makes the optimization NP hard. In this work, we adopt the greedy
principle to tackle this NP hard problem by iteratively updating the network toward
the probable optimal discrete solution in each iteration. A hash coding layer is designed to implement our approach which strictly uses the sign function in forward
propagation to maintain the discrete constraints, while in back propagation the
gradients are transmitted intactly to the front layer to avoid the vanishing gradients.
In addition to the theoretical derivation, we provide a new perspective to visualize
and understand the effectiveness and efficiency of our algorithm. Experiments on
benchmark datasets show that our scheme outperforms state-of-the-art hashing
methods in both supervised and unsupervised tasks.

1

Introduction

In the era of big data, searching for the desired information has become an important topic in such a
vast ocean of data. Hashing for large-scale image set retrieval [7, 8, 21, 22] has attracted extensive
interest in Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search due to its computation and storage efficiency
with the generated binary representation. Deep hashing further promotes the performance by learning
the image representation and hash coding in the same network simultaneously [30, 15, 18, 6]. Not
only the common pairwise label based methods [17, 30, 4], but also triplet [34, 35] and point-wise
[19, 31] schemes have been exploited extensively.
Despite the considerable progress, it’s still a difficult task to realize the real end-to-end training of
deep hashing owing to the vanishing gradient problem from sign function which is appended after the
output of the network to achieve binary code. To be specific, the gradient of sign function is zero
for all nonzero input, and that is fatal to the neural network which uses gradient descent for training.
Most of the previous works choose to first solve a relaxed problem discarding the discrete constraints
(e.g., [34, 19, 31] replace sign function with tanh or sigmoid, [20, 36, 17] add a penalty term in loss
function to generate feature as discrete as possible), and later in test phase apply sign function to
obtain real binary code. Although capable of training the network, these relaxation schemes will
introduce quantization error which basically leads to suboptimal hash code. Later HashNet [4] and
Deep Supervised Discrete Hashing (DSDH) [16] made a progress on this difficulty. HashNet starts
∗

Corresponding author

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

