Learn What Not to Learn: Action Elimination with
Deep Reinforcement Learning

Tom Zahavy∗1,2 , Matan Haroush∗1 , Nadav Merlis∗1 , Daniel J. Mankowitz3 , Shie Mannor1
1
The Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, 2 Google research, 3 Deepmind
* Equal contribution
Corresponding to {tomzahavy,matan.h,merlis}@campus.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Learning how to act when there are many available actions in each state is a
challenging task for Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents, especially when many of
the actions are redundant or irrelevant. In such cases, it is sometimes easier to learn
which actions not to take. In this work, we propose the Action-Elimination Deep
Q-Network (AE-DQN) architecture that combines a Deep RL algorithm with an
Action Elimination Network (AEN) that eliminates sub-optimal actions. The AEN
is trained to predict invalid actions, supervised by an external elimination signal
provided by the environment. Simulations demonstrate a considerable speedup
and added robustness over vanilla DQN in text-based games with over a thousand
discrete actions.

1

Introduction

Learning control policies for sequential decision-making tasks where both the state space and the
action space are vast is critical when applying Reinforcement Learning (RL) to real-world problems.
This is because there is an exponential growth of computational requirements as the problem size
increases, known as the curse of dimensionality (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1995). Deep RL (DRL)
tackles the curse of dimensionality due to large state spaces by utilizing a Deep Neural Network
(DNN) to approximate the value function and/or the policy. This enables the agent to generalize
across states without domain-specific knowledge (Tesauro, 1995; Mnih et al., 2015).
Despite the great success of DRL methods, deploying them in real-world applications is still limited.
One of the main challenges towards that goal is dealing with large action spaces, especially when
many of the actions are redundant or irrelevant (for many states). While humans can usually detect
the subset of feasible actions in a given situation from the context, RL agents may attempt irrelevant
actions or actions that are inferior, thus wasting computation time. Control systems for large industrial
processes like power grids (Wen, O’Neill, and Maei, 2015; Glavic, Fonteneau, and Ernst, 2017; Dalal,
Gilboa, and Mannor, 2016) and traffic control (Mannion, Duggan, and Howley, 2016; Van der Pol
and Oliehoek, 2016) may have millions of possible actions that can be applied at every time step.
Other domains utilize natural language to represent the actions. These action spaces are typically
composed of all possible sequences of words from a fixed size dictionary resulting in considerably
large action spaces. Common examples of systems that use this action space representation include
conversational agents such as personal assistants (Dhingra et al., 2016; Li et al., 2017; Su et al., 2016;
Lipton et al., 2016b; Liu et al., 2017; Zhao and Eskenazi, 2016; Wu et al., 2016), travel planners
(Peng et al., 2017), restaurant/hotel bookers (Budzianowski et al., 2017), chat-bots (Serban et al.,
2017; Li et al., 2016) and text-based game agents (Narasimhan, Kulkarni, and Barzilay, 2015; He et
al., 2015; Zelinka, 2018; Yuan et al., 2018; Côté et al., 2018). RL is currently being applied in all of
these domains, facing new challenges in function approximation and exploration due to the larger
action space.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

