The Global Anchor Method for Quantifying
Linguistic Shifts and Domain Adaptation

Zi Yin
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
s09600974@gmail.com

Vin Sachidananda
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
vsachi@stanford.edu

Balaji Prabhakar
Department of Electrical Engineering and
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
balaji@stanford.edu

Abstract
Language is dynamic, constantly evolving and adapting with respect to time,
domain or topic. The adaptability of language is an active research area, where
researchers discover social, cultural and domain-specific changes in language using
distributional tools such as word embeddings. In this paper, we introduce the
global anchor method for detecting corpus-level language shifts. We show both
theoretically and empirically that the global anchor method is equivalent to the
alignment method, a widely-used method for comparing word embeddings, in
terms of detecting corpus-level language shifts. Despite their equivalence in terms
of detection abilities, we demonstrate that the global anchor method is superior in
terms of applicability as it can compare embeddings of different dimensionalities.
Furthermore, the global anchor method has implementation and parallelization
advantages. We show that the global anchor method reveals fine structures in the
evolution of language and domain adaptation. When combined with the graph
Laplacian technique, the global anchor method recovers the evolution trajectory
and domain clustering of disparate text corpora.

1

Introduction

Linguistic variations are commonly observed among text corpora from different communities or time
periods [9, 11]. Domain adaptation seeks to quantify the degree to which language varies in distinct
corpora, such as text from different time periods or academic communities such as computer science
and physics. This adaptation can be performed either at a word-level–to determine if a particular
word’s semantics are different in the two corpora, or at the corpus-level–to determine the similarity
of language usage in the two corpora. Applications of these methods include identifying how words
or phrases differ in meaning in different corpora or how well text-based models trained on one corpus
can be transferred to other settings. In this paper, we focus on corpus-level adaptation methods which
quantify the structural similarity of two vector space embeddings each learned on a separate corpus.
Consider a motivating example of training conversational intent and entity classifiers for computer
software diagnosis. While many pre-trained word embeddings are available for such types of natural
language problems, most of these embeddings are trained on general corpora such as news collections
or Wikipedia. As previously mentioned, linguistic shifts can result in semantic differences between
the domain on which the embeddings were trained and the domain in which the embeddings are
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

