Multi-Task Zipping via Layer-wise Neuron Sharing

Xiaoxi He
ETH Zurich
hex@ethz.ch

Zimu Zhou∗
ETH Zurich
zzhou@tik.ee.ethz.ch

Lothar Thiele
ETH Zurich
thiele@ethz.ch

Abstract
Future mobile devices are anticipated to perceive, understand and react to the world
on their own by running multiple correlated deep neural networks on-device. Yet
the complexity of these neural networks needs to be trimmed down both withinmodel and cross-model to ﬁt in mobile storage and memory. Previous studies
squeeze the redundancy within a single model. In this work, we aim to reduce the
redundancy across multiple models. We propose Multi-Task Zipping (MTZ), a
framework to automatically merge correlated, pre-trained deep neural networks
for cross-model compression. Central in MTZ is a layer-wise neuron sharing and
incoming weight updating scheme that induces a minimal change in the error
function. MTZ inherits information from each model and demands light retraining
to re-boost the accuracy of individual tasks. Evaluations show that MTZ is able
to fully merge the hidden layers of two VGG-16 networks with a 3.18% increase
in the test error averaged on ImageNet and CelebA, or share 39.61% parameters
between the two networks with < 0.5% increase in the test errors for both tasks.
The number of iterations to retrain the combined network is at least 17.8× lower
than that of training a single VGG-16 network. Moreover, experiments show that
MTZ is also able to effectively merge multiple residual networks.

1

Introduction

AI-powered mobile applications increasingly demand multiple deep neural networks for correlated
tasks to be performed continuously and concurrently on resource-constrained devices such as wearables, smartphones, self-driving cars, and drones [5, 18]. While many pre-trained models for different
tasks are available [14, 23, 25], it is often infeasible to deploy them directly on mobile devices. For
instance, VGG-16 models for object detection [25] and facial attribute classiﬁcation [17] both contain
over 130M parameters. Packing multiple such models easily strains mobile storage and memory.
Sharing information among tasks holds potential to reduce the sizes of multiple correlated models
without incurring drop in individual task inference accuracy.
We study information sharing in the context of cross-model compression, which seeks effective and
efﬁcient information sharing mechanisms among pre-trained models for multiple tasks to reduce the
size of the combined model without accuracy loss in each task. A solution to cross-model compression
is multi-task learning (MTL), a paradigm that jointly learns multiple tasks to improve the robustness
and generalization of tasks [1, 5]. However, most MTL studies use heuristically conﬁgured shared
structures, which may lead to dramatic accuracy loss due to improper sharing of knowledge [31].
Some recent proposals [17, 19, 28] automatically decide “what to share” in deep neural networks.
Yet deep MTL usually involves enormous training overhead [31]. Hence it is inefﬁcient to ignore the
already trained parameters in each model and apply MTL for cross-model compression.
We propose Multi-Task Zipping (MTZ), a framework to automatically and adaptively merge correlated,
well-trained deep neural networks for cross-model compression via neuron sharing. It decides the
∗

Corresponding Author: Zimu Zhou.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

