Mean Field for the Stochastic Blockmodel:
Optimization Landscape and Convergence Issues

Soumendu Sunder Mukherjee∗
Interdisciplinary Statistical Research Unit (ISRU)
Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata
Kolkata 700108, India
soumendu041@gmail.com
Y. X. Rachel Wang∗
School of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Sydney
NSW 2006, Australia
rachel.wang@sydney.edu.au

Purnamrita Sarkar∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science
University of Texas, Austin
Austin, TX 78712
purna.sarkar@austin.utexas.edu

Bowei Yan
Department of Statistics and Data Science
University of Texas, Austin
Austin, TX 78712
boweiy@utexas.edu

Abstract
Variational approximation has been widely used in large-scale Bayesian inference
recently, the simplest kind of which involves imposing a mean field assumption to
approximate complicated latent structures. Despite the computational scalability
of mean field, theoretical studies of its loss function surface and the convergence
behavior of iterative updates for optimizing the loss are far from complete. In
this paper, we focus on the problem of community detection for a simple twoclass Stochastic Blockmodel (SBM). Using batch co-ordinate ascent (BCAVI) for
updates, we show different convergence behavior with respect to different initializations. When the parameters are known, we show that a random initialization can
converge to the ground truth, whereas in the case when the parameters themselves
need to be estimated, a random initialization will converge to an uninformative
local optimum.

1

Introduction

Variational approximation has recently gained a huge momentum in contemporary Bayesian statistics [13, 5, 11]. Mean field is the simplest type of variational approximation, and is a popular tool in
large scale Bayesian inference. It is particularly useful for problems which involve complicated latent
structure, so that direct computation with the likelihood is not feasible. The main idea of variational
approximation is to obtain a tractable lower bound on the complete log-likelihood of any model. This
is, in fact, akin to the Expectation Maximization algorithm [6], where one obtains a lower bound on
the marginal log-likelihood function via the expectation with respect to the conditional distribution of
the latent variables under the current estimates of the underlying parameters. In contrast, for mean
field variational approximation, the lower bound or ELBO is computed using the expectation with
respect to a product distribution over the latent variables.
While there are many advances in developing new mean field type approximation methods for
Bayesian models, the theoretical behavior of these algorithms is not well understood. There is one
line of work that studies the asymptotic consistency of variational inference. Most of the existing
theoretical work focuses on the global optimizer of variational methods. For example, for Latent
∗

Equal contribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

