Long short-term memory and learning-to-learn in
networks of spiking neurons

Guillaume Bellec*, Darjan Salaj*, Anand Subramoney*, Robert Legenstein & Wolfgang Maass
Institute for Theoretical Computer Science
Graz University of Technology, Austria
{bellec,salaj,subramoney,legenstein,maass}@igi.tugraz.at
* equal contributions

Abstract
Recurrent networks of spiking neurons (RSNNs) underlie the astounding computing and learning capabilities of the brain. But computing and learning capabilities
of RSNN models have remained poor, at least in comparison with artificial neural
networks (ANNs). We address two possible reasons for that. One is that RSNNs
in the brain are not randomly connected or designed according to simple rules,
and they do not start learning as a tabula rasa network. Rather, RSNNs in the
brain were optimized for their tasks through evolution, development, and prior
experience. Details of these optimization processes are largely unknown. But
their functional contribution can be approximated through powerful optimization
methods, such as backpropagation through time (BPTT).
A second major mismatch between RSNNs in the brain and models is that the
latter only show a small fraction of the dynamics of neurons and synapses in
the brain. We include neurons in our RSNN model that reproduce one prominent dynamical process of biological neurons that takes place at the behaviourally
relevant time scale of seconds: neuronal adaptation. We denote these networks
as LSNNs because of their Long short-term memory. The inclusion of adapting
neurons drastically increases the computing and learning capability of RSNNs if
they are trained and configured by deep learning (BPTT combined with a rewiring
algorithm that optimizes the network architecture). In fact, the computational performance of these RSNNs approaches for the first time that of LSTM networks.
In addition RSNNs with adapting neurons can acquire abstract knowledge from
prior learning in a Learning-to-Learn (L2L) scheme, and transfer that knowledge
in order to learn new but related tasks from very few examples. We demonstrate
this for supervised learning and reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Recurrent networks of spiking neurons (RSNNs) are frequently studied as models for networks of
neurons in the brain. In principle, they should be especially well-suited for computations in the
temporal domain, such as speech processing, as their computations are carried out via spikes, i.e.,
events in time and space. But the performance of RSNN models has remained suboptimal also for
temporal processing tasks. One difference between RSNNs in the brain and RSNN models is that
RSNNs in the brain have been optimized for their function through long evolutionary processes,
complemented by a sophisticated learning curriculum during development. Since most details of
these biological processes are currently still unknown, we asked whether deep learning is able to
mimic these complex optimization processes on a functional level for RSNN models. We used
BPTT as the deep learning method for network optimization. Backpropagation has been adapted
previously for feed forward networks with binary activations in [1, 2], and we adapted BPTT to work
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

