MetaReg: Towards Domain Generalization using
Meta-Regularization

Yogesh Balaji
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD
yogesh@cs.umd.edu

Swami Sankaranarayanan∗
Butterfly Network Inc.
NewYork, NY
swamiviv@butterflynetinc.com

Rama Chellappa
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Maryland
College Park, MD
rama@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
Training models that generalize to new domains at test time is a problem of
fundamental importance in machine learning. In this work, we encode this notion
of domain generalization using a novel regularization function. We pose the
problem of finding such a regularization function in a Learning to Learn (or) metalearning framework. The objective of domain generalization is explicitly modeled
by learning a regularizer that makes the model trained on one domain to perform
well on another domain. Experimental validations on computer vision and natural
language datasets indicate that our method can learn regularizers that achieve good
cross-domain generalization.

1

Introduction

Existing machine learning algorithms including deep neural networks achieve good performance
in cases where the training and the test data are sampled from the same distribution. While this
is a reasonable assumption to make, it might not hold true in practice. Deploying the perception
system of an autonomous vehicle in new environments compared to its training setting might lead to
failure owing to the shift in data distribution. Even strong learners such as deep neural networks are
known to be sensitive to such domain shifts [9][33]. Approaches that resolve this issue in a domain
adaptation framework have access to the target distribution. This is hardly true in practice: deploying
real systems involve generalizing to unseen sources of data. This problem, also known as domain
generalization is the focus of this paper.
Most machine learning models (including neural networks) are susceptible to domain shift - models
trained on one dataset perform poorly on a related but a shifted dataset. Approaches for addressing this
issue can be broadly grouped into two major categories - domain adaptation and domain generalization.
Domain adaptation techniques assume access to target dataset, the models are trained using a
combination of labeled source data and unlabeled/ sparsely labeled target data. Domain generalization,
on the other hand, is a much harder problem as we assume no access to target information. Instead,
the variations in multiple source domains are utilized to generalize to novel test distributions.
∗

Work done while at University of Maryland, College Park.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

