MetaAnchor: Learning to Detect Objects with
Customized Anchors
Tong Yang∗†

Xiangyu Zhang∗

Zeming Li∗

∗

Wenqiang Zhang†

Megvii Inc (Face++)
{yangtong,zhangxiangyu,lizeming,sunjian}@megvii.com

Jian Sun∗

†

Fudan University
wqzhang@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a novel and flexible anchor mechanism named MetaAnchor for object
detection frameworks. Unlike many previous detectors model anchors via a predefined manner, in MetaAnchor anchor functions could be dynamically generated
from the arbitrary customized prior boxes. Taking advantage of weight prediction,
MetaAnchor is able to work with most of the anchor-based object detection systems
such as RetinaNet. Compared with the predefined anchor scheme, we empirically
find that MetaAnchor is more robust to anchor settings and bounding box distributions; in addition, it also shows the potential on transfer tasks. Our experiment
on COCO detection task shows that MetaAnchor consistently outperforms the
counterparts in various scenarios.

1

Introduction

The last few years have seen the success of deep neural networks in object detection task [5, 39, 9,
12, 8, 32, 16, 2]. In practice, object detection often requires to generate a set of bounding boxes
along with their classification labels associated with each object in the given image. However, it is
nontrivial for convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to directly predict an orderless set of arbitrary
cardinality1 . One widely-used workaround is to introduce anchor, which employs the thought
of divide-and-conquer and has been successfully demonstrated in the state-of-the-art detection
frameworks [39, 32, 25, 30, 31, 11, 22, 23, 2]. In short, anchor method suggests dividing the box
space (including position, size, class, etc.) into discrete bins (not necessarily disjoint) and generating
each object box via the anchor function defined in the corresponding bin. Denote x as the feature
extracted from the input image, then anchor function for i-th bin could be formulated as follows:

Fbi (x; θi ) = Fbcls
(x; θicls ), Fbreg
(x; θireg )
(1)
i
i
where bi ∈ B is the prior (also named anchor box in [32]), which describes the common properties
of object boxes associated with i-th bin (e.g. averaged position/size and classification label); while
Fbcls
(·) discriminates whether there exists an object box associated with the i-th bin, and Fbreg
(·)
i
i
regresses the relative location of the object box (if any) to the prior bi ; θi represents the parameters
for the anchor function.
To model anchors with deep neural networks, one straight-forward strategy is via enumeration,
which is adopted by most of the previous work [32, 39, 25, 30, 31, 23, 11, 22]. First, a number of
predefined priors (or anchor boxes) B is chosen by handcraft [32] or statistical methods like clustering
[39, 31]. Then for each bi ∈ B the anchor function Fbi is usually implemented by one or a few
neural network layers respectively. Weights for different anchor functions are independent or partially
shared. Obviously in this framework anchor strategies (i.e. anchor box choices and the definition of
1

There are a few recent studies on the topic, such as [33, 37].

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

