Gradient Descent for Spiking Neural Networks

Terrence J. Sejnowski
Salk Institute
La Jolla, CA 92037
terry@salk.edu

Dongsung Huh
Salk Institute
La Jolla, CA 92037
huh@salk.edu

Abstract
Most large-scale network models use neurons with static nonlinearities that produce analog output, despite the fact that information processing in the brain is
predominantly carried out by dynamic neurons that produce discrete pulses called
spikes. Research in spike-based computation has been impeded by the lack of
efficient supervised learning algorithm for spiking neural networks. Here, we
present a gradient descent method for optimizing spiking network models by introducing a differentiable formulation of spiking dynamics and deriving the exact
gradient calculation. For demonstration, we trained recurrent spiking networks on
two dynamic tasks: one that requires optimizing fast (≈ millisecond) spike-based
interactions for efficient encoding of information, and a delayed-memory task over
extended duration (≈ second). The results show that the gradient descent approach
indeed optimizes networks dynamics on the time scale of individual spikes as well
as on behavioral time scales. In conclusion, our method yields a general purpose
supervised learning algorithm for spiking neural networks, which can facilitate
further investigations on spike-based computations.

1

Introduction

The brain operates in a highly decentralized event-driven manner, processing multiple asynchronous
streams of sensory-motor data in real-time. The main currency of neural computation is spikes:
i.e. brief impulse signals transmitted between neurons. Experimental evidence shows that brain’s
architecture utilizes not only the rate, but the precise timing of spikes to process information [1].
Deep-learning models solve simplified problems by assuming static units that produce analog output,
which describes the time-averaged firing-rate response of a neuron. These rate-based artificial neural
networks (ANNs) are easily differentiated, and therefore can be efficiently trained using gradient
descent learning rules. The recent success of deep learning demonstrates the computational potential
of trainable, hierarchical distributed architectures.
This brings up the natural question: What types of computation would be possible if we could train
spiking neural networks (SNNs)? The set of implementable functions by SNNs subsumes that of
ANNs, since a spiking neuron reduces to a rate-based unit in the high firing-rate limit. Moreover,
in the low firing-rate range in which the brain operates (1∼10 Hz), spike-times can be utilized as
an additional dimension for computation. However, such computational potential has never been
explored due to the lack of general learning algorithms for SNNs.
1.1

Prior work

Dynamical systems are most generally described by ordinary differential equations, but linear timeinvariant systems can also be characterized by impulse response kernels. Most SNN models are
constructed using the latter approach, by defining a neuron’s membrane voltage vi (t) as a weighted
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

