Re-evaluating Evaluation
David Balduzzi⇤

Karl Tuyls⇤

Julien Perolat⇤

Thore Graepel⇤

Abstract
“What we observe is not nature itself, but nature exposed to our method of questioning.” – Werner Heisenberg
Progress in machine learning is measured by careful evaluation on problems of
outstanding common interest. However, the proliferation of benchmark suites
and environments, adversarial attacks, and other complications has diluted the
basic evaluation model by overwhelming researchers with choices. Deliberate
or accidental cherry picking is increasingly likely, and designing well-balanced
evaluation suites requires increasing effort. In this paper we take a step back
and propose Nash averaging. The approach builds on a detailed analysis of the
algebraic structure of evaluation in two basic scenarios: agent-vs-agent and agentvs-task. The key strength of Nash averaging is that it automatically adapts to
redundancies in evaluation data, so that results are not biased by the incorporation
of easy tasks or weak agents. Nash averaging thus encourages maximally inclusive
evaluation – since there is no harm (computational cost aside) from including all
available tasks and agents.

1

Introduction

Evaluation is a key driver of progress in machine learning, with e.g. ImageNet [1] and the Arcade
Learning Environment [2] enabling subsequent breakthroughs in supervised and reinforcement
learning [3, 4]. However, developing evaluations has received little systematic attention compared to
developing algorithms. Immense amounts of compute is continually expended smashing algorithms
and tasks together – but the results are almost never used to evaluate and optimize evaluations. In a
striking asymmetry, results are almost exclusively applied to evaluate and optimize algorithms.
The classic train-and-test paradigm on common datasets, which has served the community well [5], is
reaching its limits. Three examples suffice. Adversarial attacks have complicated evaluation, raising
questions about which attacks to test against [6–9]. Training agents far beyond human performance
with self-play means they can only really be evaluated against each other [10, 11]. The desire to build
increasingly general-purpose agents has led to a proliferation of environments: Mujoco, DM Lab,
Open AI Gym, Psychlab and others [12–15].
In this paper we pause to ask, and partially answer, some basic questions about evaluation: Q1. Do
tasks test what we think they test? Q2. When is a task redundant? Q3. Which tasks (and agents)
matter the most? Q4. How should evaluations be evaluated?
We consider two scenarios: agent vs task (AvT), where algorithms are evaluated on suites of datasets
or environments; and agent vs agent (AvA), where agents compete directly as in Go and Starcraft.
Our goal is to treat tasks and agents symmetrically – with a view towards, ultimately, co-optimizing
agents and evaluations. From this perspective AvA, where the task is (beating) another agent, is
especially interesting. Performance in AvA is often quantified using Elo ratings [16] or the closely
related TrueSkill [17]. There are two main problems with Elo. Firstly, Elo bakes-in the assumption
that relative skill is transitive; but Elo is meaningless – it has no predictive power – in cyclic games
⇤

DeepMind. Email: { dbalduzzi | karltuyls | perolat | thore }@google.com

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

