Manifold-tiling Localized Receptive Fields are
Optimal in Similarity-preserving Neural Networks
Anirvan M. Sengupta†‡
Mariano Tepper‡⇤
Cengiz Pehlevan‡⇤
Alexander Genkin§
Dmitri B. Chklovskii‡§
†
‡
§
Rutgers University
Flatiron Institute
NYU Langone Medical Center
anirvans@physics.rutgers.edu, alexander.genkin@gmail.com
{mtepper,cpehlevan,dchklovskii}@flatironinstitute.org

Abstract
Many neurons in the brain, such as place cells in the rodent hippocampus, have localized receptive fields, i.e., they respond to a small neighborhood of stimulus space.
What is the functional significance of such representations and how can they arise?
Here, we propose that localized receptive fields emerge in similarity-preserving
networks of rectifying neurons that learn low-dimensional manifolds populated by
sensory inputs. Numerical simulations of such networks on standard datasets yield
manifold-tiling localized receptive fields. More generally, we show analytically
that, for data lying on symmetric manifolds, optimal solutions of objectives, from
which similarity-preserving networks are derived, have localized receptive fields.
Therefore, nonnegative similarity-preserving mapping (NSM) implemented by
neural networks can model representations of continuous manifolds in the brain.

1

Introduction

A salient and unexplained feature of many neurons is that their receptive fields are localized in the
parameter space they represent. For example, a hippocampus place cell is active in a particular spatial
location [1], the response of a V1 neuron is localized in visual space and orientation [2], and the
response of an auditory neuron is localized in the sound frequency space [3]. In all these examples,
receptive fields of neurons from the same brain area tile (with overlap) low-dimensional manifolds.
Localized receptive fields are shaped by neural activity as evidenced by experimental manipulations
in developing and adult animals [4, 5, 6, 7]. Activity influences receptive fields via modification, or
learning, of synaptic weights which gate the activity of upstream neurons channeling sensory inputs.
To be biologically plausible, synaptic learning rules must be physically local, i.e., the weight of a
synapse depends on the activity of only the two neurons it connects, pre- and post-synaptic.
In this paper, we demonstrate that biologically plausible neural networks can learn manifold-tiling
localized receptive fields from the upstream activity in an unsupervised fashion. Because analyzing
the outcome of learning in arbitrary neural networks is often difficult, we take a normative approach,
Fig. 1. First, we formulate an optimization problem by postulating an objective function and
constraints, Fig. 1. Second, for inputs lying on a manifold, we derive an optimal offline solution and
demonstrate analytically and numerically that the receptive fields are localized and tile the manifold,
Fig. 1. Third, from the same objective, we derive an online optimization algorithm which can be
implemented by a biologically plausible neural network, Fig. 1. We expect this network to learn
localized receptive fields, the conjecture we confirm by simulating the network numerically, Fig. 1.
Optimization functions considered here belong to the family of similarity-preserving objectives which
dictate that similar inputs to the network elicit similar outputs [8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. In the absence of sign
⇤

M. Tepper and C. Pehlevan contributed equally to this work.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

