Unsupervised Learning of Shape and Pose
with Differentiable Point Clouds
Eldar Insafutdinov∗
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
eldar@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Alexey Dosovitskiy
Intel Labs
adosovitskiy@gmail.com

Abstract
We address the problem of learning accurate 3D shape and camera pose from a
collection of unlabeled category-specific images. We train a convolutional network
to predict both the shape and the pose from a single image by minimizing the
reprojection error: given several views of an object, the projections of the predicted
shapes to the predicted camera poses should match the provided views. To deal
with pose ambiguity, we introduce an ensemble of pose predictors which we then
distill to a single “student” model. To allow for efficient learning of high-fidelity
shapes, we represent the shapes by point clouds and devise a formulation allowing
for differentiable projection of these. Our experiments show that the distilled
ensemble of pose predictors learns to estimate the pose accurately, while the point
cloud representation allows to predict detailed shape models.

1

Introduction

We live in a three-dimensional world, and a proper understanding of its volumetric structure is
crucial for acting and planning. However, we perceive the world mainly via its two-dimensional
projections. Based on these projections, we are able to infer the three-dimensional shapes and poses
of the surrounding objects. How does this volumetric shape perception emerge from observing only
from two-dimensional projections? Is it possible to design learning systems with similar capabilities?
Deep learning methods have recently shown promise in addressing these questions [25, 20]. Given
a set of views of an object and the corresponding camera poses, these methods learn 3D shape via
the reprojection error: given an estimated shape, one can project it to the known camera views and
compare to the provided images. The discrepancy between these generated projections and the
training samples provides training signal for improving the shape estimate. Existing methods of this
type have two general restrictions. First, these approaches assume that the camera poses are known
precisely for all provided images. This is a practically and biologically unrealistic assumption: a
typical intelligent agent only has access to its observations, not its precise location relative to objects
in the world. Second, the shape is predicted as a low-resolution (usually 323 voxels) voxelated
volume. This representation can only describe very rough shape of an object. It should be possible to
learn finer shape details from 2D supervision.
In this paper, we learn high-fidelity shape models solely from their projections, without ground
truth camera poses. This setup is challenging for two reasons. First, estimating both shape and
pose is a chicken-and-egg problem: without a good shape estimate it is impossible to learn accurate
pose because the projections would be uninformative, and vice versa, an accurate pose estimate is
necessary to learn the shape. Second, pose estimation is prone to local minima caused by ambiguity:
an object may look similar from two viewpoints, and if the network converges to predicting only one
of these in all cases, it will not be able to learn predicting the other one. We find that the first problem
can be solved surprisingly well by joint optimization of shape and pose predictors: in practice, good
∗

Work done while interning at Intel.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

