An Efficient Pruning Algorithm for Robust Isotonic
Regression

Cong Han Lim ∗
School of Industrial Systems and Engineering
Georgia Tech
Altanta, GA 30332
clim31@gatech.edu

Abstract
We study a generalization of the classic isotonic regression problem where we allow
separable nonconvex objective functions, focusing on the case where the functions
are estimators used in robust regression. One can solve this problem to within
-accuracy (of the global minimum) in O(n/) using a simple dynamic program,
and the complexity of this approach is independent of the underlying functions. We
introduce an algorithm that combines techniques from the convex case with branchand-bound ideas that is able to exploit the shape of the functions. Our algorithm
achieves the best known bounds for both the convex case (O(n log(1/))) and the
general nonconvex case. Experiments show that this algorithm can perform much
faster than the dynamic programming approach on robust estimators, especially as
the desired accuracy increases.

1

Introduction

In this paper we study the following optimization problem with monotonicity constraints:
X
minx∈[0,1]n
fi (xi ) where xi ≤ xi+1 for i ∈ [n − 1]
i∈[n]

(1)

where the functions f1 , f2 , . . . , fn : [0, 1] → R may be nonconvex and the notation [n] denotes the
set {1, 2, . . . , n}. Our goal is to develop an algorithm that achieves an objective -close to the global
optimal value for any  > 0 with a complexity that scales along with the properties of f . In particular,
we present an algorithm that simultaneously achieves the best known bounds when fi are convex and
also for general fi , while scaling much better in practice than the straightforward approach when
considering f used in robust estimation such as Huber Loss, Tukey’s biweight function, and MCP.
Problem (1) is a generalization of the classic isotonic regression problem (Brunk, 1955; Ayer et al.,
1955). The goal there to find the best isotonic fit in terms of Euclidean distance to a given set of points
y1 , y2 , . . . , yn . This corresponds to setting each fi (x) to kxi − yi k22 . Besides having applications
in domains where such a monotonicity assumption is reasonable, isotonic regression also appears
as a key step in other statistical and optimization problems such as learning generalized linear and
single index models (Kalai and Sastry, 2009), submodular optimization (Bach, 2013), sparse recovery
(Bogdan et al., 2013; Zeng and Figueiredo, 2014), and ranking problems (Gunasekar et al., 2016).
There are several reasons to go beyond Euclidean distance and to consider more general fi functions.
For example, using the appropriate Bregman divergence can lead to better regret bounds for certain
online learning problems over the convex hull of all rankings (Yasutake et al., 2011; Suehiro et al.,
2012), and allowing general fi functions has applications in computer vision (Hochbaum, 2001;
∗

Work done while at Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, University of Wisconsin-Madison.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

