Poison Frogs! Targeted Clean-Label Poisoning
Attacks on Neural Networks
Ali Shafahi∗
University of Maryland
ashafahi@cs.umd.edu
Mahyar Najibi
University of Maryland
najibi@cs.umd.edu

W. Ronny Huang∗
University of Maryland
wrhuang@umd.edu

Octavian Suciu
University of Maryland
osuciu@umiacs.umd.edu

Tudor Dumitras
University of Maryland
tudor@umiacs.umd.edu

Christoph Studer
Cornell University
studer@cornell.edu

Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland
tomg@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Data poisoning is an attack on machine learning models wherein the attacker adds
examples to the training set to manipulate the behavior of the model at test time.
This paper explores poisoning attacks on neural nets. The proposed attacks use
“clean-labels”; they don’t require the attacker to have any control over the labeling
of training data. They are also targeted; they control the behavior of the classifier
on a specific test instance without degrading overall classifier performance. For
example, an attacker could add a seemingly innocuous image (that is properly
labeled) to a training set for a face recognition engine, and control the identity of
a chosen person at test time. Because the attacker does not need to control the
labeling function, poisons could be entered into the training set simply by leaving
them on the web and waiting for them to be scraped by a data collection bot.
We present an optimization-based method for crafting poisons, and show that just
one single poison image can control classifier behavior when transfer learning
is used. For full end-to-end training, we present a “watermarking” strategy that
makes poisoning reliable using multiple (≈ 50) poisoned training instances. We
demonstrate our method by generating poisoned frog images from the CIFAR
dataset and using them to manipulate image classifiers.

1

Introduction

Before deep learning algorithms can be deployed in high stakes, security-critical applications, their
robustness against adversarial attacks must be put to the test. The existence of adversarial examples
in deep neural networks (DNNs) has triggered debates on how secure these classifiers are [Szegedy
et al., 2013, Goodfellow et al., 2015, Biggio et al., 2013]. Adversarial examples fall within a category
of attacks called evasion attacks. Evasion attacks happen at test time – a clean target instance is
modified to avoid detection by a classifier, or spur misclassification. However, these attacks do not
map to certain realistic scenarios in which the attacker cannot control test time data. For example,
consider a retailer aiming to mark a competitor’s email as spam through an ML-based spam filter.
Evasion attacks are not applicable because the attacker cannot modify the victim emails. Similarly,
∗

Authors contributed equally.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

