Soft-Gated Warping-GAN for Pose-Guided Person
Image Synthesis

Haoye Dong1,2 , Xiaodan Liang3,∗ , Ke Gong1 , Hanjiang Lai1,2 , Jia Zhu4 , Jian Yin1,2
1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou 510006, P.R.China
3
School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
4
School of Computer Science, South China Normal University
{donghy7@mail2, laihanj3@mail, issjyin@mail}.sysu.edu.cn
{xdliang328, kegong936}@gmail.com, jzhu@m.scun.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite remarkable advances in image synthesis research, existing works often
fail in manipulating images under the context of large geometric transformations.
Synthesizing person images conditioned on arbitrary poses is one of the most
representative examples where the generation quality largely relies on the capability
of identifying and modeling arbitrary transformations on different body parts.
Current generative models are often built on local convolutions and overlook the key
challenges (e.g. heavy occlusions, different views or dramatic appearance changes)
when distinct geometric changes happen for each part, caused by arbitrary pose
manipulations. This paper aims to resolve these challenges induced by geometric
variability and spatial displacements via a new Soft-Gated Warping Generative
Adversarial Network (Warping-GAN), which is composed of two stages: 1) it first
synthesizes a target part segmentation map given a target pose, which depicts the
region-level spatial layouts for guiding image synthesis with higher-level structure
constraints; 2) the Warping-GAN equipped with a soft-gated warping-block learns
feature-level mapping to render textures from the original image into the generated
segmentation map. Warping-GAN is capable of controlling different transformation
degrees given distinct target poses. Moreover, the proposed warping-block is lightweight and flexible enough to be injected into any networks. Human perceptual
studies and quantitative evaluations demonstrate the superiority of our WarpingGAN that significantly outperforms all existing methods on two large datasets.

1

Introduction

Person image synthesis, posed as one of most challenging tasks in image analysis, has huge potential
applications for movie making, human-computer interaction, motion prediction, etc. Despite recent
advances in image synthesis for low-level texture transformations [13, 35, 14] (e.g. style or colors),
the person image synthesis is particularly under-explored and encounters with more challenges that
cannot be resolved due to the technical limitations of existing models. The main difficulties that
affect the generation quality lie in substantial appearance diversity and spatial layout transformations
on clothes and body parts, induced by large geometric changes for arbitrary pose manipulations.
Existing models [20, 21, 28, 8, 19] built on the encoder-decoder structure lack in considering the
crucial shape and appearance misalignments, often leading to unsatisfying generated person images.
Among recent attempts of person image synthesis, the best-performing methods (PG2 [20], BodyROI7 [21], and DSCF [28]) all directly used the conventional convolution-based generative models
∗

Corresponding author is Xiaodan Liang

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

