S PIDER: Near-Optimal Non-Convex Optimization via
Stochastic Path Integrated Differential Estimator

1

Cong Fang1 ∗ Chris Junchi Li2 Zhouchen Lin1† Tong Zhang2
Key Lab. of Machine Intelligence (MoE), School of EECS, Peking University
2
Tencent AI Lab

{fangcong, zlin}@pku.edu.cn

junchi.li.duke@gmail.com

tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new technique named Stochastic Path-Integrated
Differential EstimatoR (S PIDER), which can be used to track many deterministic
quantities of interests with significantly reduced computational cost. Combining
S PIDER with the method of normalized gradient descent, we propose S PIDER-SFO
that solve non-convex stochastic optimization problems using stochastic gradients
only. We provide a few error-bound results on its convergence rates. Specially,
we prove that the S PIDER-SFO algorithm achieves a gradient computation cost
of O min(n1/2 −2 , −3 ) to find an -approximate first-order stationary point.
In addition, we prove that S PIDER-SFO nearly matches the algorithmic lower
bound for finding stationary point under the gradient Lipschitz assumption in
the finite-sum setting. Our S PIDER technique can be further applied to find an
(, O(0.5 ))-approximate second-orderstationary point at a gradient computation
cost of Õ min(n1/2 −2 + −2.5 , −3 ) .

1

Introduction
In this paper, we study the optimization problem
minimize
x∈Rd

f (x) ≡ E [F (x; ζ)]

(1.1)

where the stochastic component F (x; ζ), indexed by some random vector ζ, is smooth and possibly
non-convex. Non-convex optimization problem of form (1.1) contains many large-scale statistical
learning tasks and is gaining tremendous popularity due to its favorable computational and statistical
efficiency [5–7]. Typical examples of form (1.1) include principal component analysis, estimation
of graphical models, as well as training deep neural networks [17]. The expectation-minimization
structure of stochastic optimization problem (1.1) allows us to perform iterative updates and minimize
the objective using its stochastic gradient ∇F (x; ζ) as an estimator of its deterministic counterpart.
A special case of central interest is when the stochastic vector ζ is finitely sampled. In such
finite-sum (or offline) case, we denote each component function as fi (x) and (1.1) can be restated as
n

minimize
x∈Rd

∗
†

f (x) =

1X
fi (x)
n i=1

This work was done while Cong Fang was a Research Intern with Tencent AI Lab.
Corresponding author.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

(1.2)

