Diminishing Returns Shape Constraints for
Interpretability and Regularization

Maya R. Gupta, Dara Bahri, Andrew Cotter, Kevin Canini
Google AI
1600 Charleston Rd
Mountain View, CA 94043
{mayagupta,dbahri,acotter,canini}@google.com

Abstract
We investigate machine learning models that can provide diminishing returns
and accelerating returns guarantees to capture prior knowledge or policies
about how outputs should depend on inputs. We show that one can build
flexible, nonlinear, multi-dimensional models using lattice functions with any
combination of concavity/convexity and monotonicity constraints on any
subsets of features, and compare to new shape-constrained neural networks.
We demonstrate on real-world examples that these shape constrained models
can provide tuning-free regularization and improve model understandability.

1

Introduction

Diminishing returns are common in physical systems, human perception and psychology [1],
and have been recognized in economics [2] and agriculture [3] for centuries. For example,
a model that predicts how much a renter will like an apartment should predict a strong
preference for 60 square meters of living space over 50 square meters, but a smaller preference
for 100 square meters over 90 square meters, if everything else is the same. Similarly, a
model that predicts the time it will take a customer to grocery shop should decrease in the
number of cashiers, but each added cashier reduces average wait time by less. In both cases,
we would like to be able to incorporate this prior knowledge by constraining the machine
learned model’s output to have a diminishing returns response to the size of the apartment
or number of cashiers. Mathematically, we say a function has diminishing returns with
respect to an input if the function is monotonically increasing and concave, or monotonically
decreasing and convex, with respect to that input. Accelerating returns are also common in
the real-world; for example, Adam Smith characterized labor specialization and economies of
scale as causing accelerating returns [4]. Accelerating returns describes functions that are
monotonically increasing and convex, or monotonically decreasing and concave with respect
to an input.
We show how one can train flexible models that capture one’s prior knowledge or preference
that the model should exhibit diminishing or accelerating returns with respect to some inputs.
Such shape constraints are effective regularization, reducing the chance that noisy training
data or adversarial examples produce a model that does not behave as expected, and act as a
machine learning poka-yoke (mistake-proofing) strategy [5] when a model is re-trained with
fresh data. Unlike most regularizers, shape constraints do not require tuning the amount of
regularization (beyond the binary decision of whether to apply a shape constraint), and are
especially useful when there is domain shift between training and test distributions. Shape
constraints have a clear semantic meaning, and thus improve interpretability because the
user knows and understands at a high-level how each of the shape-constrained inputs affects
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

