Mental Sampling in Multimodal Representations

Jian-Qiao Zhu
Department of Psychology
University of Warwick
j.zhu@warwick.ac.uk

Adam N. Sanborn
Department of Psychology
University of Warwick
a.n.sanborn@warwick.ac.uk

Nick Chater
Behavioural Science Group
Warwick Business School
nick.chater@wbs.ac.uk

Abstract
Both resources in the natural environment and concepts in a semantic space are
distributed “patchily”, with large gaps in between the patches. To describe people’s
internal and external foraging behavior, various random walk models have been
proposed. In particular, internal foraging has been modeled as sampling: in order
to gather relevant information for making a decision, people draw samples from a
mental representation using random-walk algorithms such as Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC). However, two common empirical observations argue against people using simple sampling algorithms such as MCMC for internal foraging. First,
the distance between samples is often best described by a Lévy flight distribution: the probability of the distance between two successive locations follows a
power-law on the distances. Second, humans and other animals produce long-range,
slowly decaying autocorrelations characterized as 1/f -like fluctuations, instead of
the 1/f 2 fluctuations produced by random walks. We propose that mental sampling
is not done by simple MCMC, but is instead adapted to multimodal representations
and is implemented by Metropolis-coupled Markov chain Monte Carlo (MC3 ), one
of the first algorithms developed for sampling from multimodal distributions. MC3
involves running multiple Markov chains in parallel but with target distributions
of different temperatures, and it swaps the states of the chains whenever a better
location is found. Heated chains more readily traverse valleys in the probability
landscape to propose moves to far-away peaks, while the colder chains make the
local steps that explore the current peak or patch. We show that MC3 generates
distances between successive samples that follow a Lévy flight distribution and
produce 1/f -like autocorrelations, providing a single mechanistic account of these
two puzzling empirical phenomena of internal foraging.

1

Introduction

In many complex domains, such as vision, motor control, language, categorization or common-sense
reasoning, human behavior is consistent with the predictions of Bayesian models (e.g., [4, 39, 8, 3,
19, 25, 52, 54]). Bayes’ theorem prescribes a simple normative method for combining prior beliefs
with new information to make inferences about the world. However, the sheer number of hypotheses
that must be considered in complex domains makes exact Bayesian inference intractable. Instead
it must be that individuals are performing some kind of approximate inference, such as sampling
[49, 38].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

