Bandit Learning with Positive Externalities
Virag Shah
Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
California, USA 94305
virag@stanford.edu

Jose Blanchet
Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
California, USA 94305
jblanche@stanford.edu

Ramesh Johari
Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
California, USA 94305
rjohari@stanford.edu

Abstract
In many platforms, user arrivals exhibit a self-reinforcing behavior: future user
arrivals are likely to have preferences similar to users who were satisfied in the past.
In other words, arrivals exhibit positive externalities. We study multiarmed bandit
(MAB) problems with positive externalities. We show that the self-reinforcing
preferences may lead standard benchmark algorithms such as UCB to exhibit linear
regret. We develop a new algorithm, Balanced Exploration (BE), which explores
arms carefully to avoid suboptimal convergence of arrivals before sufficient evidence is gathered. We also introduce an adaptive variant of BE which successively
eliminates suboptimal arms. We analyze their asymptotic regret, and establish
optimality by showing that no algorithm can perform better.

1

Introduction

A number of different platforms use multiarmed bandit (MAB) algorithms today to optimize their
service: e.g., search engines and information retrieval platforms; e-commerce platforms; and news
sites. Many such platforms exhibit a natural self-reinforcement in the arrival process of users: future
arrivals may be biased towards users who expect to have positive experiences based on the past
outcomes of the platform. For example, if a news site generates articles that are liberal (resp.,
conservative), then it is most likely to attract additional users who are liberal (resp., conservative)
[2]. In this paper, we study the optimal design of MAB algorithms when user arrivals exhibit such
positive self-reinforcement.
We consider a setting in which a platform faces many types of users that can arrive. Each user type is
distinguished by preferring a subset of the item types above all others. The platform is not aware of
either the type of the user, or the item-user payoffs. Following the discussion above, arrivals exhibit
positive externalities (also called positive network effects) among the users [13]: in particular, if one
type of item generates positive rewards, users who prefer that type of item become more likely to
arrive in the future.
Our paper quantifies the consequences of positive externalities for bandit learning in a benchmark
model where the platform is unable to observe the user’s type on arrival. In the model we consider,
introduced in Section 3, there is a set of m arms. A given arriving user prefers a subset of these arms
over the others; in particular, all arms other than the preferred arms generate zero reward. A preferred
arm a generates a Bernoulli reward with mean µa . To capture positive externalities, the probability
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

