Ridge Regression and Provable Deterministic Ridge
Leverage Score Sampling

Shannon R. McCurdy
California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94702
smccurdy@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Ridge leverage scores provide a balance between low-rank approximation and regularization, and are ubiquitous in randomized linear algebra and machine learning.
Deterministic algorithms are also of interest in the moderately big data regime,
because deterministic algorithms provide interpretability to the practitioner by
having no failure probability and always returning the same results. We provide
provable guarantees for deterministic column sampling using ridge leverage scores.
The matrix sketch returned by our algorithm is a column subset of the original
matrix, yielding additional interpretability. Like the randomized counterparts, the
deterministic algorithm provides (1 + ) error column subset selection, (1 + ) error
projection-cost preservation, and an additive-multiplicative spectral bound. We also
show that under the assumption of power-law decay of ridge leverage scores, this
deterministic algorithm is provably as accurate as randomized algorithms. Lastly,
ridge regression is frequently used to regularize ill-posed linear least-squares problems. While ridge regression provides shrinkage for the regression coefficients,
many of the coefficients remain small but non-zero. Performing ridge regression
with the matrix sketch returned by our algorithm and a particular regularization
parameter forces coefficients to zero and has a provable (1 + ) bound on the
statistical risk. As such, it is an interesting alternative to elastic net regularization.

1

Introduction

Classical leverage scores quantify the importance of each column i for the range space of the sampleby-feature data matrix A ∈ Rn×d . Classical leverage scores have been used in regression diagnostics,
outlier detection, and randomized matrix algorithms (Velleman and Welsch, 1981; Chatterjee and
Hadi, 1986; Drineas et al., 2008). Historically, leverage scores were used to select informative
samples (rows, in our matrix orientation). More recently, as datasets with d > n have become more
common, leverage scores have been used to select informative features (columns, in our matrix
orientation). There are many different flavors of leverage scores, and we will focus on a variation
called ridge leverage scores. However, to appreciate the advantages of ridge leverage scores, we also
briefly review classical and rank-k subspace leverage scores.
Ridge leverage scores were introduced by Alaoui and Mahoney (2015) to give statistical bounds
for the Nyström approximation for kernel ridge regression. Alaoui and Mahoney (2015) argue that
ridge leverage scores provide the relevant notion of leverage in the context of kernel ridge regression.
Ridge leverage scores have been successfully used in kernel ridge regression to approximate the
symmetric kernel matrix (∈ Rn×n ) by selecting informative samples (Alaoui and Mahoney, 2015;
Rudi et al., 2015). Cohen et al. (2017) provide a definition for ridge leverage scores for selecting
informative features from the non-symmetric sample-by-feature data matrix A ∈ Rn×d . The ridge
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

