Information-theoretic Limits for Community
Detection in Network Models
Jean Honorio
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
jhonorio@purdue.edu

Chuyang Ke
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
cke@purdue.edu

Abstract
We analyze the information-theoretic limits for the recovery of node labels in
several network models. This includes the Stochastic Block Model, the Exponential Random Graph Model, the Latent Space Model, the Directed Preferential
Attachment Model, and the Directed Small-world Model. For the Stochastic Block
Model, the non-recoverability condition depends on the probabilities of having
edges inside a community, and between different communities. For the Latent
Space Model, the non-recoverability condition depends on the dimension of the
latent space, and how far and spread are the communities in the latent space. For
the Directed Preferential Attachment Model and the Directed Small-world Model,
the non-recoverability condition depends on the ratio between homophily and
neighborhood size. We also consider dynamic versions of the Stochastic Block
Model and the Latent Space Model.

1

Introduction

Network models have already become a powerful tool for researchers in various fields. With the rapid
expansion of online social media including Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn and Instagram, researchers
now have access to more real-life network data and network models are great tools to analyze the vast
amount of interactions [16, 2, 1, 21]. Recent years have seen the applications of network models in
machine learning [5, 33, 23], bioinformatics [9, 15, 11], as well as in social and behavioral researches
[26, 14].
Among these literatures one of the central problems related to network models is community detection.
In a typical network model, nodes represent individuals in a social network, and edges represent
interpersonal interactions. The goal of community detection is to recover the label associated with
each node (i.e., the community where each node belongs to). The exact recovery of 100% of the labels
has always been an important research topic in machine learning, for instance, see [2, 10, 20, 27].
One particular issue researchers care about in the recovery of network models is the relation between
the number of nodes, and the proximity between the likelihood of connecting within the same
community and across different communities. For instance, consider the Stochastic Block Model
(SBM), in which p is the probability for connecting two nodes in the same community, and q is the
probability for connecting two nodes in different communities. Clearly if p equals q, it is impossible
to identify the communities, or equivalently, to recover the labels for all nodes. Intuitively, as the
difference between p and q increases, labels are easier to be recovered.
In this paper, we analyze the information-theoretic limits for community detection. Our main contribution is the comprehensive study of several network models used in the literature. To accomplish
that task, we carefully construct restricted ensembles. The key idea of using restricted ensembles is
that for any learning problem, if a subclass of models is difficult to be learnt, then the original class
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

