On the Local Hessian in Back-propagation
Huishuai Zhang
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, 100080

Wei Chen
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, 100080

Tie-Yan Liu
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, 100080

Abstract
Back-propagation (BP) is the foundation for successfully training deep neural
networks. However, BP sometimes has difficulties in propagating a learning signal
deep enough effectively, e.g., the vanishing gradient phenomenon. Meanwhile, BP
often works well when combining with “designing tricks” like orthogonal initialization, batch normalization and skip connection. There is no clear understanding
on what is essential to the efficiency of BP. In this paper, we take one step towards
clarifying this problem. We view BP as a solution of back-matching propagation
which minimizes a sequence of back-matching losses each corresponding to one
block of the network. We study the Hessian of the local back-matching loss (local
Hessian) and connect it to the efficiency of BP. It turns out that those designing
tricks facilitate BP by improving the spectrum of local Hessian. In addition, we can
utilize the local Hessian to balance the training pace of each block and design new
training algorithms. Based on a scalar approximation of local Hessian, we propose
a scale-amended SGD algorithm. We apply it to train neural networks with batch
normalization, and achieve favorable results over vanilla SGD. This corroborates
the importance of local Hessian from another side.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have been advancing the state-of-the-art performance over a number of tasks
in artificial intelligence, from speech recognition [Hinton et al., 2012], computer vision [He et al.,
2016a] to natural language understanding [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997]. These problems
are typically formulated as minimizing non-convex objectives parameterized by the neural network
models. Typically, the models are trained with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) or its variants and
the gradient information is computed through back-propagation (BP) [Rumelhart et al., 1986].
It is known that BP sometimes has difficulties in propagating a learning signal deep enough effectively,
e.g., the vanishing/exploding gradient phenomenon, [Hochreiter, 1991, Hochreiter et al., 2001].
Recent designing tricks, such as orthogonal initialization [Saxe et al., 2014], batch normalization
[Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015] and skip connection [He et al., 2016a], improve the performance of
deep neural networks on almost all tasks, which are interpreted to be able to alleviate the vanishing
gradient to some extent. However, a recent work [Orhan and Pitkow, 2018] shows that a network
with non-orthogonal skip connection always underperforms a network with orthogonal (identity is a
special case) skip connection and neither network has vanishing gradient as back-propagating through
layers. This suggests that vanishing gradient is not the core reason for a network being good or not.
We ask that if vanishing gradient is a superficial reason, what is essential to the efficiency of BP?
In this paper, we consider this question from the optimization’s perspective and give an answer: the
Hessian of the local back-matching loss is responsible for the difficulty of training deep nets with
BP. Specifically, we start from a penalized loss formulation, which takes the intermediate feature
outputs as variables of the optimization and the penalty is to enforce the coordination (architecture)
connection [Carreira-Perpinan and Wang, 2014]. Minimizing the penalized loss following backward
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

