ATOMO: Communication-efficient Learning via
Atomic Sparsification
Hongyi Wang1⇤, Scott Sievert2⇤, Zachary Charles2 , Shengchao Liu1 ,
Stephen Wright1 , Dimitris Papailiopoulos2
1
Department of Computer Sciences, 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Abstract
Distributed model training suffers from communication overheads due to frequent
gradient updates transmitted between compute nodes. To mitigate these overheads,
several studies propose the use of sparsified stochastic gradients. We argue that
these are facets of a general sparsification method that can operate on any possible
atomic decomposition. Notable examples include element-wise, singular value,
and Fourier decompositions. We present ATOMO, a general framework for atomic
sparsification of stochastic gradients. Given a gradient, an atomic decomposition,
and a sparsity budget, ATOMO gives a random unbiased sparsification of the atoms
minimizing variance. We show that recent methods such as QSGD and TernGrad
are special cases of ATOMO and that sparsifiying the singular value decomposition
of neural networks gradients, rather than their coordinates, can lead to significantly
faster distributed training.

1

Introduction

Several machine learning frameworks such as TensorFlow [1], MXNet [2], and Caffe2[3], come with
distributed implementations of popular training algorithms, such as mini-batch SGD. However, the
empirical speed-up gains offered by distributed training, often fall short of the optimal linear scaling
one would hope for. It is now widely acknowledged that communication overheads are the main
source of this speedup saturation phenomenon [4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
Communication bottlenecks are largely attributed to frequent gradient updates transmitted between
compute nodes. As the number of parameters in state-of-the-art models scales to hundreds of millions
[9, 10], the size of gradients scales proportionally. These bottlenecks become even more pronounced
in the context of federated learning [11, 12], where edge devices (e.g., mobile phones, sensors, etc)
perform decentralized training, but suffer from low-bandwidth during up-link.
To reduce the cost of of communication during distributed model training, a series of recent studies
propose communicating low-precision or sparsified versions of the computed gradients during model
updates. Partially initiated by a 1-bit implementation of SGD by Microsoft in [5], a large number of
recent studies revisited the idea of low-precision training as a means to reduce communication [13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 17, 20, 21]. Other approaches for low-communication training focus on
sparsification of gradients, either by thresholding small entries or by random sampling [6, 22, 23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 28]. Several approaches, including QSGD and TernGrad, implicitly combine quantization
and sparsification to maximize performance gains [14, 16, 12, 29, 30], while providing provable
guarantees for convergence and performance. We note that quantization methods in the context of
gradient based updates have a rich history, dating back to at least as early as the 1970s [31, 32, 33].
⇤

These authors contributed equally

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

