(Probably) Concave Graph Matching

Yaron Lipman
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel
yaron.lipman@weizmann.ac.il

Haggai Maron
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel
haggai.maron@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
In this paper, we address the graph matching problem. Following the recent works
of Zaslavskiy et al. (2009); Vestner et al. (2017) we analyze and generalize the
idea of concave relaxations. We introduce the concepts of conditionally concave
and probably conditionally concave energies on polytopes and show that they
encapsulate many instances of the graph matching problem, including matching
Euclidean graphs and graphs on surfaces. We further prove that local minima of
probably conditionally concave energies on general matching polytopes (e.g., doubly stochastic) are with high probability extreme points of the matching polytope
(e.g., permutations).

1

Introduction

Graph matching is a generic and popular modeling tool for problems in computational sciences such
as computer vision (Berg et al., 2005; Zhou and De la Torre, 2012; Rodola et al., 2013; Bernard et al.,
2017), computer graphics (Funkhouser and Shilane, 2006; Kezurer et al., 2015), medical imaging
(Guo et al., 2013), and machine learning (Umeyama, 1988; Huet et al., 1999; Cour et al., 2007). In
general, graph matching refers to several different optimization problems of the form:
min E(X)
X

s.t.

X∈F

(1)

where F ⊂ Rn×n0 is a collection of matchings between vertices of two graphs GA and GB , and
E(X) = [X]T M [X] + aT [X] is usually a quadratic function in X ∈ Rn×n0 ([X] ∈ Rnn0 ×1 is its
column stack). Often, M quantifies the discrepancy between edge affinities exerted by the matching
X. Edge affinities are represented by symmetric matrices A ∈ Rn×n , B ∈ Rn0 ×n0 . Maybe the most
common instantiation of (1) is
2
E1 (X) = kAX − XBkF
(2)
and F = Πn , the matrix group of n × n permutations. The permutations X ∈ Πn represent bijections
between the set of (n) vertices of GA and the set of (n) vertices of GB . We denote this problem as
GM. From a computational point of view, this problem is equivalent to the quadratic assignment
problem, and as such is an NP-hard problem (Burkard et al., 1998). A popular way of obtaining
approximate solutions is by relaxing its combinatorial constraints (Loiola et al., 2007).
A standard relaxation of this formulation (e.g. Almohamad and Duffuaa (1993); Aflalo et al. (2015);
Fiori and Sapiro (2015)) is achieved by replacing
Πn with its convex hull, namely the set of doubly
stochastic matrices DS = hull(F) = X ∈ Rn×n | X1 = 1, X T 1 = 1, X ≥ 0 . The main advantage of this formulation is the convexity of the energy E1 ; the main drawback is that often the
minimizer is not a permutation and simply projecting the solution onto Πn doesn’t take the energy
into account resulting in a suboptimal solution. The prominent Path Following algorithm (Zaslavskiy
et al., 2009) suggests a better solution of continuously changing E1 to a concave energy E 0 that
coincide (up to an additive constant) with E1 over the permutations. The concave energy E 0 is called
concave relaxation and enjoys three key properties: (i) Its solution set is the same as the GM problem.
(ii) Its set of local optima are all permutations. This means no projection of the local optima onto the
permutations is required. (iii) For every descent direction, a maximal step is always guaranteed to
reduce the energy most.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

