Tight Bounds for Collaborative PAC Learning via
Multiplicative Weights∗

Jiecao Chen
Computer Science Department
Indiana University at Bloomington
jiecchen@iu.edu

Qin Zhang
Computer Science Department
Indiana University at Bloomington
qzhangcs@indiana.edu

Yuan Zhou
Computer Science Department
Indiana University at Bloomington
and
Department of Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
yuanz@illinois.edu

Abstract
We study the collaborative PAC learning problem recently proposed in Blum
et al. [3], in which we have k players and they want to learn a target function
collaboratively, such that the learned function approximates the target function
well on all players’ distributions simultaneously. The quality of the collaborative
learning algorithm is measured by the ratio between the sample complexity of the
algorithm and that of the learning algorithm for a single distribution (called the
overhead). We obtain a collaborative learning algorithm with overhead O(ln k),
improving the one with overhead O(ln2 k) in [3]. We also show that an Ω(ln k)
overhead is inevitable when k is polynomial bounded by the VC dimension of the
hypothesis class. Finally, our experimental study has demonstrated the superiority
of our algorithm compared with the one in Blum et al. [3] on real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

In this paper we study the collaborative PAC learning problem recently proposed in Blum et al. [3].
In this problem we have an instance space X , a label space Y, and an unknown target function f ∗ :
X → Y chosen from the hypothesis class F. We have k players with distributions D1 , D2 , . . . , Dk
labeled by the target function f ∗ . Our goal is to probably approximately correct (PAC) learn the
target function f ∗ for every distribution Di . That is, for any given parameters , δ > 0, we need to
return a function f so that with probability 1 − δ, f agrees with the target f ∗ on instances of at least
1 −  probability mass in Di for every player i.
As a motivating example, consider a scenario of personalized medicine where a pharmaceutical
company wants to obtain a prediction model for dose-response relationship of a certain drug based
on the genomic profiles of individual patients. While existing machine learning methods are efficient
to learn the model with good accuracy for the whole population, for fairness consideration, it is
also desirable to ensure the model accuracies among demographic subgroups, e.g. defined by
gender, ethnicity, age, social-economic status and etc., where each of them is associated with a label
distribution.
∗

A full version of this paper is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.09217

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

