Estimators for Multivariate Information Measures
in General Probability Spaces

Arman Rahimzamani
Department of ECE
University of Washington
armanrz@uw.edu

Himanshu Asnani
Department of ECE
University of Washington
asnani@uw.edu

Pramod Viswanath
Department of ECE
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
pramodv@illinois.edu

Sreeram Kannan
Department of ECE
University of Washington
ksreeram@uw.edu

Abstract
Information theoretic quantities play an important role in various settings in machine learning, including causality testing, structure inference in graphical models,
time-series problems, feature selection as well as in providing privacy guarantees.
A key quantity of interest is the mutual information and generalizations thereof,
including conditional mutual information, multivariate mutual information, total correlation and directed information. While the aforementioned information
quantities are well defined in arbitrary probability spaces, existing estimators add
or subtract entropies (we term them ΣH methods). These methods work only
in purely discrete space or purely continuous case since entropy (or differential
entropy) is well defined only in that regime.
In this paper, we define a general graph divergence measure (GDM),as a measure
of incompatibility between the observed distribution and a given graphical model
structure. This generalizes the aforementioned information measures and we construct a novel estimator via a coupling trick that directly estimates these multivariate
information measures using the Radon-Nikodym derivative. These estimators are
proven to be consistent in a general setting which includes several cases where the
existing estimators fail, thus providing the only known estimators for the following
settings: (1) the data has some discrete and some continuous valued components
(2) some (or all) of the components themselves are discrete-continuous mixtures (3)
the data is real-valued but does not have a joint density on the entire space, rather is
supported on a low-dimensional manifold. We show that our proposed estimators
significantly outperform known estimators on synthetic and real datasets.

1

Introduction

Information theoretic quantities, such as mutual information and its generalizations, play an important
role in various settings in machine learning and statistical estimation and inference. Here we
summarize briefly the role of some generalizations of mutual information in learning (cf. Sec. 2.1 for
a mathematical definition of these quantities).
1. Conditional mutual information measures the amount of information between two variables X
and Y given a third variable Z and is zero iff X is independent of Y given Z. CMI finds a wide
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

