A Bridging Framework for
Model Optimization and Deep Propagation

Risheng Liu1,2∗, Shichao Cheng3 , Xiaokun Liu1 , Long Ma1 , Xin Fan1,2 , Zhongxuan Luo2,3
1
International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
2
Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province
3
School of Mathematical Science, Dalian University of Technology

Abstract
Optimizing task-related mathematical model is one of the most fundamental
methodologies in statistic and learning areas. However, generally designed schematic iterations may hard to investigate complex data distributions in real-world applications. Recently, training deep propagations (i.e., networks) has gained promising
performance in some particular tasks. Unfortunately, existing networks are often
built in heuristic manners, thus lack of principled interpretations and solid theoretical supports. In this work, we provide a new paradigm, named Propagation and
Optimization based Deep Model (PODM), to bridge the gaps between these different mechanisms (i.e., model optimization and deep propagation). On the one hand,
we utilize PODM as a deeply trained solver for model optimization. Different from
these existing network based iterations, which often lack theoretical investigations,
we provide strict convergence analysis for PODM in the challenging nonconvex
and nonsmooth scenarios. On the other hand, by relaxing the model constraints
and performing end-to-end training, we also develop a PODM based strategy to
integrate domain knowledge (formulated as models) and real data distributions
(learned by networks), resulting in a generic ensemble framework for challenging
real-world applications. Extensive experiments verify our theoretical results and
demonstrate the superiority of PODM against these state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

In the last several decades, many machine learning and computer vision tasks have been formulated
as the problems of solving mathematically designed optimization models. Indeed, these models are
the workhorse of learning, vision and power in most practical algorithms. However, it is actually
hard to obtain a theoretically efficient formulation to handle these complex data distributions in
different practical problems. Moreover, generally designed optimization models [3, 5] may be lack
of flexibility and robustness leading to severe corruptions and errors, which are commonly existed in
real-world scenarios.
In recent years, a variety of deep neural networks (DNNs) have been established and trained in end-toend manner for different learning and vision problems. For example, AlexNet [13] first demonstrated
the advantages of DNNs in the challenge of ImageNet large scale visual recognition. With a careful
design, [29] proposed GoogleNet, which increased the depth and width of the network while keeping
the computational budget constant. However, some researchers also found that although increasing
the layers of the networks may improve the performance, it is more difficult to train a deeper network.
By introducing shortcut blocks, [10] proposed the well-known residual network. It has been verified
that the residual structure can successfully avoid gradient vanishing problems and thus significantly
∗

Corresponding Author. Correspondence to <rsliu@dlut.edu.cn>.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

