MULAN: A Blind and Off-Grid Method for
Multichannel Echo Retrieval
Helena Peić Tukuljac
Department of Computer and Communication Sciences
École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne
helena.peictukuljac@epfl.ch
Antoine Deleforge
Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria, LORIA
F-54000 Nancy, France
antoine.deleforge@inria.fr

Rémi Gribonval
Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA
35000 Rennes, France
remi.gribonval@inria.fr

Abstract
This paper addresses the general problem of blind echo retrieval, i.e., given M
sensors measuring in the discrete-time domain M mixtures of K delayed and
attenuated copies of an unknown source signal, can the echo locations and weights
be recovered? This problem has broad applications in fields such as sonars, seismology, ultrasounds or room acoustics. It belongs to the broader class of blind channel
identification problems, which have been intensively studied in signal processing.
Existing methods in the literature proceed in two steps: (i) blind estimation of
sparse discrete-time filters and (ii) echo information retrieval by peak-picking on
filters. The precision of these methods is fundamentally limited by the rate at which
the signals are sampled: estimated echo locations are necessary on-grid, and since
true locations never match the sampling grid, the weight estimation precision is
impacted. This is the so-called basis-mismatch problem in compressed sensing.
We propose a radically different approach to the problem, building on the framework of finite-rate-of-innovation sampling. The approach operates directly in the
parameter-space of echo locations and weights, and enables near-exact blind and
off-grid echo retrieval from discrete-time measurements. It is shown to outperform
conventional methods by several orders of magnitude in precision.

1

Introduction

When a wave propagates from a point source through a medium and is reflected on surfaces before
reaching sensors, the measured signals consist of mixtures of the direct path signal with delayed
and attenuated copies of itself. This physical phenomenon is commonly referred to as echoes and
has a wide range of applications in different areas of science, from sonars [1] to seismology [2],
from acoustics [3, 4, 5] to ultrasounds [6]. For instance, in acoustics, it has been shown that precise
knowledge of early echo timing enables the estimation of the positions of reflective surfaces in a room
[3, 4]. In [3], the approximate 3D geometry of Lausanne cathedral could be retrieved in this way. On
the other hand, echoes’ attenuation capture information about the acoustic impedance of surfaces,
which is notoriously hard to measure or estimate in practice [7, 8]. In [9] and [10], it is shown that
knowing the attenuation and timing of early echoes may improve beamforming and source separation
performance, respectively. Systems using echoes for beamforming are commonly referred to as rake
receivers in the wireless literature [11].
Retrieving echo properties when the emitted signal is known is referred to as active echolocation in
biology, and is well exemplified by the sensory system of echoing bats. This principle is for instance
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

