Diversity-Driven Exploration Strategy for Deep
Reinforcement Learning

Zhang-Wei Hong, Tzu-Yun Shann, Shih-Yang Su, Yi-Hsiang Chang, Tsu-Jui Fu,
and Chun-Yi Lee
Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University
{williamd4112,arielshann,at7788546,shawn420,rayfu1996ozig,cylee}
@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
Efficient exploration remains a challenging research problem in reinforcement
learning, especially when an environment contains large state spaces, deceptive
or sparse rewards. To tackle this problem, we present a diversity-driven approach
for exploration, which can be easily combined with both off- and on-policy reinforcement learning algorithms. We show that by simply adding a distance measure
regularization to the loss function, the proposed methodology significantly enhances an agent’s exploratory behavior, and thus prevents the policy from being
trapped in local optima. We further propose an adaptive scaling strategy to enhance
the performance. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in huge 2D
gridworlds and a variety of benchmark environments, including Atari 2600 and
MuJoCo. Experimental results validate that our method outperforms baseline
approaches in most tasks in terms of mean scores and exploration efficiency.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has attracted attention in a variety of application
domains, such as game playing [1, 2] and robot navigation [3]. However, exploration remains a major
challenge for environments with large state spaces, deceptive local optima, or sparse reward signals.
In an environment with deceptive rewards, an agent can be trapped in local optima, and never discover
alternate strategies to find larger payoffs. For example, in HalfCheetah of MuJoCo [4], the agent
quickly learns to flip on its back and then “wiggles” its way forward, which is a sub-optimal policy [5].
In addition, environments with only sparse rewards provide few training signals, making it hard for
agents to discover feasible policies. A common approach for exploration is to adopt simple heuristic
methods, such as -greedy [1, 6] or entropy regularization [7]. However, such strategies are unlikely
to yield satisfactory results in tasks with deceptive or sparse rewards [8, 9]. A more sophisticated line
of methods provides agents with bonus rewards whenever they visit a novel state. For example, [10]
uses information gain as a measurement of state novelty. In [11], a counting table is used to estimate
the novelty of a visited state. Neural density model [12] has also been utilized to measure bonus
rewards for agents. In [13, 14], the novelty of a state is estimated from the prediction errors of their
system dynamics models. These methods, however, often require statistical or predictive models to
evaluate the novelty of a state, and therefore increase the complexity of the training procedure.
In order to deal with the issue of complexity, a few researchers attempts to embrace the idea of random
perturbation from evolutionary algorithms [5, 8]. By adding random noise to the parameter space,
their methods allow RL agents to perform exploration more consistently without introducing extra
computational costs. Despite their simplicity, these methods are less efficient in large state spaces, as
random noise changes the behavioral patterns of agents in an unpredictable fashion [5, 8]. In [15],
the authors propose to address the problem by training multiple value functions with bootstrap subsamples. However, it requires extra model parameters, causing additional computational overheads.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

