GLoMo: Unsupervised Learning of
Transferable Relational Graphs

Zhilin Yang∗1 , Jake (Junbo) Zhao∗23 , Bhuwan Dhingra1
Kaiming He3 , William W. Cohen1 , Ruslan Salakhutdinov1 , Yann LeCun23
∗
Equal contribution
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 New York University, 3 Facebook AI Research
{zhiliny,bdhingra,wcohen,rsalakhu}@cs.cmu.edu
{jakezhao,yann}@cs.nyu.com, kaiminghe@fb.com

Abstract
Modern deep transfer learning approaches have mainly focused on learning generic
feature vectors from one task that are transferable to other tasks, such as word
embeddings in language and pretrained convolutional features in vision. However,
these approaches usually transfer unary features and largely ignore more structured
graphical representations. This work explores the possibility of learning generic
latent relational graphs that capture dependencies between pairs of data units (e.g.,
words or pixels) from large-scale unlabeled data and transferring the graphs to
downstream tasks. Our proposed transfer learning framework improves performance on various tasks including question answering, natural language inference,
sentiment analysis, and image classification. We also show that the learned graphs
are generic enough to be transferred to different embeddings on which the graphs
have not been trained (including GloVe embeddings, ELMo embeddings, and
task-specific RNN hidden units), or embedding-free units such as image pixels.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in deep learning have largely relied on building blocks such as convolutional
networks (CNNs) [19] and recurrent networks (RNNs) [14] augmented with attention mechanisms
[1]. While possessing high representational capacity, these architectures primarily operate on grid-like
or sequential structures due to their built-in “innate priors”. As a result, CNNs and RNNs largely rely
on high expressiveness to model complex structural phenomena, compensating the fact that they do
not explicitly leverage structural, graphical representations.
This paradigm has led to a standardized norm in transfer learning and pretraining—fitting an expressive function on a large dataset with or without supervision, and then applying the function to
downstream task data for feature extraction. Notable examples include pretrained ImageNet features
[13] and pretrained word embeddings [24, 29].
In contrast, a variety of real-world data exhibit much richer relational graph structures than the simple
grid-like or sequential structures. This is also emphasized by a parallel work [3]. For example in
the language domain, linguists use parse trees to represent syntactic dependency between words;
information retrieval systems exploit knowledge graphs to reflect entity relations; and coreference
resolution is devised to connect different expressions of the same entity. As such, these exemplified
structures are universally present in almost any natural language data regardless of the target tasks,
which suggests the possibility of transfer across tasks. These observations also generalize to other
domains such as vision, where modeling the relations between pixels is proven useful [28, 50, 44].
One obstacle remaining, however, is that many of the universal structures are essentially human32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

