Context-Aware Synthesis and Placement of
Object Instances

Donghoon Lee1,2∗,
Sifei Liu3 ,
Jinwei Gu3 ,
Ming-Yu Liu3 ,
2,4
3
Ming-Hsuan Yang ,
Jan Kautz
donghoon.lee@rllab.snu.ac.kr {sifeil, jinweig, mingyul}@nvidia.com
mhyang@ucmerced.edu jkautz@nvidia.com
1
Seoul National University, 2 Google Cloud AI, 3 NVIDIA, 4 University of California at Merced

Abstract
Learning to insert an object instance into an image in a semantically coherent
manner is a challenging and interesting problem. Solving it requires (a) determining
a location to place an object in the scene and (b) determining its appearance at the
location. Such an object insertion model can potentially facilitate numerous image
editing and scene parsing applications. In this paper, we propose an end-to-end
trainable neural network for the task of inserting an object instance mask of a
specified class into the semantic label map of an image. Our network consists
of two generative modules where one determines where the inserted object mask
should be (i.e., location and scale) and the other determines what the object mask
shape (and pose) should look like. The two modules are connected together
via a spatial transformation network and jointly trained. We devise a learning
procedure that leverage both supervised and unsupervised data and show our
model can insert an object at diverse locations with various appearances. We
conduct extensive experimental validations with comparisons to strong baselines
to verify the effectiveness of the proposed network. Code is available at https:
//github.com/NVlabs/Instance_Insertion.

1

Introduction

Inserting objects into an image that conforms to scene semantics is a challenging and interesting task.
The task is closely related to many real-world applications, including image synthesis, AR and VR
content editing and domain randomization [28]. Numerous methods [2, 7, 8, 10, 15, 16, 20, 24, 26,
31, 33–35] have recently been proposed to generate realistic images based on generative adversarial
networks (GANs) [5]. These methods, however, have not yet considered semantic constraints between
scene context and the object instances to be inserted. As shown in Figure 1, given an input semantic
map of a street scene, the context (i.e., the road, sky, and buildings) constrains possible locations,
sizes, shapes, and poses of pedestrians, cars, and other objects in this particular scene. Is it possible to
learn this conditional probabilistic distribution of object instances in order to generate novel semantic
maps? In this paper, we propose a conditional GAN framework for the task. Our generator learns
to predict plausible locations to insert object instances into the input semantic label map and also
generate object instance masks with semantically coherent scales, poses and shapes. One closely
related work is the ST-GAN approach [14] which warps an input RGB image of an object segment to
place it in a scene image. Our work differs from the ST-GAN work in two ways. First, our algorithm
operates in the semantic label map space. It allows us to manipulate the scene without relying on the
RGB image that needs to be rendered in a number of cases, e.g., simulators or virtual worlds. Second,
∗

This work was predominantly conducted when Donghoon Lee was an intern at NVIDIA.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

