Hybrid-MST: A Hybrid Active Sampling Strategy for
Pairwise Preference Aggregation

Jing Li
LS2N/IPI Lab
University of Nantes
jingli.univ@gmail.com
Junle Wang
Turing Lab
Tencent Games
wangjunle@gmail.com

Rafal K. Mantiuk
Computer Laboratory
University of Cambridge
rkm38@cam.ac.uk

Suiyi Ling, Patrick Le Callet
LS2N/IPI Lab
University of Nantes
suiyi.ling, patrick.lecallet@univ-nantes.fr

Abstract
In this paper we present a hybrid active sampling strategy for pairwise preference
aggregation, which aims at recovering the underlying rating of the test candidates
from sparse and noisy pairwise labelling. Our method employs Bayesian optimization framework and Bradley-Terry model to construct the utility function, then
to obtain the Expected Information Gain (EIG) of each pair. For computational
efficiency, Gaussian-Hermite quadrature is used for estimation of EIG. In this work,
a hybrid active sampling strategy is proposed, either using Global Maximum (GM)
EIG sampling or Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) sampling in each trial, which is
determined by the test budget. The proposed method has been validated on both
simulated and real-world datasets, where it shows higher preference aggregation
ability than the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Preference aggregation from annotators’ pairwise labeling on the test candidates is a traditional but
still active research topic. As the name implies, the objective of preference aggregation is to infer
the underlying rating or ranking of the test candidates according to annotator’s (users or players)
binary label, e.g. which one is better? In particular, recently, with the access of big data, preference
aggregation from pairwise labeling has been widely applied in recommendation systems such as on
movie, music, news, books, research articles, restaurant, products according to user’s preference
selection; or in social networks for aggregating social opinions; or in sports race, chess and online
games to infer the global ranking of the players, etc.
In some applications, such as game players matching systems (e.g. MSR’s TrueSkill system[1]),
friends-making website and subjective image/video quality assessment (IQA/VQA) [2], discovering
the underlying scores of the test candidates is more important than the rank order so the system could
know the intensity of the preference from users, eventually to assign matching players to the on-line
game players, or recommend the possible friends who have the same interests to the users, or to
quantitatively evaluate the performance of different coding/rendering/display techniques in IQA/VQA
domain. However, as the size of the test candidates n gets bigger, which is happening nowadays,
the number of required pairwise labeling grows exponentially O(n2 ) leading to the unfeasible
implementation. Thus, there is an urgent need to reduce the number of pairwise comparisons, that is,
selecting part of the pairs but without loosing the aggregation accuracy.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

