A Model for Learned Bloom Filters,
and Optimizing by Sandwiching

Michael Mitzenmacher
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
michaelm@eecs.harvard.edu

Abstract
Recent work has suggested enhancing Bloom filters by using a pre-filter, based
on applying machine learning to determine a function that models the data set the
Bloom filter is meant to represent. Here we model such learned Bloom filters,
with the following outcomes: (1) we clarify what guarantees can and cannot be
associated with such a structure; (2) we show how to estimate what size the learning
function must obtain in order to obtain improved performance; (3) we provide a
simple method, sandwiching, for optimizing learned Bloom filters; and (4) we
propose a design and analysis approach for a learned Bloomier filter, based on our
modeling approach.

1

Introduction

An interesting recent paper, “The Case for Learned Index Structures” [7], argues that standard index
structures and related structures, such as Bloom filters, could be improved by using machine learning
to develop what the authors dub learned index structures. However, this paper did not provide a
suitable mathematical model for judging the performance of such structures. Here we aim to provide
a more formal model for their variation of a Bloom filter, which they call a learned Bloom filter.
To describe our results, we first somewhat informally describe the learned Bloom filter. Like a standard
Bloom filter, it provides a compressed representation of a set of keys K that allows membership
queries. (We may sometimes also refer to the keys as elements.) Given a key y, a learned Bloom
filter always returns yes if y is in K, so there will be no false negatives, and generally returns no if y
is not in K, but may provide false positives. What makes a learned Bloom filter interesting is that it
uses a function that can be obtained by “learning” the set K to help determine the appropriate answer;
the function acts as a pre-filter that provides a probabilistic estimate that a query key y is in K. This
learned function can be used to make an initial decision as to whether the key is in K, and a smaller
backup Bloom filter is used to prevent any false negatives.
Our more formal model provides interesting insights into learned Bloom filters, and how they might
be effective. In particular, here we: (1) clarify what guarantees can and cannot be associated with
such a structure; (2) show how to estimate what size the learning function must obtain in order to
obtain improved performance; (3) provide a simple method for optimizing learned Bloom filters; and
(4) demonstrate our approach may be useful for other similar structures.
We briefly summarize the outcomes above. First, we explain how the types of guarantees offered by
learned Bloom filters differ significantly from those of standard Bloom filters. We thereby clarify
what application-level assumptions are required for a learned Bloom filter to be effective. Second,
we provide formulae for modeling the false positive rate for a learned Bloom filter, allowing for an
estimate of how small the learned function needs to be in order to be effective. We then find, perhaps
surprisingly, that a better structure uses a Bloom filter before as well as after the learned function.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

