Temporal Regularization in Markov Decision Process

Pierre Thodoroff
McGill University
pierre.thodoroff@mail.mcgill.ca
Joelle Pineau
McGill University & Facebook AI Research
jpineau@cs.mcgill.ca

Audrey Durand
McGill University
audrey.durand@mcgill.ca
Doina Precup
McGill University
dprecup@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
Several applications of Reinforcement Learning suffer from instability due to high
variance. This is especially prevalent in high dimensional domains. Regularization
is a commonly used technique in machine learning to reduce variance, at the cost
of introducing some bias. Most existing regularization techniques focus on spatial
(perceptual) regularization. Yet in reinforcement learning, due to the nature of the
Bellman equation, there is an opportunity to also exploit temporal regularization
based on smoothness in value estimates over trajectories. This paper explores a
class of methods for temporal regularization. We formally characterize the bias
induced by this technique using Markov chain concepts. We illustrate the various
characteristics of temporal regularization via a sequence of simple discrete and
continuous MDPs, and show that the technique provides improvement even in
high-dimensional Atari games.

1

Introduction

There has been much progress in Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques, with some impressive
success with games [30], and several interesting applications on the horizon [17, 29, 26, 9]. However
RL methods are too often hampered by high variance, whether due to randomness in data collection,
effects of initial conditions, complexity of learner function class, hyper-parameter configuration, or
sparsity of the reward signal [15]. Regularization is a commonly used technique in machine learning
to reduce variance, at the cost of introducing some (smaller) bias. Regularization typically takes the
form of smoothing over the observation space to reduce the complexity of the learner’s hypothesis
class.
In the RL setting, we have an interesting opportunity to consider an alternative form of regularization,
namely temporal regularization. Effectively, temporal regularization considers smoothing over the
trajectory, whereby the estimate of the value function at one state is assumed to be related to the value
function at the state(s) that typically occur before it in the trajectory. This structure arises naturally
out of the fact that the value at each state is estimated using the Bellman equation. The standard
Bellman equation clearly defines the dependency between value estimates. In temporal regularization,
we amplify this dependency by making each state depend more strongly on estimates of previous
states as opposed to multi-step methods that considers future states.
This paper proposes a class of temporally regularized value function estimates. We discuss properties
of these estimates, based on notions from Markov chains, under the policy evaluation setting, and
extend the notion to the control case. Our experiments show that temporal regularization effectively
reduces variance and estimation error in discrete and continuous MDPs. The experiments also
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

