Learning Concave Conditional Likelihood Models for
Improved Analysis of Tandem Mass Spectra

John T. Halloran
Department of Public Health Sciences
University of California, Davis
jthalloran@ucdavis.edu

David M. Rocke
Department of Public Health Sciences
University of California, Davis
dmrocke@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
The most widely used technology to identify the proteins present in a complex
biological sample is tandem mass spectrometry, which quickly produces a large
collection of spectra representative of the peptides (i.e., protein subsequences)
present in the original sample. In this work, we greatly expand the parameter
learning capabilities of a dynamic Bayesian network (DBN) peptide-scoring algorithm, Didea [25], by deriving emission distributions for which its conditional
log-likelihood scoring function remains concave. We show that this class of emission distributions, called Convex Virtual Emissions (CVEs), naturally generalizes
the log-sum-exp function while rendering both maximum likelihood estimation and
conditional maximum likelihood estimation concave for a wide range of Bayesian
networks. Utilizing CVEs in Didea allows efficient learning of a large number of
parameters while ensuring global convergence, in stark contrast to Didea’s previous
parameter learning framework (which could only learn a single parameter using
a costly grid search) and other trainable models [12, 13, 14] (which only ensure
convergence to local optima). The newly trained scoring function substantially
outperforms the state-of-the-art in both scoring function accuracy and downstream
Fisher kernel analysis. Furthermore, we significantly improve Didea’s runtime
performance through successive optimizations to its message passing schedule and
derive explicit connections between Didea’s new concave score and related MS/MS
scoring functions.

1

Introduction

A fundamental task in medicine and biology is identifying the proteins present in a complex biological
sample, such as a drop of blood. The most widely used technology to accomplish this task is tandem
mass spectrometry (MS/MS), which quickly produces a large collection of spectra representative of
the peptides (i.e., protein subsequences) present in the original sample. A critical problem in MS/MS
analysis, then, is the accurate identification of the peptide generating each observed spectrum.
The most accurate methods which solve this problem search a database of peptides derived from the
mapped organism of interest. Such database-search algorithms score peptides from the database and
return the top-ranking peptide per spectrum. The pair consisting of an observed spectrum and scored
peptide are typically referred to as a peptide-spectrum match (PSM). Many scoring functions have
been proposed, ranging from simple dot-products [2, 28], to cross-correlation based [8], to p-value
based [10, 19, 16]. Recently, dynamic Bayesian networks (DBNs) have been shown to achieve the
state-of-the-art in both PSM identification accuracy and post-search discriminative analysis, owing to
their temporal modeling capabilities, parameter learning capabilities, and generative nature.
The first such DBN-based scoring function, Didea [25], used sum-product inference to efficiently
compute a log-posterior score for highly accurate PSM identification. However, Didea utilized a
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

