DeepExposure: Learning to Expose Photos with
Asynchronously Reinforced Adversarial Learning

Runsheng Yu∗
Xiaomi AI Lab
South China Normal University
runshengyu@gmail.com
Zhi Qu
Xiaomi AI Lab
quzhi@xiaomi.com

Wenyu Liu ∗
Xiaomi AI Lab
Peking University
liuwenyu@pku.edu.cn
Deli Zhao
Xiaomi AI Lab
zhaodeli@xiaomi.com

Yasen Zhang
Xiaomi AI Lab
zhangyasen@xiaomi.com

Bo Zhang
Xiaomi AI Lab
zhangbo@xiaomi.com

Abstract
The accurate exposure is the key of capturing high-quality photos in computational
photography, especially for mobile phones that are limited by sizes of camera
modules. Inspired by luminosity masks usually applied by professional photographers, in this paper, we develop a novel algorithm for learning local exposures with
deep reinforcement adversarial learning. To be specific, we segment an image into
sub-images that can reflect variations of dynamic range exposures according to raw
low-level features. Based on these sub-images, a local exposure for each sub-image
is automatically learned by virtue of policy network sequentially while the reward
of learning is globally designed for striking a balance of overall exposures. The
aesthetic evaluation function is approximated by discriminator in generative adversarial networks. The reinforcement learning and the adversarial learning are trained
collaboratively by asynchronous deterministic policy gradient and generative loss
approximation. To further simply the algorithmic architecture, we also prove the
feasibility of leveraging the discriminator as the value function. Further more,
we employ each local exposure to retouch the raw input image respectively, thus
delivering multiple retouched images under different exposures which are fused
with exposure blending. The extensive experiments verify that our algorithms are
superior to state-of-the-art methods in terms of quantitative accuracy and visual
illustration.

1

Introduction

Retouching raw low-quality photos into high-quality ones will greatly increase the aesthetic experience of our vision. Due to the requirement of expertise of photography, photo quality enhancement is
beyond the capability of non-professional users, thus leading to the new trend of automatic techniques
of image retouching.
The traditional methods for automatic image retouching include retinex of a theory based on human
image perception [21], transform of using enhancement-parametric operators to retouch images [1],
and exposure/contrast fusion [10, 23, 25]. But these methods have their own limitations: Most of
them are incapable of comprehending semantic information or object relationship in images well.
With the prevalence of deep learning, many researchers focus on applying this method to the image
retouching area. In general, the image retouching approaches based on deep learning fall into three
categories:
∗

Joint first authors.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

