Weakly Supervised Dense Event Captioning in Videos

Xuguang Duan∗ 1 , Wenbing Huang∗2 , Chuang Gan3 , Jingdong Wang4 ,
Wenwu Zhu1 , Junzhou Huang2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China; 2 Tencent AI Lab. ;
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab; 4 Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China;
1

duan_xg@outlook.com, hwenbing@126.com, ganchuang1990@gmail.com,
jingdw@microsoft.com, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn,joehhuang@tencent.com

Abstract
Dense event captioning aims to detect and describe all events of interest contained
in a video. Despite the advanced development in this area, existing methods tackle
this task by making use of dense temporal annotations, which is dramatically
source-consuming. This paper formulates a new problem: weakly supervised dense
event captioning, which does not require temporal segment annotations for model
training. Our solution is based on the one-to-one correspondence assumption,
each caption describes one temporal segment, and each temporal segment has one
caption, which holds in current benchmark datasets and most real-world cases. We
decompose the problem into a pair of dual problems: event captioning and sentence
localization and present a cycle system to train our model. Extensive experimental
results are provided to demonstrate the ability of our model on both dense event
captioning and sentence localization in videos.

1

Introduction

Dramatic improvements have been made on video understanding due to the development of deep
neural networks and large-scale video datasets [1, 2, 3]. Among the wide variety of applications
on video understanding, the video captioning task is attracting more and more interests in recent
years [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. In video captioning, the machine is required to describe the video
content in the natural language form, which makes it more meticulous and thus challenging compared
to other tasks describing the video content using a few tags or labels, such as video classification and
action detection [12, 13].
The current trend on video captioning is to perform Dense Event Captioning (DEC, also called
Dense-Captioning Event in videos in [10]). As one video usually contains more than one event of
interest, the goal of DEC is to locate all events in the video and perform captioning for each of
them. Clearly, such dense captioning enriches the information we obtained and is beneficial for more
in-depth video analysis. Nevertheless, to achieve this goal, we need to collect the caption annotation
for each event along with its temporal segment coordinate (i.e., the start and end times) for network
training, which is source-consuming and impractical.
In this paper, we introduce a new problem, Weakly Supervised Dense Event Captioning (WS-DEC)2 ,
which aims at dense event captioning only using the caption annotations for training. In the training
∗

denotes equal contributions. This paper was done when Xuguang Duan was served as a research intern in
Tencent AI Lab. Wenwu Zhu is the corresponding author.
2
More specifically, the term “weakly” in our paper refers to the incompleteness of the supervision rather than
the amount of information.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

