Proximal SCOPE for Distributed Sparse Learning

Shen-Yi Zhao
National Key Lab. for Novel Software Tech.
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech.
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
zhaosy@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Gong-Duo Zhang
National Key Lab. for Novel Software Tech.
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech.
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
zhanggd@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Ming-Wei Li
National Key Lab. for Novel Software Tech.
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech.
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
limw@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Wu-Jun Li
National Key Lab. for Novel Software Tech.
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech.
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
liwujun@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Distributed sparse learning with a cluster of multiple machines has attracted
much attention in machine learning, especially for large-scale applications with
high-dimensional data. One popular way to implement sparse learning is to
use L1 regularization. In this paper, we propose a novel method, called proximal SCOPE (pSCOPE), for distributed sparse learning with L1 regularization.
pSCOPE is based on a cooperative autonomous local learning (CALL) framework.
In the CALL framework of pSCOPE, we find that the data partition affects the
convergence of the learning procedure, and subsequently we define a metric to
measure the goodness of a data partition. Based on the defined metric, we theoretically prove that pSCOPE is convergent with a linear convergence rate if the
data partition is good enough. We also prove that better data partition implies
faster convergence rate. Furthermore, pSCOPE is also communication efficient.
Experimental results on real data sets show that pSCOPE can outperform other
state-of-the-art distributed methods for sparse learning.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning models can be formulated as the following regularized empirical risk minimization problem:
n

min P (w) =

w∈Rd

1X
fi (w) + R(w),
n i=1

(1)

where w is the parameter to learn, fi (w) is the loss on training instance i, n is the number of
training instances, and R(w) is a regularization term. Recently, sparse learning, which tries to learn
a sparse model for prediction, has become a hot topic in machine learning. There are different
ways to implement sparse learning [28, 30]. One popular way is to use L1 regularization, i.e.,
R(w) = λkwk1 . In this paper, we focus on sparse learning with R(w) = λkwk1 . Hence, in the
following content of this paper, R(w) = λkwk1 unless otherwise stated.
One traditional method to solve (1) is proximal gradient descent (pGD) [2], which can be written as
follows:
wt+1 = proxR,η (wt − η∇F (wt )),
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

(2)

