Constrained Graph Variational Autoencoders for
Molecule Design
Qi Liu∗1 , Miltiadis Allamanis2 , Marc Brockschmidt2 , and Alexander L. Gaunt2
1

Singapore University of Technology and Design
2
Microsoft Research, Cambridge
qiliu@u.nus.edu, {miallama, mabrocks, algaunt}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Graphs are ubiquitous data structures for representing interactions between entities.
With an emphasis on applications in chemistry, we explore the task of learning to
generate graphs that conform to a distribution observed in training data. We propose
a variational autoencoder model in which both encoder and decoder are graphstructured. Our decoder assumes a sequential ordering of graph extension steps
and we discuss and analyze design choices that mitigate the potential downsides
of this linearization. Experiments compare our approach with a wide range of
baselines on the molecule generation task and show that our method is successful
at matching the statistics of the original dataset on semantically important metrics.
Furthermore, we show that by using appropriate shaping of the latent space, our
model allows us to design molecules that are (locally) optimal in desired properties.

1

Introduction

Structured objects such as program source code, physical systems, chemical molecules and even 3D
scenes are often well represented using graphs [2, 6, 16, 25]. Recently, considerable progress has been
made on building discriminative deep learning models that ingest graphs as inputs [4, 9, 17, 21]. Deep
learning approaches have also been suggested for graph generation. More specifically, generating
and optimizing chemical molecules has been identified as an important real-world application for this
set of techniques [8, 23, 24, 28, 29].
In this paper, we propose a novel probabilistic model for graph generation that builds gated graph
neural networks (GGNNs) [21] into the encoder and decoder of a variational autoencoder (VAE) [15].
Furthermore, we demonstrate how to incorporate hard domain-specific constraints into our model to
adapt it for the molecule generation task. With these constraints in place, we refer to our model as a
constrained graph variational autoencoder (CGVAE). Additionally, we shape the latent space of the
VAE to allow optimization of numerical properties of the resulting molecules. Our experiments are
performed with real-world datasets of molecules with pharmaceutical and photo-voltaic applications.
By generating novel molecules from these datasets, we demonstrate the benefits of our architectural
choices. In particular, we observe that (1) the GGNN architecture is beneficial for state-of-the-art
generation of molecules matching chemically relevant statistics of the training distribution, and (2)
the semantically meaningful latent space arising from the VAE allows continuous optimization of
molecule properties [8].
The key challenge in generating graphs is that sampling directly from a joint distribution over all
configurations of labeled nodes and edges is intractable for reasonably sized graphs. Therefore,
a generative model must decompose this joint in some way. A straightforward approximation is
to ignore correlations and model the existence and label of each edge with independent random
∗

work performed during an internship with Microsoft Research, Cambridge.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

