Flexible and accurate inference and learning
for deep generative models

Eszter Vértes
Maneesh Sahani
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
London, W1T 4JG
{eszter, maneesh}@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce a new approach to learning in hierarchical latent-variable generative
models called the “distributed distributional code Helmholtz machine”, which
emphasises flexibility and accuracy in the inferential process. Like the original
Helmholtz machine and later variational autoencoder algorithms (but unlike adversarial methods) our approach learns an explicit inference or “recognition” model
to approximate the posterior distribution over the latent variables. Unlike these
earlier methods, it employs a posterior representation that is not limited to a narrow
tractable parametrised form (nor is it represented by samples). To train the generative and recognition models we develop an extended wake-sleep algorithm inspired
by the original Helmholtz machine. This makes it possible to learn hierarchical
latent models with both discrete and continuous variables, where an accurate posterior representation is essential. We demonstrate that the new algorithm outperforms
current state-of-the-art methods on synthetic, natural image patch and the MNIST
data sets.

1

Introduction

There is substantial interest in applying variational methods to learn complex latent-variable generative
models, for which the full likelihood function (after marginalising over the latent variables) and its
gradients are intractable. Unsupervised learning of such models has two complementary goals: to
learn a good approximation to the distribution of the observations; and also to learn the underlying
structural dependence so that the values of latent variables may be inferred from new observations.
Variational methods rely on optimising a lower bound to the log-likelihood (the free energy), which
depends on an approximation to the posterior distribution over the latents [1]. The performance of
variational algorithms depends critically on the flexibility of the variational posterior. In cases where
the approximating class does not contain the true posterior distribution, variational learning may
introduce substantial bias to estimates of model parameters [2].
Variational autoencoders [3, 4] combine the variational inference framework with the earlier idea of
the recognition network. This approach has made variational inference applicable to a large class
of complex generative models. However, many challenges remain. Most current algorithms have
difficulty learning hierarchical generative models with multiple layers of stochastic latent variables
[5]. Arguably, this class of models is crucial for modelling data where the underlying physical
process is itself hierarchical in nature. Furthermore, the generative models typically considered in the
literature restrict the prior distribution to a simple form, most often a factorised Gaussian distribution,
which makes it difficult to incorporate additional generative structure such as sparsity into the model.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

