Understanding Weight Normalized Deep Neural
Networks with Rectified Linear Units
Xiao Wang
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
wangxiao@purdue.edu

Yixi Xu
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
xu573@purdue.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a general framework for norm-based capacity control for Lp,q
weight normalized deep neural networks. We establish the upper bound on the
Rademacher complexities of this family. With an Lp,q normalization where q ≤ p∗
and 1/p+1/p∗ = 1, we discuss properties of a width-independent capacity control,
which only depends on the depth by a square root term. We further analyze the
approximation properties of Lp,q weight normalized deep neural networks. In
particular, for an L1,∞ weight normalized network, the approximation error can be
controlled by the L1 norm of the output layer, and the corresponding generalization
error only depends on the architecture by the square root of the depth.

1

Introduction

During the past decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated an amazing performance in
solving many complex artificial intelligence tasks such as object recognition and identification, text
understanding and translation, question answering, and more [11]. The capacity of unregularized fully
connected DNNs, as a function of the network size and depth, is fairly well understood [1, 4, 23]. By
bounding the L2 norm of the incoming weights of each unit, [22] is able to accelerate the convergence
of stochastic gradient descent optimization across applications in supervised image recognition,
generative modeling, and deep reinforcement learning. However, theoretical investigations on such
networks are less explored in the literature, and a few exceptions are [4, 5, 10, 18, 19, 25]. There is a
central question waiting for an answer: Can we bound the capacity of fully connected DNNs with
bias neurons by weight normalization alone, which has the least dependence on the architecture?
In this paper, we focus on networks with rectified linear units (ReLU) and study a more general
weight normalized deep neural network (WN-DNN), which includes all layer-wise Lp,q weight
normalizations. In addition, these networks have a bias neuron per hidden layer, while prior studies [4, 5, 10, 18, 19, 25] either exclude the bias neuron, or only include the bias neuron in the
input layer, which differs from the practical application. We establish the upper bound on the
Rademacher complexities of this family and study the theoretical properties of WN-DNNs in terms
of the approximation error.
We first examine how the Lp,q WN-DNN architecture influences their generalization properties.
Specifically, for Lp,q normalization where q ≤ p∗ and 1/p + 1/p∗ = 1, we obtain a complexity
bound that is independent of width and only has a square root dependence on the depth. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first theoretical result for the fully connected DNNs including a
bias neuron for each hidden layer in terms of generalization. We will demonstrate later that it is
nontrivial to extend the existing results to the DNNs with bias neurons. Even excluding the bias
neurons, existing generalization bounds for DNNs depend on either width or depth logarithmically
[5], polynomially[10, 18], or even exponentially [19, 25]. Even for [5], the logarithmic dependency
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

