A Linear Speedup Analysis of Distributed Deep
Learning with Sparse and Quantized Communication
Peng Jiang
The Ohio State University
jiang.952@osu.edu

Gagan Agrawal
The Ohio State University
agrawal@cse.ohio-state.edu

Abstract
The large communication overhead has imposed a bottleneck on the performance
of distributed Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) for training deep neural networks.
Previous works have demonstrated the potential of using gradient sparsification
and quantization to reduce the communication cost. However, there is still a lack
of understanding about how sparse and quantized communication affects the convergence rate of the training algorithm. In this paper, we study the convergence
rate of distributed SGD for non-convex optimization with two communication
reducing strategies:
p sparse parameter averaging and gradient quantization. We
show that O(1/ M K) convergence rate can be achieved if the sparsification and
quantization hyperparameters are configured properly. We also propose a strategy
called periodic quantized averaging (PQASGD)
that further reduces the communip
cation cost while preserving the O(1/ M K) convergence rate. Our evaluation
validates our theoretical results and shows that our PQASGD can converge as fast
as full-communication SGD with only 3% 5% communication data size.

1

Introduction

The explosion of data and an increase in model size has led to great interest in training deep
neural networks on distributed systems. In particular, distributed stochastic gradient descent has
been extensively studied in both deep learning and high-performance computing communities,
with the goal of accelerating large-scale learning tasks [13, 10, 9, 47, 3, 14, 30, 31, 6, 44, 38].
In today’s mainstream deep learning frameworks such as Tensorflow, Torch, MXNet, Caffe, and
CNTK [22, 1, 11, 8, 36], data-parallel distributed SGD is widely adopted to exploit the compute
capacity of multiple machines.
The idea of data-parallel distributed SGD is that each machine holds a copy of the entire model and
computes stochastic gradients with local mini-batches, and the local model parameters or gradients
are frequently synchronized to achieve a global consensus of the learned model. In this context,
a well-known performance bottleneck is the high bandwidth cost for synchronizing the gradients
or model parameters among multiple machines [3, 27, 20, 28, 9, 42, 29]. A popular approach to
overcome such a bottleneck is to perform compression of the gradients [33, 4, 46, 5, 37]. For example,
Aji et al. [4] propose to sparsify the gradients and transmit only the components with absolute values
larger than a threshold. Their sparsification method reduces the gradient exchange and achieve 22%
speedup gain on 4 GPUs for a neural machine translation task. Wen et al. [46] propose to aggressively
quantize the gradients to three numerical levels {-1, 0, 1}. Their quantization method reduces the
communication cost with none or little accuracy lost on image classification.
Though numerous variants of gradient quantization and/or sparsification have been proposed and
successfully applied to different deep learning tasks [42, 45, 37, 48, 18, 7, 16], their impact to the
convergence rate of distributed SGD (especially for non-convex optimization) is still unclear. Most
of the research efforts involve a simple empirical demonstration of convergence. Wen et al. [46]
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

