Efficient Algorithms for Non-convex Isotonic
Regression through Submodular Optimization
Francis Bach
Inria
Département d’Informatique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University, Paris, France
francis.bach@ens.fr

Abstract
We consider the minimization of submodular functions subject to ordering constraints. We show that this potentially non-convex optimization problem can be cast
as a convex optimization problem on a space of uni-dimensional measures, with
ordering constraints corresponding to first-order stochastic dominance. We propose
new discretization schemes that lead to simple and efficient algorithms based on
zero-th, first, or higher order oracles; these algorithms also lead to improvements
without isotonic constraints. Finally, our experiments show that non-convex loss
functions can be much more robust to outliers for isotonic regression, while still
being solvable in polynomial time.

1

Introduction

Shape constraints such as ordering constraints appear everywhere in estimation problems in machine
learning, signal processing and statistics. They typically correspond to prior knowledge, and are
imposed for the interpretability of models, or to allow non-parametric estimation with improved
convergence rates [16, 8]. In this paper, we focus on imposing ordering constraints into an estimation
problem, a setting typically referred to as isotonic regression [4, 26, 22], and we aim to generalize
the set of problems for which efficient (i.e., polynomial-time) algorithms exist.
We thus focus on the following optimization problem:
min H(x) such that 8(i, j) 2 E, xi > xj ,

x2[0,1]n

(1)

where E ⇢ {1, . . . , n}2 represents the set of constraints, which form a directed acyclic graph. For
simplicity, we restrict x to the set [0, 1]n , but our results extend to general products of (potentially
unbounded) intervals.
As convex constraints, isotonic constraints are well-adapted to estimation problems formulated as
convex optimization problems where H is convex, such as for linear supervised learning problems,
with many efficient algorithms for separable convex problems [4, 26, 22, 30], which can thus be used
as inner loops in more general convex problems by using projected gradient methods (see, e.g., [3]).
In this paper, we show that another form of structure can be leveraged. We will assume that H is
submodular, which is equivalent, when twice continuously differentiable, to having nonpositive cross
second-order derivatives. This notably includes all (potentially non convex) separable functions (i.e.,
sums of functions that depend on single variables), but also many other examples (see Section 2).
Minimizing submodular functions on continuous domains has been recently shown to be equivalent
to a convex optimization problem on a space of uni-dimensional measures [2], and given that the
functions x 7! (xj xi )+ are submodular for any > 0, it is natural that by using tending to +1,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

