Learning and Inference in Hilbert Space with
Quantum Graphical Models
Siddarth Srinivasan
College of Computing
Georgia Tech
Atlanta, GA 30332
sidsrini@gatech.edu

Carlton Downey
Department of Machine Learning
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
cmdowney@cs.cmu.edu

Byron Boots
College of Computing
Georgia Tech
Atlanta, GA 30332
bboots@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Quantum Graphical Models (QGMs) generalize classical graphical models by
adopting the formalism for reasoning about uncertainty from quantum mechanics.
Unlike classical graphical models, QGMs represent uncertainty with density matrices in complex Hilbert spaces. Hilbert space embeddings (HSEs) also generalize
Bayesian inference in Hilbert spaces. We investigate the link between QGMs
and HSEs and show that the sum rule and Bayes rule for QGMs are equivalent
to the kernel sum rule in HSEs and a special case of Nadaraya-Watson kernel
regression, respectively. We show that these operations can be kernelized, and
use these insights to propose a Hilbert Space Embedding of Hidden Quantum
Markov Models (HSE-HQMM) to model dynamics. We present experimental
results showing that HSE-HQMMs are competitive with state-of-the-art models
like LSTMs and PSRNNs on several datasets, while also providing a nonparametric
method for maintaining a probability distribution over continuous-valued features.

1

Introduction and Related Work

Various formulations of Quantum Graphical Models (QGMs) have been proposed by researchers in
physics and machine learning [Srinivasan et al., 2018, Yeang, 2010, Leifer and Poulin, 2008] as a
way of generalizing probabilistic inference on graphical models by adopting quantum mechanics’
formalism for reasoning about uncertainty. While Srinivasan et al. [2018] focused on modeling
dynamical systems with Hidden Quantum Markov Models (HQMMs) [Monras et al., 2010], they
also describe the basic operations on general quantum graphical models, which generalize Bayesian
reasoning within a framework consistent with quantum mechanical principles. Inference using Hilbert
space embeddings (HSE) is also a generalization of Bayesian reasoning, where data is mapped to a
Hilbert space in which kernel sum, chain, and Bayes rules can be used [Smola et al., 2007, Song et al.,
2009, 2013]. These methods can model dynamical systems such as HSE-HMMs [Song et al., 2010],
HSE-PSRs [Boots et al., 2012], and PSRNNs [Downey et al., 2017]. [Schuld and Killoran, 2018]
present related but orthogonal work connecting kernels, Hilbert spaces, and quantum computing.
Since quantum states live in complex Hilbert spaces, and both QGMs and HSEs generalize Bayesian
reasoning, it is natural to ask: what is the relationship between quantum graphical models and Hilbert
space embeddings? This is precisely the question we tackle in this paper. Overall, we present four
contributions: (1) we show that the sum rule for QGMs is identical to the kernel sum rule for HSEs,
while the Bayesian update in QGMs is equivalent to performing Nadaraya-Watson kernel regression,
(2) we show how to kernelize these operations and argue that with the right choice of features, we are
mapping our data to quantum systems and modeling dynamics as quantum state evolution, (3) we use
these insights to propose a HSE-HQMM to model dynamics by mapping data to quantum systems
and performing inference in Hilbert space, and, finally, (4) we present a learning algorithm and
experimental results showing that HSE-HQMMs are competitive with other state-of-the-art methods
for modeling sequences, while also providing a nonparametric method for estimating the distribution
of continuous-valued features.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

