Spectral Filtering for
General Linear Dynamical Systems

Elad Hazan
Princeton University & Google AI Princeton
ehazan@cs.princeton.edu
Karan Singh
Princeton University & Google AI Princeton
karans@cs.princeton.edu

Holden Lee
Princeton University
holdenl@princeton.edu

Cyril Zhang
Princeton University & Google AI Princeton
cyril.zhang@cs.princeton.edu

Yi Zhang
Princeton University & Google AI Princeton
y.zhang@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
We give a polynomial-time algorithm for learning latent-state linear dynamical
systems without system identification, and without assumptions on the spectral
radius of the system’s transition matrix. The algorithm extends the recently introduced technique of spectral filtering, previously applied only to systems with
a symmetric transition matrix, using a novel convex relaxation to allow for the
efficient identification of phases.

1

Introduction

Linear dynamical systems (LDSs) are a cornerstone of signal processing and time series analysis.
The problem of predicting the response signal arising from a LDS is a fundamental problem in
machine learning, with a history of more than half a century.
An LDS is given by matrices (𝐴, 𝐵, 𝐶, 𝐷). Given a sequence of inputs {𝑥𝑡 }, the output {𝑦𝑡 } of the
system is governed by the linear equations
ℎ𝑡 = 𝐴ℎ𝑡−1 + 𝐵𝑥𝑡 + 𝜂𝑡
𝑦𝑡 = 𝐶ℎ𝑡 + 𝐷𝑥𝑡 + 𝜉𝑡 ,

(1)

where 𝜂𝑡 , 𝜉𝑡 are noise vectors, and ℎ𝑡 is a hidden (latent) state.
Roweis and Ghahramani [RG99] show that special cases of this formulation capture a host of machine learning models, including hidden Markov models, Gaussian mixture models, principal component analysis, and linear Gaussian models. It has been observed numerous times in the literature
that if there is no hidden state, or if the transition matrices are known, then the formulation is essentially convex and amenable to efficient optimization.
In this paper we are concerned with the general and more challenging case, arguably the one which
is more applicable as well, in which the hidden state is not observed, and the system dynamics
are unknown to the learner. In this setting, despite the vast literature on the subject from various
communities, there is a lack of provably efficient methods for learning the LDS without strong
generative or other assumptions.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

