Using Large Ensembles of Control Variates for
Variational Inference
Tomas Geffner
College of Information and Computer Science
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003
tgeffner@cs.umass.edu

Justin Domke
College of Information and Computer Science
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003
domke@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Variational inference is increasingly being addressed with stochastic optimization.
In this setting, the gradient’s variance plays a crucial role in the optimization procedure, since high variance gradients lead to poor convergence. A popular approach
used to reduce gradient’s variance involves the use of control variates. Despite
the good results obtained, control variates developed for variational inference are
typically looked at in isolation. In this paper we clarify the large number of control
variates that are available by giving a systematic view of how they are derived. We
also present a Bayesian risk minimization framework in which the quality of a
procedure for combining control variates is quantiﬁed by its effect on optimization
convergence rates, which leads to a very simple combination rule. Results show
that combining a large number of control variates this way signiﬁcantly improves
the convergence of inference over using the typical gradient estimators or a reduced
number of control variates.

1

Introduction

Variational Inference (VI) [29, 2, 11] is a framework for approximate probabilistic inference. It
has been successfully applied in several areas including topic modeling [3, 21], generative models
[13, 5, 22], reinforcement learning [6], and parsing [15], among others. Recently, VI has been able to
address a wider range of problems by adopting a "black box" [25] view based on only evaluating the
value or gradient of the target distribution. Then, the target can be optimized via stochastic gradient
descent. It is desirable to reduce the variance of the gradient estimate, since this governs convergence.
Control variates (CVs), a classical technique from statistics, is often used to accomplish this.
This paper investigates how to use many CVs in concert. We present a systematic view of existing
CVs, which starts by splitting the exact gradient into four terms (Eq. 2). Then, a CV is obtained by
application of a generic "recipe": Pick a term, possibly approximate it, and take the difference of two
estimators (Fig. 2). This suggests many possible CVs, including some seemingly not used before.
With many possible CVs, one can naturally ask how to use many together. In principle, the optimal
combination is well known (Eq. 6). However, this requires unknown (intractable) expectations. We
address this using decision theory. The goal is a “decision rule” that takes a minibatch of evaluations
together with the set of CVs to be used, and returns a gradient estimate. We adopt a Bayesian risk
measuring how gradient variance impacts convergence rates of stochastic optimization, with simple
prior over gradients and sets of CVs. A simple optimal decision rule emerges, where the intractable
expectations are replaced with "regularized" empirical estimates (Thm 4.1). To share information
across iterations, we suggest combining this Bayesian approach with exponential averaging by using
an “effective” minibatch size.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

