Bounded-Loss Private Prediction Markets
Rafael Frongillo
Colorado Boulder
raf@colorado.edu

Bo Waggoner
Microsoft Research
bwag@colorado.edu

Abstract
Prior work has investigated variations of prediction markets that preserve participants’ (differential) privacy, which formed the basis of useful mechanisms
for purchasing data for machine learning objectives. Such markets required potentially unlimited financial subsidy, however, making them impractical. In this
work, we design an adaptively-growing prediction market with a bounded financial
subsidy, while achieving privacy, incentives to produce accurate predictions, and
precision in the sense that market prices are not heavily impacted by the added
privacy-preserving noise. We briefly discuss how our mechanism can extend to the
data-purchasing setting, and its relationship to traditional learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

In a prediction market, a platform maintains a prediction (usually a probability distribution or
an expectation) of a future random variable such as an election outcome. Participants’ trades of
financial securities tied to this event are translated into updates to the prediction. Prediction markets,
designed to aggregate information from participants, have gained a substantial following in the
machine learning literature. One reason is the overlap in goals (predicting future outcomes) as well
as techniques (convex analysis, Bregman divergences), even at a deep level: the form of market
updates in standard automated market makers have been shown to mimic standard online learning or
optimization algorithms in many settings [2, 3, 8, 9]. Beyond this research-level bridge, recent papers
have suggested prediction market mechanisms as a way of crowdsourcing data or algorithms for
machine learning, usually by providing incentives for participants to repeatedly update a centralized
hypothesis or prediction [4, 12].
One recently-proposed mechanism to purchase data or hypotheses from participants is that of
Waggoner, et al. [12], in which participants submit updates to a centralized market maker, either by
directly altering the hypothesis, or in the form of submitted data; both are interpreted as buying or
selling shares in a market, paying off according to a set of holdout data that is revealed after the close
of the market. The authors then show how to preserve differential privacy for participants, meaning
that the content of any individual update is protected, as well as natural accuracy and incentive
guarantees.
One important drawback of Waggoner, et al. [12], however, is the lack of a bounded worst-case loss
guarantee: as the number of participants grows, the possible financial liability of the mechanism
grows without bound. In fact, their mechanism cannot achieve a bounded worst-case loss without
giving up privacy guarantees. Subsequently, Cummings, et al. [7] show that all differentially-private
prediction markets of the form proposed in [12] must suffer from unbounded financial loss in the
worst case. Intuitively, one could interpret this negative result as saying that the randomness of the
mechanism, which must be introduced to preserve privacy, also creates arbitrage opportunities for
participants: by betting against the noise, they collectively expect to make an unbounded profit from
the market maker. Nevertheless, Cummings, et al. leave open the possibility that mechanisms outside
the mold of Waggoner, et al. could achieve both privacy and a bounded worst-case loss.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

