Efficient Loss-Based Decoding on Graphs for
Extreme Classification
Itay Evron
Computer Science Dept.
The Technion, Israel
evron.itay@gmail.com

Edward Moroshko
Electrical Engineering Dept.
The Technion, Israel
edward.moroshko@gmail.com

Koby Crammer
Electrical Engineering Dept.
The Technion, Israel
koby@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
In extreme classification problems, learning algorithms are required to map instances to labels from an extremely large label set. We build on a recent extreme
classification framework with logarithmic time and space [19], and on a general
approach for error correcting output coding (ECOC) with loss-based decoding [1],
and introduce a flexible and efficient approach accompanied by theoretical bounds.
Our framework employs output codes induced by graphs, for which we show how
to perform efficient loss-based decoding to potentially improve accuracy. In addition, our framework offers a tradeoff between accuracy, model size and prediction
time. We show how to find the sweet spot of this tradeoff using only the training
data. Our experimental study demonstrates the validity of our assumptions and
claims, and shows that our method is competitive with state-of-the-art algorithms.

1

Introduction

Multiclass classification is the task of assigning instances with a category or class from a finite set. Its
numerous applications range from finding a topic of a news item, via classifying objects in images,
via spoken words detection, to predicting the next word in a sentence. Our ability to solve multiclass
problems with larger and larger sets improves with computation power. Recent research focuses on
extreme classification where the number of possible classes K is extremely large.
In such cases, previously developed methods, such as One-vs-One (OVO) [17], One-vs-Rest (OVR) [9]
and multiclass SVMs [34, 6, 11, 25], that scale linearly in the number of classes K, are not feasible.
These methods maintain too large models, that cannot be stored easily. Moreover, their training and
inference times are at least linear in K, and thus do not scale for extreme classification problems.
Recently, Jasinska and Karampatziakis [19] proposed a Log-Time Log-Space (LTLS) approach,
representing classes as paths on graphs. LTLS is very efficient, but has a limited representation,
resulting in an inferior accuracy compared to other methods. More than a decade earlier, Allwein et
al. [1] presented a unified view of error correcting output coding (ECOC) for classification, as well
as the loss-based decoding framework. They showed its superiority over Hamming decoding, both
theoretically and empirically.
In this work we build on these two works and introduce an efficient (i.e. O(log K) time and space)
loss-based learning and decoding algorithm for any loss function of the binary learners’ margin. We
show that LTLS can be seen as a special case of ECOC. We also make a more general connection
between loss-based decoding and graph-based representations and inference. Based on the theoretical
framework and analysis derived by [1] for loss-based decoding, we gain insights on how to improve
on the specific graphs proposed in LTLS by using more general trellis graphs – which we name
Wide-LTLS (W-LTLS). Our method profits from the best of both worlds: better accuracy as in lossbased decoding, and the logarithmic time and space of LTLS. Our empirical study suggests that by
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

