Differentially Private Contextual Linear Bandits

Roshan Shariff
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
roshan.shariff@ualberta.ca

Or Sheffet
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
osheffet@ualberta.ca

Abstract
We study the contextual linear bandit problem, a version of the standard stochastic
multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem where a learner sequentially selects actions
to maximize a reward which depends also on a user provided per-round context.
Though the context is chosen arbitrarily or adversarially, the reward is assumed to be
a stochastic function of a feature vector that encodes the context and selected action.
Our goal is to devise private learners for the contextual linear bandit problem.
We first show that using the standard definition of differential privacy results in
linear regret. So instead, we adopt the notion of joint differential privacy, where we
assume that the action chosen on day t is only revealed to user t and thus needn’t be
kept private that day, only on following days. We give a general scheme converting
the classic linear-UCB algorithm into a joint differentially private algorithm using
the tree-based algorithm [10, 18]. We then apply either Gaussian noise or Wishart
noise to achieve joint-differentially private algorithms and bound the resulting
algorithms’ regrets. In addition, we give the first lower bound on the additional
regret any private algorithms for the MAB problem must incur.

1

Introduction

The well-known stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a sequential decision-making task in which
a learner repeatedly chooses an action (or arm) and receives a noisy reward. The objective is to
maximize cumulative reward by exploring the actions to discover optimal ones (having the best
expected reward), balanced with exploiting them. The contextual bandit problem is an extension of
the MAB problem, where the learner also receives a context in each round, and the expected reward
depends on both the context and the selected action.
As a motivating example, consider online shopping: the user provides a context (composed of query
words, past purchases, etc.), and the website responds with a suggested product and receives a reward
if the user buys it. Ignoring the context and modeling the problem as a standard MAB (with an action
for each possible product) suffers from the drawback of ignoring the variety of users’ preferences;
whereas separately learning each user’s preferences doesn’t allow us to generalize between users.
Therefore it is common to model the task as a contextual linear bandit problem: Based on the
user-given context, each action is mapped to a feature vector; the reward probability is then assumed
to depend on the same unknown linear function of the feature vector across all users.
The above example motivates the need for privacy in the contextual bandit setting: users’ past
purchases and search queries are sensitive personal information, yet they strongly predict future
purchases. In this work, we give upper and lower bounds for the problem of (joint) differentially private
contextual linear bandits. Differential privacy is the de facto gold standard of privacy-preserving
data analysis in both academia and industry, requiring that an algorithm’s output have very limited
dependency on any single user interaction (one context and reward). However, as we later illustrate,
adhering to the standard notion of differential privacy (under event-level continual observation) in
the contextual bandit requires us to essentially ignore the context and thus incur linear regret. We
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

