On the Dimensionality of Word Embedding

Zi Yin
Stanford University
s0960974@gmail.com

Yuanyuan Shen
Microsoft Corp. & Stanford University
Yuanyuan.Shen@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this paper, we provide a theoretical understanding of word embedding and its
dimensionality. Motivated by the unitary-invariance of word embedding, we propose the Pairwise Inner Product (PIP) loss, a novel metric on the dissimilarity
between word embeddings. Using techniques from matrix perturbation theory, we
reveal a fundamental bias-variance trade-off in dimensionality selection for word
embeddings. This bias-variance trade-off sheds light on many empirical observations which were previously unexplained, for example the existence of an optimal
dimensionality. Moreover, new insights and discoveries, like when and how word
embeddings are robust to over-fitting, are revealed. By optimizing over the biasvariance trade-off of the PIP loss, we can explicitly answer the open question of
dimensionality selection for word embedding.

1

Introduction

Word embeddings are very useful and versatile tools, serving as keys to many fundamental problems in numerous NLP research [Turney and Pantel, 2010]. To name a few, word embeddings
are widely applied in information retrieval [Salton, 1971, Salton and Buckley, 1988, Sparck Jones,
1972], recommendation systems [Breese et al., 1998, Yin et al., 2017], image description [Frome
et al., 2013], relation discovery [Mikolov et al., 2013c] and word level translation [Mikolov et al.,
2013b]. Furthermore, numerous important applications are built on top of word embeddings. Some
prominent examples are long short-term memory (LSTM) networks [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber,
1997] that are used for language modeling [Bengio et al., 2003], machine translation [Sutskever
et al., 2014, Bahdanau et al., 2014], text summarization [Nallapati et al., 2016] and image caption
generation [Xu et al., 2015, Vinyals et al., 2015]. Other important applications include named entity
recognition [Lample et al., 2016], sentiment analysis [Socher et al., 2013] and so on.
However, the impact of dimensionality on word embedding has not yet been fully understood. As
a critical hyper-parameter, the choice of dimensionality for word vectors has huge influence on the
performance of a word embedding. First, it directly impacts the quality of word vectors - a word
embedding with a small dimensionality is typically not expressive enough to capture all possible
word relations, whereas one with a very large dimensionality suffers from over-fitting. Second,
the number of parameters for a word embedding or a model that builds on word embeddings (e.g.
recurrent neural networks) is usually a linear or quadratic function of dimensionality, which directly
affects training time and computational costs. Therefore, large dimensionalities tend to increase
model complexity, slow down training speed, and add inferential latency, all of which are constraints
that can potentially limit model applicability and deployment [Wu et al., 2016].
Dimensionality selection for embedding is a well-known open problem. In most NLP research, dimensionality is either selected ad hoc or by grid search, either of which can lead to sub-optimal
model performances. For example, 300 is perhaps the most commonly used dimensionality in various studies [Mikolov et al., 2013a, Pennington et al., 2014, Bojanowski et al., 2017]. This is possibly
due to the influence of the groundbreaking paper, which introduced the skip-gram Word2Vec model
and chose a dimensionality of 300 [Mikolov et al., 2013a]. A better empirical approach used by
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

