PG-TS: Improved Thompson Sampling for Logistic
Contextual Bandits
Bianca Dumitrascu∗
Lewis Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
biancad@princeton.edu

Karen Feng∗
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
karenfeng@princeton.edu

Barbara E Engelhardt
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
bee@princeton.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of regret minimization in logistic contextual bandits, where
a learner decides among sequential actions or arms given their respective contexts
to maximize binary rewards. Using a fast inference procedure with Pólya-Gamma
distributed augmentation variables, we propose an improved version of Thompson
Sampling, a Bayesian formulation of contextual bandits with near-optimal performance. Our approach, Pólya-Gamma augmented Thompson Sampling (PG-TS),
achieves state-of-the-art performance on simulated and real data. PG-TS explores
the action space efficiently and exploits high-reward arms, quickly converging to
solutions of low regret. Its explicit estimation of the posterior distribution of the
context feature covariance leads to substantial empirical gains over approximate
approaches. PG-TS is the first approach to demonstrate the benefits of PólyaGamma augmentation in bandits and to propose an efficient Gibbs sampler for
approximating the analytically unsolvable integral of logistic contextual bandits.

1

Introduction

A contextual bandit is an online learning framework for modeling sequential decision-making
problems. Contextual bandits have been applied to problems ranging from advertising [1] and
recommendations [22, 21] to clinical trials [37] and mobile health [33]. In a contextual bandit
algorithm, a learner is given a choice among K actions or arms, for which contexts are available
as d-dimensional feature vectors, across T sequential rounds. During each round, the learner uses
information from previous rounds to estimate associations between contexts and rewards. The
learner’s goal in each round is to select the arm that minimizes the cumulative regret, which is the
difference between the optimal oracle rewards and the observed rewards from the chosen arms. To
do this, the learner must balance exploring arms that improve the expected reward estimates and
exploiting the current expected reward estimates to select arms with the largest expected reward. In
this work, we focus on scenarios with binary rewards.
To address the exploration-exploitation trade-off in sequential decision making, two directions are
generally considered: Upper Confidence Bound algorithms (UCB) and Thompson Sampling (TS).
∗

indicates equal authorship

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

