Dual Policy Iteration
Wen Sun1 , Geoffrey J. Gordon1 , Byron Boots2 , and J. Andrew Bagnell3
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
2
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
3
Aurora Innovation, USA
{wensun, ggordon, dbagnell}@cs.cmu.edu, bboots@cc.gatech.edu
1

Abstract
A novel class of Approximate Policy Iteration (API) algorithms have recently
demonstrated impressive practical performance (e.g., ExIt [1], AlphaGo-Zero [2]).
This new family of algorithms maintains, and alternately optimizes, two policies: a
fast, reactive policy (e.g., a deep neural network) deployed at test time, and a slow,
non-reactive policy (e.g., Tree Search), that can plan multiple steps ahead. The
reactive policy is updated under supervision from the non-reactive policy, while
the non-reactive policy is improved via guidance from the reactive policy. In this
work we study this class of Dual Policy Iteration (DPI) strategy in an alternating
optimization framework and provide a convergence analysis that extends existing
API theory. We also develop a special instance of this framework which reduces
the update of non-reactive policies to model-based optimal control using learned
local models, and provides a theoretically sound way of unifying model-free and
model-based RL approaches with unknown dynamics. We demonstrate the efficacy
of our approach on various continuous control Markov Decision Processes.

1

Introduction

Approximate Policy Iteration (API) [3, 4, 5, 6, 7], including conservative API (CPI) [5], API driven
by learned critics [8], or gradient-based API with stochastic policies [9, 10, 11, 12], have played a
central role in Reinforcement Learning (RL) for decades and motivated many modern practical RL
algorithms. Several existing API methods [4, 5] can provide both local optimality guarantees and
global guarantees under strong assumptions regarding the way samples are generated (e.g., access to
a reset distribution that is similar to the optimal policy’s state distribution). However, most modern
practical API algorithms rely on myopic random exploration (e.g., REINFORCE [13] type policy
gradient or ✏-greedy). Sample inefficiency due to random exploration can cause even sophisticated
RL methods to perform worse than simple black-box optimization with random search in parameter
space [14].
Recently, a new class of API algorithms, which we call Dual Policy Iteration (DPI), has begun to
emerge. These algorithms follow a richer strategy for improving the policy, with two policies under
consideration at any time during training: a reactive policy, usually learned by some form of function
approximation, used for generating samples and deployed at test time, and an intermediate policy that
can only be constructed or accessed during training, used as an expert policy to guide the improvement
of the reactive policy. For example, ExIt [1] maintains and updates a UCT-based policy [15] as an
intermediate expert. ExIt then updates the reactive policy by directly imitating the tree-based policy
which we expect would be better than the reactive policy as it involves a multi-step lookahead search.
AlphaGo-Zero [2] employs a similar strategy to achieve super-human performance at the ancient
game of Go. The key difference that distinguishes ExIt and AlphaGo-Zero from previous APIs is that
they leverage models to perform systematic forward search: the policy resulting from forward search
acts as an expert and directly informs the improvement direction for the reactive policy. Hence the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

