Exact natural gradient in deep linear networks and
application to the nonlinear case

Alberto Bernacchia
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK, CB2 1PZ
ab2347@cam.ac.uk

Máté Lengyel
Department of Engineering Department of Cognitive Science
University of Cambridge
Central European University
Cambridge CB2 1PZ, UK
Budapest H-1051, Hungary
m.lengyel@eng.cam.ac.uk
Guillaume Hennequin
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK, CB2 1PZ
g.hennequin@eng.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) remains the method of choice for deep learning,
despite the limitations arising for ill-behaved objective functions. In cases where it
could be estimated, the natural gradient has proven very effective at mitigating the
catastrophic effects of pathological curvature in the objective function, but little
is known theoretically about its convergence properties, and it has yet to find a
practical implementation that would scale to very deep and large networks. Here,
we derive an exact expression for the natural gradient in deep linear networks, which
exhibit pathological curvature similar to the nonlinear case. We provide for the first
time an analytical solution for its convergence rate, showing that the loss decreases
exponentially to the global minimum in parameter space. Our expression for the
natural gradient is surprisingly simple, computationally tractable, and explains why
some approximations proposed previously work well in practice. This opens new
avenues for approximating the natural gradient in the nonlinear case, and we show
in preliminary experiments that our online natural gradient descent outperforms
SGD on MNIST autoencoding while sharing its computational simplicity.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is used ubiquitously to train deep neural networks, due to its
low computational cost and ease of implementation. However, long narrow valleys, saddle points
and plateaus in the objective function dramatically slow down learning and often give the illusory
impression of having reached a local minimum [Martens, 2010; Dauphin et al., 2014]. The natural
gradient is an appealing alternative to the standard gradient: it accelerates convergence by using
curvature information, it represents the steepest descent direction in the space of distributions, and is
invariant to reparametrization of the network [Amari, 1998; Le Roux et al., 2008]. However, besides
some numerical evidence, the exact convergence rate of natural gradient remains unknown, and its
implementation remains prohibitive due to its very expensive numerical computation [Pascanu and
Bengio, 2013; Martens, 2014; Ollivier, 2015].
In order to gain theoretical insight into the convergence rate of natural gradient descent, we analyze a
deep (multilayer) linear network. While deep linear networks have obviously no practical relevance
(they can only perform linear regression and are grossly over-parameterized, see below), their
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

