Parsimonious Quantile Regression of Financial Asset
Tail Dynamics via Sequential Learning

Xing Yan3

Weizhong Zhang1
Lin Ma1
Wei Liu1
Qi Wu2,∗
1
Tencent AI Lab
2
School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong
3
Department of SEEM, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
xyan@se.cuhk.edu.hk {zhangweizhongzju,forest.linma}@gmail.com
wl2223@columbia.edu qiwu55@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
We propose a parsimonious quantile regression framework to learn the dynamic
tail behaviors of financial asset returns. Our model captures well both the timevarying characteristic and the asymmetrical heavy-tail property of financial time
series. It combines the merits of a popular sequential neural network model, i.e.,
LSTM, with a novel parametric quantile function that we construct to represent the
conditional distribution of asset returns. Our model also captures individually the
serial dependences of higher moments, rather than just the volatility. Across a wide
range of asset classes, the out-of-sample forecasts of conditional quantiles or VaR
of our model outperform the GARCH family. Further, the proposed approach does
not suffer from the issue of quantile crossing, nor does it expose to the ill-posedness
comparing to the parametric probability density function approach.

1

Introduction

In general, machine learning models aim to predict one single value of output variable y given input
x, usually to estimate the conditional mean E[y|x]. In many situations, we are also interested in the
characteristics of the conditional distribution p(y|x). A typical domain needing the learning of these
characteristics is financial returns. Data from financial markets is highly stochastic or noisy. It is
impossible to accurately predict future financial returns. What we can predict and what we really care
about are their conditional distributional characteristics like volatility, heavy tails, and Value-at-Risk,
which are all widely used measures of risks. The huge and increasing demands for risk management
and for understanding market behaviors make it extremely important to predict these characteristics.
In the scope of discrete-time econometric models, the benchmark of forecasting conditional distribution of time-t asset return rt conditional on past return history is the Generalized Autoregressive
Conditional Heteroskedasticity (GARCH) model as well as its variants. First appearing in [9] and
[2] to model time-varying volatility, GARCH-type models have now become a big family, including
popular variants like EGARCH [24], GJR-GARCH [16], TGARCH [32], etc. They all describe the
distribution p(rt |rt−1 , rt−2 , . . . ) by making strong assumptions on the probability density function
of it, e.g., assuming it is Gaussian, and let the distribution parameters depend on past information.
Usually, t-distribution is assumed to model heavy tails. Quantile regression [19][20] is another
type of method to forecast the conditional distributional characteristics. It predicts the quantiles of
p(y|x) without making any distributional assumption. In this paper, we model and predict conditional
quantiles and heavy tails of financial return series in a parsimonious quantile regression framework
that describes the distribution p(rt |rt−1 , rt−2 , . . . ) in a parametric quantile function way.
∗

Corresponding author.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

