Multi-View Silhouette and Depth Decomposition for
High Resolution 3D Object Representation

Edward Smith
McGill University
edward.smith@mail.mcgill.ca

Scott Fujimoto
McGill University
scott.fujimoto@mail.mcgill.ca

David Meger
McGill University
dmeger@cim.mcgill.ca

Abstract
We consider the problem of scaling deep generative shape models to high-resolution.
Drawing motivation from the canonical view representation of objects, we introduce
a novel method for the fast up-sampling of 3D objects in voxel space through
networks that perform super-resolution on the six orthographic depth projections.
This allows us to generate high-resolution objects with more efficient scaling than
methods which work directly in 3D. We decompose the problem of 2D depth
super-resolution into silhouette and depth prediction to capture both structure and
fine detail. This allows our method to generate sharp edges more easily than an
individual network. We evaluate our work on multiple experiments concerning
high-resolution 3D objects, and show our system is capable of accurately predicting
novel objects at resolutions as large as 512×512×512 – the highest resolution
reported for this task. We achieve state-of-the-art performance on 3D object
reconstruction from RGB images on the ShapeNet dataset, and further demonstrate
the first effective 3D super-resolution method.

1

Introduction

The 3D shape of an object is a combination of countless physical elements that range in scale
from gross structure and topology to minute textures endowed by the material of each surface.
Intelligent systems require representations capable of modeling this complex shape efficiently, in
order to perceive and interact with the physical world in detail (e.g., object grasping, 3D perception,
motion prediction and path planning). Deep generative models have recently achieved strong
performance in hallucinating diverse 3D object shapes, capturing their overall structure and rough
texture [3, 37, 47]. The first generation of these models utilized voxel representations which scale
cubically with resolution, limiting training to only 643 shapes on typical hardware. Numerous recent
papers have begun to propose high resolution 3D shape representations with better scaling, such
as those based on meshes, point clouds or octrees but these often require more difficult training
procedures and customized network architectures.
Our 3D shape model is motivated by a foundational concept in 3D perception: that of canonical
views. The shape of a 3D object can be completely captured by a set of 2D images from multiple
viewpoints (see [21, 4] for an analysis of selecting the location and number of viewpoints). Deep
learning approaches for 2D image recognition and generation [40, 10, 8, 13] scale easily to high
resolutions. This motivates the primary question in this paper: can a multi-view representation be
used efficiently with modern deep learning methods?
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

