Efficient inference for time-varying behavior
during learning

Nicholas A. Roy1 Ji Hyun Bak2 Athena Akrami1,3,∗
Carlos D. Brody1,3,4 Jonathan W. Pillow1,5
1

Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University
Korea Institute for Advanced Study 3 Howard Hughes Medical Institute
4
Dept. of Molecular Biology, 5 Dept. of Psychology, Princeton University
∗
current address at Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, UCL
{nroy,brody,pillow}@princeton.edu,
jhbak@kias.re.kr, athena.akrami@ucl.ac.uk

2

Abstract
The process of learning new behaviors over time is a problem of great interest in
both neuroscience and artificial intelligence. However, most standard analyses of
animal training data either treat behavior as fixed or track only coarse performance
statistics (e.g., accuracy, bias), providing limited insight into the evolution of the
policies governing behavior. To overcome these limitations, we propose a dynamic
psychophysical model that efficiently tracks trial-to-trial changes in behavior over
the course of training. Our model consists of a dynamic logistic regression model,
parametrized by a set of time-varying weights that express dependence on sensory
stimuli as well as task-irrelevant covariates, such as stimulus, choice, and answer
history. Our implementation scales to large behavioral datasets, allowing us to infer
500K parameters (e.g., 10 weights over 50K trials) in minutes on a desktop computer. We optimize hyperparameters governing how rapidly each weight evolves
over time using the decoupled Laplace approximation, an efficient method for maximizing marginal likelihood in non-conjugate models. To illustrate performance,
we apply our method to psychophysical data from both rats and human subjects
learning a delayed sensory discrimination task. The model successfully tracks the
psychophysical weights of rats over the course of training, capturing day-to-day
and trial-to-trial fluctuations that underlie changes in performance, choice bias,
and dependencies on task history. Finally, we investigate why rats frequently
make mistakes on easy trials, and suggest that apparent lapses can be explained by
sub-optimal weighting of known task covariates.

1

Introduction

A vast swath of modern neuroscience research requires training animals to perform specific tasks. This
training is expensive and time-consuming, yet the data collected during the training period are often
discarded from analysis. Moreover, animals can learn at vastly different rates, and may learn different
strategies to achieve a criterion level of performance in a given task. Most neuroscience studies ignore
such variability, and commonly track only coarse statistics like accuracy and bias during training.
These statistics are not sufficient to reveal subtle differences in strategy, such as unequal weighting of
task variables or reliance on particular aspects of trial history. However, behavior collected during
training may provide valuable insights into an animal’s mental arsenal of problem solving strategies,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

