Multi-Layered Gradient Boosting Decision Trees

Ji Feng†, ‡, Yang Yu†, Zhi-Hua Zhou†
†National Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
†{fengj, yuy, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
‡ Sinovation Ventures AI Institute
‡{fengji}@chuangxin.com

Abstract
Multi-layered distributed representation is believed to be the key ingredient of
deep neural networks especially in cognitive tasks like computer vision. While
non-differentiable models such as gradient boosting decision trees (GBDTs) are
still the dominant methods for modeling discrete or tabular data, they are hard to
incorporate with such representation learning ability. In this work, we propose the
multi-layered GBDT forest (mGBDTs), with an explicit emphasis on exploring the
ability to learn hierarchical distributed representations by stacking several layers
of regression GBDTs as its building block. The model can be jointly trained by
a variant of target propagation across layers, without the need to derive backpropagation nor differentiability. Experiments confirmed the effectiveness of the
model in terms of performance and representation learning ability.

1

Introduction

The development of deep neural networks has achieved remarkable advancement in the field of
machine learning during the past decade. By constructing a hierarchical or "deep" structure, the
model is able to learn good representations from raw data in both supervised and unsupervised
settings which is believed to be its key ingredient. Successful application areas include computer
vision, speech recognition, natural language processing and more [Goodfellow et al., 2016].
Currently, almost all the deep neural networks use back-propagation [Werbos, 1974; Rumelhart et al.,
1986] with stochastic gradient descent as the workhorse behind the scene for updating parameters
during training. Indeed, when the model is composed of differentiable components (e.g., weighted
sum with non-linear activation functions), it appears that back-prop is still currently the best choice.
Some other methods such as target propagation [Bengio, 2014] has been proposed as an alternative
for training, the effectiveness and popularity are however still in a premature stage. For instance,
the work in Lee et al. [2015] proved that target propagation can be at most as good as back-prop,
and in practice an additional back-propagation for fine-tuning is often needed. In other words, the
good-old back-propagation is still the most effective way to train a differentiable learning system
such as neural networks.
On the other hand, the need to explore the possibility to build a multi-layered or deep model using
non-differentiable modules is not only of academic interest but also with important application
potentials. For instance, tree-based ensembles such as Random Forest [Breiman, 2001] or gradient
boosting decision trees (GBDTs) [Friedman, 2000] are still the dominant way of modeling discrete or
tabular data in a variety of areas, it thus would be of great interest to obtain a hierarchical distributed
representation learned by tree ensembles on such data. In such cases, there is no chance to use chain
rule to propagate errors, thus back-propagation is no longer possible. This yields to two fundamental
questions: First, can we construct a multi-layered model with non-differentiable components, such
that the outputs in the intermediate layers are distributed representations? Second, if so, how to jointly
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

