Adding One Neuron Can Eliminate All Bad
Local Minima
Shiyu Liang
Coordinated Science Laboratory
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
sliang26@illinois.edu
Jason D. Lee
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
jasonlee@marshall.usc.edu

Ruoyu Sun
Coordinated Science Laboratory
Department of ISE
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
ruoyus@illinois.edu

R. Srikant
Coordinated Science Laboratory
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
rsrikant@illinois.edu
∗

Abstract
One of the main difficulties in analyzing neural networks is the non-convexity
of the loss function which may have many bad local minima. In this paper, we
study the landscape of neural networks for binary classification tasks. Under mild
assumptions, we prove that after adding one special neuron with a skip connection
to the output, or one special neuron per layer, every local minimum is a global
minimum.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have recently achieved huge success in various machine learning tasks (see,
Krizhevsky et al. 2012; Goodfellow et al. 2013; Wan et al. 2013, for example). However, a theoretical
understanding of neural networks is largely lacking. One of the difficulties in analyzing neural
networks is the non-convexity of the loss function which allows the existence of many local minima
with large losses. This was long considered a bottleneck of neural networks, and one of the reasons
why convex formulations such as support vector machine (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995) were preferred
previously. Given the recent empirical success of the deep neural networks, an interesting question is
whether the non-convexity of the neural network is really an issue.
It has been widely conjectured that all local minima of the empirical loss lead to similar training
performance (LeCun et al., 2015; Choromanska et al., 2015). For example, prior works empirically
showed that neural networks with identical architectures but different initialization points can converge
to local minima with similar classification performance (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016;
Huang & Liu, 2017). On the theoretical side, there have been many recent attempts to analyze the
landscape of the neural network loss functions. A few works have studied deep networks, but they
either require linear activation functions (Baldi & Hornik, 1989; Kawaguchi, 2016; Freeman &
Bruna, 2016; Hardt & Ma, 2017; Yun et al., 2017), or require assumptions such as independence
of ReLU activations (Choromanska et al., 2015) and significant overparametrization (Nguyen &
Hein, 2017a,b; Livni et al., 2014). There is a large body of works that study single-hidden-layer
neural networks and provide various conditions under which a local search algorithm can find a
global minimum (Du & Lee, 2018; Ge et al., 2018; Andoni et al., 2014; Sedghi & Anandkumar,
2014; Janzamin et al., 2015; Haeffele & Vidal, 2015; Gautier et al., 2016; Brutzkus & Globerson,
∗

Correpondence to R. Srikant, rsrikant@illinois.edu and Ruoyu Sun, ruoyus@illinois.edu

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

