Representation Balancing MDPs
for Off-Policy Policy Evaluation
Yao Liu
Stanford University
yaoliu@stanford.edu

Omer Gottesman
Harvard University
gottesman@fas.harvard.edu

Aniruddh Raghu
Cambridge University
aniruddhraghu@gmail.com

Matthieu Komorowski
Imperial College London
matthieu.komorowski@gmail.com

Aldo Faisal
Imperial College London
a.faisal@imperial.ac.uk

Finale Doshi-Velez
Harvard University
finale@seas.harvard.edu

Emma Brunskill
Stanford University
ebrun@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of off-policy policy evaluation (OPPE) in RL. In contrast
to prior work, we consider how to estimate both the individual policy value and
average policy value accurately. We draw inspiration from recent work in causal
reasoning, and propose a new finite sample generalization error bound for value
estimates from MDP models. Using this upper bound as an objective, we develop a
learning algorithm of an MDP model with a balanced representation, and show that
our approach can yield substantially lower MSE in common synthetic benchmarks
and a HIV treatment simulation domain.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning, off-policy (batch) policy evaluation is the task of estimating the performance of some evaluation policy given data gathered under a different behavior policy. Off-policy
policy evaluation (OPPE) is essential when deploying a new policy might be costly or risky, such as
in consumer marketing, healthcare, and education. Technically off-policy evaluation relates to other
fields that study counterfactual reasoning, including causal reasoning, statistics and economics.
Off-policy batch policy evaluation is challenging because the distribution of the data under the
behavior policy will in general be different than the distribution under the desired evaluation policy.
This difference in distributions comes from two sources. First, at a given state, the behavior policy
may select a different action than the one preferred by the evaluation policy—for example, a clinician
may chose to amputate a limb, whereas we may be interested in what might have happened if the
clinician had not. We never see the counterfactual outcome. Second, the distribution of future
states—not just the immediate outcomes—is also determined by the behavior policy. This challenge
is unique to sequential decision processes and is not covered by most causal reasoning work: for
example, the resulting series of a patient’s health states observed after amputating a patient’s limb is
likely to be significantly different than if the limb was not amputated.
Approaches for OPPE must make a choice about whether and how to address this data distribution
mismatch. Importance sampling (IS) based approaches [16, 23, 8, 5, 10, 22] are typically unbiased
and strongly consistent, but despite recent progress tend to have high variance—especially if the
evaluation policy is deterministic, as evaluating deterministic policies requires finding in the data
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

