Improving Neural Program Synthesis with Inferred
Execution Traces
Richard Shin∗
UC Berkeley
ricshin@cs.berkeley.edu

Illia Polosukhin
NEAR Protocol
illia@nearprotocol.com

Dawn Song
UC Berkeley
dawnsong@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
The task of program synthesis, or automatically generating programs that are
consistent with a provided specification, remains a challenging task in artificial
intelligence. As in other fields of AI, deep learning-based end-to-end approaches
have made great advances in program synthesis. However, compared to other
fields such as computer vision, program synthesis provides greater opportunities
to explicitly exploit structured information such as execution traces. While execution traces can provide highly detailed guidance for a program synthesis method,
they are more difficult to obtain than more basic forms of specification such as
input/output pairs. Therefore, we use the insight that we can split the process into
two parts: infer traces from input/output examples, then infer programs from traces.
Our application of this idea leads to state-of-the-art results in program synthesis in
the Karel domain, improving accuracy to 81.3% from the 77.12% of prior work.

1

Introduction

The task of program synthesis is to automatically generate a computer program that satisfies some
specification. It is a problem that has been studied since the earliest days of artificial intelligence [Waldinger and Lee, 1969, Manna and Waldinger, 1975]. With the renewed popularity
of neural networks for machine learning in recent years, neural approaches to program synthesis have
correspondingly attracted greater attention from the research community. One set of approaches,
referred as neural program induction by Devlin et al. [2017b], involves learning parameters for
a neural network architecture with a design inspired by existing computational structures such as
stacks [Grefenstette et al., 2015, Joulin and Mikolov, 2015], random-access and associative memory [Kurach et al., 2016, Graves et al., 2016], and GPUs [Kaiser and Sutskever, 2015].
A different set of approaches, neural program synthesis, instead learn to generate explicit discrete
programs in a domain-specific language from a specification that consists of as few as 5 input/output
example pairs. Several recent papers have proposed neural network-based approaches to program
synthesis from input/output examples [Parisotto et al., 2017, Devlin et al., 2017b, Bunel et al., 2018].
These methods use an end-to-end encoder-decoder approach, where a neural network learns to
generate a program from an encoding of a program specification (a set of input/output examples)
from a large synthetic training dataset.
End-to-end approaches like these have been particularly successful in perceptual domains like
computer vision where designing intermediate representations is a big challenge. In contrast, within
program synthesis, there exists a great deal of structure and auxiliary information the model could
learn to exploit in addition to the typically used input/output examples. An example is program
execution traces, which have also been used to great effect by prior work [Reed and de Freitas, 2016,
Wang et al., 2018].
∗

Work partially performed at NEAR.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

