Quantifying Learning Guarantees for Convex but
Inconsistent Surrogates

Kirill Struminsky
NRU HSE,∗ Moscow, Russia

Simon Lacoste-Julien†
MILA and DIRO
Université de Montréal, Canada

Anton Osokin
NRU HSE,∗‡ Moscow, Russia
Skoltech,§ Moscow, Russia

Abstract
We study consistency properties of machine learning methods based on minimizing
convex surrogates. We extend the recent framework of Osokin et al. [14] for the
quantitative analysis of consistency properties to the case of inconsistent surrogates.
Our key technical contribution consists in a new lower bound on the calibration
function for the quadratic surrogate, which is non-trivial (not always zero) for inconsistent cases. The new bound allows to quantify the level of inconsistency of the
setting and shows how learning with inconsistent surrogates can have guarantees on
sample complexity and optimization difficulty. We apply our theory to two concrete
cases: multi-class classification with the tree-structured loss and ranking with the
mean average precision loss. The results show the approximation-computation
trade-offs caused by inconsistent surrogates and their potential benefits.

1

Introduction

Consistency is a desirable property of any statistical estimator, which informally means that in the
limit of infinite data, the estimator converges to the correct quantity. In the context of machine
learning algorithms based on surrogate loss minimization, we usually use the notion of Fisher
consistency, which means that the exact minimization of the expected surrogate loss leads to the exact
minimization of the actual task loss. It can be shown that Fisher consistency is closely related to the
question of infinite-sample consistency (a.k.a. classification calibration) of the surrogate loss with
respect to the task loss (see [2, 17] for a detailed review).
The property of infinite-sample consistency (which we will refer to as simply consistency) shows
that the minimization of a particular surrogate is the right problem to solve, but it becomes especially
attractive when one can actually minimize the surrogate, which is the case, e.g, when the surrogate
is convex. Consistency of convex surrogates has been the central question of many studies for such
problems as binary classification [2, 24, 19], multi-class classification [23, 21, 1, 17], ranking [11, 4,
5, 18, 15] and, more recently, structured prediction [7, 14].
Recently, Osokin et al. [14] have pinpointed that in some cases minimizing a consistent convex
surrogate might be not sufficient for efficient learning. In particular, when the number of possible
predictions is large (which is typically the case in the settings of structured prediction and ranking)
reaching adequately small value of the expected task loss can be practically impossible, because
one would need to optimize the surrogate to high accuracy, which requires an intractable number of
iterations of the optimization algorithm.
∗

National Research University Higher School of Economics
CIFAR Fellow
‡
Samsung-HSE Joint Lab
§
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

