Visualizing the Loss Landscape of Neural Nets

1

Hao Li1 , Zheng Xu1 , Gavin Taylor2 , Christoph Studer3 , Tom Goldstein1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 United States Naval Academy 3 Cornell University
{haoli,xuzh,tomg}@cs.umd.edu, taylor@usna.edu, studer@cornell.edu

Abstract
Neural network training relies on our ability to find “good” minimizers of highly
non-convex loss functions. It is well-known that certain network architecture
designs (e.g., skip connections) produce loss functions that train easier, and wellchosen training parameters (batch size, learning rate, optimizer) produce minimizers that generalize better. However, the reasons for these differences, and their
effect on the underlying loss landscape, are not well understood. In this paper, we
explore the structure of neural loss functions, and the effect of loss landscapes on
generalization, using a range of visualization methods. First, we introduce a simple
“filter normalization” method that helps us visualize loss function curvature and
make meaningful side-by-side comparisons between loss functions. Then, using
a variety of visualizations, we explore how network architecture affects the loss
landscape, and how training parameters affect the shape of minimizers.

1

Introduction

Training neural networks requires minimizing a high-dimensional non-convex loss function – a
task that is hard in theory, but sometimes easy in practice. Despite the NP-hardness of training
general neural loss functions [3], simple gradient methods often find global minimizers (parameter
configurations with zero or near-zero training loss), even when data and labels are randomized before
training [43]. However, this good behavior is not universal; the trainability of neural nets is highly
dependent on network architecture design choices, the choice of optimizer, variable initialization, and
a variety of other considerations. Unfortunately, the effect of each of these choices on the structure of
the underlying loss surface is unclear. Because of the prohibitive cost of loss function evaluations
(which requires looping over all the data points in the training set), studies in this field have remained
predominantly theoretical.

(a) without skip connections

(b) with skip connections

Figure 1: The loss surfaces of ResNet-56 with/without skip connections. The proposed filter
normalization scheme is used to enable comparisons of sharpness/flatness between the two figures.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

