cpSGD: Communication-efficient and
differentially-private distributed SGD
Naman Agarwal
Google Brain
Princeton, NJ 08540
namanagarwal@google.com

Ananda Theertha Suresh
Google Research
New York, NY
theertha@google.com

Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research
New York, NY
sanjivk@google.com

Felix Yu
Google Research
New York, NY
felixyu@google.com

H. Brendan McMahan
Google Research
Seattle, WA
mcmahan@google.com

Abstract
Distributed stochastic gradient descent is an important subroutine in distributed
learning. A setting of particular interest is when the clients are mobile devices,
where two important concerns are communication efficiency and the privacy of the
clients. Several recent works have focused on reducing the communication cost or
introducing privacy guarantees, but none of the proposed communication efficient
methods are known to be privacy preserving and none of the known privacy
mechanisms are known to be communication efficient. To this end, we study
algorithms that achieve both communication efficiency and differential privacy. For
d variables and n ⇡ d clients, the proposed method uses O(log log(nd)) bits of
communication per client per coordinate and ensures constant privacy.
We also improve previous analysis of the Binomial mechanism showing that it
achieves nearly the same utility as the Gaussian mechanism, while requiring fewer
representation bits, which can be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background

Distributed stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is a basic building block of modern machine learning [25, 11, 9, 28, 1, 27, 5]. In the typical scenario of synchronous distributed learning, in every
round, each client obtains a copy of a global model which it updates based on its local data. The
updates (usually in the form of gradients) are sent to a parameter server, where they are averaged
and used to update the global model. Alternatively, without a central server, each client maintains
a global model and either broadcasts the gradient to all or a subset of other clients, and updates its
model with the aggregated gradient. In our paper we specifically consider the centralized setting, for
the decentralized case the authors are referred to [36] and references therein.
Often, the communication cost of sending the gradient becomes the bottleneck [30, 23, 22]. To address
this issue, several recent works have focused on reducing the communication cost of distributed
learning algorithms via gradient quantization and sparsification [32, 17, 33, 20, 21, 4, 34]. These
algorithms have been shown to improve communication cost and hence communication time in
distributed learning. This is especially effective in the federated learning setting where clients are
mobile devices with expensive up-link communication cost [26, 20].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

