Provable Gaussian Embedding with One Observation
Ming Yu ⇤

Zhuoran Yang †

Tuo Zhao ‡

Mladen Kolar §

Zhaoran Wang ¶

Abstract
The success of machine learning methods heavily relies on having an appropriate
representation for data at hand. Traditionally, machine learning approaches relied
on user-defined heuristics to extract features encoding structural information about
data. However, recently there has been a surge in approaches that learn how to
encode the data automatically in a low dimensional space. Exponential family
embedding provides a probabilistic framework for learning low-dimensional representation for various types of high-dimensional data [20]. Though successful
in practice, theoretical underpinnings for exponential family embeddings have
not been established. In this paper, we study the Gaussian embedding model and
develop the first theoretical results for exponential family embedding models. First,
we show that, under mild condition, the embedding structure can be learned from
one observation by leveraging the parameter sharing between different contexts
even though the data are dependent with each other. Second, we study properties of
two algorithms used for learning the embedding structure and establish convergence
results for each of them. The first algorithm is based on a convex relaxation, while
the other solved the non-convex formulation of the problem directly. Experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Exponential family embedding is a powerful technique for learning a low dimensional representation
of high-dimensional data [20]. Exponential family embedding framework comprises of a known
graph G = (V, E) and the conditional exponential family. The graph G has m vertices and with
each vertex we observe a p-dimensional vector xj , j = 1, . . . , m, representing an observation for
which we would like to learn a low-dimensional embedding. The exponential family distribution
is used to model the conditional distribution of xj given the context {xk , (k, j) 2 E} specified by
the neighborhood of the node j in the graph G. In order for the learning of the embedding to be
possible, one furthermore assumes how the parameters of the conditional distributions are shared
across different nodes in the graph. The graph structure, conditional exponential family, and the way
parameters are shared across the nodes are modeling choices and are application specific.
For example, in the context of word embeddings [1, 11], a word in a document corresponds to a
node in a graph with the corresponding vector xj being a one-hot vector (the indicator of this word);
the context of the word j is given by the surrounding words and hence the neighbors of the node j
in the graph are the nodes corresponding to those words; and the conditional distribution of xj is
⇤

Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL. Email: ming93@uchicago.edu
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ.
‡
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA.
§
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
¶
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

