Deep State Space Models for Time Series Forecasting

Syama Sundar Rangapuram

Matthias Seeger

Yuyang Wang

Jan Gasthaus

Lorenzo Stella

Tim Januschowski
Amazon Research

{rangapur, matthis, gasthaus, stellalo, yuyawang, tjnsch}@amazon.com

Abstract
We present a novel approach to probabilistic time series forecasting that combines
state space models with deep learning. By parametrizing a per-time-series linear state space model with a jointly-learned recurrent neural network, our method
retains desired properties of state space models such as data efficiency and interpretability, while making use of the ability to learn complex patterns from raw data
offered by deep learning approaches. Our method scales gracefully from regimes
where little training data is available to regimes where data from large collection
of time series can be leveraged to learn accurate models. We provide qualitative
as well as quantitative results with the proposed method, showing that it compares
favorably to the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting is a key component in many industrial and business decision processes. A
typical example of such tasks is demand forecasting: accurate and up-to-date models are fundamental to successful inventory planning and minimization of operational costs.
State space models [8, 13, 23] (SSMs) provide a principled framework for modeling and learning
time series patterns such as trend and seasonality. Prominent examples include ARIMA models
[4, 8] and exponential smoothing [13]. SSMs are particularly well-suited for applications where the
structure of the time series is well-understood, as they allow for the incorporation of structural assumptions into the model. This allows for the model to be interpretable and the associated learning
procedure to be data efficient, but it requires time series with enough history. In modern forecasting applications with large and diverse time series corpora, SSMs require prohibitively labor- and
compute-intensive tasks such as model and covariate selection. Further, traditional SSMs cannot
infer shared patterns from a dataset of similar time series, as they are fitted on each time series
separately. This makes creating forecasts for time series with little or no history challenging.
Deep neural networks [12, 25, 26] offer an alternative. With their capability to extract higher order
features, they can identify complex patterns within and across time series, and can do so from
datasets of raw time series with considerably less human effort [9, 27, 19]. However, as these models
make fewer structural assumptions, they typically require larger training datasets to learn accurate
models. Additionally, these models are difficult to interpret and—often more importantly—make it
difficult to enforce assumptions such as temporal smoothness.
In this paper we propose to bridge the gap between these two approaches by fusing SSMs with deep
(recurrent) neural networks. We present a forecasting method that parametrizes a particular linear
SSM using a recurrent neural network (RNN). The parameters of the RNN are learned jointly from
a dataset of raw time series and associated covariates, allowing the model to automatically extract
features and learn complex temporal patterns. At the same time, as each individual time series
is modeled using an SSM, we can enforce and exploit assumptions such as temporal smoothness.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

