Regret Bounds for Robust Adaptive Control of the
Linear Quadratic Regulator

Sarah Dean

Horia Mania

Nikolai Matni

Benjamin Recht

Stephen Tu

University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
We consider adaptive control of the Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR), where
an unknown linear system is controlled subject to quadratic costs. Leveraging
recent developments in the estimation of linear systems and in robust controller
synthesis, we present the first provably polynomial time algorithm that provides
high probability guarantees of sub-linear regret on this problem. We further study
the interplay between regret minimization and parameter estimation by proving a
lower bound on the expected regret in terms of the exploration schedule used by any
algorithm. Finally, we conduct a numerical study comparing our robust adaptive
algorithm to other methods from the adaptive LQR literature, and demonstrate the
flexibility of our proposed method by extending it to a demand forecasting problem
subject to state constraints.

1

Introduction

The problem of adaptively controlling an unknown dynamical system has a rich history, with classical
asymptotic results of convergence and stability dating back decades [12, 13]. Of late, there has
been a renewed interest in the study of a particular instance of such problems, namely the adaptive
Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR), with an emphasis on non-asymptotic guarantees of stability and
performance. Initiated by Abbasi-Yadkori and Szepesvári [1], there have since been several works
analyzing the regret suffered by various adaptive algorithms on LQR– here the regret incurred by
an algorithm is thought of as a measure of deviations in performance from optimality over time.
These results can be broadly divided into two categories: those providing high-probability guarantees
for a single execution of the algorithm [1, 4, 8, 11], and those providing bounds on the expected
Bayesian regret incurred over a family of possible systems [2, 16]. As we discuss in more detail,
these methods all suffer from one or several of the following limitations: restrictive and unverifiable
assumptions, limited applicability, and computationally intractable subroutines. In this paper, we
provide, to the best of our knowledge, the first polynomial-time algorithm for the adaptive LQR
problem that provides high probability guarantees of sub-linear regret, and that does not require
unverifiable or unrealistic assumptions.
Related Work. There is a rich body of work on the estimation of linear systems as well as on the
robust and adaptive control of unknown systems. We target our discussion to works on non-asymptotic
guarantees for the LQR control of an unknown system, broadly divided into three categories.
Offline estimation and control synthesis: In a non-adaptive setting, i.e., when system identification
can be done offline prior to controller synthesis and implementation, the first work to provide endto-end guarantees for the LQR optimal control problem is that of Fiechter [10], who shows that the
discounted LQR problem is PAC-learnable. Dean et al. [6] improve on this result, and provide the
first end-to-end sample complexity guarantees for the infinite horizon average cost LQR problem.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

