Model-based targeted dimensionality reduction for
neuronal population data

Mikio C. Aoi∗
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ 08544
maoi@princeton.edu

Jonathan W. Pillow †
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ 08544
pillow@princeton.edu

Abstract
Summarizing high-dimensional data using a small number of parameters is a
ubiquitous first step in the analysis of neuronal population activity. Recently
developed methods use “targeted" approaches that work by identifying multiple,
distinct low-dimensional subspaces of activity that capture the population response
to individual experimental task variables, such as the value of a presented stimulus
or the behavior of the animal. These methods have gained attention because they
decompose total neural activity into what are ostensibly different parts of a neuronal
computation. However, existing targeted methods have been developed outside of
the confines of probabilistic modeling, making some aspects of the procedures ad
hoc, or limited in flexibility or interpretability. Here we propose a new model-based
method for targeted dimensionality reduction based on a probabilistic generative
model of the population response data. The low-dimensional structure of our model
is expressed as a low-rank factorization of a linear regression model. We perform
efficient inference using a combination of expectation maximization and direct
maximization of the marginal likelihood. We also develop an efficient method
for estimating the dimensionality of each subspace. We show that our approach
outperforms alternative methods in both mean squared error of the parameter
estimates, and in identifying the correct dimensionality of encoding using simulated
data. We also show that our method provides more accurate inference of lowdimensional subspaces of activity than a competing algorithm, demixed PCA.

1

Introduction

Neuroscience has recently seen a massive expansion in the number of neurons that can be recorded
from a single animal, largely due to transformative technological advancements in electrode design
and two-photon imaging. One of the effects of our increased measurement capacity is an increased
interest in the properties of the activity of groups of neurons (i.e. population activity), as opposed
to analyzing the activity of single-neurons independently [1]. One goal of analyzing population
activity is to characterize the ways in which groups of neurons coordinate to perform task-relevant
computations.
Dimensionality reduction is central to the analysis of population activity [1]. Concomitant with the
broader use of classical dimensionality reduction methods like PCA and ICA come the recognition
that these methods often do not take full advantage of well-characterized properties of neuronal
population data such as tensor structure or temporal correlations in spike rates and a number of recent
data analysis techniques have been developed to improve our ability to meet such specific challenges
∗
†

http://mikioaoi.com
http://pillowlab.princeton.edu/jpillow/

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

