Blockwise Parallel Decoding for
Deep Autoregressive Models

Mitchell Stern∗
University of California, Berkeley
mitchell@berkeley.edu

Noam Shazeer
Google Brain
noam@google.com

Jakob Uszkoreit
Google Brain
usz@google.com

Abstract
Deep autoregressive sequence-to-sequence models have demonstrated impressive
performance across a wide variety of tasks in recent years. While common architecture classes such as recurrent, convolutional, and self-attention networks make
different trade-offs between the amount of computation needed per layer and the
length of the critical path at training time, generation still remains an inherently
sequential process. To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel blockwise
parallel decoding scheme in which we make predictions for multiple time steps
in parallel then back off to the longest prefix validated by a scoring model. This
allows for substantial theoretical improvements in generation speed when applied to
architectures that can process output sequences in parallel. We verify our approach
empirically through a series of experiments using state-of-the-art self-attention
models for machine translation and image super-resolution, achieving iteration
reductions of up to 2x over a baseline greedy decoder with no loss in quality, or up
to 7x in exchange for a slight decrease in performance. In terms of wall-clock time,
our fastest models exhibit real-time speedups of up to 4x over standard greedy
decoding.

1

Introduction

Neural autoregressive sequence-to-sequence models have become the de facto standard for a wide
variety of tasks, including machine translation, summarization, and speech synthesis (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Rush et al., 2015; van den Oord et al., 2016). One common feature among recent architectures
such as the Transformer and convolutional sequence-to-sequence models is an increased capacity for
parallel computation, making them a better fit for today’s massively parallel hardware accelerators
(Vaswani et al., 2017; Gehring et al., 2017). While advances in this direction have allowed for
significantly faster training, outputs are still generated one token at a time during inference, posing a
substantial challenge for many practical applications (Oord et al., 2017).
In light of this limitation, a growing body of work is concerned with different approaches to accelerating generation for autoregressive models. Some general-purpose methods include probability
density distillation (Oord et al., 2017), subscaling (Kalchbrenner et al., 2018), and decomposing the
problem into the autoregressive generation of a short sequence of discrete latent variables followed by
a parallel generation step conditioned on the discrete latents (Kaiser et al., 2018). Other techniques
are more application-specific, such as the non-autoregressive Transformer for machine translation
(Gu et al., 2018). While speedups of multiple orders of magnitude have been achieved on tasks with
high output locality like speech synthesis, to the best of our knowledge, published improvements in
machine translation either show much more modest speedups or come at a significant cost in quality.
∗

Work performed while the author was an intern at Google Brain.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

