Near-Optimal Time and Sample Complexities for
Solving Markov Decision Processes with a Generative
Model
Aaron Sidford
Stanford University
sidford@stanford.edu

Mengdi Wang
Princeton University
mengdiw@princeton.edu

Lin F. Yang
Princeton University
lin.yang@princeton.edu

Xian Wu
Stanford University
xwu20@stanford.edu

Yinyu Ye
Stanford University
yyye@stanford.edu

Abstract
In this paper we consider the problem of computing an -optimal policy of a discounted Markov Decision Process (DMDP) provided we can only access its transition function through a generative sampling model that given any state-action
pair samples from the transition function in O(1) time. Given such a DMDP with
states S, actions A, discount factor γ ∈ (0, 1), and rewards in range [0, 1] we
provide an algorithm which computes an -optimal policy with probability 1 − δ
where both the time spent and number of sample taken are upper bounded by





|S||A|
|S||A|
1
O
log
log
.
(1 − γ)3 2
(1 − γ)δ
(1 − γ)
For fixed values of , this improves upon the previous best known bounds by a
factor of (1 − γ)−1 and matches the sample complexity lower bounds proved in
[AMK13] up to logarithmic factors. We also extend our method to computing
-optimal policies for finite-horizon MDP with a generative model and provide a
nearly matching sample complexity lower bound.

1

Introduction

Markov decision processes (MDPs) are a fundamental mathematical abstraction used to model sequential decision making under uncertainty and are a basic model of discrete-time stochastic control
and reinforcement learning (RL). Particularly central to RL is the case of computing or learning an
approximately optimal policy when the MDP itself is not fully known beforehand. One of the simplest such settings is when the states, rewards, and actions are all known but the transition between
states when an action is taken is probabilistic, unknown, and can only be sampled from.
Computing an approximately optimal policy with high probability in this case is known as PAC
RL with a generative model. It is a well studied problem with multiple existing results providing
algorithms with improved the sample complexity (number of sample transitions taken) and running
time (the total time of the algorithm) under various MDP reward structures, e.g. discounted infinitehorizon, finite-horizon, etc. (See Section 5 for a detailed review of the literature.)
In this work, we consider this well studied problem of computing approximately optimal policies
of discounted infinite-horizon Markov Decision Processes (DMDP) under the assumption we can
only access the DMDP by sampling state transitions. Formally, we suppose that we have a DMDP
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

