Distributed Multitask Reinforcement Learning with
Quadratic Convergence

Rasul Tutunov
PROWLER.io
Cambridge, United Kingdom
rasul@prowler.io

Dongho Kim
PROWLER.io
Cambridge, United Kingdom
dongho@prowler.io

Haitham Bou-Ammar
PROWLER.io
Cambridge, United Kingdom
haitham@prowler.io

Abstract
Multitask reinforcement learning (MTRL) suffers from scalability issues when
the number of tasks or trajectories grows large. The main reason behind this
drawback is the reliance on centeralised solutions. Recent methods exploited the
connection between MTRL and general consensus to propose scalable solutions.
These methods, however, suffer from two drawbacks. First, they rely on predefined
objectives, and, second, exhibit linear convergence guarantees. In this paper, we
improve over state-of-the-art by deriving multitask reinforcement learning from a
variational inference perspective. We then propose a novel distributed solver for
MTRL with quadratic convergence guarantees.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) allows agents to solve sequential decision-making problems with limited
feedback. Applications with these characteristics are ubiquitous ranging from stock-trading [1] to
robotics control [2, 3]. Though successful, RL methods typically require substantial amounts of data
and computation for successful behaviour. Multitask and transfer learning [4–6, 2, 7] techniques have
been developed to remedy these problems by allowing for knowledge reuse between tasks to bias
initial behaviour. Unfortunately, such methods suffer from scalability constraints when the number of
tasks or policy dimensions grows large.
Two promising directions remedy these scalability problems. In the first, tasks are streamed online and
models are fit iteratively. Such an alternative has been well-explored under the name of lifelong RL [8,
9]. When considering lifelong learning, however, one comes to recognise that these improvements
in computation come hand-in-hand with a decrease in the model’s accuracy due to the usage of
approximations to the original loss (e.g., second-order expansions [10]), as well as the unavailability
of all tasks in batch. Interested readers are referred to [11] for an in-depth discussion of the limitations
of lifelong reinforcement learners.
The other direction based on decentralised optimisation remedies scalability and accuracy constraints
by distributing computation across multiple units. Though successful in supervised learning [12],
this direction is still to be well-explored in the context of MTRL. Recently, however, the authors
in [11] proposed a distributed solver for MTRL with linear convergence guarantees based on the
Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM). Their method relied on a connection between
MTRL and distributed general consensus. However, such ADMM-based techniques suffer from the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

