Differentially Private Bayesian Inference for
Exponential Families

Garrett Bernstein
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01002
gbernstein@cs.umass.edu
Daniel Sheldon
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01002
sheldon@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
The study of private inference has been sparked by growing concern regarding the
analysis of data when it stems from sensitive sources. We present the first method
for private Bayesian inference in exponential families that properly accounts for
noise introduced by the privacy mechanism. It is efficient because it works only
with sufficient statistics and not individual data. Unlike other methods, it gives
properly calibrated posterior beliefs in the non-asymptotic data regime.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy is the dominant standard for privacy [1]. A randomized algorithm that satisfies
differential privacy offers protection to individuals by guaranteeing that its output is insensitive to
changes caused by the data of any single individual entering or leaving the data set. An algorithm can
be made differentially private by applying one of several general-purpose mechanisms to randomize
the computation in an appropriate way, for example, by adding noise calibrated to the sensitivity
of the quantity being computed, where sensitivity captures how much the quantity depends on any
individual’s data [1]. Due to the obvious importance of protecting individual privacy while drawing
population level inferences from data, differentially private algorithms have been developed for a
broad range of machine learning tasks [2–9].
There is a growing interest in private methods for Bayesian inference [10–14]. In Bayesian inference,
a modeler selects a prior distribution p(θ) over some parameter, observes data x that depends
probabilistically on θ through a model p(x | θ), and then reasons about θ through the posterior
distribution p(θ | x), which quantifies updated beliefs and uncertainty about θ after observing x.
Bayesian inference is a core machine learning task and there is an obvious need to be able to conduct
it in a way that protects privacy when x is sensitive. Additionally, recent work has identified surprising
connections between sampling from posterior distributions and differential privacy—for example,
a single perfect sample from p(θ | x) satisfies differential privacy for some setting of the privacy
parameter [10–13].
An “obvious” way to conduct private Bayesian inference is to privatize the computation of the
posterior, that is, to design a differentially private algorithm A that outputs y = A(x) with the goal
that y ≈ p(θ | x) is a privatized representation of the posterior. However, using y directly as “the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

