Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation for Deep
Reinforcement Learning
Vik Goel, Jameson Weng, Pascal Poupart
Cheriton School of Computer Science, Waterloo AI Institute, University of Waterloo, Canada
Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada
{v5goel,jj2weng,ppoupart}@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
We present a new technique for deep reinforcement learning that automatically
detects moving objects and uses the relevant information for action selection. The
detection of moving objects is done in an unsupervised way by exploiting structure
from motion. Instead of directly learning a policy from raw images, the agent first
learns to detect and segment moving objects by exploiting flow information in
video sequences. The learned representation is then used to focus the policy of
the agent on the moving objects. Over time, the agent identifies which objects are
critical for decision making and gradually builds a policy based on relevant moving
objects. This approach, which we call Motion-Oriented REinforcement Learning
(MOREL), is demonstrated on a suite of Atari games where the ability to detect
moving objects reduces the amount of interaction needed with the environment
to obtain a good policy. Furthermore, the resulting policy is more interpretable
than policies that directly map images to actions or values with a black box neural
network. We can gain insight into the policy by inspecting the segmentation and
motion of each object detected by the agent. This allows practitioners to confirm
whether a policy is making decisions based on sensible information. Our code is
available at https://github.com/vik-goel/MOREL.

1

Introduction

Tremendous progress has been made in the development of reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms for
tasks where the input consists of images. For instance, model-free RL techniques [33] now outperform
humans on the majority of the Atari games in the arcade learning environment [3]. Despite this
outstanding performance, RL techniques require a lot more interactions with the environment than
human players to perform well on Atari games. This is largely due to the fact that RL techniques
do not have any prior knowledge of these games and therefore require a lot more interactions to
learn to extract relevant information from images. In contrast, humans immediately recognize salient
objects (e.g., spaceships, monsters, balls) and exploit texture cues to guess a strategy [6]. Within
a few interactions with the environment, humans quickly learn the effects of their actions and can
easily predict future frames. At that point, humans can focus on learning a good policy.
Existing RL techniques for image inputs typically use convolutional neural networks as part of a
policy network or Q-network. The beauty of deep RL is that there is no need for practitioners to
handcraft features such as object detectors, but this obviously requires more interactions with the
environment since the convolutional neural network needs to learn what features to extract for a good
policy and/or value function.
We propose a new approach that leverages existing work in computer vision to estimate the segmentation and motion of objects in video sequences [8]. In many games, the position and velocity of moving
objects constitute important features that should be taken into account by an optimal policy. More
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

