Improved Algorithms for Collaborative PAC
Learning

Huy Lê Nguyễn
College of Computer and Information Science
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
hu.nguyen@northeastern.edu

Lydia Zakynthinou
College of Computer and Information Science
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
zakynthinou.l@northeastern.edu

Abstract
We study a recent model of collaborative PAC learning where k players with
k different tasks collaborate to learn a single classifier that works for all tasks.
Previous work showed that when there is a classifier that has very small error
on all tasks, there is a collaborative algorithm that finds a single classifier for all
tasks and has O((ln(k))2 ) times the worst-case sample complexity for learning
a single task. In this work, we design new algorithms for both the realizable
and the non-realizable setting, having sample complexity only O(ln(k)) times the
worst-case sample complexity for learning a single task. The sample complexity
upper bounds of our algorithms match previous lower bounds and in some range
of parameters are even better than previous algorithms that are allowed to output
different classifiers for different tasks.

1

Introduction

There has been a lot of work in machine learning concerning learning multiple tasks simultaneously,
ranging from multi-task learning [3, 4], to domain adaptation [10, 11], to distributed learning [2, 7, 14].
Another area in similar spirit to this work is meta-learning, where one leverages samples from many
different tasks to train a single algorithm that adapts well to all tasks (see e.g. [8]).
In this work, we focus on a model of collaborative PAC learning, proposed by [5]. In the classic
PAC learning setting introduced by [13], where PAC stands for probably approximately correct,
the goal is to learn a task by drawing from a distribution of samples. The optimal classifier that
achieves the lowest error on the task with respect to the given distribution is assumed to come
from a concept
dimension d. The VC theorem [1] states that for any instance
  class
 F of VC
 
m,δ = O 1 d ln 1 + ln 1δ
labeled samples suffice to learn a classifier that achieves low
error with probability at least 1 − δ, where the error depends on .
In the collaborative model, there are k players attempting to learn their own tasks, each task involving
a different distribution of samples. The goal is to learn a single classifier that also performs well
on all the tasks. One example from [5], which motivates this problem, is having k hospitals with
different patient demographics which want to predict the overall occurrence of a disease. In this case,
it would be more fitting as well as cost efficient to develop and distribute a single classifier to all the
hospitals. In addition, the requirement for a single classifier is imperative in settings where there are
fairness concerns. For example, consider the case that the goal is to find a classifier that predicts loan
defaults for a bank by gathering information from bank stores located in neighborhoods with diverse
socioeconomic characteristics. In this setting, the samples provided by each bank store come from
different distributions while it is desired to guarantee low error rates for all the neighborhoods. Again,
in this setting, the bank should employ a single classifier among all the neighborhoods.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

