Causal Inference via Kernel Deviance Measures
Jovana Mitrovic∗
Dino Sejdinovic
Yee Whye Teh∗
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford
[mitrovic, dino.sejdinovic, y.w.teh]@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Discovering the causal structure among a set of variables is a fundamental problem
in many areas of science. In this paper, we propose Kernel Conditional Deviance
for Causal Inference (KCDC) a fully nonparametric causal discovery method
based on purely observational data. From a novel interpretation of the notion
of asymmetry between cause and effect, we derive a corresponding asymmetry
measure using the framework of reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces. Based on this,
we propose three decision rules for causal discovery. We demonstrate the wide
applicability and robustness of our method across a range of diverse synthetic
datasets. Furthermore, we test our method on real-world time series data and the
real-world benchmark dataset Tübingen Cause-Effect Pairs where we outperform
state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

In many areas of science, we strive to answer questions that are fundamentally causal in nature. For
example, in medicine one is often interested in the genetic drivers of diseases, while in commerce one
might want to identify the motives behind customers’ purchasing behaviour. Furthermore, it is of the
utmost importance to thoroughly understand the underlying causal structure of the data-generating
process if we are to predict, with reasonable accuracy, the consequences of interventions or answer
counterfactual questions about what would have happened had we acted differently. While most
machine learning methods excel at prediction tasks by successfully inferring statistical dependencies,
there are still many open questions when it comes to uncovering the causal dependencies between the
variables driving the underlying data-generating process. Given the growing interest in using data to
guide decisions in areas where interventional and counterfactual questions abound, causal discovery
methods have attracted considerable research interest [9, 25, 13, 16].
While causal inference is preferably performed on data coming from randomized control experiments,
often this kind of data is not available due to a combination of ethical, technical and financial considerations. These real-world limitations have motivated research into inferring causal relationships from
purely observational data. While methods that attempt to recover the causal structure by analyzing
conditional independencies present in the data [20, 23] are mathematically well-founded, they are not
robust to the choice of conditional independence testing methodology. Another group of methods
[9, 25, 14] postulates that there is some inherent asymmetry between cause and effect and proposes
different asymmetry measures that form the basis for causal discovery. In order to facilitate causal
inference, these approaches typically assume a particular functional form for the interaction between
the variables and a particular noise structure which limits their applicability. We aim our contribution
to be a step towards a method that can deal with highly complex data-generating processes, relies
only observational data and whose inference can easily be extended without the need to develop
novel, specifically tailored algorithms for each new model class.
In this work, we develop a fully nonparametric causal inference method to automatically discover
causal relationships from purely observational data. In particular, our proposed method does not
∗

Now at DeepMind, UK.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

