Frequency-Domain Dynamic Pruning for
Convolutional Neural Networks

1

Zhenhua Liu1 , Jizheng Xu2 , Xiulian Peng2 , Ruiqin Xiong1
Institute of Digital Media, School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
2
Microsoft Research Asia
liu-zh@pku.edu.cn, jzxu@microsoft.com, xipe@microsoft.com, rqxiong@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks have demonstrated their powerfulness in a
variety of applications. However, the storage and computational requirements have
largely restricted their further extensions on mobile devices. Recently, pruning
of unimportant parameters has been used for both network compression and acceleration. Considering that there are spatial redundancy within most filters in
a CNN, we propose a frequency-domain dynamic pruning scheme to exploit the
spatial correlations. The frequency-domain coefficients are pruned dynamically
in each iteration and different frequency bands are pruned discriminatively, given
their different importance on accuracy. Experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed scheme can outperform previous spatial-domain counterparts by a large
margin. Specifically, it can achieve a compression ratio of 8.4× and a theoretical
inference speed-up of 9.2× for ResNet-110, while the accuracy is even better than
the reference model on CIFAR-10.

1

Introduction

In recent years, convolutional neural networks have been performing well in a variety of artificial tasks
including image classification, face recognition, natural language processing and speech recognition.
Since convolutional neural networks tend to be deeper and deeper which means more storage
requirements and floating-point operations, there are many works devoting to simplify and accelerate
the deep neural networks.
Some works performed structural sparsity approximation which alter the large sub-networks or
layers into shallow ones. Jaderberg et al. [1] proposed to construct a low rank basis of filters by
exploiting cross-channel or filter redundancy. [2] took the nonlinear units into account and minimized
the reconstruction error of nonlinear responses, subjecting to a low-rank constraint. [3] and [4]
employed tensor-decomposition and tucker-decomposition to simplify convolutional neural networks,
respectively.
Since operations in high precision are much more time-consuming than those with fewer fix-point
values, Courbariaux et al. [5] proposed to constrain activations to +1 and −1. [6] proposed XNORNetworks which computed the scaling factor applying to both binary weights and binary input. [7]
proposed HORQ Network which recursively computed the quantized residual to reduce the information loss. Methods in [8–11] employed ternary or fixed-point values to compress and accelerate the
convolutional neural networks.
Some researchers also employed quantization to reduce the computation of CNNs. [12] utilized
k-means clusting to identify the shared weights and limited all the weights that fell into the same
cluster sharing the same weight. [13] employed product quantization to implement the efficient inner
product computation. [14] extended the quantization method into frequency domain and used a hash
function to randomly group frequency parameters into hash buckets and all parameters assigned to
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

