Natasha 2: Faster Non-Convex Optimization Than
SGD
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu∗
Microsoft Research AI
zeyuan@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We design a stochastic algorithm to find ε-approximate local minima of any
smooth nonconvex function in rate O(ε−3.25 ), with only oracle access to stochastic gradients. The best result before this work was O(ε−4 ) by stochastic gradient
descent (SGD).2

1

Introduction

In diverse world of deep learning research has given rise to numerous architectures for neural networks (convolutional ones, long short term memory ones, etc). However, to this date, the underlying
training algorithms for neural networks are still stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its heuristic
variants. In this paper, we address the problem of designing a new algorithm that has provably faster
running time than the best known result for SGD.
Mathematically, we study the problem of online stochastic nonconvex optimization:
n
o
Pn
minx∈Rd f (x) := Ei [fi (x)] = n1 i=1 fi (x)

(1.1)

where both f (·) and each fi (·) can be nonconvex. We want to study
online algorithms to find appx. local minimum of f (x).
Here, we say an algorithm is online if its complexity is independent of n. This tackles the big-data
scenarios when n is extremely large or even infinite.3
Nonconvex optimization arises prominently in large-scale machine learning. Most notably, training deep neural networks corresponds to minimizing f (x) of this average structure: each training
sample i corresponds to one loss function fi (·) in the summation. This average structure allows
one to perform stochastic gradient descent (SGD) which uses a random ∇fi (x) —corresponding to
computing backpropagation once— to approximate ∇f (x) and performs descent updates.
The standard goal of nonconvex optimization with provable guarantee is to find approximate local
minima. This is not only because finding the global one is NP-hard, but also because there exist rich
literature on heuristics for turning a local-minima finding algorithm into a global one. This includes
random seeding, graduated optimization [25] and others. Therefore, faster algorithms for finding
approximate local minima translate into faster heuristic algorithms for finding global minimum.
On a separate note, experiments [16, 17, 24] suggest that fast convergence to approximate local
minima may be sufficient for training neural nets, while convergence to stationary points (i.e., points
that may be saddle points) is not. In other words, we need to avoid saddle points.
∗

The full version of this paper can be found on https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.08694.
When this manuscript first appeared online, the best rate was T = O(ε−4 ) by SGD. Several followups
appeared after this paper. This includes stochastic cubic regularization [44] which gives T = O(ε−3.5 ), and
Neon+SCSG [10, 46] which gives T = O(ε−3.333 ). These rates are worse than T = O(ε−3.25 ).
3
All of our results in this paper apply to the case when n is infinite, meaning f (x) = Ei [fi (x)], because we
focus on online methods. However, we still introduce n to simplify notations.
2

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

