Multilingual Anchoring: Interactive Topic Modeling
and Alignment Across Languages

Michelle Yuan
University of Maryland
myuan@cs.umd.edu

Benjamin Van Durme
John Hopkins University
vandurme@jhu.edu

Jordan Boyd-Graber
University of Maryland
jbg@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
Multilingual topic models can reveal patterns in cross-lingual document collections.
However, existing models lack speed and interactivity, which prevents adoption in
everyday corpora exploration or quick moving situations (e.g., natural disasters,
political instability). First, we propose a multilingual anchoring algorithm that
builds an anchor-based topic model for documents in different languages. Then,
we incorporate interactivity to develop MTAnchor (Multilingual Topic Anchors),
a system that allows users to refine the topic model. We test our algorithms on
labeled English, Chinese, and Sinhalese documents. Within minutes, our methods
can produce interpretable topics that are useful for specific classification tasks.

1

Introduction: Exploring multilingual document collections

Modeling multilingual topics aids exploration of large corpora across languages [1]. These models
help align topics cross-lingually and uncover latent relationships between languages, such as observing the differences in describing economic issues between English and Spanish speakers [2].
Incorporating multilingual information also forms better monolingual topics [3].
Multilingual topic models usually depend on some resource to bridge languages. These resources
include word alignments [4], dictionaries [3, 5], topic alignments in documents [6], or all of the
above [7]. Existing multilingual models have several shortcomings; they assume extensive knowledge
about languages, preclude human refinement, and are slow. Thus, a topic model may not be
appropriate in emergent sitations on low resource languages when time is of the essence: e.g.,
when relief workers must triage relief messages in Hatian Creole [8].
Beyond these practical concerns, adding interactivity to topic modeling allows machine learning
non-experts to build models better suited to their needs [9–11]. One way to quickly incorporate human
knowledge into the model is through anchor words [12]. Inference in anchor-based topic models is
driven by anchors, which are words that have high probability in one topic and low probability in
remaining topics [13, 14]. The anchoring algorithm scales with the number of unique word types,
making it fast enough for interactive updates.
We present two contributions for modeling multilingual topics. First, we develop a multilingual
anchoring algorithm, which is an extension to anchor-based topic inference for comparable corpora.1
Second, we introduce MTAnchor, a human-in-the-loop system that uses multilingual anchoring
to align topics and enables users to make further adjustments to the model.2 Through interaction,
the model produces interpretable, low-dimensional representations of documents. These vector
representations improve intra-lingual or cross-lingual text classification. The topic model generates
coherent topic aligments for comparable corpora because users themselves align topics.
1

Comparable corpora across languages are collections of documents about the same themes but that are not
translations. Compared to more typical parallel data [15, 16], comparable data are more challenging.
2
http://github.com/forest-snow/mtanchor_demo.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

