Optimization over Continuous and Multi-dimensional
Decisions with Observational Data
Dimitris Bertsimas
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02142
dbertsim@mit.edu

Christopher McCord
Operations Research Center
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02142
mccord@mit.edu

Abstract
We consider the optimization of an uncertain objective over continuous and multidimensional decision spaces in problems in which we are only provided with
observational data. We propose a novel algorithmic framework that is tractable,
asymptotically consistent, and superior to comparable methods on example problems. Our approach leverages predictive machine learning methods and incorporates information on the uncertainty of the predicted outcomes for the purpose of
prescribing decisions. We demonstrate the efficacy of our method on examples
involving both synthetic and real data sets.

1

Introduction

We study the general problem in which a decision maker seeks to optimize a known objective function
that depends on an uncertain quantity. The uncertain quantity has an unknown distribution, which
may be affected by the action chosen by the decision maker. Many important problems across a
variety of fields fit into this framework. In healthcare, for example, a doctor aims to prescribe drugs in
specific dosages to regulate a patient’s vital signs. In revenue management, a store owner must decide
how to price various products in order to maximize profit. In online retail, companies decide which
products to display for a user to maximize sales. The general problem we study is characterized by
the following components:
• Decision variable: z ∈ Z ⊂ Rp ,
• Outcome: Y (z) ∈ Y (We adopt the potential outcomes framework [20], in which Y (z)
denotes the (random) quantity that would have been observed had decision z been chosen.),
• Auxiliary covariates (also called side-information or context): x ∈ X ⊂ Rd ,
• Cost function: c(z; y) : Z × Y → R. (This function is known a priori.)
We allow the auxiliary covariates, decision variable, and outcome to take values on multi-dimensional,
continuous sets. A decision-maker seeks to determine the action that minimizes the conditional
expected cost:
min E[c(z; Y (z))|X = x].
(1)
z∈Z

Of course, the distribution of Y (z) is unknown, so it is not possible to solve this problem exactly.
However, we assume that we have access to observational data, consisting of n independent and
identically distributed observations, (Xi , Zi , Yi ) for i = 1, . . . , n. Each of these observations consists
of an auxiliary covariate vector, a decision, and an observed outcome. This type of data presents
two challenges that differentiate our problem from a predictive machine learning problem. First, it is
incomplete. We only observe Yi := Yi (Zi ), the outcome associated with the applied decision. We do
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

