HOGWILD!-Gibbs Can Be PanAccurate
Constantinos Daskalakis ∗
EECS & CSAIL, MIT
costis@csail.mit.edu

Nishanth Dikkala ∗
EECS & CSAIL, MIT
nishanthd@csail.mit.edu

Siddhartha Jayanti ∗†
EECS & CSAIL, MIT
jayanti@mit.edu

Abstract
Asynchronous Gibbs sampling has been recently shown to be fast-mixing and
an accurate method for estimating probabilities of events on a small number of
variables of a graphical model satisfying Dobrushin’s condition [DSOR16]. We
investigate whether it can be used to accurately estimate expectations of functions
of all the variables of the model. Under the same condition, we show that the
synchronous (sequential) and asynchronous Gibbs samplers can be coupled so
that the expected Hamming distance between their (multivariate) samples remains
bounded by O(τ log n), where n is the number of variables in the graphical model,
and τ is a measure of the asynchronicity. A similar bound holds for any constant
power of the Hamming distance. Hence, the expectation of any function that is
Lipschitz with respect to a power of the Hamming distance, can be estimated
with a bias that grows logarithmically in n. Going beyond Lipschitz functions,
we consider the bias arising from asynchronicity in estimating the expectation of
polynomial functions of all variables in the model. Using recent concentration of
measure results [DDK17, GLP17, GSS18], we show that the bias introduced by
the asynchronicity is of smaller order than the standard deviation of the function
value already present in the true model. We perform experiments on a multiprocessor machine to empirically illustrate our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

The increasingly ambitious applications of data analysis, and the corresponding growth in the size
of the data that needs to processed has brought important scalability challenges to machine learning
algorithms. Fundamental methods such as Gradient Descent and Gibbs sampling, which were designed with a sequential computational model in mind, are to be applied on datasets of increasingly
larger size. As such, there has recently been increased interest towards developing techniques for
parallelizing these methods. However, these algorithms are inherently sequential and are difficult to
parallelize.
HOGWILD!-SGD, proposed by Niu et al. [NRRW11], is a lock-free asynchronous execution
of stochastic gradient descent that has been shown to converge under the right sparsity conditions. Several variants of this method, and extensions of the asynchronous execution approach have been recently proposed, and have found successful applications in a broad range
of applications ranging from PageRank approximation, to deep learning and recommender systems [YHSD12, NO14, MBDC15, MPP+ 15, LWR+ 15, LWR+ 15, DSZOR15].
Similar to HOGWILD!-SGD, lock-free asynchronous execution of Gibbs sampling, called
HOGWILD!-Gibbs, was proposed by Smola and Narayanamurthy [SN10], and empirically shown
to work well on several models [ZR14]. Johnson et al. [JSW13] provide sufficient conditions under
∗
Supported by NSF awards CCF-1617730 and IIS-1741137, a Simons Investigator Award, a Google Faculty
Research Award, and an MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab research grant.
†
Also supported by the Department of Defense (DoD) through the NDSEG Program.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

