Hessian-based Analysis of Large Batch Training and
Robustness to Adversaries

1

Zhewei Yao1⇤ Amir Gholami1⇤ Qi Lei2 Kurt Keutzer1 Michael W. Mahoney1
University of California at Berkeley, {zheweiy, amirgh, keutzer and mahoneymw}@berkeley.edu
2
University of Texas at Austin, leiqi@ices.utexas.edu

Abstract
Large batch size training of Neural Networks has been shown to incur accuracy loss
when trained with the current methods. The exact underlying reasons for this are
still not completely understood. Here, we study large batch size training through
the lens of the Hessian operator and robust optimization. In particular, we perform
a Hessian based study to analyze exactly how the landscape of the loss function
changes when training with large batch size. We compute the true Hessian spectrum,
without approximation, by back-propagating the second derivative. Extensive
experiments on multiple networks show that saddle-points are not the cause for
generalization gap of large batch size training, and the results consistently show
that large batch converges to points with noticeably higher Hessian spectrum.
Furthermore, we show that robust training allows one to favors flat areas, as points
with large Hessian spectrum show poor robustness to adversarial perturbation. We
further study this relationship, and provide empirical and theoretical proof that the
inner loop for robust training is a saddle-free optimization problem. We present
detailed experiments with five different network architectures, including a residual
network, tested on MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100 datasets.

1

Introduction

During the training of a Neural Network (NN), we are given a set of input data x with the corresponding labels y drawn from an unknown distribution P. In practice, we only observe a set of discrete
examples drawn from P, and train the NN to learn this unknown distribution. This is typically a
non-convex optimization problem, in which the choice of hyper-parameters would highly affect the
convergence properties. In particular, it has been observed that using large batch size for training
often results in convergence to points with poor convergence properties. The main motivation for
using large batch is the increased opportunities for data parallelism which can be used to reduce
training time [13]. Recently, there have been several works that have proposed different methods to
avoid the performance loss with large batch [16, 28, 31]. However, these methods do not work for
all networks and datasets. This has motivated us to revisit the original problem and study how the
optimization with large batch size affects the convergence behavior.
We first start by analyzing how the Hessian spectrum and gradient change during training for small
batch and compare it to large batch size and then draw connection with robust training. In particular,
we aim to answer the following questions:
Q1 How is the training for large batch size different than small batch size? Equivalently, what is
the difference between the local geometry of the neighborhood that the model converges when large
batch size is used as compared to small batch?
A1 We backpropagate the second-derivative and compute its spectrum during training. The results
show that despite the arguments regarding prevalence of saddle-points plaguing optimization [6, 12],
that is actually not the problem with large batch size training, even when batch size is increased to
the gradient descent limit. In [19], an approximate numerical method was used to approximate the
⇤

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

