Self-Supervised Generation of Spatial Audio
for 360◦ Video
Pedro Morgado
University of California, San Diego∗

Nuno Vasconcelos
University of California, San Diego

Timothy Langlois
Adobe Research, Seattle

Oliver Wang
Adobe Research, Seattle

Abstract
We introduce an approach to convert mono audio recorded by a 360◦ video camera
into spatial audio, a representation of the distribution of sound over the full viewing
sphere. Spatial audio is an important component of immersive 360◦ video viewing,
but spatial audio microphones are still rare in current 360◦ video production. Our
system consists of end-to-end trainable neural networks that separate individual
sound sources and localize them on the viewing sphere, conditioned on multi-modal
analysis of audio and 360◦ video frames. We introduce several datasets, including
one filmed ourselves, and one collected in-the-wild from YouTube, consisting of
360◦ videos uploaded with spatial audio. During training, ground-truth spatial
audio serves as self-supervision and a mixed down mono track forms the input to
our network. Using our approach, we show that it is possible to infer the spatial
location of sound sources based only on 360◦ video and a mono audio track.

1

Introduction

360◦ video provides viewers an immersive viewing experience where they are free to look in any
direction, either by turning their heads with a Head-Mounted Display (HMD), or by mouse-control
while watching the video in a browser (e.g., YouTube). Capturing 360◦ video involves filming the
scene with multiple cameras and stitching the result together. While early systems relied on expensive
rigs with carefully mounted cameras, recent consumer-level devices combine multiple lenses in a
small fixed-body frame that enables automatic stitching, allowing 360◦ video to be recorded with a
single push of a button.
As humans rely on audio localization cues for full scene awareness, spatial audio is a crucial
component of 360◦ video. Spatial audio enables viewers to experience sound in all directions, while
adjusting the audio in real time to match the viewing position. This gives users a more immersive
experience, as well as providing cues about which part of the scene might have interesting content
to look at. However, unlike 360◦ video, producing spatial audio content still requires a moderate
degree of expertise. Most consumer-level 360◦ cameras only record mono audio, and syncing an
external spatial audio microphone can be expensive and technically challenging. As a consequence,
while most video platforms (e.g., YouTube and Facebook) support spatial audio, it is often ignored
by content creators, and at the time of submission, a random polling of 1000 YouTube 360◦ videos
yielded less than 5% with spatial audio.
In order to close this gap between the audio and visual experiences, we introduce three main
contributions: (1) we formalize the 360◦ spatialization problem; (2) design the first 360◦ spatialization
procedure; and (3) collect two datasets and propose an evaluation protocol to benchmark ours and
∗

Contact author: pmaravil@eng.ucsd.edu

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

