Task-Driven Convolutional Recurrent Models of the
Visual System
Aran Nayebi1,* , Daniel Bear2,* , Jonas Kubilius5,7,* , Kohitij Kar5 , Surya Ganguli4,8 , David
Sussillo8 , James J. DiCarlo5,6 , and Daniel L. K. Yamins2,3,9
1

Neurosciences PhD Program, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
2
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
3
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
4
Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
5
McGovern Institute for Brain Research, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139
6
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139
7
Brain and Cognition, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
8
Google Brain, Google, Inc., Mountain View, CA 94043
9
Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford, CA 94305
*
Equal contribution. {anayebi,dbear}@stanford.edu; qbilius@mit.edu

Abstract
Feed-forward convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are currently state-of-the-art
for object classification tasks such as ImageNet. Further, they are quantitatively
accurate models of temporally-averaged responses of neurons in the primate brain’s
visual system. However, biological visual systems have two ubiquitous architectural
features not shared with typical CNNs: local recurrence within cortical areas, and
long-range feedback from downstream areas to upstream areas. Here we explored
the role of recurrence in improving classification performance. We found that
standard forms of recurrence (vanilla RNNs and LSTMs) do not perform well
within deep CNNs on the ImageNet task. In contrast, novel cells that incorporated
two structural features, bypassing and gating, were able to boost task accuracy
substantially. We extended these design principles in an automated search over
thousands of model architectures, which identified novel local recurrent cells and
long-range feedback connections useful for object recognition. Moreover, these
task-optimized ConvRNNs matched the dynamics of neural activity in the primate
visual system better than feedforward networks, suggesting a role for the brain’s
recurrent connections in performing difficult visual behaviors.

1

Introduction

The visual system of the brain must discover meaningful patterns in a complex physical world [James,
1890]. Animals are more likely to survive and reproduce if they reliably notice food, signs of danger,
and memorable social partners. However, the visual appearance of these objects varies widely in
position, pose, contrast, background, foreground, and many other factors from one occasion to the
next: it is not easy to identify them from low-level image properties [Pinto et al., 2008]. In primates,
the visual system solves this problem by transforming the original “pixel values” of an image into a
new internal representation, in which high-level properties are more explicit [DiCarlo et al., 2012].
This can be modeled as an algorithm that encodes each image as a set of nonlinear features. For an
animal, a good encoding algorithm is one that allows behaviorally-relevant information to be decoded
simply from these features, such as by linear classification [Hung et al., 2005, Majaj et al., 2015].
Understanding this encoding is key to explaining animals’ visual behavior [Rajalingham et al., 2018].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

