Plug-in Estimation in High-Dimensional Linear
Inverse Problems: A Rigorous Analysis

Alyson K. Fletcher
Dept. Statistics
UC Los Angeles
akfletcher@ucla.edu

Parthe Pandit
Dept. ECE
UC Los Angeles
parthepandit@ucla.edu

Subrata Sarkar
Dept. ECE
The Ohio State Univ.
sarkar.51@osu.edu

Sundeep Rangan
Dept. ECE
NYU
srangan@nyu.edu

Philip Schniter
Dept. ECE
The Ohio State Univ.
schniter.1@osu.edu

Abstract
Estimating a vector x from noisy linear measurements Ax + w often requires
use of prior knowledge or structural constraints on x for accurate reconstruction.
Several recent works have considered combining linear least-squares estimation
with a generic or “plug-in” denoiser function that can be designed in a modular manner based on the prior knowledge about x. While these methods have
shown excellent performance, it has been difficult to obtain rigorous performance
guarantees. This work considers plug-in denoising combined with the recentlydeveloped Vector Approximate Message Passing (VAMP) algorithm, which is
itself derived via Expectation Propagation techniques. It shown that the mean
squared error of this “plug-and-play" VAMP can be exactly predicted for highdimensional right-rotationally invariant random A and Lipschitz denoisers. The
method is demonstrated on applications in image recovery and parametric bilinear
estimation.

1

Introduction

The estimation of an unknown vector x0 ∈ RN from noisy linear measurements y of the form
M ×N

y = Ax0 + w ∈ RM ,

(1)

where A ∈ R
is a known transform and w is disturbance, arises in a wide-range of learning
and inverse problems. In many high-dimensional situations, such as when the measurements are
fewer than the unknown parameters (i.e., M ≪ N ), it is essential to incorporate known structure on
x0 in the estimation process. A fundamental challenge is how to perform structured estimation of
x0 while maintaining computational efficiency and a tractable analysis.
Approximate message passing (AMP), originally proposed in [1], refers to a powerful class of algorithms that can be applied to reconstruction of x0 from (1) that can easily incorporate a wide class
−1
I), noting that AMP
of statistical priors. In this work, we restrict our attention to w ∼ N (0, γw
was extended to non-Gaussian measurements in [2, 3, 4]. AMP is computationally efficient, in that
it generates a sequence of estimates {b
xk }∞
k=0 by iterating the steps
bk = g(rk , γk )
x
(2a)
N
vk = y − Ab
xk + M
h∇g(rk−1 , γk−1 )ivk−1
T

rk+1 = b
xk + A vk ,

2

γk+1 = M/kvk k ,

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

(2b)
(2c)

