Learning To Learn Around A Common Mean
Giulia Denevi1,2 , Carlo Ciliberto3,4 , Dimitris Stamos4 and Massimiliano Pontil1,4
1
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (Italy), 2 University of Genoa (Italy),
3
Imperial College of London (UK), 4 University College of London (UK)

Abstract
The problem of learning-to-learn (LTL) or meta-learning is gaining increasing
attention due to recent empirical evidence of its effectiveness in applications. The
goal addressed in LTL is to select an algorithm that works well on tasks sampled
from a meta-distribution. In this work, we consider the family of algorithms given
by a variant of Ridge Regression, in which the regularizer is the square distance
to an unknown mean vector. We show that, in this setting, the LTL problem can
be reformulated as a Least Squares (LS) problem and we exploit a novel metaalgorithm to efficiently solve it. At each iteration the meta-algorithm processes only
one dataset. Specifically, it firstly estimates the stochastic LS objective function,
by splitting this dataset into two subsets used to train and test the inner algorithm,
respectively. Secondly, it performs a stochastic gradient step with the estimated
value. Under specific assumptions, we present a bound for the generalization error
of our meta-algorithm, which suggests the right splitting parameter to choose.
When the hyper-parameters of the problem are fixed, this bound is consistent as
the number of tasks grows, even if the sample size is kept constant. Preliminary
experiments confirm our theoretical findings, highlighting the advantage of our
approach, with respect to independent task learning.

1 Introduction
Learning-to-learn (LTL) or meta-learning addresses the problem of learning an algorithm that “works
well” on a class of learning tasks, which are randomly observed via a corresponding finite set of
training examples, see [4, 19, 29] and references therein. The learning tasks are assumed to share
specific similarities, in that they are sampled from a common meta-distribution, often referred to
as environment in literature [4]. The LTL process aims at leveraging such similarities in order to
learn an algorithm which is well suited to learn new tasks sampled from the same environment.
This approach brings a substantial improvement over learning the tasks in isolation – known as
independent task learning (ITL) – especially when the sample size per task is small, a common
setting in many applications [6, 27, 30]. These ideas are strongly related to multitask learning (MTL)
[7, 8, 9, 10, 14, 18, 23]. The key difference is that in MTL the goal is to perform well on the observed
tasks while in LTL the aim is to perform well on “future” tasks.
In this work, we study a particular kind of environment, in which the randomly observed tasks are
linear regression problems and the underlying family of learning algorithms is Ridge Regression
around a common mean, that is, Ridge Regression in which we introduce in the regularizer a bias
term, playing the role of a common mean among the tasks. Starting from a stream of datasets sampled
from this environment, our goal is to learn the common mean by minimizing the transfer risk [4, 19],
which measures the average error of the underlying learning algorithm, trained on a random dataset
from the environment. Although previous theoretical investigations of LTL minimize a proxy for the
transfer risk, given by the average multitask empirical error [4, 19, 20, 22, 24] or the so-called future
empirical risk [12] of the algorithm, as a first contribution of this work, we show that the specific
family of algorithms considered here, naturally lends itself to directly minimize the transfer risk of
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

