Maximizing Induced Cardinality Under a
Determinantal Point Process
Jennifer Gillenwater
Google Research NYC
jengi@google.com

Alex Kulesza
Google Research NYC
kulesza@google.com

Zelda Mariet
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
zelda@csail.mit.edu

Sergei Vassilvitskii
Google Research NYC
sergeiv@google.com

Abstract
Determinantal point processes (DPPs) are well-suited to recommender systems
where the goal is to generate collections of diverse, high-quality items. In the
existing literature this is usually formulated as finding the mode of the DPP (the
so-called MAP set). However, the MAP objective inherently assumes that the DPP
models “optimal” recommendation sets, and yet obtaining such a DPP is nontrivial
when there is no ready source of example optimal sets. In this paper we advocate an
alternative framework for applying DPPs to recommender systems. Our approach
assumes that the DPP simply models user engagements with recommended items,
which is more consistent with how DPPs for recommender systems are typically
trained. With this assumption, we are able to formulate a metric that measures
the expected number of items that a user will engage with. We formalize this
optimization of this metric as the Maximum Induced Cardinality (MIC) problem.
Although the MIC objective is not submodular, we show that it can be approximated
by a submodular function, and that empirically it is well-optimized by a greedy
algorithm.

1

Introduction

Diversity is frequently advantageous for recommender systems. It can compensate for uncertainty,
for example, when a search engine can’t be sure which type of “java” a user intended and hence
returns results spanning coffee, programming languages, and Indonesia. But diversity can also be an
inherently desirable property, reflecting the way that users engage with a set of results. A news feed,
for example, might include stories on politics, health, sports, and arts—even when the important
news of the day is all political—simply because users enjoy reading a variety of articles. This is one
of the reasons why diversity has been a longstanding focus for research on information retrieval and
recommender systems [Smyth and McClave, 2001, Herlocker et al., 2004, Ziegler et al., 2005, Hurley
and Zhang, 2011].
The determinantal point process (DPP), a probabilistic model of subset selection that prefers diverse
sets, is a natural fit for these kinds of applications. However, while DPPs offer efficient algorithms for
probabilistic operations like marginalization, conditioning, and sampling, in practice we often need
to select a single “best” set, and this can be more challenging. To date, most research in this direction
has focused on approximation algorithms for finding the set with the highest probability, sometimes
called the maximum a posteriori (MAP) set [Gillenwater et al., 2012, Kathuria and Deshpande,
2017, Zhang and Ou, 2016, Nikolov and Singh, 2016]. In particular, the MAP objective has recently
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

