Bayesian Structure Learning by Recursive Bootstrap

Raanan Y. Rohekar∗
Intel AI Lab

Yaniv Gurwicz∗
Intel AI Lab

Shami Nisimov∗
Intel AI Lab

raanan.yehezkel@intel.com

yaniv.gurwicz@intel.com

shami.nisimov@intel.com

Guy Koren
Intel AI Lab

Gal Novik
Intel AI Lab

guy.koren@intel.com

gal.novik@intel.com

Abstract
We address the problem of Bayesian structure learning for domains with hundreds
of variables by employing non-parametric bootstrap, recursively. We propose a
method that covers both model averaging and model selection in the same framework. The proposed method deals with the main weakness of constraint-based
learning—sensitivity to errors in the independence tests—by a novel way of combining bootstrap with constraint-based learning. Essentially, we provide an algorithm
for learning a tree, in which each node represents a scored CPDAG for a subset of
variables and the level of the node corresponds to the maximal order of conditional
independencies that are encoded in the graph. As higher order independencies are
tested in deeper recursive calls, they benefit from more bootstrap samples, and
therefore are more resistant to the curse-of-dimensionality. Moreover, the re-use
of stable low order independencies allows greater computational efficiency. We
also provide an algorithm for sampling CPDAGs efficiently from their posterior
given the learned tree. That is, not from the full posterior, but from a reduced
space of CPDAGs encoded in the learned tree. We empirically demonstrate that
the proposed algorithm scales well to hundreds of variables, and learns better
MAP models and more reliable causal relationships between variables, than other
state-of-the-art-methods.

1

Introduction

Bayesian networks (BN) are probabilistic graphical models, commonly used for probabilistic inference, density estimation, and causal modeling (Darwiche, 2009; Pearl, 2009; Murphy, 2012; Spirtes
et al., 2000). The graph of a BN is a DAG over random variables, encoding conditional independence
assertions. Learning this DAG structure, G, from data, D, has been a fundamental problem for the
past two decades. Often, it is desired to learn an equivalence class (EC) of DAGs, that is, a CPDAG.
DAGs in an EC are Markov equivalent; that is, given an observed dataset, they are statistically
indistinguishable and represent the same set of independence assertions (Verma & Pearl, 1990).
Commonly, two main scenarios are considered. In one scenario, the posterior probability, P (G|D),
(or some other structure scoring metric) peaks sharply around a single structure, GMAP . Here, the
goal is to find the highest-scoring structure—a maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) estimation (model
selection). In a second scenario, several distinct structures have high posterior probabilities, which is
common when the data size is small compared to the domain size (Friedman & Koller, 2003). In this
case, learning model structure or causal relationships between variables using a single MAP model
may give unreliable conclusions. Thus, instead of learning a single structure, graphs are sampled
∗

Equal contribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

