Mirrored Langevin Dynamics

Ya-Ping Hsieh

Ali Kavis

Paul Rolland

Volkan Cevher

Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems (LIONS),
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
{ya-ping.hsieh, ali.kavis, paul.rolland, volkan.cevher}@epfl.ch

Abstract
We consider the problem of sampling from constrained distributions, which
has posed significant challenges to both non-asymptotic analysis and algorithmic design. We propose a unified framework, which is inspired by the
classical mirror descent, to derive novel first-order sampling schemes. We
prove that, for a general target distribution with strongly convex potential,
our framework implies the existence of a first-order algorithm achieving
Õ(−2 d) convergence, suggesting that the state-of-the-art Õ(−6 d5 ) can be
vastly improved. With the important Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
application in mind, we specialize our algorithm to sample from Dirichlet
posteriors, and derive the first non-asymptotic Õ(−2 d2 ) rate for first-order
sampling. We further extend our framework to the mini-batch setting and
prove convergence rates when only stochastic gradients are available. Finally,
we report promising experimental results for LDA on real datasets.

1

Introduction

Many modern learning tasks involve sampling from a high-dimensional and large-scale
distribution, which calls for algorithms that are scalable with respect to both the dimension
and the data size. One approach [32] that has found wide success is to discretize the
Langevin Dynamics:
√
dXt = −∇V (Xt )dt + 2dBt ,
(1.1)
where e−V (x) dx presents a target distribution and Bt is a d-dimensional Brownian motion.
Such a framework has inspired numerous first-order sampling algorithms [1, 7, 13, 15, 18,
19, 26, 29], and the convergence rates are by now well-understood for unconstrained and
log-concave distributions [8, 12, 14].
However, applying (1.1) to sampling from constrained distributions (i.e., when V has a
bounded convex domain) remains a difficult challenge. From the theoretical perspective,
there are only two existing algorithms [4, 5] that possess non-asymptotic guarantees, and
their rates are significantly worse than the unconstrained scenario under the same assumtions;
cf., Table 1. Furthermore, many important constrained distributions are inherently non-logconcave. A prominent instance is the Dirichlet posterior, which, in spite of the presence of
several tailor-made first-order algorithms [18, 26], is still lacking a non-asymptotic guarantee.
In this paper, we aim to bridge these two gaps at the same time. For general constrained
distributions with a strongly convex potential V , we prove the existence of a first-order
algorithm that achieves the same convergence rates as if there is no constraint at all, suggesting
the state-of-the-art Õ(−6 d5 ) can be brought down to Õ(−2 d). When specialized to the
important case of simplex constraint, we provide the first non-asymptotic guarantee for
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

