Importance Weighting and Variational Inference

1

Justin Domke1 and Daniel Sheldon1,2
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst
2
Department of Computer Science, Mount Holyoke College

Abstract
Recent work used importance sampling ideas for better variational bounds on likelihoods. We clarify the applicability of these ideas to pure probabilistic inference, by
showing the resulting Importance Weighted Variational Inference (IWVI) technique
is an instance of augmented variational inference, thus identifying the looseness in
previous work. Experiments confirm IWVI’s practicality for probabilistic inference.
As a second contribution, we investigate inference with elliptical distributions,
which improves accuracy in low dimensions, and convergence in high dimensions.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic modeling is used to reason about the world by formulating a joint model p(z, x) for
unobserved variables z and observed variables x, and then querying the posterior distribution p(z | x)
to learn about hidden quantities given evidence x. Common tasks are to draw samples from p(z | x)
or compute posterior expectations. However, it is often intractable to perform these tasks directly, so
considerable research has been devoted to methods for approximate probabilistic inference.
Variational inference (VI) is a leading approach for approximate inference. In VI, p(z | x) is
approximated by a distribution q(z) in a simpler family for which inference is tractable. The process
to select q is based on the following decomposition [22, Eqs. 11-12]:
p(z, x)
log p(x) = E log
+ KL [q(z)kp(z|x)] .
|
{z
}
q(z)
q(z)
|
{z
}
divergence

(1)

ELBO[q(z)kp(z,x)]

The first term is a lower bound of log p(x) known as the "evidence lower bound" (ELBO). Selecting
q to make the ELBO as big as possible simultaneously obtains a lower bound of log p(x) that is as
tight as possible and drives q close to p in KL-divergence.
The ELBO is closely related to importance sampling. For fixed q, let R = p(z, x)/q(z) where
z ⇠ q. This random variable satisfies p(x) = E R, which is the foundation of importance sampling.
Similarly, we can write by Jensen’s inequality that log p(x) E log R = ELBO [qkp], which is the
foundation of modern “black-box” versions of VI (BBVI) [19] in which Monte Carlo samples are
used to estimate E log R, in the same way that IS estimates E R.
Critically, the only property VI uses to obtain a lower bound is p(x) = E R. Further, it is straightforward to see that Jensen’s inequality yields a tighter bound when R is more concentrated about its
mean p(x). So, it is natural to consider different random variables with the same mean that are more
PM
1
concentrated, for example the sample average RM = M
m=1 Rm . Then, by identical reasoning,
log p(x) E log RM . The last quantity is the objective of importance-weighted auto-encoders [5];
we call it the importance weighted ELBO (IW-ELBO), and the process of selecting q to maximize it
importance-weighted VI (IWVI).
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

