Relational recurrent neural networks
Adam Santoro*α , Ryan Faulkner*α , David Raposo*α , Jack Raeαβ , Mike Chrzanowskiα ,
Théophane Weberα , Daan Wierstraα , Oriol Vinyalsα , Razvan Pascanuα , Timothy Lillicrapαβ
*Equal Contribution
α
DeepMind
London, United Kingdom
β

CoMPLEX, Computer Science, University College London
London, United Kingdom

{adamsantoro; rfaulk; draposo; jwrae; chrzanowskim;
theophane; weirstra; vinyals; razp; countzero}@google.com

Abstract
Memory-based neural networks model temporal data by leveraging an ability to
remember information for long periods. It is unclear, however, whether they also
have an ability to perform complex relational reasoning with the information they
remember. Here, we first confirm our intuitions that standard memory architectures
may struggle at tasks that heavily involve an understanding of the ways in which
entities are connected – i.e., tasks involving relational reasoning. We then improve
upon these deficits by using a new memory module – a Relational Memory Core
(RMC) – which employs multi-head dot product attention to allow memories to
interact. Finally, we test the RMC on a suite of tasks that may profit from more
capable relational reasoning across sequential information, and show large gains
in RL domains (e.g. Mini PacMan), program evaluation, and language modeling,
achieving state-of-the-art results on the WikiText-103, Project Gutenberg, and
GigaWord datasets.

1

Introduction

Humans use sophisticated memory systems to access and reason about important information regardless of when it was initially perceived [1, 2]. In neural network research many successful approaches
to modeling sequential data also use memory systems, such as LSTMs [3] and memory-augmented
neural networks generally [4–7]. Bolstered by augmented memory capacities, bounded computational
costs over time, and an ability to deal with vanishing gradients, these networks learn to correlate
events across time to be proficient at storing and retrieving information.
Here we propose that it is fruitful to consider memory interactions along with storage and retrieval.
Although current models can learn to compartmentalize and relate distributed, vectorized memories,
they are not biased towards doing so explicitly. We hypothesize that such a bias may allow a model
to better understand how memories are related, and hence may give it a better capacity for relational
reasoning over time. We begin by demonstrating that current models do indeed struggle in this
domain by developing a toy task to stress relational reasoning of sequential information. Using a new
Relational Memory Core (RMC), which uses multi-head dot product attention to allow memories to
interact with each other, we solve and analyze this toy problem. We then apply the RMC to a suite
of tasks that may profit from more explicit memory-memory interactions, and hence, a potentially
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

