Robust Subspace Approximation in a Stream

Roie Levin1
roiel@cs.cmu.edu

Anish Sevekari2
asevekar@andrew.cmu.edu

David P. Woodruff1
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

1

2

Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Abstract
We study robust subspace estimation in the streaming and distributed settings.
Given a set of n data points {ai }ni=1 in Rd∑and an integer k, we wish to find a linear subspace S of dimension k for which i M (dist(S, ai )) is minimized, where
dist(S, x) := miny∈S ∥x − y∥2 , and M (·) is some loss function. When M is the
identity function, S gives a subspace that is more robust to outliers than that provided by the truncated SVD. Though the problem is NP-hard, it is approximable
within a (1 + ϵ) factor in polynomial time when k and ϵ are constant. We give the
first sublinear approximation algorithm for this problem in the turnstile streaming
and arbitrary partition distributed models, achieving the same time guarantees as
in the offline case. Our algorithm is the first based entirely on oblivious dimensionality reduction, and significantly simplifies prior methods for this problem, which
held in neither the streaming nor distributed models.

1

Introduction

A fundamental problem in large-scale machine learning is that of subspace approximation. Given
n
d
a set of n data points {a
∑i }i=1 in R and an integer k, we wish to find a linear subspace S of
dimension k for which i M (dist(S, ai )) is minimized, where dist(S, x) := miny∈S ∥x − y∥2 ,
and M (·) is some loss function. When M (·) = (·)2 , this is the well-studied least squares subspace
approximation problem. The minimizer in this case can be computed exactly by computing the
truncated SVD of the data matrix.
Otherwise M is often chosen from (·)p for some p ≥ 0, or from a class of functions called M estimators, with the goal of providing a more robust estimate than least squares in the face of outliers.
Indeed, for p < 2, since one is not squaring the distances to the subspace, one is placing less
emphasis on outliers and therefore capturing more of the remaining data points. For example, when
M is the identity function, we are finding a subspace so as to minimize the sum of distances to it,
which could arguably be more natural than finding a subspace so as to minimize the sum of squared
distances. We can write this problem in the following form:
∑
∑
min
dist(S, ai ) = min
∥(A − AX)i∗ ∥2
S dim k

i

X rank k

i

where A is the matrix in which the i-th row is the vector ai . This is the form of robust subspace
approximation that we study in this work. We will be interested in the approximate version of the
problem for which the goal is to output a k-dimensional subspace S ′ for which with high probability,
∑
∑
(1)
dist(S ′ , ai ) ≤ (1 + ϵ)
dist(S, ai )
i

i

The particular form with M equal to the identity was introduced to the machine learning community by Ding et al. [10], though these authors employed heuristic solutions. The series of work in
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

