MixLasso: Generalized Mixed Regression via
Convex Atomic-Norm Regularization

Ian E.H. Yen ∗†
∗

Wei-Cheng Lee ‡ Sung-En Chang ‡
Pradeep Ravikumar ∗ Shou-De Lin ‡

Carnegie Mellon University

†

Snap Inc.

‡

Kai Zhong §

National Taiwan University

§

Amazon Inc.

Abstract
We consider a generalization of mixed regression where the response is an additive
combination of several mixture components. Standard mixed regression is a special
case where each response is generated from exactly one component. Typical
approaches to the mixture regression problem employ local search methods such
as Expectation Maximization (EM) that are prone to spurious local optima. On the
other hand, a number of recent theoretically-motivated Tensor-based methods either
have high sample complexity, or require the knowledge of the input distribution,
which is not available in most of practical situations. In this work, we study a novel
convex estimator MixLasso for the estimation of generalized mixed regression,
based on an atomic norm specifically constructed to regularize the number of
mixture components. Our algorithm gives a risk bound that trades off between
prediction accuracy and model sparsity without imposing stringent assumptions on
the input/output distribution, and can be easily adapted to the case of non-linear
functions. In our numerical experiments on mixtures of linear as well as nonlinear
regressions, the proposed method yields high-quality solutions in a wider range of
settings than existing approaches.

1

Introduction

The Mixed Regression (MR) problem considers the estimation of K functions from a collection of
input-output samples, where for each sample, the output is generated by one of the K regression
functions. When fitting linear functions in a noiseless setting, this is equivalent to solving K
linear systems, while at the same time, identifying which system each equation belongs to. The
MR formulation can be employed as an approach to decompose a complicated function into K
simpler ones, by splitting the observations into K classes. Variants of regression families such as
piecewise-linear regression can be viewed as special cases of MR.
However, the MR problem is NP-hard in general [1] due to the simultaneous fitting of the discrete
class labels as well as the regression functions. Standard approaches to the mixture problem employ
local search methods such as Expectation Maximization (EM) [2] and Variational Bayes [3] that are
prone to spurious local optima. There have thus been several lines of recent work studying estimation
of mixed regression models with strong statistical guarantees under additional statistical assumptions.
For the special case of linear function with K=2 components, [4] propose a convex nuclear norm
minimization formulation that is guaranteed to estimate the two functions with minimax-optimal rates
when given a sub-Gaussian design matrix. With the additional conditions of zero noise and isotropic
Gaussian inputs, [1] propose an initialization for the EM algorithm to guarantee exact recovery of
the true parameters. However, in addition to the stringent statistical assumptions, these methods and
results are specialized to the case of two components, and seem non-trivial to generalize.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

