3D-Aware Scene Manipulation via Inverse Graphics

Shunyu Yao∗
IIIS, Tsinghua University

Tzu-Ming Harry Hsu∗
MIT CSAIL

Antonio Torralba
MIT CSAIL

William T. Freeman
MIT CSAIL, Google Research

Jun-Yan Zhu
MIT CSAIL

Jiajun Wu
MIT CSAIL

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
We aim to obtain an interpretable, expressive, and disentangled scene representation
that contains comprehensive structural and textural information for each object.
Previous scene representations learned by neural networks are often uninterpretable,
limited to a single object, or lacking 3D knowledge. In this work, we propose 3D
scene de-rendering networks (3D-SDN) to address the above issues by integrating
disentangled representations for semantics, geometry, and appearance into a deep
generative model. Our scene encoder performs inverse graphics, translating a scene
into a structured object-wise representation. Our decoder has two components: a
differentiable shape renderer and a neural texture generator. The disentanglement of
semantics, geometry, and appearance supports 3D-aware scene manipulation, e.g.,
rotating and moving objects freely while keeping the consistent shape and texture,
and changing the object appearance without affecting its shape. Experiments
demonstrate that our editing scheme based on 3D-SDN is superior to its 2D
counterpart.

1

Introduction

Humans are incredible at perceiving the world, but more distinguishing is our mental ability to
simulate and imagine what will happen. Given a street scene as in Fig. 1, we can effortlessly detect
and recognize cars and their attributes, and more interestingly, imagine how cars may move and rotate
in the 3D world. Motivated by such human abilities, in this work we seek to obtain an interpretable,
expressive, and disentangled scene representation for machines, and employ the learned representation
for flexible, 3D-aware scene manipulation.
Deep generative models have led to remarkable breakthroughs in learning hierarchical representations
of images and decoding them back to images [Goodfellow et al., 2014]. However, the obtained
representation is often limited to a single object, hard to interpret, and missing the complex 3D
structure behind visual input. As a result, these deep generative models cannot support manipulation
tasks such as moving an object around as in Fig. 1. On the other hand, computer graphics engines
use a predefined, structured, and disentangled input (e.g., graphics code), often intuitive for scene
manipulation. However, it is in general intractable to infer the graphics code from an input image.
In this paper, we propose 3D scene de-rendering networks (3D-SDN) to incorporate an object-based,
interpretable scene representation into a deep generative model. Our method employs an encoderdecoder architecture and has three branches: one for scene semantics, one for object geometry and
3D pose, and one for the appearance of objects and the background. As shown in Fig. 2, the semantic
de-renderer aims to learn the semantic segmentation of a scene. The geometric de-renderer learns
to infer the object shape and 3D pose with the help of a differentiable shape renderer. The textural
* indicates equal contributions. The work was done when Shunyu Yao was a visiting student at MIT CSAIL.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

