A no-regret generalization of hierarchical softmax to
extreme multi-label classification
Marek Wydmuch
Institute of Computing Science
Poznan University of Technology, Poland
mwydmuch@cs.put.poznan.pl
Mikhail Kuznetsov
Yahoo! Research
New York, USA
kuznetsov@oath.com

Kalina Jasinska
Institute of Computing Science
Poznan University of Technology, Poland
kjasinska@cs.put.poznan.pl

Róbert Busa-Fekete
Yahoo! Research
New York, USA
busafekete@oath.com

Krzysztof Dembczyński
Institute of Computing Science
Poznan University of Technology, Poland
kdembczynski@cs.put.poznan.pl

Abstract
Extreme multi-label classification (XMLC) is a problem of tagging an instance with
a small subset of relevant labels chosen from an extremely large pool of possible
labels. Large label spaces can be efficiently handled by organizing labels as a tree,
like in the hierarchical softmax (HSM) approach commonly used for multi-class
problems. In this paper, we investigate probabilistic label trees (PLTs) that have
been recently devised for tackling XMLC problems. We show that PLTs are a
no-regret multi-label generalization of HSM when precision@k is used as a model
evaluation metric. Critically, we prove that pick-one-label heuristic—a reduction
technique from multi-label to multi-class that is routinely used along with HSM—is
not consistent in general. We also show that our implementation of PLTs, referred
to as EXTREME T EXT (XT), obtains significantly better results than HSM with the
pick-one-label heuristic and XML-CNN, a deep network specifically designed for
XMLC problems. Moreover, XT is competitive to many state-of-the-art approaches
in terms of statistical performance, model size and prediction time which makes it
amenable to deploy in an online system.

1

Introduction

In several machine learning applications, the label space can be enormous, containing even millions
of different classes. Learning problems of this scale are often referred to as extreme classification.
To name a few examples of such problems, consider image and video annotation for multimedia
search (Deng et al., 2011), tagging of text documents for categorization of Wikipedia articles (Dekel
& Shamir, 2010), recommendation of bid words for online ads (Prabhu & Varma, 2014), or prediction
of the next word in a sentence (Mikolov et al., 2013).
To tackle extreme classification problems in an efficient way, one can organize the labels into a
tree. A prominent example of such label tree model is hierarchical softmax (HSM) (Morin &
Bengio, 2005), often used with neural networks to speed up computations in multi-class classification
with large output spaces. For example, it is commonly applied in natural language processing
problems such as language modeling (Mikolov et al., 2013). To adapt HSM to extreme multi-label
classification (XMLC), several very popular tools, such as FAST T EXT (Joulin et al., 2016) and
L EARNED T REE (Jernite et al., 2017), apply the pick-one-label heuristic. As the name suggests, this
heuristic randomly picks one of the labels from a multi-label training example and treats the example
as a multi-class one.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

