Deep Predictive Coding Network with Local
Recurrent Processing for Object Recognition
Kuan Han1,3 , Haiguang Wen1,3 , Yizhen Zhang1,3 , Di Fu1,3 , Eugenio Culurciello1,2 ,
Zhongming Liu1,2,3∗
1

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University
2
Weldon School of Biomedical Engineering, Purdue University
3
Purdue Institute for Integrative Neuroscience, Purdue University

Abstract
Inspired by "predictive coding" - a theory in neuroscience, we develop a bidirectional and dynamic neural network with local recurrent processing, namely
predictive coding network (PCN). Unlike feedforward-only convolutional neural
networks, PCN includes both feedback connections, which carry top-down predictions, and feedforward connections, which carry bottom-up errors of prediction.
Feedback and feedforward connections enable adjacent layers to interact locally
and recurrently to refine representations towards minimization of layer-wise prediction errors. When unfolded over time, the recurrent processing gives rise to
an increasingly deeper hierarchy of non-linear transformation, allowing a shallow
network to dynamically extend itself into an arbitrarily deep network. We train and
test PCN for image classification with SVHN, CIFAR and ImageNet datasets. Despite notably fewer layers and parameters, PCN achieves competitive performance
compared to classical and state-of-the-art models. Further analysis shows that the
internal representations in PCN converge over time and yield increasingly better
accuracy in object recognition. Errors of top-down prediction also reveal visual
saliency or bottom-up attention.

1

Introduction

Modern computer vision is mostly based on feedforward convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
[18, 33, 50]. To achieve better performance, CNN models tend to use an increasing number of layers
[19, 24, 50, 59], while sometimes adding "short-cuts" to bypass layers [19, 56]. What motivates
such design choices is the notion that models should learn a deep hierarchy of representations to
perform complex tasks in vision [50, 59]. This notion generally agrees with the brain’s hierarchical
organization [31, 62, 67, 16]: visual areas are connected in series to enable a cascade of neural
processing [60]. If one layer in a model is analogous to one area in the visual cortex, the state-of-theart CNNs are considerably deeper (with 50 to 1000 layers) [20, 18] than the visual cortex (with 10
to 20 areas) . As we look to the brain for more inspiration, it is noteworthy that biological neural
networks support robust and efficient intelligence for a wide range of tasks without any need to grow
their depth or width [37].
What distinguishes the brain from CNNs is the presence of abundant feedback connections that
link a feedforward series of brain areas in reverse order [11]. Given both feedforward and feedback
connections, information passes not only bottom-up but also top-down, and interacts with one another
to update the internal states over time. The interplay between feedforward and feedback connections
∗

Correspondence to: Zhongming Liu <zmliu@purdue.edu>

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

