From Stochastic Planning to Marginal MAP

Hao Cui
Department of Computer Science
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155, USA
hao.cui@tufts.edu

Radu Marinescu
IBM Research
Dublin, Ireland
radu.marinescu@ie.ibm.com

Roni Khardon
Department of Computer Science
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN, USA
rkhardon@iu.edu

Abstract
It is well known that the problems of stochastic planning and probabilistic inference are closely related. This paper makes two contributions in this context. The
first is to provide an analysis of the recently developed SOGBOFA heuristic planning algorithm that was shown to be effective for problems with large factored
state and action spaces. It is shown that SOGBOFA can be seen as a specialized
inference algorithm that computes its solutions through a combination of a symbolic variant of belief propagation and gradient ascent. The second contribution is
a new solver for Marginal MAP (MMAP) inference. We introduce a new reduction from MMAP to maximum expected utility problems which are suitable for the
symbolic computation in SOGBOFA. This yields a novel algebraic gradient-based
solver (AGS) for MMAP. An experimental evaluation illustrates the potential of
AGS in solving difficult MMAP problems.

1

Introduction

The connection between planning and inference is well known. Over the last decade multiple authors
have introduced explicit reductions showing how stochastic planning can be solved using probabilistic inference (for example, [4, 25, 5, 17, 23, 12, 8, 19, 26, 10, 18]) with applications in robotics,
scheduling and environmental problems. However, heuristic methods and search are still the best
performing approaches for planning in large combinatorial state and action spaces [9, 7, 2].
This paper makes two contributions in this context. We first analyze a recent heuristic planning
algorithm that was shown to be effective in practice. SOGBOFA [2] builds an approximate algebraic
computation graph capturing marginals of state and reward variables under independence assumptions. It then uses automatic differentiation [6] and gradient based search to optimize action choice.
Our analysis shows that the value computed by SOGBOFA’s computation graph is identical to the
solution of Belief Propagation (BP) when conditioned on actions. This provides an explicit connection between heuristic planning algorithms and approximate inference. Inference through algebraic
expressions has been explored before [16] and even applied to planning but both the symbolic representation and algorithms are different from the ones in SOGBOFA.
Our second contribution is in showing how planning algorithms can be used to solve inference
problems, making use of the correspondence in the reverse direction from prior work. The original
construction for SOGBOFA can be seen to solve Maximum expected Utility (MEU) problems with
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

