Direct Runge-Kutta Discretization
Achieves Acceleration
Jingzhao Zhang
LIDS
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, 02139
jzhzhang@mit.edu

Aryan Mokhtari
LIDS
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, 02139
aryanm@mit.edu

Suvrit Sra
LIDS, IDSS
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, 02139
suvrit@mit.edu

Ali Jadbabaie
LIDS, IDSS
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, 02139
jadbabai@mit.edu

Abstract
We study gradient-based optimization methods obtained by directly discretizing
a second-order ordinary differential equation (ODE) related to the continuous
limit of Nesterov’s accelerated gradient method. When the function is smooth
enough, we show that acceleration can be achieved by a stable discretization of
this ODE using standard Runge-Kutta integrators. Specifically, we prove that under Lipschitz-gradient, convexity and order-(s + 2) differentiability assumptions,
the sequence of iterates generated by discretizing the proposed second-order ODE
s
converges to the optimal solution at a rate of O(N −2 s+1 ), where s is the order
of the Runge-Kutta numerical integrator. Furthermore, we introduce a new local
flatness condition on the objective, under which rates even faster than O(N −2 )
can be achieved with low-order integrators and only gradient information. Notably, this flatness condition is satisfied by several standard loss functions used in
machine learning. We provide numerical experiments that verify the theoretical
rates predicted by our results.

1

Introduction

We study accelerated first-order optimization algorithms for the problem
min

x∈Rd

f (x),

(1)

where f is convex and sufficiently smooth. A classical method for solving (1) is gradient descent
(G D), which displays a sub-optimal convergence rate of O(N −1 )—i.e., the gap f (xN ) − f (x∗ )
between G D and the optimal value f (x∗ ) decreases to zero at the rate of O(N −1 ). Nesterov’s
seminal accelerated gradient method [19] matches the oracle lower bound of O(N −2 ) [18], and is
thus a central result in the theory of convex optimization.
However, ever since its introduction, acceleration has remained somewhat mysterious, especially
because Nesterov’s original derivation relies on elegant but unintuitive algebraic arguments. This
lack of understanding has spurred a variety of recent attempts to uncover the rationale behind the
phenomenon of acceleration [1, 9, 11, 13, 16, 21].
We pursue instead an approach to NAG (and accelerated methods in general) via a continuous-time
perspective. This view was recently studied by Su et al. [23], who showed that the continuous limit
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

