Recurrent Transformer Networks for Semantic
Correspondence

Seungryong Kim1 , Stephen Lin2 , Sangryul Jeon1 , Dongbo Min3 , and Kwanghoon Sohn1,∗
1
Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea, 2 Microsoft Research, Beijing, China,
3
Ewha Womans University, Seoul, South Korea
{srkim89,cheonjsr,khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr, stevelin@microsoft.com,
dbmin@ewha.ac.kr
∗
Corresponding author

Abstract
We present recurrent transformer networks (RTNs) for obtaining dense correspondences between semantically similar images. Our networks accomplish this through
an iterative process of estimating spatial transformations between the input images
and using these transformations to generate aligned convolutional activations. By
directly estimating the transformations between an image pair, rather than employing spatial transformer networks to independently normalize each individual image,
we show that greater accuracy can be achieved. This process is conducted in a
recursive manner to refine both the transformation estimates and the feature representations. In addition, a technique is presented for weakly-supervised training of
RTNs that is based on a proposed classification loss. With RTNs, state-of-the-art
performance is attained on several benchmarks for semantic correspondence.

1

Introduction

Establishing dense correspondences across semantically similar images can facilitate a variety of
computer vision applications including non-parametric scene parsing, semantic segmentation, object
detection, and image editing [25, 22, 19]. In this semantic correspondence task, the images resemble
each other in content but differ in object appearance and configuration, as exemplified in the images
with different car models in Fig. 1(a-b). Unlike the dense correspondence computed for estimating
depth [34] or optical flow [4], semantic correspondence poses additional challenges due to intra-class
appearance and shape variations among different instances from the same object or scene category.
To address these challenges, state-of-the-art methods generally extract deep convolutional neural
network (CNN) based descriptors [5, 44, 18], which provide some robustness to appearance variations,
and then perform a regularization step to estimate spatially regularized geometric fields. The most
recent techniques handle geometric deformations in addition to appearance variations within deep
CNNs. These methods can generally be classified into two categories, namely methods for geometric
invariance in the feature extraction step, e.g., spatial transformer networks (STNs) [15, 5, 19], and
methods for geometric invariance in the regularization step, e.g., geometric matching networks [30,
31]. The STN-based methods infer geometric deformation fields within a deep network and transform
the convolutional activations to provide geometric-invariant features [5, 41, 19]. While this approach
has shown geometric invariance to some extent, we conjecture that directly estimating the geometric
deformations between a pair of input images would be more robust and precise than learning to
transform each individual image to a geometric-invariant feature representation. This direct estimation
approach is used by geometric matching-based techniques [30, 31], which recover a matching model
directly through deep networks. Drawbacks of these methods include that globally-varying geometric
fields are inferred, and only fixed, untransformed versions of the features are used.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

