Graphical Generative Adversarial Networks

Chongxuan Li∗
licx14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Jun Zhu∗
dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Max Welling†
M.Welling@uva.nl
Bo Zhang∗
dcszb@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose Graphical Generative Adversarial Networks (Graphical-GAN) to
model structured data. Graphical-GAN conjoins the power of Bayesian networks on
compactly representing the dependency structures among random variables and that
of generative adversarial networks on learning expressive dependency functions.
We introduce a structured recognition model to infer the posterior distribution of
latent variables given observations. We generalize the Expectation Propagation
(EP) algorithm to learn the generative model and recognition model jointly. Finally,
we present two important instances of Graphical-GAN, i.e. Gaussian Mixture
GAN (GMGAN) and State Space GAN (SSGAN), which can successfully learn
the discrete and temporal structures on visual datasets, respectively.

1

Introduction

Deep implicit models [29] have shown promise on synthesizing realistic images [10, 33, 2] and
inferring latent variables [26, 11]. However, these approaches do not explicitly model the underlying
structures of the data, which are common in practice (e.g., temporal structures in videos). Probabilistic
graphical models [18] provide principle ways to incorporate the prior knowledge about the data
structures but these models often lack the capability to deal with the complex data like images.
To conjoin the benefits of both worlds, we propose a flexible generative modelling framework
called Graphical Generative Adversarial Networks (Graphical-GAN). On one hand, Graphical-GAN
employs Bayesian networks [18] to represent the structures among variables. On the other hand,
Graphical-GAN uses deep implicit likelihood functions [10] to model complex data.
Graphical-GAN is sufficiently flexible to model structured data but the inference and learning are
challenging due to the presence of deep implicit likelihoods and complex structures. We build a
structured recognition model [17] to approximate the true posterior distribution. We study two families
of the recognition models, i.e. the mean field posteriors [14] and the inverse factorizations [39].
We generalize the Expectation Propagation (EP) [27] algorithm to learn the generative model and
recognition model jointly. Motivated by EP, we minimize a local divergence between the generative
model and recognition model for each individual local factor defined by the generative model. The
local divergences are estimated via the adversarial technique [10] to deal with the implicit likelihoods.
Given a specific scenario, the generative model is determined a priori by context or domain knowledge
and the proposed inference and learning algorithms are applicable to arbitrary Graphical-GAN. As
instances, we present Gaussian Mixture GAN (GMGAN) and State Space GAN (SSGAN) to learn
the discrete and temporal structures on visual datasets, respectively. Empirically, these models can
∗

Department of Computer Science & Technology, Institute for Artificial Intelligence, BNRist Center, THBI
Lab, State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys., Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: J. Zhu.
†
University of Amsterdam, and the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR).
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

