Training deep learning based denoisers
without ground truth data

Shakarim Soltanayev
Se Young Chun
Department of Electrical Engineering
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Republic of Korea
{shakarim,sychun}@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently developed deep-learning-based denoisers often outperform state-of-the-art
conventional denoisers, such as the BM3D. They are typically trained to minimize
the mean squared error (MSE) between the output image of a deep neural network
and a ground truth image. In deep learning based denoisers, it is important to
use high quality noiseless ground truth data for high performance, but it is often
challenging or even infeasible to obtain noiseless images in application areas such
as hyperspectral remote sensing and medical imaging. In this article, we propose a
method based on Stein’s unbiased risk estimator (SURE) for training deep neural
network denoisers only based on the use of noisy images. We demonstrate that our
SURE-based method, without the use of ground truth data, is able to train deep
neural network denoisers to yield performances close to those networks trained
with ground truth, and to outperform the state-of-the-art denoiser BM3D. Further
improvements were achieved when noisy test images were used for training of
denoiser networks using our proposed SURE-based method. Code is available at
https://github.com/Shakarim94/Net-SURE.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has been successful in various high-level computer vision tasks [1], such as image
classification [2, 3], object detection [4, 5], and semantic segmentation [6, 7]. Deep learning has also
been investigated for low-level computer vision tasks, such as image denoising [8, 9, 10, 11, 12],
image inpainting [13], and image restoration [14, 15, 16]. In particular, image denoising is a
fundamental computer vision task that yields images with reduced noise, and improves the execution
of other tasks, such as image classification [8] and image restoration [16].
Deep learning based image denoisers [9, 11, 12] have yielded performances that are equivalent
to or better than those of conventional state-of-the-art denoising techniques such as BM3D [17].
These deep denoisers typically train their networks by minimizing the mean-squared error (MSE)
between the output of a network and the ground truth (noiseless) image. Thus, it is crucial to have
high quality noiseless images for high performance deep learning denoisers. Thus far, deep neural
network denoisers have been successful since high quality camera sensors and abundant light allow
the acquisition of high quality, almost noiseless 2D images in daily environment tasks. Acquiring
such high quality photographs is quite cheap with the use of smart phones and digital cameras.
However, it is challenging to apply currently developed deep learning based image denoisers with
minimum MSE to some application areas, such as hyperspectral remote sensing and medical imaging,
where the acquisition of noiseless ground truth data is expensive, or sometimes even infeasible. For
example, hyperspectral imaging contains hundreds of spectral information per pixel, often leading to
increased noise in hyperspectral imaging sensors [18]. Long acquisitions may improve image quality,
but it is challenging to perform them with spaceborne or airborne hyperspectral imaging. Similarly,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

