BML: A High-performance, Low-cost Gradient
Synchronization Algorithm for DML Training

Songtao Wang1,2 , Dan Li1 , Yang Cheng1 , Jinkun Geng1 ,
Yanshu Wang1 , Shuai Wang1 , Shutao Xia1,2 and Jianping Wu1
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University

Abstract
In distributed machine learning (DML), the network performance between machines significantly impacts the speed of iterative training. In this paper we propose BML, a new gradient synchronization algorithm with higher network performance and lower network cost than the current practice. BML runs on BCube
network, instead of using the traditional Fat-Tree topology. BML algorithm is designed in such a way that, compared to the parameter server (PS) algorithm on a
Fat-Tree network connecting the same number of server machines, BML achieves
theoretically k1 of the gradient synchronization time, with k5 of switches (the typical number of k is 2∼4). Experiments of LeNet-5 and VGG-19 benchmarks on a
testbed with 9 dual-GPU servers show that, BML reduces the job completion time
of DML training by up to 56.4%.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) has become a core service in large companies [14]. The scale of modern
ML training can be huge [17, 7, 4]. From our survey of a large internet company, a CTR (click
through rate) estimation task trains a model of >100 billion features with >1PB training data. Given the memory size and processing capability of today’s commodity machines, it is inevitable to run
distributed machine learning (DML) on multiple machines [10, 18]. For instance, the internet company under survey currently uses several hundreds of dedicated machines to carry out the training
for CTR estimation. With the ever-increasing training data and model sizes, it is expected that even
larger-scale DML will appear in the near future.
A typical ML training task trains a model iteratively until the parameters converge. In the widelyused gradient descent optimization method, in each iteration the algorithm uses a minibatch of
training data to compute a gradient, which decides the changes to make to the parameters trained
by the previous iteration. In DML, every machine iteratively trains a sub-minibatch of data and
synchronizes the gradients with other machines. Ideally, more machines help reduce the training
time. However, it has been shown that, when more machines are used in DML, we have to set a
smaller sub-minibatch size per machine, so as to keep the aggregated minibatch over all the machines
with a reasonable size. Otherwise, the large aggregated minibatch may cause the training to quickly
converge to a worse model. For instance, a recent work from Facebook discloses that their translation
service cannot currently train on large minibatches without degrading model quality [14].
A side effect of smaller sub-minibatch size per machine in larger-scale DML is the break of computation/communication balance. For example, an experiment from Amazon shows that [23], if setting
the batch size on a GPU as 16, the processing time per batch stays stable from 1 GPU to 128 GPUs;
while if setting the batch size on a GPU as 2, the processing time per batch under 128 GPUs increases by more than 6 times compared with the time per batch under a single GPU, because of the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

