Fast deep reinforcement learning using online
adjustments from the past

Steven S. Hansen ∗, Pablo Sprechmann ∗, Alexander Pritzel ∗, André Barreto, Charles Blundell
{stevenhansen,psprechmann,apritzel,andrebarreto,cblundell}@google.com

DeepMind

Abstract
We propose Ephemeral Value Adjusments (EVA): a means of allowing deep reinforcement learning agents to rapidly adapt to experience in their replay buffer.
EVA shifts the value predicted by a neural network with an estimate of the value
function found by planning over experience tuples from the replay buffer near
the current state. EVA combines a number of recent ideas around combining
episodic memory-like structures into reinforcement learning agents: slot-based
storage, content-based retrieval, and memory-based planning. We show that EVA
is performant on a demonstration task and Atari games.

1

Introduction

Complementary learning systems [McClelland et al., 1995, CLS] combine two mechanisms for
learning: one, fast learning and highly adaptive but poor at generalising, the other, slow at learning
and consequentially better at generalising across many examples. The need for two systems reflects
the typical trade-off between the sample efficiency and the computational complexity of a learning
algorithm. We argue that the majority of contemporary deep reinforcement learning systems fall into
the latter category: slow, gradient-based updates combined with incremental updates from Bellman
backups result in systems that are good at generalising, as evidenced by many successes [Mnih et al.,
2015, Silver et al., 2016, Moravčík et al., 2017], but take many steps in an environment to achieve
this feat.
RL methods are often categorised as either model-free methods or model-based RL methods [Sutton
and Barto, 1998]. In practice, model-free methods are typically fast at acting time, but computationally
expensive to update from experience, whilst model-based methods can be quick to update but
expensive to act with (as on-the-fly planning is required). Recently there has been interest in
incorporating episodic memory-like into reinforcement learning algorithms [Blundell et al., 2016a,
Pritzel et al., 2017], potentially providing increases in flexibility and learning speed, driven by
motivations from the neuroscience literature known as Episodic Control [Dayan and Daw, 2008,
Gershman and Daw, 2017]. Episodic Control use episodic memory in lieu of a learnt model of
the environment, aiming for a different computational trade-off to model-free and model-based
approaches.
We will be interested in a hybrid approach, motivated by the observations of CLS [McClelland et al.,
1995], where we will build an agent with two systems: one slow and general (model-free) and the
other fast and adaptive (episodic control-like). Similar to previous proposals for agents, the fast,
adaptive subsystem of our agent uses episodic memories to remember and later mimic previously
experienced rewarding sequences of states and actions. This can be seen as a memory-based form of
planning [Silver et al., 2008], in which related experiences are recalled to inform decisions. Planning
∗

denotes equal contribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

