Adaptive Negative Curvature Descent
with Applications in Non-convex Optimization

†

Mingrui Liu† , Zhe Li† , Xiaoyu Wang‡ , Jinfeng Yi\ , Tianbao Yang†
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
‡
Intellifusion \ JD AI Research
mingrui-liu, tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu

Abstract
Negative curvature descent (NCD) method has been utilized to design deterministic
or stochastic algorithms for non-convex optimization aiming at finding second-order
stationary points or local minima. In existing studies, NCD needs to approximate
the smallest eigen-value of the Hessian matrix with a sufficient precision (e.g.,
2  1) in order to achieve a sufficiently accurate second-order stationary solution
(i.e., λmin (∇2 f (x)) ≥ −2 ). One issue with this approach is that the target
precision 2 is usually set to be very small in order to find a high quality solution,
which increases the complexity for computing a negative curvature. To address
this issue, we propose an adaptive NCD to allow an adaptive error dependent on
the current gradient’s magnitude in approximating the smallest eigen-value of the
Hessian, and to encourage competition between a noisy NCD step and gradient
descent step. We consider the applications of the proposed adaptive NCD for both
deterministic and stochastic non-convex optimization, and demonstrate that it can
help reduce the the overall complexity in computing the negative curvatures during
the course of optimization without sacrificing the iteration complexity.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the following optimization problem:
min f (x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where f (x) is a non-convex smooth function with Lipschitz continuous Hessian, which could has
some special structure (e.g., expectation structure or a finite-sum structure). A standard measure
of an optimization algorithm is how fast the algorithm converges to an optimal solution. However,
finding the global optimal solution to a generally non-convex problem is intractable [13] and is even a
NP-hard problem [10]. Therefore, we aim to find an approximate second-order stationary point with:
k∇f (x)k ≤ 1 ,

and

λmin (∇2 f (x)) ≥ −2 ,

(2)

which nearly satisfy the second-order necessary optimality conditions, i.e., ∇f (x∗ ) =
0, λmin (∇2 f (x∗ )) ≥ 0, where k · k denotes the Euclidean norm and λmin (·) denotes the smallest
eigen-value function. In this work, we refer to a solution that satisfies (2) as an (1 , 2 )-second-order
stationary solution. When the function is non-degenerate (i.e., strict saddle or the Hessian at all
saddle points have a strictly negative eigen-value), then the solution satisfying (2) is close to a local
minimum for sufficiently small 0 <
√1 , 2  1. Please note that in this paper we do not follow the
tradition of [14] that restricts 2 = 1 . One reason is for more generality that allows us to compare
several recent results and another reason is that having different accuracy levels for the first-order and
the second-order guarantee brings more flexibility in the choice of our algorithms.
Recently, there has emerged a surge of studies interested in finding an approximate second-order
stationary point that satisfy (2). An effective technique used in many algorithms is negative curvature
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

