Geometry-Aware Recurrent Neural Networks for
Active Visual Recognition

Ricson Cheng∗, Ziyan Wang∗, Katerina Fragkiadaki
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{ricsonc,ziyanw1}@andrew.cmu.edu, katef@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We present recurrent geometry-aware neural networks that integrate visual information across multiple views of a scene into 3D latent feature tensors, while
maintaining an one-to-one mapping between 3D physical locations in the world
scene and latent feature locations. Object detection, object segmentation, and 3D
reconstruction is then carried out directly using the constructed 3D feature memory,
as opposed to any of the input 2D images. The proposed models are equipped
with differentiable egomotion-aware feature warping and (learned) depth-aware
unprojection operations to achieve geometrically consistent mapping between the
features in the input frame and the constructed latent model of the scene. We
empirically show the proposed model generalizes much better than geometryunaware LSTM/GRU networks, especially under the presence of multiple objects
and cross-object occlusions. Combined with active view selection policies, our
model learns to select informative viewpoints to integrate information from by
“undoing" cross-object occlusions, seamlessly combining geometry with learning
from experience.

1

Introduction

Cross-object occlusions remain an important source of failures for current state-of-the-art object
detectors [29], which, despite their formidable performance increase in recent years, still carry the
biases and idiosyncrasies of the data they were trained on [16]: static images from Imagenet and
COCO datasets. Thus, detectors do well on viewpoints that human photographers tend to prefer, but
may fail on images (non skillfully) captured by robotic agents, that often feature severe cross-object
occlusions and viewpoints which are unusual for humans. Robotic agents on the other hand do not
abide by the constraints of passive vision: they can actively choose where to look in order to recover
from occlusions and difficult viewpoints.
Actively selecting camera views for “undoing" occlusions and recovering missing information has
been identified as an important field of research since as early as 1980’s, under the name active
vision [1]. It has been argued that without such active view selection, no formal performance
guarantees can be provided for visual recognition algorithms [32]. Yet, 1980’s active vision was
not equipped with deep neural detectors, memory modules, or view selection policies, and often
attempted tasks and imagery that would appear elementary with current detectors, even from a single
camera view. There has been recent methods that have attempted to resurrect the active vision
paradigm [23, 9, 4, 18]. Paradoxically, they either focus on sequential processing of selected visual
glimpses from a passive static image [23, 9, 4], and thus they are not able to “undo" occlusions, or
they consider 3D reconstruction of isolated objects [18, 43, 20], while one can argue that isolating
objects from clutter is precisely the premise of having an active camera.
∗

Indicates equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

