Scalar Posterior Sampling with Applications
Georgios Theocharous
Adobe Research
theochar@adobe.com

Zheng Wen
Adobe Research
zwen@adobe.com

Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori
Adobe Research
abbasiya@adobe.com

Nikos Vlassis
Netflix
nvlassis@netflix.com

Abstract
We propose a practical non-episodic PSRL algorithm that unlike recent state-of-theart PSRL algorithms uses a deterministic, model-independent episode switching
schedule. Our algorithm termed deterministic schedule PSRL (DS-PSRL) is efficient in terms of time, sample, and space complexity. We prove a Bayesian
regret bound under mild assumptions. Our result is more generally applicable
to multiple parameters and continuous state action problems. We compare our
algorithm with state-of-the-art PSRL algorithms on standard discrete and continuous problems from the literature. Finally, we show how the assumptions of
our algorithm satisfy a sensible parametrization for a large class of problems in
sequential recommendations.

1

Introduction

Thompson sampling [Thompson, 1933], or posterior sampling for reinforcement learning (PSRL), is
a conceptually simple approach to deal with unknown MDPs [Strens, 2000; Osband et al., 2013].
PSRL begins with a prior distribution over the MDP model parameters (transitions and/or rewards)
and typically works in episodes. At the start of each episode, an MDP model is sampled from the
posterior belief and the agent follows the policy that is optimal for that sampled MDP until the end of
the episode. The posterior is updated at the end of every episode based on the observed actions, states,
and rewards. A special case of MDP under which PSRL has been recently extensively studied is
MDP with state resetting, either explicitly or implicitly. Specifically, in [Osband et al., 2013; Osband
and Van Roy, 2014] the considered MDPs are assumed to have fixed-length episodes, and at the
end of each episode the MDP’s state is reset according to a fixed state distribution. In [Gopalan and
Mannor, 2015], there is an assumption that the environment is ergodic and that there exists a recurrent
state under any policy. Both approaches have developed variants of PSRL algorithms under their
respective assumptions, as well as state-of-the-art regret bounds, Bayesian in [Osband et al., 2013;
Osband and Van Roy, 2014] and Frequentist in [Gopalan and Mannor, 2015].
However, many real-world problems are of a continuing and non-resetting nature. These include
sequential recommendations and other common examples found in controlled mechanical systems
(e.g., control of manufacturing robots), and process optimization (e.g., controlling a queuing system),
where ‘resets’ are rare or unnatural. Many of these real world examples could easily be parametrized
with a scalar parameter, where each value of the parameter could specify a complete model. These
type of domains do not have the luxury of state resetting, and the agent needs to learn to act, without
necessarily revisiting states. Extensions of the PSRL algorithms to general MDPs without state
resetting has so far produced non-practical algorithms and in some cases buggy theoretical analysis.
This is due to the difficulty of analyzing regret under policy switching schedules that depend on
various dynamic statistics produced by the true underlying model (e.g., doubling the visitations of
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

