A Smoother Way to Train
Structured Prediction Models
Krishna Pillutla, Vincent Roulet, Sham M. Kakade, Zaid Harchaoui
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering and Department of Statistics
University of Washington
name@uw.edu

Abstract
We present a framework to train a structured prediction model by performing
smoothing on the inference algorithm it builds upon. Smoothing overcomes the
non-smoothness inherent to the maximum margin structured prediction objective,
and paves the way for the use of fast primal gradient-based optimization algorithms.
We illustrate the proposed framework by developing a novel primal incremental
optimization algorithm for the structural support vector machine. The proposed
algorithm blends an extrapolation scheme for acceleration and an adaptive smoothing scheme and builds upon the stochastic variance-reduced gradient algorithm.
We establish its worst-case global complexity bound and study several practical
variants. We present experimental results on two real-world problems, namely
named entity recognition and visual object localization. The experimental results
show that the proposed framework allows us to build upon efficient inference
algorithms to develop large-scale optimization algorithms for structured prediction
which can achieve competitive performance on the two real-world problems.

1

Introduction

Consider the optimization problem arising when training structural support vector machines:
#
"
n
1 X (i)
λ
2
min F (w) :=
f (w) + kwk2 ,
n i=1
2
w∈Rd

(1)

where each f (i) is the structural hinge loss. Structural support vector machines were designed for
prediction problems where outputs are discrete data structures such as sequences or trees [59, 65].
Batch nonsmooth optimization algorithms such as cutting plane methods are appropriate for problems
with small or moderate sample sizes [65, 21]. Stochastic nonsmooth optimization algorithms such as
stochastic subgradient methods can tackle problems with large sample sizes [49, 57]. However both
families of methods achieve the typical worst-case complexity bounds of nonsmooth optimization
algorithms and cannot easily leverage a possible hidden smoothness of the objective.
Furthermore, as significant progress is being made on incremental smooth optimization algorithms
for training unstructured prediction models [36], we would like to transfer such advances and design
faster optimization algorithms to train structured prediction models. Indeed if each term in the
finite-sum were L-smooth 1 , incremental optimization algorithms such as MISO [37], SAG [33, 53],
SAGA [10], SDCA [55], and SVRG [23] could leverage the finite-sum structure of the objective (1)
and achieve faster convergence than batch algorithms on large-scale problems.
1
We say f is L-smooth with respect to k·k when ∇f exists everywhere and is L-Lipschitz with respect to
k·k. Smoothness and strong convexity are taken to be with respect to k · k2 unless stated otherwise.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

