Life-Long Disentangled Representation
Learning with Cross-Domain Latent Homologies
Alessandro Achille, Tom Eccles, Loic Matthey, Christopher P Burgess,
Nick Watters, Alexander Lerchner, Irina Higgins
UCLA, DeepMind
achille@cs.ucla.edu,
{eccles,lmatthey,cpburgess,nwatters,lerchner,irinah}@google.com

Abstract
Intelligent behaviour in the real-world requires the ability to acquire new knowledge
from an ongoing sequence of experiences while preserving and reusing past knowledge. We propose a novel algorithm for unsupervised representation learning from
piece-wise stationary visual data: Variational Autoencoder with Shared Embeddings
(VASE). Based on the Minimum Description Length principle, VASE automatically
detects shifts in the data distribution and allocates spare representational capacity to
new knowledge, while simultaneously protecting previously learnt representations
from catastrophic forgetting. Our approach encourages the learnt representations
to be disentangled, which imparts a number of desirable properties: VASE can
deal sensibly with ambiguous inputs, it can enhance its own representations through
imagination-based exploration, and most importantly, it exhibits semantically
meaningful sharing of latents between different datasets. Compared to baselines
with entangled representations, our approach is able to reason beyond surface-level
statistics and perform semantically meaningful cross-domain inference.

1

Introduction

A critical feature of biological intelligence is its capacity for life-long learning [10] – the ability to
acquire new knowledge from a sequence of experiences to solve progressively more tasks, while
maintaining performance on previous ones. This, however, remains a serious challenge for current
deep learning approaches. While current methods are able to outperform humans on many individual
problems [53, 37, 20], these algorithms suffer from catastrophic forgetting [14, 34, 35, 43, 17].
Training on a new task or environment can be enough to degrade their performance from super-human
to chance level [47]. Another critical aspect of life-long learning is the ability to sensibly reuse
previously learnt representations in new domains (positive transfer). For example, knowing that
strawberries and bananas are not edible when they are green could be useful when deciding whether to
eat a green peach in the future. Finding semantic homologies between visually distinctive domains can
remove the need to learn from scratch on every new environment and hence help with data efficiency
– another major drawback of current deep learning approaches [16, 30].
But how can an algorithm maximise the informativeness of the representation it learns on one domain
for positive transfer on other domains without knowing a priori what experiences are to come? One
approach might be to capture the important structure of the current environment in a maximally
compact way (to preserve capacity for future learning). Such learning is likely to result in positive
transfer if future training domains share some structural similarity with the old ones. This is a
reasonable expectation to have for most natural (non-adversarial) tasks and environments, since they
tend to adhere to the structure of the real world (e.g. relate to objects and their properties) governed by
the consistent rules of chemistry or physics. A similar motivation underlies the Minimum Description
Length (MDL) principle [45] and disentangled representation learning [8].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

