Hybrid Knowledge Routed Modules for Large-scale
Object Detection

Chenhan Jiang∗
Sun Yat-Sen University
jchcyan@gmail.com

Hang Xu∗
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
xbjxh@live.com

Xiaodan Liang†
School of Intelligent Systems Engineering
Sun Yat-Sen University
xdliang328@gmail.com

Liang Lin
Sun Yat-Sen University
linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
The dominant object detection approaches treat the recognition of each region
separately and overlook crucial semantic correlations between objects in one scene.
This paradigm leads to substantial performance drop when facing heavy long-tail
problems, where very few samples are available for rare classes and plenty of
confusing categories exists. We exploit diverse human commonsense knowledge
for reasoning over large-scale object categories and reaching semantic coherency
within one image. Particularly, we present Hybrid Knowledge Routed Modules
(HKRM) that incorporates the reasoning routed by two kinds of knowledge forms:
an explicit knowledge module for structured constraints that are summarized with
linguistic knowledge (e.g. shared attributes, relationships) about concepts; and an
implicit knowledge module that depicts some implicit constraints (e.g. common
spatial layouts). By functioning over a region-to-region graph, both modules can
be individualized and adapted to coordinate with visual patterns in each image,
guided by specific knowledge forms. HKRM are light-weight, general-purpose
and extensible by easily incorporating multiple knowledge to endow any detection
networks the ability of global semantic reasoning. Experiments on large-scale
object detection benchmarks show HKRM obtains around 34.5% improvement on
VisualGenome (1000 categories) and 30.4% on ADE in terms of mAP. Codes and
trained model can be found in https://github.com/chanyn/HKRM.

1

Introduction

The most state-of-the-art object detection methods [16, 43, 8, 4] follow the region-based paradigm,
which treats the classification and boundingbox regression of each region proposal separately. The
detection performance purely relies on the discriminative capabilities of region features, which
often depends on sufficient training data for each category. Such paradigm thus obtains substantial
performance drop when dealing with large-scale detection task [49, 18] that recognizes and localizes
a large number of categories (e.g. 3000 classes in VG [23]). The long-tail problem is very common,
where very few samples exist for rare classes, such as pepperoni and bagel. On the other hand,
detection challenges such as heavy occlusion, class ambiguities and tiny-size objects become more
severe due to more categories within one image. However, humans can still identity objects precisely
under complex circumstances because of the remarkable reasoning ability resorting to commonsense
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding Author

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

