A Game-Theoretic Approach to Recommendation
Systems with Strategic Content Providers

Omer Ben-Porat and Moshe Tennenholtz
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa 32000 Israel
{omerbp@campus,moshe@ie}.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We introduce a game-theoretic approach to the study of recommendation systems
with strategic content providers. Such systems should be fair and stable. Showing
that traditional approaches fail to satisfy these requirements, we propose the Shapley mediator. We show that the Shapley mediator fulfills the fairness and stability
requirements, runs in linear time, and is the only economically efficient mechanism
satisfying these properties.

1

Introduction

Recommendation systems (RSs hereinafter) have rapidly developed over the past decade. By
predicting a user preference for an item, RSs have been successfully applied in a variety of applications.
Moreover, the amazing RSs offered by giant e-tailers and e-marketing platforms, such as Amazon
and Google, lie at the heart of online commerce and marketing on the web. However, current
significant challenges faced by personal assistants (e.g. Cortana, Google Now and Alexa) and mobile
applications go way beyond the practice of predicting the satisfaction levels of a user from a set of
offered items. Such systems have to generate recommendations that satisfy the needs of both the end
users and other parties or stakeholders [8, 39]. Consider the following cases:
• When Alice drives her car, her personal assistant runs the default navigation application. When
she makes a stop at a junction, the personal assistant may show Alice advertisements provided by
neighborhood stores, or an update on the stock market status as provided by financial brokers. Each of
these pieces of information — the plain navigation content, the local advertisements and the financial
information — are served by different content providers. These content providers are all competing
over Alice’s attention at a given point. The personal assistant is aware of Alice’s satisfaction with
each content, and needs to select the right content to show at a particular time.
• Bob is reading news of the day on his mobile application. The application, aware of Bob’s interests,
is presenting news deemed most relevant to him. The news is augmented by advertisements, provided
by competing content providers, as well as articles by independent reporters. The mobile application,
balancing Bob’s taste and the interests of the content providers, determines the mix of content shown
to Bob.
In these contexts, the RS integrates information from various providers, often sponsored content,
which is probably relevant to the user. The content providers are strategic — namely, make decisions
based on the way the RS operates, aiming at maximizing their exposure. For instance, to draw Bob’s
attention, a content provider strategically selects the topic of her news item, aiming at maximizing the
exposure to her item. On the one hand, fair content provider treatment is critical for smooth efficient
use of the system and also to maintained content provider engagement over time. On the other hand,
the strategic behavior of the content providers may lead to instability of the system: a content provider
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

