Speaker-Follower Models for
Vision-and-Language Navigation

Daniel Fried∗ 1 , Ronghang Hu∗1 , Volkan Cirik∗2 , Anna Rohrbach1 , Jacob Andreas1 ,
Louis-Philippe Morency2 , Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick2 , Kate Saenko3 ,
Dan Klein∗∗1 , Trevor Darrell∗∗1
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Boston University

Abstract
Navigation guided by natural language instructions presents a challenging reasoning problem for instruction followers. Natural language instructions typically
identify only a few high-level decisions and landmarks rather than complete lowlevel motor behaviors; much of the missing information must be inferred based
on perceptual context. In machine learning settings, this is doubly challenging: it
is difficult to collect enough annotated data to enable learning of this reasoning
process from scratch, and also difficult to implement the reasoning process using
generic sequence models. Here we describe an approach to vision-and-language
navigation that addresses both these issues with an embedded speaker model. We
use this speaker model to (1) synthesize new instructions for data augmentation and
to (2) implement pragmatic reasoning, which evaluates how well candidate action
sequences explain an instruction. Both steps are supported by a panoramic action
space that reflects the granularity of human-generated instructions. Experiments
show that all three components of this approach—speaker-driven data augmentation, pragmatic reasoning and panoramic action space—dramatically improve the
performance of a baseline instruction follower, more than doubling the success rate
over the best existing approach on a standard benchmark.

1

Introduction

In the vision-and-language navigation task [1], an agent is placed in a realistic environment, and
provided a natural language instruction such as “Go down the stairs, go slight left at the bottom
and go through door, take an immediate left and enter the bathroom, stop just inside in front of the
sink”. The agent must follow this instruction to navigate from its starting location to a goal location,
as shown in Figure 1 (left). To accomplish this task the agent must learn to relate the language
instructions to the visual environment. Moreover, it should be able to carry out new instructions in
unseen environments.
Even simple navigation tasks require nontrivial reasoning: the agent must resolve ambiguous references to landmarks, perform a counterfactual evaluation of alternative routes, and identify incompletely specified destinations. While a number of approaches [33, 34, 55] have been proposed for
the various navigation benchmarks, they generally employ a single model that learns to map directly
from instructions to actions from a limited corpus of annotated trajectories.
In this paper we treat the vision-and-language navigation task as a trajectory search problem, where
the agent needs to find (based on the instruction) the best trajectory in the environment to navigate
from the start location to the goal location. Our model involves an instruction interpretation (follower)
module, mapping instructions to action sequences; and an instruction generation (speaker) module,
mapping action sequences to instructions (Figure 1), both implemented with standard sequence-tosequence architectures. The speaker learns to give textual instructions for visual routes, while the
∗ ∗∗

, : Authors contributed equally

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

