Equality of Opportunity in Classification:
A Causal Approach

Junzhe Zhang
Purdue University, USA
zhang745@purdue.edu

Elias Bareinboim
Purdue University, USA
eb@purdue.edu

Abstract
The Equalized Odds (for short, EO) is one of the most popular measures of discrimination used in the supervised learning setting. It ascertains fairness through
the balance of the misclassification rates (false positive and negative) across the
protected groups – e.g., in the context of law enforcement, an African-American
defendant who would not commit a future crime will have an equal opportunity of
being released, compared to a non-recidivating Caucasian defendant. Despite this
noble goal, it has been acknowledged in the literature that statistical tests based
on the EO are oblivious to the underlying causal mechanisms that generated the
disparity in the first place (Hardt et al. 2016). This leads to a critical disconnect
between statistical measures readable from the data and the meaning of discrimination in the legal system, where compelling evidence that the observed disparity is
tied to a specific causal process deemed unfair by society is required to characterize
discrimination. The goal of this paper is to develop a principled approach to connect the statistical disparities characterized by the EO and the underlying, elusive,
and frequently unobserved, causal mechanisms that generated such inequality. We
start by introducing a new family of counterfactual measures that allows one to
explain the misclassification disparities in terms of the underlying mechanisms
in an arbitrary, non-parametric structural causal model. This will, in turn, allow
legal and data analysts to interpret currently deployed classifiers through causal
lens, linking the statistical disparities found in the data to the corresponding causal
processes. Leveraging the new family of counterfactual measures, we develop a
learning procedure to construct a classifier that is statistically efficient, interpretable,
and compatible with the basic human intuition of fairness. We demonstrate our
results through experiments in both real (COMPAS) and synthetic datasets.

1

Introduction

The goal of supervised learning is to provide a statistical basis upon which individuals with different
group memberships can be reliably classified. For instance, a bank may want to learn a function from
a set of background factors so as to determine whether a customer will repay her loan; a university
may train a classifier to predict the future GPA of an applicant to decide whether to accept her into
the program. The growing adoption of automated systems based on standard classification algorithms
throughout society (including in law enforcement, education, and finance [13, 4, 8, 21, 1]) has raised
concerns about potential issues due to unfairness and discrimination.
Z
A recent high-profile example is a risk assessment tool called COMPAS,
Y
which has been widely used across the US to inform decisions in the criminal X
justice system. Fig. 1 graphically describes this setting – X represents the
W
race (0 for Caucasian, 1 for African-American) of a defendant and Y stands Figure 1: COMPAS
for the recidivism outcome (0 for no, 1 otherwise), which are mediated by the prior convictions W , and
confounded by other demographic information Z (e.g., age, gender) of the defendant. The COMPAS
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

