A Lyapunov-based Approach to Safe Reinforcement
Learning

Yinlam Chow
DeepMind
yinlamchow@google.com

Ofir Nachum
Google Brain
ofirnachum@google.com

Edgar Duenez-Guzman
DeepMind
duenez@google.com

Mohammad Ghavamzadeh
Facebook AI Research
mgh@fb.com

Abstract
In many real-world reinforcement learning (RL) problems, besides optimizing the
main objective function, an agent must concurrently avoid violating a number of
constraints. In particular, besides optimizing performance, it is crucial to guarantee the safety of an agent during training as well as deployment (e.g., a robot
should avoid taking actions - exploratory or not - which irrevocably harm its hardware). To incorporate safety in RL, we derive algorithms under the framework
of constrained Markov decision processes (CMDPs), an extension of the standard
Markov decision processes (MDPs) augmented with constraints on expected cumulative costs. Our approach hinges on a novel Lyapunov method. We define
and present a method for constructing Lyapunov functions, which provide an effective way to guarantee the global safety of a behavior policy during training
via a set of local linear constraints. Leveraging these theoretical underpinnings,
we show how to use the Lyapunov approach to systematically transform dynamic
programming (DP) and RL algorithms into their safe counterparts. To illustrate
their effectiveness, we evaluate these algorithms in several CMDP planning and
decision-making tasks on a safety benchmark domain. Our results show that our
proposed method significantly outperforms existing baselines in balancing constraint satisfaction and performance.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown exceptional successes in a variety of domains such as video
games [25] and recommender systems [40], where the main goal is to optimize a single return.
However, in many real-world problems, besides optimizing the main objective (the return), there
can exist several conflicting constraints that make RL challenging. In particular, besides optimizing
performance it is crucial to guarantee the safety of an agent in deployment [5, 32, 33], as well as
during training [2]. For example, a robot should avoid taking actions which irrevocably harm its
hardware; a recommender system must avoid presenting harmful or offending items to users.
Sequential decision-making in non-deterministic environments has been extensively studied in the
literature under the framework of Markov decision processes (MDPs). To incorporate safety into the
RL process, we are particularly interested in deriving algorithms under the context of constrained
Markov decision processes (CMDPs), which is an extension of MDPs with expected cumulative
constraint costs. The additional constraint component of CMDPs increases flexibility in modeling
problems with trajectory-based constraints, when compared with other approaches that customize
immediate costs in MDPs to handle constraints [34]. As shown in numerous applications from robot
motion planning [30, 26, 11], resource allocation [24, 18], and financial engineering [1, 41], it is
more natural to define safety over the whole trajectory, instead of over particular state and action
pairs. Under this framework, we denote an agent’s behavior policy to be safe if it satisfies the
cumulative cost constraints of the CMDP.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

