Unsupervised Image-to-Image Translation Using
Domain-Specific Variational Information Bound

Hadi Kazemi
hakazemi@mix.wvu.edu

Sobhan Soleymani
ssoleyma@mix.wvu.edu

Fariborz Taherkhani
fariborztaherkhani@gmail.com

Seyed Mehdi Iranmanesh
seiranmanesh@mix.wvu.edu

Nasser M. Nasrabadi
nasser.nasrabadi@mail.wvu.edu
West Virginia University
Morgantown, WV 26505

Abstract
Unsupervised image-to-image translation is a class of computer vision problems
which aims at modeling conditional distribution of images in the target domain,
given a set of unpaired images in the source and target domains. An image in the
source domain might have multiple representations in the target domain. Therefore,
ambiguity in modeling of the conditional distribution arises, specially when the
images in the source and target domains come from different modalities. Current
approaches mostly rely on simplifying assumptions to map both domains into a
shared-latent space. Consequently, they are only able to model the domain-invariant
information between the two modalities. These approaches usually fail to model
domain-specific information which has no representation in the target domain.
In this work, we propose an unsupervised image-to-image translation framework
which maximizes a domain-specific variational information bound and learns the
target domain-invariant representation of the two domain. The proposed framework
makes it possible to map a single source image into multiple images in the target
domain, utilizing several target domain-specific codes sampled randomly from the
prior distribution, or extracted from reference images.

1

Introduction

Image-to-image translation is the major goal for many computer vision problems, such as sketch
to photo-realistic image translation [25], style transfer [13], inpainting missing image regions [12],
colorization of grayscale images [11, 32], and super-resolution [18]. If corresponding image pairs
are available in both source and target domains, these problems can be studied in a supervised
setting. For years, researchers [22] have made great efforts to solve this problem employing classical
methods, such as superpixel-based segmentation [39]. More recentely, frameworks such as conditional
Generative Adversarial Networks (cGAN) [12], Style and Structure Generative Adversarial Network
(S2 -GAN) [30], and VAE-GAN [17] are proposed to address the problem of supervised imageto-image translation. However, in many real-world applications, collecting paired training data is
laborious and expensive [37]. Therefore, in many applications, there are only a few paired images
available or no paired images at all. In this case, only independent sets of images in each domain,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

