Towards Deep Conversational Recommendations
Raymond Li1, 2 , Samira Ebrahimi Kahou1, 3 , Hannes Schulz3 , Vincent Michalski4, 5 ,
Laurent Charlin5, 6 , and Chris Pal1, 2, 5
1

Ecole Polytechnique de Montréal 2 Element AI
4
Université de Montréal 5 Mila

3
6

Microsoft Research Montreal
HEC Montréal

Abstract
There has been growing interest in using neural networks and deep learning techniques to create dialogue systems. Conversational recommendation is an interesting
setting for the scientiﬁc exploration of dialogue with natural language as the associated discourse involves goal-driven dialogue that often transforms naturally
into more free-form chat. This paper provides two contributions. First, until now
there has been no publicly available large-scale dataset consisting of real-world dialogues centered around recommendations. To address this issue and to facilitate our
exploration here, we have collected R E D IAL, a dataset consisting of over 10,000
conversations centered around the theme of providing movie recommendations.
We make this data available to the community for further research. Second, we
use this dataset to explore multiple facets of conversational recommendations. In
particular we explore new neural architectures, mechanisms, and methods suitable
for composing conversational recommendation systems. Our dataset allows us
to systematically probe model sub-components addressing different parts of the
overall problem domain ranging from: sentiment analysis and cold-start recommendation generation to detailed aspects of how natural language is used in this setting
in the real world. We combine such sub-components into a full-blown dialogue
system and examine its behavior.

1

Introduction

Deep-learning-based approaches to creating dialogue systems provide extremely ﬂexible solutions
for the fundamental algorithms underlying dialogue systems. In this paper we explore fundamental
algorithmic elements of conversational recommendation systems through examining a suite of neural
architectures for sub-problems of conversational recommendation making.
It is well known that deep learning techniques require considerable amounts of data to be effective.
Addressing this need, we provide a new dataset of 10,000 dialogues to the community to facilitate the
study of discourse with natural language when making recommendations is an explicit goal of the
exchange. Our setting of interest and our new dataset, named REcommendations through DIALog
(R E D IAL)1 , are centered around conversations about movies where one party in the conversation
is seeking recommendations and the other party is providing recommendations. Our decision for
focusing on this domain is motivated in part by the following.
A good discussion with a friend, librarian, movie rental store clerk or movie fan can be an enjoyable
experience, leading to new ideas for movies that one might like to watch. We shall refer to this
general setting as conversational movie recommendation. While dialogue systems are sometimes
characterized as falling into the categories of goal-directed dialogue vs chit-chat, we observe that
discussions about movies often combine various elements of chit-chat, goal-directed dialogue, and
even question answering in a natural way. As such the practical goal of creating conversational
1

https://redialdata.github.io/website/

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

