Boolean Decision Rules via Column Generation
Sanjeeb Dash, Oktay Günlük, Dennis Wei
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
{sanjeebd,gunluk,dwei}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
This paper considers the learning of Boolean rules in either disjunctive normal
form (DNF, OR-of-ANDs, equivalent to decision rule sets) or conjunctive normal
form (CNF, AND-of-ORs) as an interpretable model for classification. An integer
program is formulated to optimally trade classification accuracy for rule simplicity.
Column generation (CG) is used to efficiently search over an exponential number
of candidate clauses (conjunctions or disjunctions) without the need for heuristic
rule mining. This approach also bounds the gap between the selected rule set and
the best possible rule set on the training data. To handle large datasets, we propose
an approximate CG algorithm using randomization. Compared to three recently
proposed alternatives, the CG algorithm dominates the accuracy-simplicity tradeoff in 8 out of 16 datasets. When maximized for accuracy, CG is competitive with
rule learners designed for this purpose, sometimes finding significantly simpler
solutions that are no less accurate.

1

Introduction

Interpretability has become a well-recognized goal for machine learning models. The need for
interpretable models is certain to increase as machine learning pushes further into domains such as
medicine, criminal justice, and business, where such models complement human decision-makers and
decisions can have major consequences on human lives. Transparency is thus required for domain
experts to understand, critique, and trust models, and reasoning is required to explain individual
decisions.
This paper considers Boolean rules in either disjunctive normal form (DNF, OR-of-ANDs) or conjunctive normal form (CNF, AND-of-ORs) as a class of interpretable models for binary classification.
An example of a DNF rule with two clauses is “IF (# accounts < 5) OR (# accounts 7 AND debt
> $1000) THEN risk = high”. Particularly desirable for interpretability are compact Boolean rules
with few clauses and conditions in each clause.
DNF classification rules are also referred to as decision rule sets, where each conjunction is considered
an individual rule, rules are unordered, and a positive prediction is made when at least one of the
rules is satisfied. Rule sets stand in contrast to decision lists [44, 35, 49, 3, 34, 53], where rules are
ordered in an IF-ELSE sequence, and decision trees [11, 43, 6], where they are organized into a tree
structure. While the latter two classes are also considered interpretable, the metrics for measuring
their complexity are different and not directly comparable [27]. Moreover, a user study [33] has
quantified the extra effort involved in understanding decision lists due to the need to account for the
negations of all preceding rules.
The learning of Boolean rules and rule sets has an extensive history spanning multiple fields. DNF
learning theory (e.g. [47, 32, 24]) focuses on the ideal noiseless setting (sometimes allowing arbitrary
queries) and is less relevant to the practice of learning compact models from noisy data. Predominant
practical approaches include a covering or separate-and-conquer strategy ([15, 14, 16, 26, 28, 40],
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

