Library Learning for Neurally-Guided Bayesian
Program Induction

Kevin Ellis
MIT
ellisk@mit.edu

Lucas Morales
MIT
lucasem@mit.edu

Armando Solar-Lezama
MIT
asolar@csail.mit.edu

Mathias Sablé-Meyer
ENS Paris-Saclay
mathsm@mit.edu
Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT
jbt@mit.edu

Abstract
Successful approaches to program induction require a hand-engineered domainspecific language (DSL), constraining the space of allowed programs and imparting
prior knowledge of the domain. We contribute a program induction algorithm
called EC2 that learns a DSL while jointly training a neural network to efficiently
search for programs in the learned DSL. We use our model to synthesize functions
on lists, edit text, and solve symbolic regression problems, showing how the model
learns a domain-specific library of program components for expressing solutions to
problems in the domain.

1

Introduction

Much of everyday human thinking and learning can be understood in terms of program induction:
constructing a procedure that maps inputs to desired outputs, based on observing example inputoutput pairs. People can induce programs flexibly across many different domains, and remarkably,
often from just one or a few examples. For instance, if shown that a text-editing program should map
“Jane Morris Goodall” to “J. M. Goodall”, we can guess it maps “Richard Erskine Leakey” to “R. E.
Leakey”; if instead the first input mapped to “Dr. Jane”, “Goodall, Jane”, or ”Morris”, we might have
guessed the latter should map to “Dr. Richard”, “Leakey, Richard”, or “Erskine”, respectively.
The FlashFill system [1] developed by Microsoft researchers and now embedded in Excel solves
problems such as these and is probably the best known practical program-induction algorithm, but
researchers in programming languages and AI have built successful program induction algorithms
for many applications, such as handwriting recognition and generation [2], procedural graphics [3],
cognitive modeling [4], question answering [5] and robot motion planning [6], to name just a few.
These systems work in different ways, but most hinge upon having a carefully engineered Domain
Specific Language (DSL). This is especially true for systems such as FlashFill that aim to induce
a wide range of programs very quickly, in a few seconds or less. DSLs constrain the search over
programs with strong prior knowledge in the form of a restricted set of programming primitives tuned
to the needs of the domain: for text editing, these are operations like appending strings and splitting
on characters.
In this work, we consider the problem of building agents that learn to solve program induction tasks,
and also the problem of acquiring the prior knowledge necessary to quickly solve these tasks in a new
domain. Representative problems in three domains are shown in Table 1. Our solution is an algorithm
that grows or boostraps a DSL while jointly training a neural network to help write programs in the
increasingly rich DSL.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

