Semidefinite relaxations
for certifying robustness to adversarial examples

Aditi Raghunathan, Jacob Steinhardt and Percy Liang
Stanford University
{aditir, jsteinhardt, pliang}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Despite their impressive performance on diverse tasks, neural networks fail catastrophically in the presence of adversarial inputs—imperceptibly but adversarially
perturbed versions of natural inputs. We have witnessed an arms race between
defenders who attempt to train robust networks and attackers who try to construct
adversarial examples. One promise of ending the arms race is developing certified
defenses, ones which are provably robust against all attackers in some family. These
certified defenses are based on convex relaxations which construct an upper bound
on the worst case loss over all attackers in the family. Previous relaxations are loose
on networks that are not trained against the respective relaxation. In this paper,
we propose a new semidefinite relaxation for certifying robustness that applies to
arbitrary ReLU networks. We show that our proposed relaxation is tighter than previous relaxations and produces meaningful robustness guarantees on three different
foreign networks whose training objectives are agnostic to our proposed relaxation.

1

Introduction

Many state-of-the-art classifiers have been shown to fail catastrophically in the presence of small
imperceptible but adversarial perturbations. Since the discovery of such adversarial examples [25],
numerous defenses have been proposed in attempt to build classifiers that are robust to adversarial
examples. However, defenses are routinely broken by new attackers who adapt to the proposed defense,
leading to an arms race. For example, distillation was proposed [22] but shown to be ineffective [5].
A proposed defense based on transformations of test inputs [20] was broken in only five days [2].
Recently, seven defenses published at ICLR 2018 fell to the attacks of Athalye et al. [3].
A recent body of work aims to break this arms race by training classifiers that are certifiably robust to
all attacks within a fixed attack model [13, 23, 29, 8]. These approaches construct a convex relaxation
for computing an upper bound on the worst-case loss over all valid attacks—this upper bound serves
as a certificate of robustness. In this work, we propose a new convex relaxation based on semidefinite
programming (SDP) that is significantly tighter than previous relaxations based on linear programming
(LP) [29, 8, 9] and handles arbitrary number of layers (unlike the formulation in [23], which was
restricted to two). We summarize the properties of our relaxation as follows:
1. Our new SDP relaxation reasons jointly about intermediate activations and captures interactions
that the LP relaxation cannot. Theoretically, we prove that there is a square root dimension gap between
the LP relaxation and our proposed SDP relaxation for neural networks with random weights.
2. Empirically, the tightness of our proposed relaxation allows us to obtain tight certificates for
foreign networks—networks that were not specifically trained towards the certification procedure.
For instance, adversarial training against the Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) attack [21] has led
to networks that are “empirically” robust against known attacks, but which have only been certified
against small perturbations (e.g.  = 0.05 in the `∞ -norm for the MNIST dataset [9]). We use our SDP
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

