Generative Neural Machine Translation

1

Harshil Shah1
University College London

2

David Barber1,2,3
3
Alan Turing Institute
reinfer.io

Abstract
We introduce Generative Neural Machine Translation (GNMT), a latent variable
architecture which is designed to model the semantics of the source and target
sentences. We modify an encoder-decoder translation model by adding a latent
variable as a language agnostic representation which is encouraged to learn the
meaning of the sentence. GNMT achieves competitive BLEU scores on pure translation tasks, and is superior when there are missing words in the source sentence.
We augment the model to facilitate multilingual translation and semi-supervised
learning without adding parameters. This framework significantly reduces overfitting when there is limited paired data available, and is effective for translating
between pairs of languages not seen during training.

1

Introduction

Data from multiple modalities (e.g. an image and a caption) can be used to learn representations with
more understanding about their environment compared to when only a single modality (an image
or a caption alone) is available. Such representations can then be included as components in larger
models which may be responsible for several tasks. However, it can often be expensive to acquire
multi-modal data even when large amounts of unsupervised data may be available.
In the machine translation context, the same sentence expressed in different languages offers the
potential to learn a representation of the sentence’s meaning. Variational Neural Machine Translation (VNMT) [Zhang et al., 2016] attempts to achieve this by augmenting a baseline model with
a latent variable intended to represent the underlying semantics of the source sentence, achieving
higher BLEU scores than the baseline. However, because the latent representation is dependent on
the source sentence, it can be argued that it doesn’t serve a different purpose to the encoder hidden
states of the baseline model. As we demonstrate empirically, this model tends to ignore the latent
variable therefore it is not clear that it learns a useful representation of the sentence’s meaning.
In this paper, we introduce Generative Neural Machine Translation (GNMT), whose latent variable
is more explicitly designed to learn the sentence’s semantic meaning. Unlike the majority of neural
machine translation models (which model the conditional distribution of the target sentence given
the source sentence), GNMT models the joint distribution of the target sentence and the source
sentence. To do this, it uses the latent variable as a language agnostic representation of the sentence,
which generates text in both the source and target languages. By giving the latent representation
responsibility for generating the same sentence in multiple languages, it is encouraged to learn the
semantic meaning of the sentence. We show that GNMT achieves competitive BLEU scores on
translation tasks, relies heavily on the latent variable and is particularly effective at translating long
sentences. When there are missing words in the source sentence, GNMT is able to use its learned
representation to infer what those words may be and produce good translations accordingly.
We then extend GNMT to facilitate multilingual translation whilst sharing parameters across languages. This is achieved by adding two categorical variables to the model in order to indicate the
source and target languages respectively. We show that this parameter sharing helps to reduce the
impact of overfitting when the amount of available paired data is limited, and proves to be effective
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

