Thermostat-assisted continuously-tempered
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo for Bayesian learning

Rui Luo1 , Jianhong Wang∗1 , Yaodong Yang∗1 , Zhanxing Zhu2 , and Jun Wang†1
1 University College London, 2 Peking University

Abstract
We propose a new sampling method, the thermostat-assisted continuously-tempered
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, for Bayesian learning on large datasets and multimodal
distributions. It simulates the Nosé-Hoover dynamics of a continuously-tempered
Hamiltonian system built on the distribution of interest. A significant advantage of
this method is that it is not only able to efficiently draw representative i.i.d. samples
when the distribution contains multiple isolated modes, but capable of adaptively
neutralising the noise arising from mini-batches and maintaining accurate sampling.
While the properties of this method have been studied using synthetic distributions,
experiments on three real datasets also demonstrated the gain of performance over
several strong baselines with various types of neural networks plunged in.

1

Introduction

Bayesian learning via Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods is appealing for its inborn nature
of characterising the uncertainty within the learnable parameters. However, when the distributions of
interest contain multiple modes, rapid exploration on the corresponding multimodal landscapes w.r.t.
the parameters becomes difficult using classic methods [7, 16]. In particular, given a large number of
modes, some “distant” ones might be beyond the reach from others; this would potentially lead to the
so-called pseudo-convergence [1], where the guarantee of ergodicity for MCMC methods breaks.
To make things worse, Bayesian learning on large datasets is typically conducted in an online setting:
at each of the iterations, only a subset, i.e. a mini-batch, of the dataset is utilised to update the model
parameters [24]. Although the computational complexity is substantially reduced, those mini-batches
inevitably introduce noise into the system and therefore increase the uncertainty within the parameters,
making it harder to properly sample multimodal distributions.
In this paper, we propose a new sampling method, referred to as the thermostat-assisted continuouslytempered Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, to address the aforementioned problems and to facilitate Bayesian
learning on large datasets and multimodal posterior distributions. We extend the classic Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo (HMC) with the scheme of continuous tempering stemming from the recent advances in
physics [8] and chemistry [15]. The extended dynamics governs the variation on effective temperature
for the distribution of interest in a continuous and systematic fashion such that the sampling trajectory
can readily overcome high energy barriers and rapidly explore the entire parameter space. In addition
to tempering, we also introduce a set of Nosé-Hoover thermostats [18, 11] to handle the noise arising
from the use of mini-batches. The thermostats are integrated into the tempered dynamics so that the
mini-batch noise can be effectively recognised and automatically neutralised. In short, the proposed
method leverages continuous tempering to enhance the sampling efficiency, especially for multimodal
distributions; it makes use of Nosé-Hoover thermostats to adaptively dissipate the instabilities caused
by mini-batches so that the desired distributions can be recovered. Various experiments are conducted
to demonstrate the effectiveness of the new method: it consistently outperforms several samplers and
optimisers on the accuracy of image classification with different types of neural network.
∗ Equal
† Correspondence to: j.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

