GradiVeQ: Vector Quantization for
Bandwidth-Efficient Gradient Aggregation in
Distributed CNN Training
Mingchao Yu∗1 , Zhifeng Lin∗1 , Krishna Narra , Songze Li , Youjie Li† , Nam Sung Kim† ,
Alexander Schwing† , Murali Annavaram , and Salman Avestimehr


†

University of Southern California
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign

Abstract
Data parallelism can boost the training speed of convolutional neural networks
(CNN), but could suffer from significant communication costs caused by gradient aggregation. To alleviate this problem, several scalar quantization techniques
have been developed to compress the gradients. But these techniques could perform poorly when used together with decentralized aggregation protocols like
ring all-reduce (RAR), mainly due to their inability to directly aggregate compressed gradients. In this paper, we empirically demonstrate the strong linear
correlations between CNN gradients, and propose a gradient vector quantization technique, named GradiVeQ, to exploit these correlations through principal
component analysis (PCA) for substantial gradient dimension reduction. GradiVeQ enables direct aggregation of compressed gradients, hence allows us to build
a distributed learning system that parallelizes GradiVeQ gradient compression
and RAR communications. Extensive experiments on popular CNNs demonstrate
that applying GradiVeQ slashes the wall-clock gradient aggregation time of the
original RAR by more than 5X without noticeable accuracy loss, and reduces the
end-to-end training time by almost 50%. The results also show that GradiVeQ is
compatible with scalar quantization techniques such as QSGD (Quantized SGD),
and achieves a much higher speed-up gain under the same compression ratio.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNN) such as VGG [1] and ResNet [2] can achieve unprecedented
performance on many practical applications like speech recognition [3, 4], text processing [5, 6],
and image classification on very large datasets like CIFAR-100 [7] and ImageNet [8]. Due to the
large dataset size, CNN training is widely implemented using distributed methods such as dataparallel stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16], where gradients computed
by distributed nodes are summed after every iteration to update the CNN model of every node2 .
However, this gradient aggregation can dramatically hinder the expansion of such systems, for it
incurs significant communication costs, and will become the system bottleneck when communication
is slow.
To improve gradient aggregation efficiency, two main approaches have been proposed in the literature,
namely gradient compression and parallel aggregation. Gradient compression aims at reducing the
∗

M. Yu and Z. Lin contributed equally to this work.
We focus on synchronized training. Our compression technique could be applied to asynchronous systems
where the model at different nodes may be updated differently [17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22]
2

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

