Online Structured Laplace Approximations for
Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting

Hippolyt Ritter1∗
Aleksandar Botev1
David Barber1,2,3
1
2
University College London
Alan Turing Institute 3 reinfer.io

Abstract
We introduce the Kronecker factored online Laplace approximation for overcoming
catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. The method is grounded in a Bayesian
online learning framework, where we recursively approximate the posterior after
every task with a Gaussian, leading to a quadratic penalty on changes to the weights.
The Laplace approximation requires calculating the Hessian around a mode, which
is typically intractable for modern architectures. In order to make our method
scalable, we leverage recent block-diagonal Kronecker factored approximations to
the curvature. Our algorithm achieves over 90% test accuracy across a sequence
of 50 instantiations of the permuted MNIST dataset, substantially outperforming
related methods for overcoming catastrophic forgetting.

1

Introduction

Creating an agent that performs well across multiple tasks and continuously incorporates new
knowledge has been a longstanding goal of research on artificial intelligence. When training on a
sequence of tasks, however, the performance of many machine learning algorithms, including neural
networks, decreases on older tasks when learning new ones. This phenomenon has been termed
‘catastrophic forgetting’ [6, 26, 33] and has recently received attention in the context of deep learning
[8, 16]. Catastrophic forgetting cannot be overcome by simply initializing the parameters for a
new task with optimal ones from the old task and hoping that stochastic gradient descent will stay
sufficiently close to the original values to maintain good performance on previous datasets [8].
Bayesian learning provides an elegant solution to this problem. It combines the current data with
prior information to find an optimal trade-off in our belief about the parameters. In the sequential
setting, such information is readily available: the posterior over the parameters given all previous
datasets. It follows from Bayes’ rule that we can use the posterior over the parameters after training
on one task as our prior for the next one. As the posterior over the weights of a neural network is
typically intractable, we need to approximate it. This type of Bayesian online learning has been
studied extensively in the literature [31, 7, 13].
In this work, we combine Bayesian online learning [31] with the Kronecker factored Laplace
approximation [34] to update a quadratic penalty for every new task. The block-diagonal Kronecker
factored approximation of the Hessian [23, 2] allows for an expressive scalable posterior that takes
interactions between weights within the same layer into account. In our experiments we show that
this principled approximation of the posterior leads to substantial gains in performance over simpler
diagonal methods, in particular for long sequences of tasks.
∗

Corresponding author: j.ritter@cs.ucl.ac.uk

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

