Algorithmic Regularization in Learning Deep
Homogeneous Models: Layers are Automatically
Balanced˚
Simon S. Du:

Wei Hu;

Jason D. Lee§

Abstract
We study the implicit regularization imposed by gradient descent for learning
multi-layer homogeneous functions including feed-forward fully connected and
convolutional deep neural networks with linear, ReLU or Leaky ReLU activation.
We rigorously prove that gradient flow (i.e. gradient descent with infinitesimal
step size) effectively enforces the differences between squared norms across different layers to remain invariant without any explicit regularization. This result
implies that if the weights are initially small, gradient flow automatically balances
the magnitudes of all layers. Using a discretization argument, we analyze gradient
descent with positive step size for the non-convex low-rank asymmetric matrix
factorization problem without any regularization. Inspired by our findings
gra´ for
¯
´p 12 ` q
dient flow, we prove that gradient descent with step sizes ⌘t “ O t

(0 † § 12 ) automatically balances two low-rank factors and converges to a
bounded global optimum. Furthermore, for rank-1 asymmetric matrix factorization we give a finer analysis showing gradient descent with constant step size
converges to the global minimum at a globally linear rate. We believe that the
idea of examining the invariance imposed by first order algorithms in learning
homogeneous models could serve as a fundamental building block for studying
optimization for learning deep models.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning models often consist of multiple layers. For example, consider a feedforward deep neural network that defines a prediction function
x ﬁÑ f px; W p1q , . . . , W pN q q “ W pN q pW pN ´1q ¨ ¨ ¨ W p2q pW p1q xq ¨ ¨ ¨ q,

where W p1q , . . . , W pN q are weight matrices in N layers, and p¨q is a point-wise homogeneous
activation function such as Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) pxq “ maxtx, 0u. A simple observation is that this model is homogeneous: if we multiply a layer by a positive scalar c and divide
another layer by c, the prediction function remains the same, e.g. f px; cW p1q , . . . , 1c W pN q q “
f px; W p1q , . . . , W pN q q.

A direct consequence of homogeneity is that a solution can produce small function value while being unbounded, because one can always multiply one layer by a huge number and divide another
˚

The full version of this paper is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.00900.
Machine Learning Department, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University. Email:
ssdu@cs.cmu.edu
;
Computer Science Department, Princeton University. Email: huwei@cs.princeton.edu
§
Department of Data Sciences and Operations, Marshall School of Business, University of Southern California. Email: jasonlee@marshall.usc.edu
:

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

