Zeroth-Order Stochastic Variance Reduction for
Nonconvex Optimization

Sijia Liu1 Bhavya Kailkhura2 Pin-Yu Chen1 Paishun Ting3 Shiyu Chang1 Lisa Amini1
1
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
2
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
3
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Abstract
As application demands for zeroth-order (gradient-free) optimization accelerate,
the need for variance reduced and faster converging approaches is also intensifying.
This paper addresses these challenges by presenting: a) a comprehensive theoretical
analysis of variance reduced zeroth-order (ZO) optimization, b) a novel variance
reduced ZO algorithm, called ZO-SVRG, and c) an experimental evaluation of
our approach in the context of two compelling applications, black-box chemical
material classification and generation of adversarial examples from black-box deep
neural network models. Our theoretical analysis uncovers an essential difficulty
in the analysis of ZO-SVRG: the unbiased assumption on gradient estimates no
longer holds. We prove that compared to its first-order counterpart, ZO-SVRG with
a two-point random gradient estimator could suffer an additional error of order
O(1/b), where b is the mini-batch size. To mitigate this error, we propose two
accelerated versions of ZO-SVRG utilizing variance reduced gradient estimators,
which achieve the best rate known for ZO stochastic optimization (in terms of
iterations). Our extensive experimental results show that our approaches outperform
other state-of-the-art ZO algorithms, and strike a balance between the convergence
rate and the function query complexity.

1

Introduction

Zeroth-order (gradient-free) optimization is increasingly embraced for solving machine learning
problems where explicit expressions of the gradients are difficult or infeasible to obtain. Recent
examples have shown zeroth-order (ZO) based generation of prediction-evasive, black-box adversarial
attacks on deep neural networks (DNNs) as effective as state-of-the-art white-box attacks, despite
leveraging only the inputs and outputs of the targeted DNN [1–3]. Additional classes of applications
include network control and management with time-varying constraints and limited computation
capacity [4, 5], and parameter inference of black-box systems [6, 7]. ZO algorithms achieve gradientfree optimization by approximating the full gradient via gradient estimators based on only the function
values [8, 9].
Although many ZO algorithms have recently been developed and analyzed [5, 10–18], they often
suffer from the high variances of ZO gradient estimates, and in turn, hampered convergence rates. In
addition, these algorithms are mainly designed for convex settings, which limits their applicability in
a wide range of (non-convex) machine learning problems.
In this paper, we study the problem of design and analysis of variance reduced and faster converging
nonconvex ZO optimization methods. To reduce the variance of ZO gradient estimates, one can draw
motivations from similar ideas in the first-order regime. The stochastic variance reduced gradient
(SVRG) is a commonly-used, effective first-order approach to reduce the variance [19–23]. Due to
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

