Solving Large Sequential Games with the Excessive
Gap Technique

Christian Kroer, Gabriele Farina, and Tuomas Sandholm
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{ckroer,gfarina,sandholm}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
There has been tremendous recent progress on equilibrium-finding algorithms for
zero-sum imperfect-information extensive-form games, but there has been a puzzling gap between theory and practice. First-order methods have significantly better
theoretical convergence rates than any counterfactual-regret minimization (CFR)
variant. Despite this, CFR variants have been favored in practice. Experiments with
first-order methods have only been conducted on small- and medium-sized games
because those methods are complicated to implement in this setting, and because
CFR variants have been enhanced extensively for over a decade they perform well
in practice. In this paper we show that a particular first-order method, a state-ofthe-art variant of the excessive gap technique—instantiated with the dilated entropy
distance function—can efficiently solve large real-world problems competitively
with CFR and its variants. We show this on large endgames encountered by the
Libratus poker AI, which recently beat top human poker specialist professionals
at no-limit Texas hold’em. We show experimental results on our variant of the
excessive gap technique as well as a prior version. We introduce a numerically
friendly implementation of the smoothed best response computation associated
with first-order methods for extensive-form game solving. We present, to our
knowledge, the first GPU implementation of a first-order method for extensiveform games. We present comparisons of several excessive gap technique and CFR
variants.

1

Introduction

Two-player zero-sum extensive-form games (EFGs) are a general representation that enables one to
model a myriad of settings ranging from security to business to military to recreational. The Nash
equilibrium solution concept [22] prescribes a sound notion of rational play for this setting. It is also
robust in this class of game: if the opponent plays some other strategy than an equilibrium strategy,
that can only help us.
There has been tremendous recent progress on equilibrium-finding algorithms for extensive-form
zero-sum games. However, there has been a vexing gap between the theory and practice of equilibriumfinding algorithms. In this paper we will help close that gap.
It is well-known that the strategy spaces of an extensive-form game can be transformed into convex
polytopes that allow a bilinear saddle-point formulation (BSPP) of the Nash equilibrium problem as
follows [26, 28, 16].
min maxhx, Ayi = max minhx, Ayi
(1)
x∈X y∈Y

y∈Y x∈X

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

