Navigating with Graph Representations for Fast and
Scalable Decoding of Neural Language Models

Minjia Zhang

Xiaodong Liu

Wenhan Wang
Jianfeng Gao
Yuxiong He
Microsoft
{minjiaz,xiaodl,wenhanw,jfgao,yuxhe}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Neural language models (NLMs) have recently gained a renewed interest by achieving state-of-the-art performance across many natural language processing (NLP)
tasks. However, NLMs are very computationally demanding largely due to the
computational cost of the decoding process, which consists of a softmax layer
over a large vocabulary. We observe that in the decoding of many NLP tasks, only
the probabilities of the top-K hypotheses need to be calculated preciously and
K is often much smaller than the vocabulary size. This paper proposes a novel
softmax layer approximation algorithm, called Fast Graph Decoder (FGD), which
quickly identifies, for a given context, a set of K words that are most likely to
occur according to a NLM. We demonstrate that FGD reduces the decoding time by
an order of magnitude while attaining close to the full softmax baseline accuracy
on neural machine translation and language modeling tasks. We also prove the
theoretical guarantee on the softmax approximation quality.

1

Introduction

Drawing inspiration from biology and neurophysiology, recent progress on many natural language
processing (NLP) tasks has been remarkable with deep neural network based approaches, including
machine translation [1–3], sentence summarization [4], speech recognition [5–7], and conversational
agents [8–11]. Such approaches often employ a neural language model (NLM) in a decoder at
inference time to generate a sequence of tokens (e.g., words) given an input [1–7, 9, 10, 12–14].
One long-recognized issue of decoding using NLMs is the computational complexity, which easily
becomes a bottleneck when the vocabulary size is large. Consider a beam search decoder using a
NLM. At each decoding step, a recurrent neural network [15, 16] first generates a context vector based
on each partial hypothesis in the beam. It then uses a softmax layer to compute a word probability
distribution over the vocabulary [17–19]. The softmax layer consists of an inner product operator that
projects the context vector into a vocabulary-sized vector of logits, followed by a softmax function that
transforms these logits into a vector of probabilities. Finally, the decoder selects top-K words with
the highest probabilities given the context (i.e., top-K maximum subset of inner product), and stores
the expended hypotheses and their probabilities in the beam. The most computationally expensive
part in this process is the softmax layer, where the complexity of performing inner product is linear
with respect to the vocabulary size. In this paper we strive to develop new softmax approximation
methods for fast decoding.
Many techniques have been proposed to speed up the softmax layer in training, such as hierarchical
softmax [20] and sampling-based approaches [21–24]. However, most of them cannot be directly
applied to decoding at inference because they rely on knowing the words to be predicted and they
still need to calculate the probability of all words to find the most likely prediction. Other works
speed up softmax inference (in training and decoding) by reducing the cost of computing each word’s
probability using some approximation [23, 25–27]. Though the cost of computing each word’s
probability is reduced, the complexity of softmax layer as a whole is still linear with respect to the
size of the vocabulary. We notice that in many NLP tasks we only need to identify the top-K most
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

