BRUNO: A Deep Recurrent Model for Exchangeable
Data
Iryna Korshunova ♥
Ghent University
iryna.korshunova@ugent.be
Yarin Gal
University of Oxford
yarin@cs.ox.ac.uk

Jonas Degrave ♥ †
Ghent University
jonas.degrave@ugent.be

Arthur Gretton ♠
Gatsby Unit, UCL
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Ferenc Huszár
Twitter
fhuszar@twitter.com
Joni Dambre ♠
Ghent University
joni.dambre@ugent.be

Abstract
We present a novel model architecture which leverages deep learning tools to perform exact Bayesian inference on sets of high dimensional, complex observations.
Our model is provably exchangeable, meaning that the joint distribution over observations is invariant under permutation: this property lies at the heart of Bayesian
inference. The model does not require variational approximations to train, and new
samples can be generated conditional on previous samples, with cost linear in the
size of the conditioning set. The advantages of our architecture are demonstrated
on learning tasks that require generalisation from short observed sequences while
modelling sequence variability, such as conditional image generation, few-shot
learning, and anomaly detection.

1

Introduction

We address the problem of modelling unordered sets of objects that have some characteristic in
common. Set modelling has been a recent focus in machine learning, both due to relevant application
domains and to efficiency gains when dealing with groups of objects [5, 18, 20, 23]. The relevant
concept in statistics is the notion of an exchangeable sequence of random variables – a sequence where
any re-ordering of the elements is equally likely. To fulfil this definition, subsequent observations must
behave like previous ones, which implies that we can make predictions about the future. This property
allows the formulation of some machine learning problems in terms of modelling exchangeable data.
For instance, one can think of few-shot concept learning as learning to complete short exchangeable
sequences [10]. A related example comes from the generative image modelling field, where we
might want to generate images that are in some ways similar to the ones from a given set. At present,
however, there are few flexible and provably exchangeable deep generative models to solve this
problem.
Formally, a finite or infinite sequence of random variables x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . is said to be exchangeable
if for all n and all permutations π

p(x1 , . . . , xn ) = p xπ(1) , . . . , xπ(n) ,
(1)

i. e. the joint probability remains the same under any permutation of the sequence. If random variables
in the sequence are independent and identically distributed (i. i. d.), then it is easy to see that the
sequence is exchangeable. The converse is false: exchangeable random variables can be correlated.
One example of an exchangeable but non-i. i. d. sequence is a sequence of variables x1 , . . . , xn , which
Equal contribution † Now at DeepMind.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.
♥♠

