PacGAN: The power of two samples in generative
adversarial networks
Zinan Lin
ECE Department
Carnegie Mellon University
zinanl@andrew.cmu.edu

Ashish Khetan
IESE Department
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
ashish.khetan09@gmail.com

Giulia Fanti
ECE Department
Carnegie Mellon University
gfanti@andrew.cmu.edu

Sewoong Oh
IESE Department
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
swoh@illinois.edu

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are a technique for learning generative
models of complex data distributions from samples. Despite remarkable advances
in generating realistic images, a major shortcoming of GANs is the fact that they
tend to produce samples with little diversity, even when trained on diverse datasets.
This phenomenon, known as mode collapse, has been the focus of much recent
work. We study a principled approach to handling mode collapse, which we
call packing. The main idea is to modify the discriminator to make decisions
based on multiple samples from the same class, either real or artificially generated.
We draw analysis tools from binary hypothesis testing—in particular the seminal
result of Blackwell [4]—to prove a fundamental connection between packing and
mode collapse. We show that packing naturally penalizes generators with mode
collapse, thereby favoring generator distributions with less mode collapse during
the training process. Numerical experiments on benchmark datasets suggest that
packing provides significant improvements.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are a technique for training generative models to produce
realistic examples from an unknown data distribution [10]. Suppose we are given N i.i.d. samples
X1 , . . . , XN from an unknown probability distribution P over some high-dimensional space Rp (e.g.,
images). The goal of generative modeling is to learn a model that can draw samples from distribution
P . In data-driven generative modeling, this model is typically formulated as a function G : Rd → Rp
that maps a low-dimensional code vector Z ∈ Rd drawn from a standard distribution (e.g. spherical
Gaussian) to a high-dimensional domain of interest.
A breakthrough in training such generative models was achieved by the innovative idea of GANs.
GANs train two neural networks called the generator G(Z) and discriminator D(X). The role of the
generator is to produce realistic samples, and the role of the discriminator is to distinguish generated
samples from real data. These two neural networks play a dynamic minimax game against each other.
If trained long enough, eventually the generator learns to produce samples that are indistinguishable
from real data (but preferably different from the training samples). Concretely, GANs search for the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

