Joint Sub-bands Learning with Clique Structures
for Wavelet Domain Super-Resolution

Zhisheng Zhong1 Tiancheng Shen1,2 Yibo Yang1,2 Chao Zhang1,∗ Zhouchen Lin1,3
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
2
Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University
3
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{zszhong, tianchengshen, ibo, c.zhang, zlin}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have recently achieved great success in
single-image super-resolution (SISR). However, these methods tend to produce
over-smoothed outputs and miss some textural details. To solve these problems,
we propose the Super-Resolution CliqueNet (SRCliqueNet) to reconstruct the high
resolution (HR) image with better textural details in the wavelet domain. The
proposed SRCliqueNet firstly extracts a set of feature maps from the low resolution
(LR) image by the clique blocks group. Then we send the set of feature maps
to the clique up-sampling module to reconstruct the HR image. The clique upsampling module consists of four sub-nets which predict the high resolution wavelet
coefficients of four sub-bands. Since we consider the edge feature properties of
four sub-bands, the four sub-nets are connected to the others so that they can
learn the coefficients of four sub-bands jointly. Finally we apply inverse discrete
wavelet transform (IDWT) to the output of four sub-nets at the end of the clique
up-sampling module to increase the resolution and reconstruct the HR image.
Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments on benchmark datasets show
that our method achieves superior performance over the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Single image super-resolution (SISR) is to reconstruct a high-resolution (HR) image from a single lowresolution (LR) image, which is an ill-posed inverse problem. SISR has gained increasing research
interest for decades. Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [6, 25, 32] significantly improve
the peak signal-to noise ratio (PSNR) in SISR. These networks commonly use an extraction module
to extract a series of feature maps from the LR image, cascaded with an up-sampling module to
increase resolution and reconstruct the HR image.
The quality of extracting features will seriously affect the performance of the HR image reconstruction.
The main part of extraction module used in modern SR networks can be primarily divided into three
types: conventional convolution layers [23], residual blocks [9] and dense blocks [10].
Conventional convolution has been widely considered by scholars since AlexNet [20] won the first
prize of ILSVRC in 2012. The first model using conventional convolution to solve the SR problem
is SRCNN [6]. After that, many improved networks such as FSRCNN [7], SCN [36], ESPCN [28]
and DRCN [18] also use conventional convolution and achieve great results. Residual block [9] is
an improved version of the convolutional layer, which exhibits excellent performance in computer
vision problems. Since it can enhance the feature propagation in networks and alleviate the vanishing∗

Corresponding author.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

