Neural-Symbolic VQA: Disentangling Reasoning
from Vision and Language Understanding

Kexin Yi∗
Harvard University

Jiajun Wu∗
MIT CSAIL

Chuang Gan
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Antonio Torralba
MIT CSAIL

Pushmeet Kohli
DeepMind

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
We marry two powerful ideas: deep representation learning for visual recognition
and language understanding, and symbolic program execution for reasoning. Our
neural-symbolic visual question answering (NS-VQA) system first recovers a
structural scene representation from the image and a program trace from the
question. It then executes the program on the scene representation to obtain an
answer. Incorporating symbolic structure as prior knowledge offers three unique
advantages. First, executing programs on a symbolic space is more robust to long
program traces; our model can solve complex reasoning tasks better, achieving an
accuracy of 99.8% on the CLEVR dataset. Second, the model is more data- and
memory-efficient: it performs well after learning on a small number of training
data; it can also encode an image into a compact representation, requiring less
storage than existing methods for offline question answering. Third, symbolic
program execution offers full transparency to the reasoning process; we are thus
able to interpret and diagnose each execution step.

1

Introduction

Looking at the images and questions in Figure 1, we instantly recognize objects and their attributes,
parse complicated questions, and leverage such knowledge to reason and answer the questions. We
can also clearly explain how we reason to obtain the answer. Now imagine that you are standing
in front of the scene, eyes closed, only able to build your scene representation through touch. Not
surprisingly, reasoning without vision remains effortless. For humans, reasoning is fully interpretable,
and not necessarily interwoven with visual perception.
The advances in deep representation learning and the development of large-scale datasets [Malinowski
and Fritz, 2014, Antol et al., 2015] have inspired a number of pioneering approaches in visual questionanswering (VQA), most trained in an end-to-end fashion [Yang et al., 2016]. Though innovative, pure
neural net–based approaches often perform less well on challenging reasoning tasks. In particular,
a recent study [Johnson et al., 2017a] designed a new VQA dataset, CLEVR, in which each image
comes with intricate, compositional questions generated by programs, and showed that state-of-the-art
VQA models did not perform well.
Later, Johnson et al. [2017b] demonstrated that machines can learn to reason by wiring in prior
knowledge of human language as programs. Specifically, their model integrates a program generator
that infers the underlying program from a question, and a learned, attention-based executor that runs
the program on the input image. Such a combination achieves very good performance on the CLEVR
∗

indicates equal contributions. Project page: http://nsvqa.csail.mit.edu

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

