Compact Representation of Uncertainty in Clustering
Craig S. Greenberg 1,2

Nicholas Monath1

Andrew McGregor1
1

Ari Kobren1

Patrick Flaherty3

Andrew McCallum1

College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst
2
National Institute of Standards and Technology
3
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Massachusetts Amherst
{csgreenberg,nmonath,akobren,mcgregor,mccallum}@cs.umass.edu
flaherty@math.umass.edu

Abstract
For many classic structured prediction problems, probability distributions over the
dependent variables can be efficiently computed using widely-known algorithms
and data structures (such as forward-backward, and its corresponding trellis for
exact probability distributions in Markov models). However, we know of no previous work studying efficient representations of exact distributions over clusterings.
This paper presents definitions and proofs for a dynamic-programming inference
procedure that computes the partition function, the marginal probability of a cluster,
and the MAP clustering—all exactly. Rather than the N th Bell number, these exact
solutions take time and space proportional to the substantially smaller powerset
of N . Indeed, we improve upon the time complexity of the algorithm introduced
by Kohonen and Corander [11] for this problem by a factor of N . While still
large, this previously unknown result is intellectually interesting in its own right,
makes feasible exact inference for important real-world small data applications
(such as medicine), and provides a natural stepping stone towards sparse-trellis
approximations that enable further scalability (which we also explore). In experiments, we demonstrate the superiority of our approach over approximate methods
in analyzing real-world gene expression data used in cancer treatment.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic models provide a rich framework for expressing and analyzing uncertain data because
they provide a full joint probability distribution rather than an uncalibrated score or point estimate.
There are many well-established, simple probabilistic models, for example Hidden Markov Models
(HMMs) for modeling sequences. Inference in HMMs is performed using the forward-backward
algorithm, which relies on an auxiliary data structure called a trellis (a graph-based dynamic programming table). This trellis structure serves as a compact representation of the distribution over state
sequences. Many model structures compactly represent distributions and allow for efficient exact or
approximate inference of joint and marginal distributions.
Clustering is a classic unsupervised learning task. Classic clustering algorithms and even modern
ones, however, only provide a point estimate of the “best” partitioning by some metric. In many
applications, there are other partitions of the data that are nearly as good as the best one. Therefore
representing uncertainty in clustering can allow one to chose the most interpretable clustering from
among a nearly equivalent set of options. We explore the benefits of representing uncertainty in
clustering in a real-world gene expression analysis application in the experiments section.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

