Learning Invariances using the Marginal Likelihood

Mark van der Wilk
PROWLER.io
Cambridge, UK
mark@prowler.io

Matthias Bauer
MPI for Intelligent Systems
University of Cambridge
msb55@cam.ac.uk

ST John
PROWLER.io
Cambridge, UK
st@prowler.io

James Hensman
PROWLER.io
Cambridge, UK
james@prowler.io

Abstract
Generalising well in supervised learning tasks relies on correctly extrapolating the
training data to a large region of the input space. One way to achieve this is to constrain the predictions to be invariant to transformations of the input that are known
to be irrelevant (e.g. translation). Commonly, this is done through data augmentation, where the training set is enlarged by applying hand-crafted transformations to
the inputs. We argue that invariances should instead be incorporated in the model
structure, and learned using the marginal likelihood, which correctly rewards the
reduced complexity of invariant models. We demonstrate this for Gaussian process
models, due to the ease with which their marginal likelihood can be estimated.
Our main contribution is a variational inference scheme for Gaussian processes
containing invariances described by a sampling procedure. We learn the sampling
procedure by backpropagating through it to maximise the marginal likelihood.

1

Introduction

In supervised learning, we want to predict some quantity y ∈ Y given an input x ∈ X from a limited
number of N training examples {xn , yn }N
n=1 . We want our model to make correct predictions in as
much of the input space X as possible. By constraining our predictor to make similar predictions
for inputs which are modified in ways that are irrelevant to the prediction (e.g. small translations,
rotations, or deformations for handwritten digits), we can generalise what we learn from a single
training example to a wide range of new inputs. It is common to encourage these invariances by
training on a dataset that is enlarged by training examples that have undergone modifications that
are known to not influence the output – a technique known as data augmentation. Developing an
augmentation for a particular dataset relies on expert knowledge, trial and error, and cross-validation.
This human input makes data augmentation undesirable from a machine learning perspective, akin
to hand-crafting features. It is also unsatisfactory from a Bayesian perspective, according to which
assumptions and expert knowledge should be explicitly encoded in the prior distribution only. By
adding data that are not true observations, the posterior may become overconfident, and the marginal
likelihood can no longer be used to compare to other models.
In this work, we argue that data augmentation should be formulated as an invariance in the functions
that are learnable by the model. To do so, we investigate prior distributions which incorporate invariances. The main benefit of treating invariances in this way is that models with different invariances
can be compared using the marginal likelihood. As a consequence, parameterised invariances can
even be learned by backpropagating through the marginal likelihood.

Figure 1: Samples describing the learned invariance for some example MNIST digits (squares). The
method becomes insensitive to the rotations, shears, and rotations that are present in the samples.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

