Connectionist Temporal Classification with
Maximum Entropy Regularization

Hu Liu Sheng Jin Changshui Zhang
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI)
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, P.R.China
{liuhu15, js17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) is an objective function for end-toend sequence learning, which adopts dynamic programming algorithms to directly
learn the mapping between sequences. CTC has shown promising results in
many sequence learning applications including speech recognition and scene text
recognition. However, CTC tends to produce highly peaky and overconfident
distributions, which is a symptom of overfitting. To remedy this, we propose a
regularization method based on maximum conditional entropy which penalizes
peaky distributions and encourages exploration. We also introduce an entropybased pruning method to dramatically reduce the number of CTC feasible paths by
ruling out unreasonable alignments. Experiments on scene text recognition show
that our proposed methods consistently improve over the CTC baseline without
the need to adjust training settings. Code has been made publicly available at:
https://github.com/liuhu-bigeye/enctc.crnn.

1

Introduction

Past few years have witnessed significant progress in sequence learning tasks. Currently recurrent
neural network (RNN) with Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) [5] has become a popular
framework and is widely used in areas such as speech recognition [6, 8, 1, 2, 22], sign language
recognition [4], video segmentation [10, 18] and scene text recognition [29, 19, 7]. CTC views the
outputs of RNN as a probability distribution over all possible alignments and directly learns the
mapping from input sequences to target sequences. It is proven to be effective in weakly supervised
sequence modeling with only temporal order supervision but no alignment information provided.
CTC can be regarded as a kind of Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) [21]. From the perspective of
MIL, the label sequence is a bag containing all feasible paths. CTC learns by maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE) over the summation of all feasible path probabilities. However, as the number of
feasible paths grows exponentially with the input sequence length, it is hard for CTC to find the most
suitable one. More seriously, once CTC finds a dominant feasible path during the training process,
the error signal will concentrate on the vicinity of this path, and the prediction of this feasible path
will continuously strengthen until this path completely dominates the prediction output. As blanks are
included in most of the feasible paths, dominant paths are often overwhelmed by blanks, interspersed
by sharp spikes (narrow regions along the time axis) of non-blank labels, which is known as the CTC
peaky distribution problem [5, 22].
This problem of CTC will lead to the following consequences.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

