Non-monotone Submodular Maximization
in Exponentially Fewer Iterations
Eric Balkanski
Harvard University
ericbalkanski@g.harvard.edu

Adam Breuer
Harvard University
breuer@g.harvard.edu

Yaron Singer
Harvard University
yaron@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
In this paper we consider parallelization for applications whose objective can be
expressed as maximizing a non-monotone submodular function under a cardinality
constraint. Our main result is an algorithm whose approximation is arbitrarily close
to 1/2e in O(log2 n) adaptive rounds, where n is the size of the ground set. This
is an exponential speedup in parallel running time over any previously studied
algorithm for constrained non-monotone submodular maximization. Beyond its
provable guarantees, the algorithm performs well in practice. Specifically, experiments on traffic monitoring and personalized data summarization applications show
that the algorithm finds solutions whose values are competitive with state-of-the-art
algorithms while running in exponentially fewer parallel iterations.

1

Introduction

In machine learning, many fundamental quantities we care to optimize such as entropy, graph
cuts, diversity, coverage, diffusion, and clustering are submodular functions. Although there has
been a great deal of work in machine learning on applications that require constrained monotone
submodular maximization, many interesting submodular objectives are non-monotone. Constrained
non-monotone submodular maximization is used in large-scale personalized data summarization
applications such as image summarization, movie recommendation, and revenue maximization in
social networks [MBK16]. In addition, many data mining applications on networks require solving
constrained max-cut problems (see Section 4).
Non-monotone submodular maximization is well-studied [FMV11, LMNS09, GRST10, FNS11,
GV11, BFNS14, CJV15, MBK16, EN16], particularly under a cardinality constraint [LMNS09,
GRST10, GV11, BFNS14, MBK16]. For maximizing a non-monotone submodular function under a
cardinality constraint k, a simple randomized greedy algorithm that iteratively includes a random
element from the set of k elements with largest marginal contribution at every iteration achieves a 1/e
approximation to the optimal set of size k [BFNS14]. For more general constraints, Mirzasoleiman et
al. develop an algorithm with strong approximation guarantees that works well in practice [MBK16].
While the algorithms for constrained non-monotone submodular maximization achieve strong approximation guarantees, their parallel runtime is linear in the size of the data due to their high
adaptivity. Informally, the adaptivity of an algorithm is the number of sequential rounds it requires
when polynomially-many function evaluations can be executed in parallel in each round. The
adaptivity of the randomized greedy algorithm is k since it sequentially adds elements in k rounds.
The algorithm in Mirzasoleiman et al. is also k-adaptive, as is any known constant approximation
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

