Learning to Share and Hide Intentions using
Information Regularization

DJ Strouse1 , Max Kleiman-Weiner2 , Josh Tenenbaum2
Matt Botvinick3,4 , David Schwab5
1
Princeton University, 2 MIT, 3 DeepMind
4
UCL, 5 CUNY Graduate Center

Abstract
Learning to cooperate with friends and compete with foes is a key component
of multi-agent reinforcement learning. Typically to do so, one requires access to
either a model of or interaction with the other agent(s). Here we show how to learn
effective strategies for cooperation and competition in an asymmetric information
game with no such model or interaction. Our approach is to encourage an agent
to reveal or hide their intentions using an information-theoretic regularizer. We
consider both the mutual information between goal and action given state, as well
as the mutual information between goal and state. We show how to optimize these
regularizers in a way that is easy to integrate with policy gradient reinforcement
learning. Finally, we demonstrate that cooperative (competitive) policies learned
with our approach lead to more (less) reward for a second agent in two simple
asymmetric information games.

1

Introduction

In order to effectively interact with others, an intelligent agent must understand the intentions of
others. In order to successfully cooperate, collaborative agents that share their intentions will do
a better job of coordinating their plans together [Tomasello et al., 2005]. This is especially salient
when information pertinent to a goal is known asymmetrically between agents. When competing
with others, a sophisticated agent might aim to hide this information from its adversary in order to
deceive or surprise them. This type of sophisticated planning is thought to be a distinctive aspect of
human intelligence compared to other animal species [Tomasello et al., 2005].
Furthermore, agents that share their intentions might have behavior that is more interpretable and
understandable by people. Many reinforcement learning (RL) systems often plan in ways that can
seem opaque to an observer. In particular, when an agent’s reward function is not aligned with the
designer’s goal the intended behavior often deviates from what is expected [Hadfield-Menell et al.,
2016]. If these agents are also trained to share high-level and often abstract information about its
behavior (i.e. intentions) it is more likely a human operator or collaborator can understand, predict,
and explain that agents decision. This is key requirement for building machines that people can trust.
Previous approaches have tackled aspects of this problem but all share a similar structure [Dragan
et al., 2013, Ho et al., 2016, Hadfield-Menell et al., 2016, Shafto et al., 2014]. They optimize their
behavior against a known model of an observer which has a theory-of-mind [Baker et al., 2009,
Ullman et al., 2009, Rabinowitz et al., 2018] or is doing some form of inverse-RL [Ng et al., 2000,
Abbeel and Ng, 2004]. In this work we take an alternative approach based on an information theoretic
formulation of the problem of sharing and hiding intentions. This approach does not require an
explicit model of or interaction with the other agent, which could be especially useful in settings
where interactive training is expensive or dangerous. Our approach also naturally combines with
scalable policy-gradient methods commonly used in deep reinforcement learning.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

