Algorithmic Assurance: An Active Approach to
Algorithmic Testing using Bayesian Optimisation
Shivapratap Gopakumar, Sunil Gupta∗, Santu Rana, Vu Nguyen, Svetha Venkatesh
Centre for Pattern Recognition and Data Analytics
Deakin University, Geelong, Australia

Abstract
We introduce algorithmic assurance, the problem of testing whether machine
learning algorithms are conforming to their intended design goal. We address this
problem by proposing an efficient framework for algorithmic testing. To provide
assurance, we need to efficiently discover scenarios where an algorithm decision
deviates maximally from its intended gold standard. We mathematically formulate
this task as an optimisation problem of an expensive, black-box function. We use an
active learning approach based on Bayesian optimisation to solve this optimisation
problem. We extend this framework to algorithms with vector-valued outputs by
making appropriate modification in Bayesian optimisation via the EXP3 algorithm.
We theoretically analyse our methods for convergence. Using two real-world
applications, we demonstrate the efficiency of our methods. The significance of
our problem formulation and initial solutions is that it will serve as the foundation
in assuring humans about machines making complex decisions.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning algorithms today serve as proxies for decision processes traditionally performed
by humans. As decision making processes get increasingly automated, it is reasonable to ask if
our algorithms are behaving as intended. How far is the algorithm from the gold standard (human
decision maker) it is serving as a proxy for? For example, consider a metallurgist who routinely
makes decisions about elemental compositions to design a target alloy. If an algorithm is built to
serve as a proxy for this decision process, can we provide assurance that the difference in the decision
made by the algorithm and the metallurgist is within a stipulated bound? Similarly if an algorithm
has been trained to recognize digits, can we ensure that the recognition error of the algorithm is
acceptable across all allowable visual variations within which a human can recognise digits correctly?
To provide such assurance we need to compare an algorithm against its gold standard and find the
maximum deviation. An exhaustive comparison may solve this problem but would be prohibitively
expensive as we need gold standard decisions for a large number of test instances. In absence of such
a large set, how do we find such deviations efficiently?
Traditionally machine learning algorithms are tested by separating a small fraction of the available
data as a validation set. Considering the validation set as a collection of random samples from the
data space, we may need a large validation set to have high confidence on the algorithmic assurance,
i.e. the maximal deviation of the algorithm from its gold standard is within an acceptable limit. Let
us assume a hypervolume vε wherein a function takes values within 1 − ε of its maximum. Then
a random search will sample this hypervolume with the probability vVε where V is the total search
space volume. Assuming V = Rd andvε ≈ rd, where d is the input dimension, the random search
−d
scheme would need, on an average O Rr
number of samples [3]. This can be expensive - e.g.
∗ Corresponding author email:sunil.gupta@deakin.edu.au

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

