PAC-Bayes bounds for stable algorithms with
instance-dependent priors
Omar Rivasplata
UCL

Emilio Parrado-Hernández
University Carlos III of Madrid

Shiliang Sun
East China Normal University

John Shawe-Taylor
UCL

Csaba Szepesvári
DeepMind

Abstract
PAC-Bayes bounds have been proposed to get risk estimates based on a training
sample. In this paper the PAC-Bayes approach is combined with stability of the
hypothesis learned by a Hilbert space valued algorithm. The PAC-Bayes setting is
used with a Gaussian prior centered at the expected output. Thus a novelty of our
paper is using priors defined in terms of the data-generating distribution. Our main
result estimates the risk of the randomized algorithm in terms of the hypothesis
stability coefficients. We also provide a new bound for the SVM classifier, which
is compared to other known bounds experimentally. Ours appears to be the first
uniform hypothesis stability-based bound that evaluates to non-trivial values.

1

Introduction

This paper combines two directions of research: stability of learning algorithms, and PAC-Bayes
bounds for algorithms that randomize with a data-dependent distribution. The combination of these
ideas enables the development of risk bounds that exploit stability of the learned hypothesis but are
independent of the complexity of the hypothesis class. The PAC-Bayes framework (Shawe-Taylor
and Williamson [1997], McAllester [1999a,b]) is used here with ‘priors’ defined in terms of the
data-generating distribution, as introduced by Catoni [2007] and developed further e.g. by Lever
et al. [2010], Parrado-Hernández et al. [2012] and Dziugaite and Roy [2018]. Specifically, our work
derives PAC-Bayes bounds for hypothesis stable Hilbert space valued algorithms.
The analysis introduced by Bousquet and Elisseeff [2002], which followed and extended Lugosi
and Pawlak [1994] and was further developed by Celisse and Guedj [2016], Abou-Moustafa and
Szepesvári [2017] and Liu et al. [2017] among others, shows that stability of learning algorithms
can be used to give bounds on the generalisation of the learned functions. Intuitively, this is because
stable learning should ensure that slightly different training sets give similar solutions. In this paper
stability is measured by the sensitivity coefficients (see our Definition 1) of the hypothesis learned
by a Hilbert space valued algorithm. We provide an analysis leading to a PAC-Bayes bound for
randomized classifiers under Gaussian randomization. As a by-product of the stability analysis we
derive a concentration inequality for the learned hypothesis. Applying it to Support Vector Machines
(Shawe-Taylor and Cristianini [2004], Steinwart and Christmann [2008]) we deduce a concentration
bound for the SVM weight vector, and a PAC-Bayes performance bound for SVM with Gaussian
randomization. Experimental results compare our new bound with other stability-based bounds, and
with a more standard PAC-Bayes bound. We also experiment with their use in model selection.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

