Sample-Efficient Reinforcement Learning
with Stochastic Ensemble Value Expansion

Jacob Buckman∗ Danijar Hafner George Tucker Eugene Brevdo
Google Brain, Mountain View, CA, USA
jacobbuckman@gmail.com, mail@danijar.com,
{gjt,ebrevdo,honglak}@google.com

Honglak Lee

Abstract
Integrating model-free and model-based approaches in reinforcement learning has
the potential to achieve the high performance of model-free algorithms with low
sample complexity. However, this is difficult because an imperfect dynamics model
can degrade the performance of the learning algorithm, and in sufficiently complex
environments, the dynamics model will almost always be imperfect. As a result,
a key challenge is to combine model-based approaches with model-free learning
in such a way that errors in the model do not degrade performance. We propose
stochastic ensemble value expansion (STEVE), a novel model-based technique
that addresses this issue. By dynamically interpolating between model rollouts
of various horizon lengths for each individual example, STEVE ensures that the
model is only utilized when doing so does not introduce significant errors. Our
approach outperforms model-free baselines on challenging continuous control
benchmarks with an order-of-magnitude increase in sample efficiency, and in
contrast to previous model-based approaches, performance does not degrade in
complex environments.

1

Introduction

Deep model-free reinforcement learning has had great successes in recent years, notably in playing
video games [23] and strategic board games [27]. However, training agents using these algorithms
requires tens to hundreds of millions of samples, which makes many practical applications infeasible,
particularly in real-world control problems (e.g., robotics) where data collection is expensive.
Model-based approaches aim to reduce the number of samples required to learn a policy by modeling
the dynamics of the environment. A dynamics model can be used to increase sample efficiency in
various ways, including training the policy on rollouts from the dynamics model [28], using rollouts
to improve targets for temporal difference (TD) learning [7], and using information gained from
rollouts as inputs to the policy [31]. Model-based algorithms such as PILCO [4] have shown that it is
possible to learn from orders-of-magnitude fewer samples.
These successes have mostly been limited to environments where the dynamics are simple to model.
In noisy, complex environments, it is difficult to learn an accurate model of the environment. When
the model makes mistakes in this context, it can cause the wrong policy to be learned, hindering
performance. Recent work has begun to address this issue. Kalweit and Boedecker [17] train a
model-free algorithm on a mix of real and imagined data, adjusting the proportion in favor of real
data as the Q-function becomes more confident. Kurutach et al. [20] train a model-free algorithm
on purely imaginary data, but use an ensemble of environment models to avoid overfitting to errors
made by any individual model.
∗

This work was completed as part of the Google AI Residency program.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

