Support Recovery for Orthogonal Matching Pursuit:
Upper and Lower bounds

Raghav Somani∗
Microsoft Research, India
t-rasom@microsoft.com

Chirag Gupta∗ †
Machine Learning Department,
Carnegie Mellon University
chiragg@andrew.cmu.edu

Prateek Jain
Microsoft Research, India
prajain@microsoft.com

Praneeth Netrapalli
Microsoft Research, India
praneeth@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study the problem of sparse regression where the goal is to learn a sparse
vector that best optimizes a given objective function. Under the assumption that
the objective function satisfies restricted strong convexity (RSC), we analyze
orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP), a greedy algorithm that is used heavily in
applications, and obtain a support recovery result as well as a tight generalization
error bound for the OMP estimator. Further, we show a lower bound for OMP,
demonstrating that both our results on support recovery and generalization error
are tight up to logarithmic factors. To the best of our knowledge, these are the first
such tight upper and lower bounds for any sparse regression algorithm under the
RSC assumption.

1

Introduction

The goal in sparse regression is to find the optimal sparse vector that minimizes a given objective
function. Sparse regression is an important problem in statistical machine learning since sparse
models lead to better generalization guarantees when the feature dimension is high or data is less,
eg, high-dimensional statistics [19], bioinformatics [18], etc. Sparse models also have a smaller
memory footprint and are thus useful for resource-constrained machine learning [9]. For simplicity
of exposition, we focus on the problem of sparse linear regression (SLR), which is a representative
problem in this domain. Results for this problem typically extend easily to the general case. Given
2
A ∈ Rn×d and y, the goal of SLR is to recover a sparse vector x̄ that minimizes kAx − yk2 .
The unconditional version of sparse regression can be shown to be NP-hard via a reduction to 3-set
cover [14]. However, the problem has been studied heavily under a variety of assumptions such
as incoherence [7], null-space property [8], restricted isometry property (RIP) or restricted strong
convexity (RSC) [4, 15]. RSC, in particular, is one of the weakest and most popular assumptions for
sparse regression problems and has been studied in the context of various algorithms [27, 11, 1, 13].
In this paper, we study the SLR problem under RSC condition.
Typically SLR is studied with one of two goals: a) support recovery,
i.e., recovering support (or

2
features) of x̄ and b) bounding generalization error kA(x−x̄)k2/n which bounds excess error on
unseen test points if each row of A is sampled from a fixed distribution. In general, support recovery
∗
†

Equal contribution
Work done in part while Chirag Gupta was a Research Fellow at Microsoft Research, India

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

