Dimensionality Reduction has Quantifiable
Imperfections: Two Geometric Bounds

Kry Yik Chau Lui
Borealis AI
Canada
yikchau.y.lui@borealisai.com

Gavin Weiguang Ding
Borealis AI
Canada
gavin.ding@borealisai.com

Ruitong Huang
Borealis AI
Canada
ruitong.huang@borealisai.com

Robert J. McCann
Department of Mathematics
University of Toronto
Canada
mccann@math.toronto.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate Dimensionality reduction (DR) maps in an information
retrieval setting from a quantitative topology point of view. In particular, we show
that no DR maps can achieve perfect precision and perfect recall simultaneously.
Thus a continuous DR map must have imperfect precision. We further prove an
upper bound on the precision of Lipschitz continuous DR maps. While precision
is a natural measure in an information retrieval setting, it does not measure “how”
wrong the retrieved data is. We therefore propose a new measure based on Wasserstein distance that comes with similar theoretical guarantee. A key technical step
in our proofs is a particular optimization problem of the L2 -Wasserstein distance
over a constrained set of distributions. We provide a complete solution to this
optimization problem, which can be of independent interest on the technical side.

1

Introduction

Dimensionality reduction (DR) serves as a core problem in machine learning tasks including information compression, clustering, manifold learning, feature extraction, logits and other modules in a
neural network and data visualization [16, 8, 34, 19, 25]. In many machine learning applications, the
data manifold is reduced to a dimension lower than its intrinsic dimension (e.g. for data visualizations,
output dimension is reduced to 2 or 3; for classifications, it is the number of classes). In such cases, it
is not possible to have a continuous bijective DR map (i.e. classic algebraic topology result on invariance of dimension [26]). With different motivations, many nonlinear DR maps have been proposed
in the literature, such as Isomap, kernel PCA, and t-SNE, just to name a few [31, 33, 22]. A common
way to compare the performances of different DR maps is to use a down stream supervised learning
task as the ground truth performance measure. However, when such down stream task is unavailable,
e.g. in an unsupervised learning setting as above, one would have to design a performance measure
based on the particular context. In this paper, we focus on the information retrieval setting, which
falls into this case. An information retrieval system extracts the features f (x) from the raw data x for
future queries. When a new query y0 = f (x0 ) is submitted, the system returns the most relevant data
with similar features, i.e. all the x such that f (x) is close to y0 . For computational efficiency and
storage, f is usually a DR map, retaining only the most informative features. Assume that the ground
truth relevant data of x0 is defined as a neighbourhood U of x that is a ball with radius rU centered at
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

