Adversarial Regularizers in Inverse Problems

Sebastian Lunz
DAMTP
University of Cambridge
Cambridge CB3 0WA
lunz@math.cam.ac.uk

Ozan Öktem
Department of Mathematics
KTH - Royal Institute of Technology
100 44 Stockholm
ozan@kth.se

Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb
DAMTP
University of Cambridge
Cambridge CB3 0WA
cbs31@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Inverse Problems in medical imaging and computer vision are traditionally solved
using purely model-based methods. Among those variational regularization models
are one of the most popular approaches. We propose a new framework for applying
data-driven approaches to inverse problems, using a neural network as a regularization functional. The network learns to discriminate between the distribution of
ground truth images and the distribution of unregularized reconstructions. Once
trained, the network is applied to the inverse problem by solving the corresponding
variational problem. Unlike other data-based approaches for inverse problems,
the algorithm can be applied even if only unsupervised training data is available.
Experiments demonstrate the potential of the framework for denoising on the BSDS
dataset and for computed tomography reconstruction on the LIDC dataset.

1

Introduction

Inverse problems naturally occur in many applications in computer vision and medical imaging. A
successful classical approach relies on the concept of variational regularization [11, 24]. It combines
knowledge about how data is generated in the forward operator with a regularization functional that
encodes prior knowledge about the image to be reconstructed.
The success of neural networks in many computer vision tasks has motivated attempts at using deep
learning to achieve better performance in solving inverse problems [15, 2, 25]. A major difficulty
is the efficient usage of knowledge about the forward operator and noise model in such data driven
approaches, avoiding the necessity to relearn the physical model structure.
The framework considered here aims to solve this by using neural networks as part of variational
regularization, replacing the typically hand-crafted regularization functional with a neural network.
As classical learning methods for regularization functionals do not scale to the high dimensional
parameter spaces needed for neural networks, we propose a new training algorithm for regularization
functionals. It is based on the ideas in Wasserstein generative adversarial models [5], training the
network as a critic to tell apart ground truth images from unregularized reconstructions.
Our contributions are as follows:
1. We introduce the idea of learning a regularization functional given by a neural network,
combining the advantages of the variational formulation for inverse problems with datadriven approaches.
2. We propose a training algorithm for regularization functionals which scales to high dimensional parameter spaces.
3. We show desirable theoretical properties of the regularization functionals obtained this way.
4. We demonstrate the performance of the algorithm for denoising and computed tomography.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

