The Limit Points of (Optimistic) Gradient Descent in
Min-Max Optimization

Constantinos Daskalakis
CSAIL
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02138
costis@csail.mit.edu

Ioannis Panageas
ISTD
SUTD
Singapore, 487371
ioannis@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Motivated by applications in Optimization, Game Theory, and the training of
Generative Adversarial Networks, the convergence properties of first order methods
in min-max problems have received extensive study. It has been recognized that
they may cycle, and there is no good understanding of their limit points when they
do not. When they converge, do they converge to local min-max solutions? We
characterize the limit points of two basic first order methods, namely Gradient
Descent/Ascent (GDA) and Optimistic Gradient Descent Ascent (OGDA). We
show that both dynamics avoid unstable critical points for almost all initializations.
Moreover, for small step sizes and under mild assumptions, the set of OGDA-stable
critical points is a superset of GDA-stable critical points, which is a superset of
local min-max solutions (strict in some cases). The connecting thread is that the
behavior of these dynamics can be studied from a dynamical systems perspective.

1

Introduction

The celebrated min-max theorem was a founding stone in the development of Game Theory [21], and
is intimately related to strong linear programming duality [1], Blackwell’s approachability theory [3],
and the theory of no-regret learning [5]. The theorem states that if f (x, y) is a convex-concave
function, and X , Y are compact and concave subsets of Euclidean space, then
min max f (x, y) = max min f (x, y).
(1)
x∈X y∈Y

y∈Y x∈X

If f (x, y) represents the payment of the X player to the Y player under choices of strategies x ∈ X
and y ∈ Y by these two players, the min-max theorem reassures us that an equilibrium of the game
exists, and that the equilibrium payoffs to both players are unique.
What does not follow directly from the min-max theorem is whether there exist dynamics via which
players would arrive at equilibrium if they were to follow some simple rule to update their current
strategies. This has been the topic of a long line of investigation starting with Julia Robinson’s
celebrated analysis of fictitious play [4, 20], and leading to the development of no-regret learning [5].
Renewed interest in this problem has been recently motivated by the task of training Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [9, 2], where two deep neural networks, the generator and the discriminator, are trained in tandem using first order methods, aiming at solving a min-max problem, of the
following form, albeit typically with a non convex-concave objective function f (x, y):
inf sup f (x, y).
(2)
x∈X y∈Y

Here x represents the parameters of the generator deep neural net, y represents the parameters of the
discriminator neural net, and f (x, y) is some measure of how close the distribution generated by the
generator appears to the true distribution from the perspective of the discriminator.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

