Robust Hypothesis Testing Using
Wasserstein Uncertainty Sets

Rui Gao
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
rgao32@gatech.edu

Liyan Xie
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
lxie49@gatech.edu

Yao Xie
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
yao.xie@isye.gatech.edu

Huan Xu
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
huan.xu@isye.gatech.edu

Abstract
We develop a novel computationally efficient and general framework for robust
hypothesis testing. The new framework features a new way to construct uncertainty
sets under the null and the alternative distributions, which are sets centered around
the empirical distribution defined via Wasserstein metric, thus our approach is
data-driven and free of distributional assumptions. We develop a convex safe
approximation of the minimax formulation and show that such approximation
renders a nearly-optimal detector among the family of all possible tests. By
exploiting the structure of the least favorable distribution, we also develop a
tractable reformulation of such approximation, with complexity independent of
the dimension of observation space and can be nearly sample-size-independent in
general. Real-data example using human activity data demonstrated the excellent
performance of the new robust detector.

1

Introduction

Hypothesis testing is a fundamental problem in statistics and an essential building block for scientific
discovery and many machine learning problems such as anomaly detection. The goal is to develop
a decision rule or a detector which can discriminate between two (or multiple) hypotheses based
on data and achieve small error probability. For simple hypothesis test, it is well-known from the
Neyman-Pearson Lemma that the likelihood ratio between the distributions of the two hypotheses
is optimal. However, in practice, when the true distribution deviates from the assumed nominal
distribution, the performance of the likelihood ratio detector is no longer optimal and it may perform
poorly.
Various robust hypothesis testing frameworks have been developed, to address the issue with distribution misspecification and outliers. The robust detectors are constructed by introducing various
uncertainty sets for the distributions under the null and the alternative hypotheses. In non-parametric
setting, Huber’s original work [13] considers the so-called -contamination sets, which contain distributions that are close to the nominal distributions in terms of total variation metric. The more recent
works [17, 9] consider uncertainty set induced by Kullback-Leibler divergence around a nominal
distribution. Based on this, robust detectors usually depend on the so-called least-favorable distributions (LFD). Although there has been much success in theoretical results, computation remains a
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

