Sparse DNNs with Improved Adversarial Robustness

Yiwen Guo1, 2∗

Chao Zhang3∗ Changshui Zhang2 Yurong Chen1
1
Intel Labs China
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI),
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRis),
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
3
Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Center for Data Science, Peking University
{yiwen.guo, yurong.chen}@intel.com

pkuzc@pku.edu.cn

zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are computationally/memory-intensive and vulnerable to adversarial attacks, making them prohibitive in some real-world applications.
By converting dense models into sparse ones, pruning appears to be a promising
solution to reducing the computation/memory cost. This paper studies classification models, especially DNN-based ones, to demonstrate that there exists intrinsic
relationships between their sparsity and adversarial robustness. Our analyses reveal,
both theoretically and empirically, that nonlinear DNN-based classifiers behave
differently under l2 attacks from some linear ones. We further demonstrate that an
appropriately higher model sparsity implies better robustness of nonlinear DNNs,
whereas over-sparsified models can be more difficult to resist adversarial examples.

1

Introduction

Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have advanced the state-of-the-art of many artificial intelligence techniques, some undesired properties may hinder them from being deployed in real-world
applications. With continued proliferation of deep learning powered applications, one major concern
raised recently is the heavy computation and storage burden that DNN models shall lay upon mobile
platforms. Such burden stems from substantially redundant feature representations and parameterizations [6]. To address this issue and make DNNs less resource-intensive, a variety of solutions have
been proposed. In particular, it has been reported that more than 90% of connections in a well-trained
DNN can be removed using pruning strategies [14, 13, 28, 21, 23], while no accuracy loss is observed.
Such a remarkable network sparsity leads to considerable compressions and speedups on both GPUs
and CPUs [25]. Aside from being efficient, sparse representations are theoretically attractive [2, 8]
and have made their way into tremendous applications over the past decade.
Orthogonal to the inefficiency issue, it has also been discovered that DNN models are vulnerable to
adversarial examples—maliciously generated images which are perceptually similar to benign ones
but can fool classifiers to make arbitrary predictions [26, 3]. Furthermore, generic regularizations
(e.g., dropout and weight decay) do not really help on resisting adversarial attacks [11]. Such
undesirable property may prohibit DNNs from being applied to security-sensitive applications. The
cause of this phenomenon seems mysterious and remains to be an open question. One reasonable
explanation is the local linearity of modern DNNs [11]. Quite a lot of attempts, including adversarial
training [11, 27, 19], knowledge distillation [24], detecting and rejecting [18], and some gradient
masking techniques like randomization [31], have been made to ameliorate this issue and defend
adversarial attacks.
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

