Sample Efficient Stochastic Gradient Iterative Hard
Thresholding Method for Stochastic Sparse Linear
Regression with Limited Attribute Observation

Tomoya Murata
NTT DATA Mathematical Systems Inc. , Tokyo, Japan
murata@msi.co.jp
Taiji Suzuki
Department of Mathematical Informatics,
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We develop new stochastic gradient methods for efficiently solving sparse linear
regression in a partial attribute observation setting, where learners are only allowed
to observe a fixed number of actively chosen attributes per example at training
and prediction times. It is shown that the methods achieve essentially a sample
complexity of O(1/ε) to attain an error of ε under a variant of restricted eigenvalue
condition, and the rate has better dependency on the problem dimension than existing methods. Particularly, if the smallest magnitude of the non-zero components of
the optimal solution is not too small, the rate of our proposed Hybrid algorithm
can be boosted to near the minimax optimal sample complexity of full information
algorithms. The core ideas are (i) efficient construction of an unbiased gradient
estimator by the iterative usage of the hard thresholding operator for configuring
an exploration algorithm; and (ii) an adaptive combination of the exploration and
an exploitation algorithms for quickly identifying the support of the optimum and
efficiently searching the optimal parameter in its support. Experimental results are
presented to validate our theoretical findings and the superiority of our proposed
methods.

1

Introduction

In real-world sequential prediction scenarios, the features (or attributes) of examples are typically highdimensional and construction of the all features for each example may be expensive or impossible.
One of the example of these scenarios arises in the context of medical diagnosis of a disease, where
each attribute is the result of a medical test on a patient [4]. In this scenarios, observations of the all
features for each patient may be impossible because it is undesirable to conduct the all medical tests
on each patient due to its physical and mental burden.
In limited attribute observation settings [1, 4] , learners are only allowed to observe a given number
of attributes per example at training time. Hence learners need to update their predictor based on the
actively chosen attributes which possibly differ from example to example.
Several methods have been proposed to deal with this setting in linear regression problems. CesaBianchi et al. [4] have proposed a generalized stochastic gradient descent algorithm [16, 5, 14] based
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

