NAIS-N ET: Stable Deep Networks from
Non-Autonomous Differential Equations

Marco Ciccone∗
Politecnico di Milano
NNAISENSE SA
marco.ciccone@polimi.it
Jonathan Masci
NNAISENSE SA
jonathan@nnaisense.com

Marco Gallieri∗ †
NNAISENSE SA
marco@nnaisense.com

Christian Osendorfer
NNAISENSE SA
christian@nnaisense.com

Faustino Gomez
NNAISENSE SA
tino@nnaisense.com

Abstract
This paper introduces Non-Autonomous Input-Output Stable Network (NAIS-Net),
a very deep architecture where each stacked processing block is derived from a
time-invariant non-autonomous dynamical system. Non-autonomy is implemented
by skip connections from the block input to each of the unrolled processing stages
and allows stability to be enforced so that blocks can be unrolled adaptively to
a pattern-dependent processing depth. NAIS-Net induces non-trivial, Lipschitz
input-output maps, even for an infinite unroll length. We prove that the network is
globally asymptotically stable so that for every initial condition there is exactly one
input-dependent equilibrium assuming tanh units, and multiple stable equilibria
for ReL units. An efficient implementation that enforces the stability under derived
conditions for both fully-connected and convolutional layers is also presented.
Experimental results show how NAIS-Net exhibits stability in practice, yielding a
significant reduction in generalization gap compared to ResNets.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are now the state-of-the-art in a variety of challenging tasks, ranging from
object recognition to natural language processing and graph analysis [28, 3, 52, 43, 36]. With enough
layers, they can, in principle, learn arbitrarily complex abstract representations through an iterative
process [13] where each layer transforms the output from the previous layer non-linearly until the
input pattern is embedded in a latent space where inference can be done efficiently.
Until the advent of Highway [40] and Residual (ResNet; [18]) networks, training nets beyond a certain
depth with gradient descent was limited by the vanishing gradient problem [19, 4]. These very deep
networks (VDNNs) have skip connections that provide shortcuts for the gradient to flow back through
hundreds of layers. Unfortunately, training them still requires extensive hyper-parameter tuning, and,
even if there were a principled way to determine the optimal number of layers or processing depth for
a given task, it still would be fixed for all patterns.
Recently, several researchers have started to view VDNNs from a dynamical systems perspective.
Haber and Ruthotto [15] analyzed the stability of ResNets by framing them as an Euler integration of
an ODE, and [34] showed how using other numerical integration methods induces various existing
network architectures such as PolyNet [50], FractalNet [30] and RevNet [11]. A fundamental problem
with the dynamical systems underlying these architectures is that they are autonomous: the input
pattern sets the initial condition, only directly affecting the first processing stage. This means that if
∗
†

The authors equally contributed.
The author derived the mathematical results.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

