Reinforcement Learning of Theorem Proving

Cezary Kaliszyk∗
University of Innsbruck

Josef Urban∗
Czech Technical University in Prague
Mirek Olšák
Charles University

Henryk Michalewski
University of Warsaw,
Institute of Mathematics of the
Polish Academy of Sciences,
deepsense.ai

Abstract
We introduce a theorem proving algorithm that uses practically no domain heuristics for guiding its connection-style proof search. Instead, it runs many MonteCarlo simulations guided by reinforcement learning from previous proof attempts.
We produce several versions of the prover, parameterized by different learning and
guiding algorithms. The strongest version of the system is trained on a large corpus of mathematical problems and evaluated on previously unseen problems. The
trained system solves within the same number of inferences over 40% more problems than a baseline prover, which is an unusually high improvement in this hard
AI domain. To our knowledge this is the first time reinforcement learning has been
convincingly applied to solving general mathematical problems on a large scale.

1

Introduction

Automated theorem proving (ATP) [38] can in principle be used to attack any formally stated mathematical problem. For this, state-of-the-art ATP systems rely on fast implementations of complete
proof calculi such as resolution [37], superposition [4], SMT [5] and (connection) tableau [15] that
have been over several decades improved by many search heuristics. This is already useful for
automatically discharging smaller proof obligations in large interactive theorem proving (ITP) verification projects [7]. In practice, today’s best ATP system are however still far weaker than trained
mathematicians in most research domains. Machine learning from many proofs could be used to
improve on this.
Following this idea, large formal proof corpora have been recently translated to ATP formalisms [45,
32, 19], and machine learning over them has started to be used to train guidance of ATP systems [47, 28, 2]. First, to select a small number of relevant facts for proving new conjectures over
large formal libraries [1, 6, 11], and more recently also to guide the internal search of the ATP systems. In sophisticated saturation-style provers this has been done by feedback loops for strategy
invention [46, 17, 39] and by using supervised learning [16, 30] to select the next given clause [31].
In the simpler connection tableau systems such as leanCoP [34], supervised learning has been used
to choose the next tableau extension step [48, 20] and first experiments with Monte-Carlo guided
proof search [10] have been done. Despite a limited ability to prioritize the proof search, the guided
search in the latter connection systems is still organized by iterative deepening. This ensures completeness, which has been for long time a sine qua non for building proof calculi.
In this work, we remove this requirement, since it basically means that all shorter proof candidates
have to be tried before a longer proof is found. The result is a bare connection-style theorem prover
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

