Thwarting Adversarial Examples: An L0-Robust
Sparse Fourier Transform

Mitali Bafna ∗
Jack Murtagh ∗
School of Engineering & Applied Sciences
School of Engineering & Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA USA
Cambridge, MA USA
mitalibafna@g.harvard.edu
jmurtagh@g.harvard.edu
Nikhil Vyas∗
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
MIT
Cambridge, MA USA
nikhilv@mit.edu

Abstract
We give a new algorithm for approximating the Discrete Fourier transform of an
approximately sparse signal that has been corrupted by worst-case L0 noise, namely
a bounded number of coordinates of the signal have been corrupted arbitrarily. Our
techniques generalize to a wide range of linear transformations that are used in data
analysis such as the Discrete Cosine and Sine transforms, the Hadamard transform,
and their high-dimensional analogs. We use our algorithm to successfully defend
against well known L0 adversaries in the setting of image classification. We give
experimental results on the Jacobian-based Saliency Map Attack (JSMA) and the
Carlini Wagner (CW) L0 attack on the MNIST and Fashion-MNIST datasets as
well as the Adversarial Patch on the ImageNet dataset.

1

Introduction

In the last several years, neural networks have made unprecedented achievements on computational
learning tasks like image classification. Despite their remarkable success, neural networks have been
shown to be brittle in the presence of adversarial noise [SZS+ 13]. Many effective attacks have been
proposed in the context of computer vision that reliably generate small perturbations to input images
(sometimes imperceptible to humans) that drastically change the network’s classification of the image
[MFF15, GSS15, CW16]. As deep learning becomes more integrated into our everyday technology,
the need for systems that are robust to adversarial noise grows, especially in applications to security.
A lot of work has been done to improve robustness and defend against adversarial attacks [PMW+ 16,
TKP+ 17, MMS+ 17]. However many approaches rely on knowing the attack strategy in advance and
too few proposed methods for robustness offer theoretical guarantees and may be broken by a new
attack shortly after they’re published. As such, recent deep learning literature has seen an arms race
of back-and-forth attacks and defenses reminiscent of cryptography before it was grounded in firm
theoretical foundations.
In this work, we give a framework for improving the robustness of classifiers to adversaries with
L0 noise budgets. That is, adversaries are restricted in the number of features they can corrupt, but
may corrupt each arbitrarily. Our framework is based on a new Sparse Discrete Fourier transform
(DFT) that is robust to worst-case L0 noise added in the time domain. We call such transformations
∗

Authors ordered alphabetically.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

