Exponentially Weighted Imitation Learning for
Batched Historical Data
Qing Wang1

Jiechao Xiong1 Lei Han1 Peng Sun1 Han Liu12 Tong Zhang1
1
Tencent AI Lab 2 Northwestern University
{drwang, jcxiong, lxhan, pythonsun}@tencent.com
hanliu@northwestern.edu, tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
We consider deep policy learning with only batched historical trajectories. The
main challenge of this problem is that the learner no longer has a simulator or
“environment oracle” as in most reinforcement learning settings. To solve this
problem, we propose a monotonic advantage reweighted imitation learning strategy
that is applicable to problems with complex nonlinear function approximation
and works well with hybrid (discrete and continuous) action space. The method
does not rely on the knowledge of the behavior policy, thus can be used to learn
from data generated by an unknown policy. Under mild conditions, our algorithm,
though surprisingly simple, has a policy improvement bound and outperforms most
competing methods empirically. Thorough numerical results are also provided to
demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed methodology.

1

Introduction

In this article, we consider the problem of learning a deep policy with batched historical trajectories.
This problem is important and challenging. As in many real-world tasks, we usually have numerous
historical data generated by different policies, but is lack of a perfect simulator of the environment. In
this case, we want to learn a good policy from these data, to make decisions in a complex environment
with possibly continuous state space and hybrid action space of discrete and continuous parts.
Several existing fields of research concern the problem of policy learning from batched data. In
particular, imitation learning (IL) aims to find a policy whose performance is close to that of the
data-generating policy [Abbeel and Ng, 2004]. On the other hand, off-policy reinforcement learning
(RL) concerns the problem of learning a good (or possibly better) policy with data collected from a
behavior policy [Sutton and Barto, 1998]. However, to the best of our knowledge, previous methods
do not have satisfiable performance or are not directly applicable in a complex environment as ours
with continuous state and hybrid action space.
In this work, we propose a novel yet simple method, to imitate a better policy by monotonic advantage
reweighting. From theoretical analysis and empirical results, we find the proposed method has several
advantages that
• From theoretical analysis, we show that the algorithm as proposed has policy improvement
lower bound under mild condition.
• Empirically, the proposed method works well with function approximation and hybrid action
space, which is crucial for the success of deep RL in practical problems.
• For off-policy learning, the method does not rely on the knowledge of action probability of
the behavior policy, thus can be used to learn from data generated by an unknown policy,
and is robust when current policy is deviated from the behavior policy.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

