Learning Latent Subspaces in
Variational Autoencoders
Jack Klys, Jake Snell, Richard Zemel
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
{jackklys,jsnell,zemel}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) [10, 20] are widely used deep generative models
capable of learning unsupervised latent representations of data. Such representations are often difficult to interpret or control. We consider the problem of
unsupervised learning of features correlated to specific labels in a dataset. We
propose a VAE-based generative model which we show is capable of extracting
features correlated to binary labels in the data and structuring it in a latent subspace
which is easy to interpret. Our model, the Conditional Subspace VAE (CSVAE),
uses mutual information minimization to learn a low-dimensional latent subspace
associated with each label that can easily be inspected and independently manipulated. We demonstrate the utility of the learned representations for attribute
manipulation tasks on both the Toronto Face [23] and CelebA [15] datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models have recently made large strides in their ability to successfully model
complex, high-dimensional data such as images [8], natural language [1], and chemical molecules
[6]. Though useful for data generation and feature extraction, these unstructured representations still
lack the ease of understanding and exploration that we desire from generative models. For example,
the correspondence between any particular dimension of the latent representation and the aspects of
the data it is related to is unclear. When a latent feature of interest is labelled in the data, learning a
representation which isolates it is possible [11, 21], but doing so in a fully unsupervised way remains
a difficult and unsolved task.
Consider instead the following slightly easier problem. Suppose we are given a dataset of N labelled
examples D = {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xN , yN )} with each label yi ∈ {1, . . . , K}, and data belonging to
each class yi has some latent structure (for example, it can be naturally clustered into sub-classes or
organized based on class-specific properties). Our goal is to learn a generative model in which this
structure can easily be recovered from the learned latent representations. Moreover, we would like
our model to allow manipulation of these class-specific properties in any given new data point (given
only a single example), or generation of data with any class-specific property in a straightforward
way.
We investigate this problem within the framework of variational
autoencoders (VAE) [10, 20]. A
R
VAE forms a generative distribution over the data pθ (x) = p(z)pθ (x|z) dz by introducing a latent
variable z ∈ Z and an associated prior p(z). We propose the Conditional Subspace VAE (CSVAE),
which learns a latent space Z × W that separates information correlated with the label y into a
predefined subspace W. To accomplish this we require that the mutual information between z and y
should be 0, and we give a mathematical derivation of our loss function as a consequence of imposing
this condition on a directed graphical model. By setting W to be low dimensional we can easily
analyze the learned representations and the effect of w on data generation.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

