Image Inpainting via Generative Multi-column
Convolutional Neural Networks
Yi Wang1 Xin Tao1,2 Xiaojuan Qi1 Xiaoyong Shen2 Jiaya Jia1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 YouTu Lab, Tencent
{yiwang, xtao, xjqi, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk goodshenxy@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a generative multi-column network for image inpainting.
This network synthesizes different image components in a parallel manner within
one stage. To better characterize global structures, we design a confidence-driven
reconstruction loss while an implicit diversified MRF regularization is adopted to
enhance local details. The multi-column network combined with the reconstruction
and MRF loss propagates local and global information derived from context to the
target inpainting regions. Extensive experiments on challenging street view, face,
natural objects and scenes manifest that our method produces visual compelling
results even without previously common post-processing.

1

Introduction

Image inpainting (also known as image completion) aims to estimate suitable pixel information to
fill holes in images. It serves various applications such as object removal, image restoration, image
denoising, to name a few. Though studied for many years, it remains an open and challenging problem
since it is highly ill-posed. In order to generate realistic structures and textures, researchers resort to
auxiliary information, from either surrounding image areas or external data.
A typical inpainting method exploits pixels under certain patch-wise similarity measures, addressing
three important problems respectively to (1) extract suitable features to evaluate patch similarity; (2)
find neighboring patches; and (3) to aggregate auxiliary information.
Features for Inpainting Suitable feature representations are very important to build connections
between missing and known areas. In contrast to traditional patch-based methods using hand-crafted
features, recent learning-based algorithms learn from data. From the model perspective, inpainting
requires understanding of global information. For example, only by seeing the entire face, the system
can determine eyes and nose position, as shown in top-right of Figure 1. On the other hand, pixel-level
details are crucial for visual realism, e.g. texture of the skin/facade in Figure 1.
Recent CNN-based methods utilize encoder-decoder [18, 25, 24, 9, 26] networks to extract features
and achieve impressive results. But there is still much room to consider features as a group of different
components and combine both global semantics and local textures.
Reliable Similar Patches In both exemplar-based [7, 8, 4, 21, 10, 11, 2] and recent learning-based
methods [18, 25, 24, 9, 26], explicit nearest-neighbor search is one of the key components for
generation of realistic details. When missing areas originally contain structure different from context,
the found neighbors may harm the generation process. Also, nearest-neighbor search during testing is
also time-consuming. Unlike these solutions, we in this paper apply search only in the training phase
with improved similarity measure. Testing is very efficient without the need of post-processing.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

