Learning Disentangled Joint Continuous and Discrete
Representations

Emilien Dupont
Schlumberger Software Technology Innovation Center
Menlo Park, CA, USA
dupont@slb.com

Abstract
We present a framework for learning disentangled and interpretable jointly continuous and discrete representations in an unsupervised manner. By augmenting the
continuous latent distribution of variational autoencoders with a relaxed discrete
distribution and controlling the amount of information encoded in each latent unit,
we show how continuous and categorical factors of variation can be discovered
automatically from data. Experiments show that the framework disentangles continuous and discrete generative factors on various datasets and outperforms current
disentangling methods when a discrete generative factor is prominent.

1

Introduction

Disentangled representations are defined as ones where a change in a single unit of the representation
corresponds to a change in single factor of variation of the data while being invariant to others (Bengio
et al. (2013)). For example, a disentangled representation of 3D objects could contain a set of units
each corresponding to a distinct generative factor such as position, color or scale. Most recent work
on learning disentangled representations has focused on modeling continuous factors of variation
(Higgins et al. (2016); Kim & Mnih (2018); Chen et al. (2018)). However, a large number of datasets
contain inherently discrete generative factors which can be difficult to capture with these methods. In
image data for example, distinct objects or entities would most naturally be represented by discrete
variables, while their position or scale might be represented by continuous variables.
Several machine learning tasks, including transfer learning and zero-shot learning, can benefit from
disentangled representations (Lake et al. (2017)). Disentangled representations have also been applied
to reinforcement learning (Higgins et al. (2017a)) and for learning visual concepts (Higgins et al.
(2017b)). Further, in contrast to most representation learning algorithms, disentangled representations
are often interpretable since they align with factors of variation of the data. Different approaches
have been explored for semi-supervised or supervised learning of factored representations (Kulkarni
et al. (2015); Whitney et al. (2016); Yang et al. (2015); Reed et al. (2014)). These approaches achieve
impressive results but either require knowledge of the underlying generative factors or other forms of
weak supervision. Several methods also exist for unsupervised disentanglement with the two most
prominent being InfoGAN and β-VAE (Chen et al. (2016); Higgins et al. (2016)). These frameworks
have shown promise in disentangling factors of variation in an unsupervised manner on a number of
datasets.
InfoGAN (Chen et al. (2016)) is a framework based on Generative Adversarial Networks (Goodfellow
et al. (2014)) which disentangles generative factors by maximizing the mutual information between
a subset of latent variables and the generated samples. While this approach is able to model both
discrete and continuous factors, it suffers from some of the shortcomings of Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN), such as unstable training and reduced sample diversity. Recent improvements in
the training of GANs (Arjovsky et al. (2017); Gulrajani et al. (2017)) have mitigated some of these
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

