Uplift Modeling from Separate Labels

Ikko Yamane1,2

Florian Yger3,2 Jamal Atif3 Masashi Sugiyama2,1
The University of Tokyo, CHIBA, JAPAN
2
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP), TOKYO, JAPAN
3
LAMSADE, CNRS, Université Paris-Dauphine, Université PSL, PARIS, FRANCE
{yamane@ms., sugi@}k.u-tokyo.ac.jp, {florian.yger@, jamal.atif@}dauphine.fr
1

Abstract
Uplift modeling is aimed at estimating the incremental impact of an action on
an individual’s behavior, which is useful in various application domains such as
targeted marketing (advertisement campaigns) and personalized medicine (medical
treatments). Conventional methods of uplift modeling require every instance to
be jointly equipped with two types of labels: the taken action and its outcome.
However, obtaining two labels for each instance at the same time is difficult or
expensive in many real-world problems. In this paper, we propose a novel method
of uplift modeling that is applicable to a more practical setting where only one type
of labels is available for each instance. We show a mean squared error bound for
the proposed estimator and demonstrate its effectiveness through experiments.

1

Introduction

In many real-world problems, a central objective is to optimally choose a right action to maximize
the profit of interest. For example, in marketing, an advertising campaign is designed to promote
people to purchase a product [29]. A marketer can choose whether to deliver an advertisement to
each individual or not, and the outcome is the number of purchases of the product. Another example
is personalized medicine, where a treatment is chosen depending on each patient to maximize the
medical effect and minimize the risk of adverse events or harmful side effects [1, 13]. In this case,
giving or not giving a medical treatment to each individual are the possible actions to choose, and the
outcome is the rate of recovery or survival from the disease. Hereafter, we use the word treatment for
taking an action, following the personalized medicine example.
A/B testing [14] is a standard method for such tasks, where two groups of people, A and B, are
randomly chosen. The outcomes are measured separately from the two groups after treating all the
members of Group A but none of Group B. By comparing the outcomes between the two groups by a
statistical test, one can examine whether the treatment positively or negatively affected the outcome.
However, A/B testing only compares the two extreme options: treating everyone or no one. These
two options can be both far from optimal when the treatment has positive effect on some individuals
but negative effect on others.
To overcome the drawback of A/B testing, uplift modeling has been investigated recently [11, 28, 32].
Uplift modeling is the problem of estimating the individual uplift, the incremental profit brought by
the treatment conditioned on features of each individual. Uplift modeling enables us to design a
refined decision rule for optimally determining whether to treat each individual or not, depending on
his/her features. Such a treatment rule allows us to only target those who positively respond to the
treatment and avoid treating negative responders.
In the standard uplift modeling setup, there are two types of labels [11, 28, 32]: One is whether the
treatment has been given to the individual and the other is its outcome. Existing uplift modeling
methods require each individual to be jointly given these two labels for analyzing the association
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

