Learning Attractor Dynamics
for Generative Memory

Yan Wu, Greg Wayne, Karol Gregor, Timothy Lillicrap
DeepMind
{yanwu,gregwayne,karolg,countzero}@google.com

Abstract
A central challenge faced by memory systems is the robust retrieval of a stored
pattern in the presence of interference due to other stored patterns and noise. A theoretically well-founded solution to robust retrieval is given by attractor dynamics,
which iteratively clean up patterns during recall. However, incorporating attractor
dynamics into modern deep learning systems poses difficulties: attractor basins are
characterised by vanishing gradients, which are known to make training neural networks difficult. In this work, we avoid the vanishing gradient problem by training a
generative distributed memory without simulating the attractor dynamics. Based
on the idea of memory writing as inference, as proposed in the Kanerva Machine,
we show that a likelihood-based Lyapunov function emerges from maximising the
variational lower-bound of a generative memory. Experiments shows it converges
to correct patterns upon iterative retrieval and achieves competitive performance as
both a memory model and a generative model.

1

Introduction

Memory plays an important role in both artificial and biological learning systems [4]. Various forms
of external memory have been used to augment neural networks [5, 14, 25, 29, 31, 32]. Most of these
approaches use attention-based reading mechanisms that compute a weighted average of memory
contents. These mechanisms typically retrieve items in a single step and are fixed after training.
While external-memory offers the potential of quickly adapting to new data after training, it is unclear
whether these previously proposed attention-based mechanisms can fully exploit this potential. For
example, when inputs are corrupted by noise that is unseen during training, are such one-step attention
processes always optimal?
In contrast, experimental and theoretical studies of neural systems suggest memory retrieval is a
dynamic and iterative process: memories are retrieved through a potentially varying period of time,
rather than a single step, during which information can be continuously integrated [3, 7, 20]. In
particular, attractor dynamics are hypothesised to support the robust performance of various forms of
memory via their self-stabilising property [8, 12, 16, 28, 33]. For example, point attractors eventually
converge to a set of fixed points even from noisy initial states. Memories stored at such fixed points
can thus be retrieved robustly. To our knowledge, only the Kanerva Machine (KM) incorporates
iterative reconstruction of a retrieved pattern within a modern deep learning model, but it does not
have any guarantee of convergence [32].
Incorporating attractor dynamics into modern neural networks is not straightforward. Although
recurrent neural networks can in principle learn any dynamics, they face the problem of vanishing
gradients. This problem is aggravated when directly training for attractor dynamics, which by
definition imply vanishing gradients [23] (see also Section 2.2). In this work, we avoid vanishing
gradients by constructing our model to dynamically optimise a variational lower-bound. After
training, the stored patterns serve as attractive fixed-points to which even random patterns will
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

