Is Q-learning Provably Efficient?

Chi Jin∗
University of California, Berkeley
chijin@cs.berkeley.edu

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu∗
Microsoft Research, Redmond
zeyuan@csail.mit.edu

Sebastien Bubeck
Microsoft Research, Redmond
sebubeck@microsoft.com

Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Model-free reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, such as Q-learning, directly
parameterize and update value functions or policies without explicitly modeling
the environment. They are typically simpler, more flexible to use, and thus more
prevalent in modern deep RL than model-based approaches. However, empirical work has suggested that model-free algorithms may require more samples to
learn [7, 22]. The theoretical question of “whether model-free algorithms can
be made sample efficient” is one of the most fundamental questions in RL, and
remains unsolved even in the basic scenario with finitely many states and actions.
We prove that, in √
an episodic MDP setting, Q-learning with UCB exploration
achieves regret Õ( H 3 SAT ), where S and A are the numbers of states and actions, H is the number of steps per episode, and T is the total number of steps.
This sample efficiency matches the optimal
regret that can be achieved by any
√
model-based approach, up to a single H factor. To the best of
√ our knowledge,
this is the first analysis in the model-free setting that establishes T regret without
requiring access to a “simulator.”

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a control-theoretic problem in which an agent tries to maximize its
cumulative rewards via interacting with an unknown environment through time [26]. There are two
main approaches to RL: model-based and model-free. Model-based algorithms make use of a model
for the environment, forming a control policy based on this learned model. Model-free approaches
dispense with the model and directly update the value function—the expected reward starting from
each state, or the policy—the mapping from states to their subsequent actions. There has been a long
debate on the relative pros and cons of the two approaches [7].
From the classical Q-learning algorithm [27] to modern DQN [17], A3C [18], TRPO [22], and others, most state-of-the-art RL has been in the model-free paradigm. Its pros—model-free algorithms
are online, require less space, and, most importantly, are more expressive since specifying the value
functions or policies is often more flexible than specifying the model for the environment—arguably
outweigh its cons relative to model-based approaches. These relative advantages underly the significant successes of model-free algorithms in deep RL applications [17, 24].
On the other hand it is believed that model-free algorithms suffer from a higher sample complexity
compared to model-based approaches. This has been evidenced empirically in [7, 22], and recent
work has tried to improve the sample efficiency of model-free algorithms by combining them with
∗

The first two authors contributed equally. Full paper (and future edition) available at https://arxiv.
org/abs/1807.03765.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

