An Off-policy Policy Gradient Theorem Using
Emphatic Weightings
Ehsan Imani⇤, Eric Graves⇤, Martha White
Reinforcement Learning and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
{imani,graves,whitem}@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Policy gradient methods are widely used for control in reinforcement learning,
particularly for the continuous action setting. There have been a host of theoretically sound algorithms proposed for the on-policy setting, due to the existence
of the policy gradient theorem which provides a simplified form for the gradient.
In off-policy learning, however, where the behaviour policy is not necessarily attempting to learn and follow the optimal policy for the given task, the existence
of such a theorem has been elusive. In this work, we solve this open problem by
providing the first off-policy policy gradient theorem. The key to the derivation is
the use of emphatic weightings. We develop a new actor-critic algorithm—called
Actor Critic with Emphatic weightings (ACE)—that approximates the simplified
gradients provided by the theorem. We demonstrate in a simple counterexample that previous off-policy policy gradient methods—particularly OffPAC and
DPG—converge to the wrong solution whereas ACE finds the optimal solution.

1

Introduction

Off-policy learning holds great promise for learning in an online setting, where an agent generates
a single stream of interaction with its environment. On-policy methods are limited to learning about
the agent’s current policy. Conversely, in off-policy learning, the agent can learn about many policies that are different from the policy being executed. Methods capable of off-policy learning have
several important advantages over on-policy methods. Most importantly, off-policy methods allow
an agent to learn about many different policies at once, forming the basis for a predictive understanding of an agent’s environment [Sutton et al., 2011, White, 2015] and enabling the learning of
options [Sutton et al., 1999, Precup, 2000]. With options, an agent can determine optimal (short)
behaviours, starting from its current state. Off-policy methods can also learn from data generated
by older versions of a policy, known as experience replay, a critical factor in the recent success of
deep reinforcement learning [Lin, 1992, Mnih et al., 2015, Schaul et al., 2015]. They also enable
learning from other forms of suboptimal data, including data generated by human demonstration,
non-learning controllers, and even random behaviour. Off-policy methods also enable learning about
the optimal policy while executing an exploratory policy [Watkins and Dayan, 1992], thereby addressing the exploration-exploitation tradeoff.
Policy gradient methods are a general class of algorithms for learning optimal policies, for both the
on and off-policy setting. In policy gradient methods, a parameterized policy is improved using
gradient ascent [Williams, 1992], with seminal work in actor-critic algorithms [Witten, 1977, Barto
et al., 1983] and many techniques since proposed to reduce variance of the estimates of this gradient
[Konda and Tsitsiklis, 2000, Weaver and Tao, 2001, Greensmith et al., 2004, Peters et al., 2005,
⇤

These authors contributed equally.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

