Expanding Holographic Embeddings
for Knowledge Completion

Yexiang Xue?
?

Yang Yuan†

Zhitian Xu?

Ashish Sabharwal‡

Dept. of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
†
Dept. of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
‡
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence (AI2), Seattle, WA, USA

Abstract
Neural models operating over structured spaces such as knowledge graphs require
a continuous embedding of the discrete elements of this space (such as entities)
as well as the relationships between them. Relational embeddings with high
expressivity, however, have high model complexity, making them computationally
difficult to train. We propose a new family of embeddings for knowledge graphs
that interpolate between a method with high model complexity and one, namely
Holographic embeddings (H OL E), with low dimensionality and high training
efficiency. This interpolation, termed H OL E X, is achieved by concatenating several
linearly perturbed copies of original H OL E. We formally characterize the number of
perturbed copies needed to provably recover the full entity-entity or entity-relation
interaction matrix, leveraging ideas from Haar wavelets and compressed sensing. In
practice, using just a handful of Haar-based or random perturbation vectors results
in a much stronger knowledge completion system. On the Freebase FB15K dataset,
H OL E X outperforms originally reported H OL E by 14.7% on the HITS@10 metric,
and the current path-based state-of-the-art method, PTransE, by 4% (absolute).

1

Introduction

Relations, as a key concept in artificial intelligence and machine learning, allow human beings as
well as intelligent systems to learn and reason about the world. In particular, relations among multiple
entities and concepts enable us to make logical inference, learn new concepts, draw analogies, make
comparisons, etc. This paper considers relational learning for knowledge graphs (KGs), which often
contain knowledge in the form of binary relations, such as livesIn(Bill Gates, Seattle). A number of
very large KGs, with millions and even billions of facts, have become prominent in the last decade,
such as Freebase [3], DBpedia [2], YAGO [11], WordNet [17], and WebChild [26].
KGs can be represented as a multigraph, where entities such as Bill Gates and Seattle are nodes,
connected with zero or more relations such as livesIn and likes. Facts such as livesIn(Bill Gates,
Seattle) form typed edges, with the relation—in this case livesIn—being the edge type. In particular,
we are interested in the knowledge completion task for KGs: Given an existing KG, we would like to
use statistical machine learning tools to extract correlations among its entities and relations, and use
these correlations to derive new knowledge about them.
Compositional vector space models, also referred to as matrix or tensor factorization based methods,
have proven to be highly effective for KG completion [e.g., 4, 5, 7, 8, 12, 14–16, 18, 19, 23–25, 28].
In these models, entities and relations are represented as (learned) vectors in a high dimensional space,
and various forms of compositional operators are used to determine the likelihood of a candidate fact.
A good design of the compositional operator is often key to the success of the model. Such design
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

