Unsupervised Depth Estimation,
3D Face Rotation and Replacement

1

Joel Ruben Antony Moniz1⇤, Christopher Beckham2,3⇤ , Simon Rajotte2,3 ,
Sina Honari2 , Christopher Pal2,3,4

Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Mila-University of Montreal, 3 Polytechnique Montreal, 4 Element AI
1

jrmoniz@andrew.cmu.edu, 2 honaris@iro.umontreal.ca, 3 firstname.lastname@polymtl.ca

Abstract
We present an unsupervised approach for learning to estimate three dimensional
(3D) facial structure from a single image while also predicting 3D viewpoint
transformations that match a desired pose and facial geometry. We achieve this
by inferring the depth of facial keypoints of an input image in an unsupervised
manner, without using any form of ground-truth depth information. We show how
it is possible to use these depths as intermediate computations within a new backpropable loss to predict the parameters of a 3D affine transformation matrix that
maps inferred 3D keypoints of an input face to the corresponding 2D keypoints on
a desired target facial geometry or pose. Our resulting approach, called DepthNets,
can therefore be used to infer plausible 3D transformations from one face pose
to another, allowing faces to be frontalized, transformed into 3D models or even
warped to another pose and facial geometry. Lastly, we identify certain shortcomings with our formulation, and explore adversarial image translation techniques as
a post-processing step to re-synthesize complete head shots for faces re-targeted to
different poses or identities. 1

1

Introduction

Face rotation is an important task in computer vision. It has been used to frontalize faces for
verification [8; 19; 25; 28] or to generate faces of arbitrary poses [22; 18]. In this paper we present
a novel unsupervised learning technique for face rotation and warping from a 2D source image –
whose facial appearance will be used in the rotation – to a target face – to which the facial pose
and geometry inferred from the source image is mapped. A use case is when we have an image of
someone in a particular target pose and we want to put a given source face into that pose, without
knowing the exact target face pose. This can be leveraged, for example, in the advertisement industry,
when putting someone in a particular location can be costly or unfeasible, or in the movie industry
when the main actor’s limited time or high cost can enforce using another actor whose face can be
later replaced by the main actor’s. This is achieved through estimating the source face depth and
the 3D affine parameters that warp the source to the target face using neural networks. These neural
networks use a novel loss formulation for the structured prediction of keypoint depths. Once the 3D
affine transformation matrix is estimated, it can be used to warp the source image onto the target
face geometry using a textured triangular mesh. The use of a 3D affine transform means that we
can capture both a 3D rotation of the face to a new viewpoint as well as a global non-Euclidean
warping of the geometry to match a target face. We call these neural networks Depth Estimation-Pose
Transformation Hybrid Networks, or DepthNets in short.
Our first contribution is to propose a neural architecture that predicts both the depth of source
keypoints as well as the parameters of a 3D geometric affine transformation which constitute the
⇤

1

Indicates equal contribution.
Code will be released at: https://github.com/joelmoniz/DepthNets/

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

