Clebsch–Gordan Nets: a Fully Fourier Space
Spherical Convolutional Neural Network

1

Risi Kondor1∗ Zhen Lin1∗ Shubhendu Trivedi2∗
The University of Chicago 2 Toyota Technological Institute
{risi, zlin7}@uchicago.edu, shubhendu@ttic.edu

Abstract
Recent work by Cohen et al. [1] has achieved state-of-the-art results for learning
spherical images in a rotation invariant way by using ideas from group representation theory and noncommutative harmonic analysis. In this paper we propose
a generalization of this work that generally exhibits improved performace, but
from an implementation point of view is actually simpler. An unusual feature
of the proposed architecture is that it uses the Clebsch–Gordan transform as its
only source of nonlinearity, thus avoiding repeated forward and backward Fourier
transforms. The underlying ideas of the paper generalize to constructing neural
networks that are invariant to the action of other compact groups.

1

Introduction

Despite the many recent breakthroughs in deep learning, we still do not have a satisfactory understanding of how deep neural networks are able to achieve such spectacular perfomance on a wide range of
learning problems. One thing that is clear, however, is that certain architectures pick up on natural
invariances in data, and this is a key component to their success. The classic example is of course
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for image classification [2]. Recall that, fundamentally, each
layer of a CNN realizes two simple operations: a linear one consisting of convolving the previous
layer’s activations with a (typically small) learnable filter, and a nonlinear but pointwise one, such
as a ReLU operator2 . This architecture is sufficient to guarantee translation equivariance, meaning
that if the input image is translated by some vector t, then the activation pattern in each higher layer
of the network will translate by the same amount. Equivariance is crucial to image recognition for
two closely related reasons: (a) It guarantees that exactly the same filters are applied to each part
the input image regardless of position. (b) Assuming that finally, at the very top of the network, we
add some layer that is translation invariant, the entire network will be invariant, ensuring that it can
detect any given object equally well regardless of its location.
Recently, a number of papers have appeared that examine equivariance from the theoretical point
of view, motivated by the understanding that the natural way to generalize convolutional networks
to other types of data will likely lead through generalizing the notion of equivariance itself to other
transformation groups [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Letting f s denote the activations of the neurons in layer s
of a hypothetical generalized convolution-like neural network, mathematically, equivariance to a
group G means that if the inputs to the network are transformed by some transformation g ∈ G,
then f s transforms to Tgs (f s ) for some fixed set of linear transformations {Tgs }g∈G . s(Note that in
some contexts this is called “covariance”, the difference between the two words being only one of
emphasis.)
∗

Authors are arranged alphabetically
Real CNNs typically of course have multiple channels, and correspondingly multiple filters per layer, but
this does not fundamentally change the network’s invariance properties.
2

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

