Understanding the Role of Adaptivity in Machine
Teaching: The Case of Version Space Learners

Yuxin Chen† Adish Singla‡ Oisin Mac Aodha†
Pietro Perona† Yisong Yue†
†

Caltech, {chenyux, macaodha, perona, yyue}@caltech.edu,
‡
MPI-SWS, adishs@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
In real-world applications of education, an effective teacher adaptively chooses
the next example to teach based on the learner’s current state. However, most
existing work in algorithmic machine teaching focuses on the batch setting,
where adaptivity plays no role. In this paper, we study the case of teaching
consistent, version space learners in an interactive setting. At any time step, the
teacher provides an example, the learner performs an update, and the teacher
observes the learner’s new state. We highlight that adaptivity does not speed up
the teaching process when considering existing models of version space learners,
such as the “worst-case” model (the learner picks the next hypothesis randomly
from the version space) and the “preference-based” model (the learner picks
hypothesis according to some global preference). Inspired by human teaching, we
propose a new model where the learner picks hypotheses according to some local
preference defined by the current hypothesis. We show that our model exhibits
several desirable properties, e.g., adaptivity plays a key role, and the learner’s
transitions over hypotheses are smooth/interpretable. We develop adaptive teaching
algorithms, and demonstrate our results via simulation and user studies.

1

Introduction

Algorithmic machine teaching studies the interaction between a teacher and a student/learner where
the teacher’s objective is to find an optimal training sequence to steer the learner towards a desired
goal [36]. Recently, there has been a surge of interest in machine teaching as several different
communities have found connections to this problem setting: (i) machine teaching provides a rigorous
formalism for a number of real-world applications including personalized educational systems [35],
adversarial attacks [24], imitation learning [6, 14], and program synthesis [18]; (ii) the complexity of
teaching (“Teaching-dimension”) has strong connections with the information complexity of learning
(“VC-dimension”) [9]; and (iii) the optimal teaching sequence has properties captured by new models
of interactive machine learning, such as curriculum learning [4] and self-paced learning [25].
In the above-mentioned applications, adaptivity clearly plays an important role. For instance, in
automated tutoring, adaptivity enables personalization of the content based on the student’s current
knowledge [31, 33, 17]. In this paper, we explore the adaptivity gain in algorithmic machine teaching,
i.e., how much speedup a teacher can achieve via adaptively selecting the next example based on the
learner’s current state? While this question has been well-studied in the context of active learning
and sequential decision making [15], the role of adaptivity is much less understood in algorithmic
machine teaching. A deeper understanding would, in turn, enable us to develop better teaching
algorithms and more realistic learner models to exploit the adaptivity gain.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

