Exponentiated Strongly Rayleigh Distributions

Zelda Mariet
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

zelda@csail.mit.edu

Suvrit Sra
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

suvrit@mit.edu

Stefanie Jegelka
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

stefje@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Strongly Rayleigh (SR) measures are discrete probability distributions over the
subsets of a ground set. They enjoy strong negative dependence properties, as a
result of which they assign higher probability to subsets of diverse elements. We
introduce in this paper Exponentiated Strongly Rayleigh (ESR) measures, which
sharpen (or smoothen) the negative dependence property of SR measures via a
single parameter (the exponent) that can be intuitively understood as an inverse
temperature. We develop efficient MCMC procedures for approximate sampling
from ESRs, and obtain explicit mixing time bounds for two concrete instances:
exponentiated versions of Determinantal Point Processes and Dual Volume Sampling. We illustrate some of the potential of ESRs, by applying them to a few
machine learning problems; empirical results confirm that beyond their theoretical appeal, ESR-based models hold significant promise for these tasks.

1

Introduction

The careful selection of a few items from a large ground set is a crucial component of many machine
learning problems. Typically, the selected set of items must fulfill a variety of application specific
requirements—e.g., when recommending items to a user, the quality of each selected item is important. This quality must be, however, balanced by diversity of the selected items to avoid redundancy
within recommendations. Notable applications requiring careful consideration of subset diversity
include recommender systems, information retrieval, and automatic summarization; more broadly,
such concerns are also vital for model design such as model pruning and experimental design.
A flexible approach for such subset selection is to sample from subsets of the ground set using a
measure that balances quality with diversity. An effective way to capture diversity is to use negatively dependent measures. While such measures have been long studied [41], remarkable recent
progress by Borcea et al. [11] has put forth a rich new theory with far-reaching impact. The key
concept in Borcea et al.’s theory is that of Strongly Rayleigh (SR) measures, which admit important
closure properties (specifically, closure under conditioning on a subset of variables, projection, imposition of external fields, and symmetric homogenization [11, Theorems 4.2, 4.9]) and enjoy the
strongest form of negative association. These properties have been instrumental in the resolution of
long-standing conjectures in mathematics [9, 35]; in machine learning, their broader impact is only
beginning to emerge [5, 31, 33], while an important subclass of SR measures, Determinantal Point
Processes (D PPs) has already found numerous applications [22, 29].
A practical challenge in using SR measures is the tuning of diversity versus quality, a task that
is application dependent and may require significant effort. The modeling need motivates us to
consider a generalization of SR measures that allows for easy tuning of the relative importance
given to quality and diversity considerations. Specifically, we introduce the class of Exponentiated
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

