Limited memory Kelley’s Method Converges for
Composite Convex and Submodular Objectives
Song Zhou
Cornell University
sz557@cornell.edu

Swati Gupta
Georgia Institute of Technology
swatig@gatech.edu

Madeleine Udell
Cornell University
udell@cornell.edu

Abstract
The original simplicial method (OSM), a variant of the classic Kelley’s cutting
plane method, has been shown to converge to the minimizer of a composite convex
and submodular objective, though no rate of convergence for this method was
known. Moreover, OSM is required to solve subproblems in each iteration whose
size grows linearly in the number of iterations. We propose a limited memory
version of Kelley’s method (L-KM) and of OSM that requires limited memory (at
most n + 1 constraints for an n-dimensional problem) independent of the iteration.
We prove convergence for L-KM when the convex part of the objective (g) is
strongly convex and show it converges linearly when g is also smooth. Our analysis
relies on duality between minimization of the composite objective and minimization
of a convex function over the corresponding submodular base polytope. We
introduce a limited memory version, L-FCFW, of the Fully-Corrective FrankWolfe (FCFW) method with approximate correction, to solve the dual problem.
We show that L-FCFW and L-KM are dual algorithms that produce the same
sequence of iterates; hence both converge linearly (when g is smooth and strongly
convex) and with limited memory. We propose L-KM to minimize composite
convex and submodular objectives; however, our results on L-FCFW hold for
general polytopes and may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

One of the earliest and fundamental methods to minimize non-smooth convex objectives is Kelley’s
method, which minimizes the maximum of lower bounds on the convex function given by the
supporting hyperplanes to the function at each previously queried point. An approximate solution
to the minimization problem is found by minimizing this piecewise linear approximation, and the
approximation is then strengthened by adding the supporting hyperplane at the current approximate
solution [11, 6]. Many variants of Kelley’s method have been analyzed in the literature [16, 12, 8,
for e.g.]. Kelley’s method and its variants are a natural fit for problem involving a piecewise linear
function, such as composite convex and submodular objectives. This paper defines a new limited
memory version of Kelley’s method adapted to composite convex and submodular objectives, and
establishes the first convergence rate for such a method, solving the open problem proposed in [2, 3].
Submodularity is a discrete analogue of convexity and has been used to model combinatorial constraints in a wide variety of machine learning applications, such as MAP inference, document
summarization, sensor placement, clustering, image segmentation [3, and references therein]. Submodular set functions are defined with respect to a ground set of elements V , which we may identify
with {1, . . . , n} where |V | = n. These functions capture the property of diminishing returns:
F : {0, 1}n ! R is said to be submodular if F (A [ {e}) F (A)
F (B [ {e}) F (B) for
all A ✓ B ✓ V , e 2
/ B. Lovász gave a convex extension f : [0, 1]n ! R of the submodular
set functions which takes the value of the set function on the vertices of the [0, 1]n hypercube, i.e.
f (1S ) = F (S), where 1S is the indicator vector of the set S ✓ V [17]. (See Section 2 for details.)
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

