Dirichlet belief networks for topic structure learning

He Zhao1 , Lan Du1 ∗, Wray Buntine1 , and Mingyuan Zhou2 ∗
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia
2
McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at Austin, USA
1

Abstract
Recently, considerable research effort has been devoted to developing deep architectures for topic models to learn topic structures. Although several deep models
have been proposed to learn better topic proportions of documents, how to leverage
the benefits of deep structures for learning word distributions of topics has not yet
been rigorously studied. Here we propose a new multi-layer generative process
on word distributions of topics, where each layer consists of a set of topics and
each topic is drawn from a mixture of the topics of the layer above. As the topics
in all layers can be directly interpreted by words, the proposed model is able to
discover interpretable topic hierarchies. As a self-contained module, our model can
be flexibly adapted to different kinds of topic models to improve their modelling
accuracy and interpretability. Extensive experiments on text corpora demonstrate
the advantages of the proposed model.

1

Introduction

Understanding text has been an important task in machine learning, natural language processing, and
data mining. Text is discrete, unstructured, and often highly sparse. A popular way of analysing texts
is to represent them as a set of latent factors via topic modelling or matrix factorisation. With great
success in modelling text, probabilistic topic models discover a set of latent topics from a collection
of documents. Those topics, as latent factors, can be interpreted by distributions over words and used
to derive low dimensional representations of the documents. Specifically, most existing topic models
are built on top of the following generative process: Each topic is a distribution over the words (i.e.,
word distribution, WD) in the vocabulary; each document is associated with a topic proportion (TP)
vector; and a word in a document is generated by first drawing a topic according to the document’s
TP, then sampling the word according to the topic’s WD.
In a Bayesian setting, TPs and WDs are both imposed on prior distributions. For example, one
commonly-used prior for TP and WD is a Dirichlet distribution, as in Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA) (Blei et al., 2003). Recently, deep hierarchical priors, especially imposed on TPs, have been
developed to generate hierarchical document representations as well as discover interpretable topic
hierarchies. For example, there are hierarchical tree-structured constructions based on the Dirichlet
Process (DP) or Chinese Restaurant Process (CRP), such as the nested CRP (nCRP) (Blei et al.,
2010) and the nested hierarchical DP (Paisley et al., 2015); deep constructions based on restricted
Boltzmann machines and neural networks such as the Replicated Softmax Model (RSM) (Hinton and
Salakhutdinov, 2009), the Neural Autoregressive Density Estimator (NADE) (Larochelle and Lauly,
2012), and the Over-replicated Softmax Model (OSM) (Srivastava et al., 2013); models based on
variational autoencoders (VAE) including Srivastava and Sutton (2017); Miao et al. (2017); Zhang
et al. (2018). Recently, models that generalise the sigmoid belief network (Hinton et al., 2006) have
been proposed, such as Deep Poisson Factor Analysis (DPFA) (Gan et al., 2015), Deep Exponential
Families (DEF) (Ranganath et al., 2015), Deep Poisson Factor Modelling (DPFM) (Henao et al.,
2015), and Gamma Belief Networks (GBNs) (Zhou et al., 2016).
∗

Corresponding authors

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

