Dialog-to-Action: Conversational Question
Answering Over a Large-Scale Knowledge Base

Daya Guo1∗, Duyu Tang2 , Nan Duan2 , Ming Zhou2 , and Jian Yin1
1
The School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University.
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, P.R.China
2
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
{guody5@mail2,issjyin@mail}.sysu.edu.cn
{dutang,nanduan,mingzhou}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present an approach to map utterances in conversation to logical forms, which
will be executed on a large-scale knowledge base. To handle enormous ellipsis phenomena in conversation, we introduce dialog memory management to manipulate
historical entities, predicates, and logical forms when inferring the logical form of
current utterances. Dialog memory management is embodied in a generative model,
in which a logical form is interpreted in a top-down manner following a small and
flexible grammar. We learn the model from denotations without explicit annotation
of logical forms, and evaluate it on a large-scale dataset consisting of 200K dialogs
over 12.8M entities. Results verify the benefits of modeling dialog memory, and
show that our semantic parsing-based approach outperforms a memory network
based encoder-decoder model by a huge margin.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of mapping conversational natural language questions to formal representations (e.g., logical form) of their underlying meanings, which would be executed to produce the
answer (denotation) [1–7]. We study the problem in a realistic setting that (1) only denotations are
available for model training while the underlying logical forms remain unknown, and (2) logical
forms will be executed on a large-scale knowledge base (KB) consisting of tens of millions of entities.
We believe that KB-based conversational question answering plays an important role in both search
engines and intelligent personal assistants (e.g., Siri, Alexa, Cortana/Xiaoice, and Google Now) [8]
to improve the ability of multi-turn question answering.
The major challenge of this task is how to interpret the meaning of an utterance in interaction where
ellipsis phenomena are frequently encountered. Let’s consider the example in Figure 1. The ellipsis
of the entity “he” in Q2 refers to “President of the United States” in Q1. The ellipsis of the entity “it”
in Q3 means the answer R2. In Q4, the ellipsis of the predicate (“yearEstablished”) comes from Q3.
We see that understanding the meaning of conversational utterances requires a good understanding of
dialog history. Another challenge is how to efficiently learn the semantic parser from denotations.
Online learning by searching legitimate logical forms requires repeated execution on a large-scale
knowledge base, which is extremely time-consuming and intolerable.
In this work, we regard the generation of a logical form as the prediction of a sequence of actions
[9, 10, 6, 11–16], each of which corresponds to a derivation rule in a simple and flexible grammar. We
introduce a generative model that interprets the logical form of an utterance in a top-down manner. A
grammar-guided decoder is developed to generate possible action sequences following the grammar.
∗

Work done while this author was an intern at Microsoft Research.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

