Reinforced Continual Learning

Ju Xu
Center for Data Science, Peking University
Beijing, China
xuju@pku.edu.cn

Zhanxing Zhu ∗
Center for Data Science, Peking University &
Beijing Institute of Big Data Research (BIBDR)
Beijing, China
zhanxing.zhu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Most artificial intelligence models are limited in their ability to solve new tasks
faster, without forgetting previously acquired knowledge. The recently emerging
paradigm of continual learning aims to solve this issue, in which the model learns
various tasks in a sequential fashion. In this work, a novel approach for continual
learning is proposed, which searches for the best neural architecture for each coming task via sophisticatedly designed reinforcement learning strategies. We name
it as Reinforced Continual Learning. Our method not only has good performance
on preventing catastrophic forgetting but also fits new tasks well. The experiments
on sequential classification tasks for variants of MNIST and CIFAR-100 datasets
demonstrate that the proposed approach outperforms existing continual learning
alternatives for deep networks.

1

Introduction

Continual learning, or lifelong learning [15], the ability to learn consecutive tasks without forgetting
how to perform previously trained tasks, is an important topic for developing artificial intelligence.
The primary goal of continual learning is to overcome the forgetting of learned tasks and to leverage
the earlier knowledge for obtaining better performance or faster convergence/training speed on the
newly coming tasks.
In the deep learning community, two groups of strategies have been developed to alleviate the problem of forgetting the previously trained tasks, distinguished by whether the network architecture
changes during learning.
The first category of approaches maintain a fixed network architecture with large capacity. When
training the network for consecutive tasks, some regularization term is enforced to prevent the model
parameters from deviating too much from the previous learned parameters according to their significance to old tasks [4, 19]. In [6], the authors proposed to incrementally match the moment of
the posterior distribution of the neural network which is trained on the first and the second task,
respectively. Alternatively, an episodic memory [7] is budgeted to store the subsets of previous
datasets, and then trained together with the new task. FearNet [3] mitigates catastrophic forgetting
by consolidating recent memories into long-term storage using pseudorehearsal [10] which employs
a generative autoencoder to generate previously learned examples that are replayed alongside novel
information during consolidation. Fernando et al. [2] proposed PathNet, in which a neural network
has ten or twenty modules in each layer, and three or four modules are picked for one task in each
layer by an evolutionary approach. However, these methods typically require unnecessarily largecapacity networks, particularly when the number of tasks is large, since the network architecture is
never dynamically adjusted during training.
∗

Corresponding author.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

