Adaptive Skip Intervals: Temporal Abstraction for
Recurrent Dynamical Models

Alexander Neitz1 3 Giambattista Parascandolo1 2 Stefan Bauer1 2 Bernhard Schölkopf1 2
1

2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems
3
aneitz@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
We introduce a method which enables a recurrent dynamics model to be temporally
abstract. Our approach, which we call Adaptive Skip Intervals (ASI), is based on the
observation that in many sequential prediction tasks, the exact time at which events
occur is irrelevant to the underlying objective. Moreover, in many situations, there
exist prediction intervals which result in particularly easy-to-predict transitions.
We show that there are prediction tasks for which we gain both computational
efficiency and prediction accuracy by allowing the model to make predictions at a
sampling rate which it can choose itself.

1

Introduction

A core component of intelligent agents is the ability to predict certain properties of future states of
their environments (Legg and Hutter, 2007). For example, model-based reinforcement learning (Daw,
2012; Arulkumaran et al., 2017) decomposes the task into the two components of learning a model
and then using the learned model for planning ahead.
Despite significant recent advances, even relatively simple tasks like pushing objects is still a
challenging robotic task and foresight for robot planning is still limited to relatively short horizon
tasks (Finn and Levine, 2017). This is partially due to the fact that errors even from early stages in the
prediction pipeline are accumulating especially when new or complex environments are considered.
Many dynamical systems have the property that long-term predictions of future states are easiest to
learn if they are obtained by a sequence of incremental predictions. Our starting point is the hypothesis
that at each instant of the evolution, there is an ideal temporal step length associated with those
state transitions which are easiest to predict: Intervals which are too long correspond to complicated
mechanisms that could be simplified by breaking them down into a successive application of simpler
mechanisms. On the other hand, intervals which are too short do not contain much change, which
means that the predictor has to represent roughly the identity – this can lead to a situation where
δs
the model makes small absolute errors δs, but a large relative error ∆t
, which is the rate at which
the prediction error accumulates. This tradeoff is illustrated in Figure 1. An additional drawback
of too short prediction intervals is that it requires many predictions, which can be computationally
expensive. Somewhere in-between the two extremes, there is an ideal step length corresponding to
transitions that are easiest to represent and learn.
We propose Adaptive Skip Intervals (ASI), a simple change to autoregressive environment simulators
(Chiappa et al., 2017; Buesing et al., 2018) which can be applied to systems in which it is not
necessary to predict the exact time of events. While in the literature, abstractions are often considered
with respect to hierarchical components e.g. for locomotor control (Heess et al., 2016) or expanding
the dynamics in a latent space (Watter et al., 2015), our work focuses on temporal abstractions. Our
goal is to understand the dynamics of the environment in terms of robust causal mechanisms at the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

