BinGAN: Learning Compact Binary Descriptors
with a Regularized GAN

Maciej Zieba
Wroclaw University of
Science and Technology, Tooploox
maciej.zieba@pwr.edu.pl
Tarek El-Gaaly
Voyage
tarek@voyage.auto

Piotr Semberecki
Wroclaw University of
Science and Technology, Tooploox
piotr.semberecki@pwr.edu.pl
Tomasz Trzcinski
Warsaw University of Technology,
Tooploox
t.trzcinski@ii.pw.edu.pl

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel regularization method for Generative Adversarial
Networks, which allows the model to learn discriminative yet compact binary representations of image patches (image descriptors). We employ the dimensionality
reduction that takes place in the intermediate layers of the discriminator network
and train binarized low-dimensional representation of the penultimate layer to
mimic the distribution of the higher-dimensional preceding layers. To achieve this,
we introduce two loss terms that aim at: (i) reducing the correlation between the
dimensions of the binarized low-dimensional representation of the penultimate
layer (i.e. maximizing joint entropy) and (ii) propagating the relations between
the dimensions in the high-dimensional space to the low-dimensional space. We
evaluate the resulting binary image descriptors on two challenging applications,
image matching and retrieval, and achieve state-of-the-art results.

1

Introduction

Compact binary representations of images are instrumental for a multitude of computer vision applications, including image retrieval, simultaneous localization and mapping, and large-scale 3D
reconstruction. Typical approaches to the problem of learning discriminative yet concise representations include supervised machine learning methods such as boosting [27], hashing [8] and, more
recently, deep learning [23]. Although unsupervised methods have also been proposed [14, 16, 6],
their performance is typically significantly lower than the competing supervised approaches.
The goal of this work is to bridge this performance gap by using an intermediate layer representation
of a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [9] discriminator as a compact binary image descriptor.
Recent studies show the powerful discriminative capabilities of features extracted from the discriminator networks of GANs [19, 21]. With a growing number of hidden units in intermediate layers, the
quality of vector representations increase, when applied to both image matching and retrieval. This
is why typical approaches make use of high-dimensional intermediate representations to generate
image descriptors, therefore leading to high memory footprint and computationally expensive matching. We address this shortcoming and build low-dimensional compact descriptors by training GAN
with a novel Distance Matching Regularizer (DMR). This regularizer is responsible for propagating
the Hamming distances between binary vectors in high-dimensional feature spaces of intermediate
discriminator layers to the compact feature space of the low-dimensional deeper layers in the same
network. More precisely, our proposed method allows to regularize the output of an intermediate
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

